The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Little Review, April 1917 (Vol. 3, No. 10)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Little Review, April 1917 (Vol. 3, No. 10)

Author: Various

Editor: Margaret C. Anderson

Release date: July 6, 2025 [eBook #76448]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago, New York: Margaret C. Anderson, 1922

Credits: Jens Sadowski and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net. This book was produced from images made available by the Modernist Journal Project, Brown and Tulsa Universities.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE REVIEW, APRIL 1917 (VOL. 3, NO. 10) ***





                           THE LITTLE REVIEW


                       Literature Drama Music Art

                          MARGARET C. ANDERSON
                                 EDITOR

                              APRIL, 1917

      I, Mary MacLane                                         jh.
      The War                                            M. C. A.
      Isadora Duncan’s Misfortune            Margaret C. Anderson
      James Joyce
      The Vers Libre Contest
        Sea Poppies                                         H. D.
        Images of Friendship                    Maxwell Bodenheim
        Stream                                  Richard Aldington
        Flower and Foam                         Edward J. O’Brien
        The Master                                  Jeanne D’Orge
        Autumn Ballet                       Charles Wharton Stork
        Once More—the Road                       Charles Ashleigh
        Lovescape                                     Adolf Wolff
        Victory                                  Sarah Bard Field
        Art is Born                             Miriam van Waters
        The Flower Smeller                           L. R. Bonham
        November Afternoon                Marjorie Allen Seiffert
        The Soldiers                                Horace Holley
        The Assault                                  John Cournos
        Girl of Jade and Ivory                    Mitchell Dawson
        The South                                   Witter Bynner
        A Mother’s Sacrifice
      Book Store Announcement
      “Surprise”!
      The Reader Critic

                           Published Monthly

                            15 cents a copy

                    MARGARET C. ANDERSON, Publisher
                          31 West 14th Street
                             NEW YORK CITY

                              $1.50 a year

     Entered as second-class matter at Postoffice, New York, N. Y.




                           THE LITTLE REVIEW


                               VOL. III.

                               APRIL 1917

                                 NO. 10

               Copyright, 1917, by Margaret C. Anderson.




                           “I, Mary MacLane”


                                  jh.

When I heard that there was to be a new Mary MacLane book I was full of
excitement, remembering vaguely her first book. “What has the world done
to you?” I thought as I went rapidly and curiously through the pages. I
came upon parts that made me more excited. Has she made poetry—has she
made literature? Then I read it through properly from first to last.

It seems to me that Mary MacLane’s Diary of Human Days is the best
answer in the world to all those people who hold that to express
yourself completely and sincerely is to have to created Art. Mary
MacLane says: “So I write this book of Me—my Soul, my Heart, my sentient
Body, my magic Mind: their potentialities and contradictions.”

Aside from the story, which is a sort of Spoon River of thoughts,
emotions, rebellions, unconventionalities, humor, the writing of those
parts which promised to be poetry in the whole became a too-pretty
prettiness, a kind of Ladies’ Home Journalness. There is a way some
maiden ladies hold a brush when painting still-life—we call it
Spencerian.... But what makes me the most weary is the tape-worm words:
Feel-of-my-Fingers, my Boredom-of-the-Moment, etc., etc.

It is an amusing book. It is an unhappy book, and it is surprising in
all kinds of ways. It is chiefly surprising because it is not the
contradictions that contradict: it is the potentialities, the
affirmations. Whatever she affirms in the letter—that she is artist,
pagan, radical, outlaw, humorist,—she denies in the spirit. She is
really a rather set little conservative with a Presbyterian conscience.
She is an interesting and entertaining neurasthenic. Her book is
surprisingly ungrown, surprisingly commonplace. It is surprisingly not a
surprise.

She makes much talk of her old soul “worn by long cycles of time”; she
names herself an artist—a double title to a universal consciousness; and
then proceeds to analyze toward a universal consciousness. She lovingly
cherishes her free analytical mind and then in chapters like “I am
someway the Lesbian woman” and “I am not Respectable nor Refined nor in
Good Taste” she refutes her free analytical mind in the best manner of
the “good non-analytic creatures.” I cannot find the interest to a free
mind, to any thinking mind, in questioning the refinement of the natural
feelings induced by a shower bath in the solitude of a mountain gorge. A
grown mind does not consider whether it is unrefined to be natural or
expect that it ought to feel “timorous, sexless, or hygenic” under such
circumstances. A grown mind does not question the integrity of its
emotions.

_I, Mary MacLane_ is good fun to read and there is enough charm in its
abrupt realism to make up for its cloying fancifulness. It is annoying
and exasperating—annoying because it makes you feel sorry for Mary
MacLane and exasperating because it makes you wish you could help her
clear up the design a bit. It is too personal. It is an intrusion. The
artist reveals not how he lives but how he Exists, not his objects but
himself. And if he chooses himself as his object, as Mary MacLane has
done, he has not made his task any different or less difficult. It is as
foolish to talk about the artist as the man as to talk about Art as
life. Whether an artist tells out his whole soul in a single verse or in
great creations through a long life time, or only exists fully and no
one has known how he passed one of his “human days”, what he has created
will tell forever how he Existed. It is never what life does to the
artist; it is what the artist does to life.

Mary MacLane has created nothing. She has given us an anatomical drawing
of her life, has wistfully told her story with some imagination, some
beauty of phrase, some poetical conceptions, with honesty, sincerity,
with the humor of a martyr. The newspapers will take it up; it will be
praised and jeered and quoted by wits and half-wits; moral fossils will
refuse to sell it and others to read it; Lady Writers will say “she has
made a contribution to literature.” She has made a contribution, but it
would seem rather to the sexual theory.

   To-day.

   It is the edge of a somber July night in this Butte-Montana.

   The sky is overcast. The nearer mountains are gray-melancholy.

   And at this point I meet Me face to face.

   I am Mary MacLane: of no importance to the wide bright world and
   dearly and damnably important to Me.

   Face to face I look at Me with some hatred, with despair and with
   great intentness.

   I put Me in a crucible of my own making and set it in the flaming
   trivial Inferno of my mind. And I assay thus:

   I am rare—I am in some ways exquisite.

   I am pagan within and without.

   I am vain and shallow and false.

   I am a specialized being, deeply myself.

   I am of woman-sex and most things that go with that, with some
   other _pointes_.

   I am dynamic but devastated, laid waste in spirit.

   I’m like a leopard and I’m like a poet and I’m like a religieuse
   and I’m like an outlaw.

   I have a potent weird sense of humor—a saving and a demoralizing
   grace.

   I have brain, cerebration—not powerful but fine and of a
   remarkable quality.

   I am scornful-tempered and I am brave.

   I am slender in body and someway fragile and firm-fleshed and
   sweet.

   I am oddly a fool and a strange complex liar and a spiritual
   vagabond.

   I am strong, individual in my falseness: wavering, faint,
   fanciful in my truth.

   I am eternally self-conscious but sincere in it.

   I am ultra-modern, very old-fashioned: savagely incongruous.

   I am young, but not very young.

   I am wistful. I am infamous.

   In brief, I am a human being.




                                The War


                          Margaret C. Anderson

                          [_We will probably be suppressed for this._]




                      Isadora Duncan’s Misfortune


                          Margaret C. Anderson

It is impossible to write about the art of Isadora Duncan. She has no
connection with that mysterious phenomenon.

Now, please, all you people who put us down as æsthetes or shallow
cultists or youth rebelling for the sake of sensation, or tiresome
upholders of art “principles,” or sapless supporters of art as a “hole
and corner” affair—please for a moment, just listen. If you get enraged
with the censorship of the vicious Mr. Sumner every one knows it is not
because you wish to flaunt your theories of good literature to the
heavens for the want of something better to do. Very well. Grant me the
same sincerity. And grant me also another thing: that I may possibly
have something true to say.

I have waited five years to see Isadora Duncan. I went to the
Metropolitan expecting to see the Dionysian, “the feet of the Centaur
trampling the stage,” etc. I expected inspiration in a form that you are
lucky enough to experience a very few times in your life. Everybody had
talked to me this way about Isadora Duncan; every poet, painter,
sculptor and musician, every radical I know, had said, “She has real
greatness.” Well, this is what I saw:

Isadora Duncan ran and jumped and skipped and stamped and swooned about
the stage, dragging with her a body that was never meant to move in
rhythmic line, turning music into stories of war and religion,
illustrating the stories with obvious gesticulations toward the heavens
or maudlin manoeuverings towards the grave, using the same gestures for
the sweetness of Schubert as for the sacraments of César Franck, moving
always _inside_ the music, never dominating it, never even controlling
it, never holding or pushing it to an authentic end. In all my life I
have never felt such disappointment or such a weary knowledge of the
public’s predilection for what is truly bad. It didn’t occur to me to
conceal these ideas. I tried to explain what was wrong. I used Isadora
Duncan as the best example I knew of the differentiation between the
artist and the pseudo-artist. I tried to show how her conception of Art
was identical with only one other conception in the world: the dream of
the adolescent brain: that to feel greatly is to make Art and to put
your passion and your anguish into expression is to create. Isadora felt
a great deal. She shook her head and arms in such a fury of feeling that
she appeared to be strangling; and when there was no way of reaching a
further intensification she shook her whole body in a kind of spasm of
human inability to bear the grief of the world. And every move was a
futile and pitiable one because never once did her body become that
mould through which a design is to shape its course and flow into its
ultimate form. If the music made a wide swinging curve she made a
cramped sudden curve; if it made a descending line she interpreted that,
for some mysterious reason, by reverently clutching her abdomen and
looking to God.

“Oh,” they say, “you are talking about technique.”

No, no, no! I am not talking about technique. I am almost never talking
technique.

Yvette Guilbert has so little voice that she couldn’t sustain the
singing of a single song through with beauty—as we commonly speak of
beauty. Yet every time she moves her hand or turns her bird-like head or
throws that voice into the creation of her design she shows herself an
artist in the one real sense of the word. Is that a matter of technique?
Cezanne studied light until he was able to paint objects as though they
were reflected in a kind of eternal light. Is that merely technique?
Harold Bauer studied sound until he has made the technique of the older
pianists sound not like an end, nor even like a means to an end, but
merely like a lack of full vision. What do you call that? James Joyce
writes a novel in which a new kind of literary architecture is achieved
not by his following of but by his departure from what has been
established as the technique of good writing. What do you call that?

“Well, then,” says Mr. John Cowper Powys, when we argue all this, “you
are at fault. Whenever you allow any theory of art to interfere with
your enjoyment you are doing a silly thing.” But why should it occur to
you that I am doing that? Is it the obtrudance of an obstinate art
theory that makes you acclaim the poetry of Byron quite second-rate
poetry compared to that of Shelley or Keats? You would not say that your
esoteric art principles interfered with your enjoyment of Mr. Kipling,
but that Mr. Kipling interfered with your enjoyment of what might have
been his art. Isadora herself interferes with the possibility of any
æsthetic experience out of her dancing. What she does is to inspire the
mob with the only kind of feeling the mob is ever inspired with. If you
were much moved by what she suggested to you—“the trampling feet of the
Centaur, the look in her face as though she could drink blood”—why not
realize that you can feel those things, _if you feel like it_, in the
performance of the cheapest amateur.

Almost no expression of the arts is too decadent to give you such
reactions. But that is no criterion of Art. In fact the more of those
feelings you have the more you will know that what you are viewing is
not Art. Because in the presence of the latter you feel almost nothing,
you imagine nothing, you are like a being in vacuo, “your mind in that
mysterious instant Shelley likened beautifully to a fading coal.” So you
are talking only of what Isadora made you feel, not what Isadora _made_.
And the best—perhaps the only—test for Art is that your emotion is
focused on the forms in the picture, not sidetracked to what those forms
suggest to you or inform you of—as in descriptive painting or any other
bad expression. Clive Bell has said all this and said it more than
lucidly. Why should I be repeating it? You all believe it, and all your
shrines are built to this one miracle.

So you must not insist to us that Isadora Duncan is an artist. This
generation can’t be fed on any such stuff. We are tired of that kind of
loose valuation. We all know and share the debt the world owes Isadora
Duncan, and which the Russian Ballet acknowledged and put to a use she
herself could not do. But you should not force us into a position where
it positively takes courage to stand up for those values which you
yourselves believe in. Isadora Duncan, as you will know after seeing her
once, is a woman of small intelligence, a monument of undirected
adolescent vision, an ingrained sentimentalist. The spectacle of her
dancing draped in an American flag is bad enough; but her
unconsciousness of how emotion must be transmuted through a significant
medium is to me far more sad.


   A soft liquid joy flowed through the words where the soft loud
   vowels hurtled noiselessly and fell away, lapping and flowing
   back and ever shaking the white bells of their waves in mute
   chime and mute peal and soft swooning cry; and he felt that the
   augury he had sought in the wheeling darting birds and in the
   pale space of sky above him had come forth from his heart like a
   bird from a turret quietly and swiftly....

   Darkness was falling.... A trembling joy, lambent as a faint
   light, played like a fairy host around him. But why? Her passage
   through the darkening air or the verse with its black vowels and
   its opening sound, rich and lutelike?—_From James Joyce’s
   “Portrait of the Artist As A Young Man”._




                             James Joyce[1]


I suppose Mr. Joyce had some idea in mind when he gave his book the
title of A Portrait of the _Artist_ as a Young Man. But the critics seem
to want it their own way and say, “Mr. Joyce paints the Irishman as he
really is.”... Irishman, doctor, lawyer, merchant, chief, I suppose.
Francis Hackett says it “reveals the inevitable malaise of serious
youth.” Why then doesn’t this inevitable malaise of all our serious
youth end inevitably like this: the call “to create proudly out of the
freedom and power of his soul, a living thing, new and soaring, and
beautiful, impalpable, imperishable.”

H. G. Wells assures us that the youth of his country need not suffer
such tortures of adolescence because of England’s more common-sense
treatment of the sex question. And all the time Mr. Joyce was talking
about the artist of any land, not the youth of England or any other
country. In this country there is only God to thank that the young
artist does not go entirely mad over one and all of its institutions. In
our country the young artists could suffer tortures far beyond anything
suffered by Stephen, over the utter emptiness of the place. But he will
always suffer. He will always be “a naked runner lost in a storm of
spears.”

There is too much geography of the body in this education of ours. You
can talk about or write about or paint or sculpt some parts of the body
but others must be treated like the Bad Lands. You can write about what
you see that you don’t like, what you touch, taste, or hear; but you
can’t write about what you smell; if you do you are accused of using
nasty words. I could say a lot more about the geography of the body, and
how its influence goes all the way through until the censor makes a
geography for your mind and soul. But I want to talk about nasty words.
The result of this education is that we have all the nasty words in the
world in our language. How often a European or an Oriental will say:
“Oh, to us it is something very nice—beautiful; but to you it would not
be nice; it is much different in English.” When they told James Joyce he
had words like that in his book he must have been as surprised as a
painter would be if he were told that some of his colors were immoral.

His story is told the way a person in a sick room sharply remembers all
the over-felt impressions and experiences of a time of fever; until the
story itself catches the fever and becomes a thing of more definite,
closer-known, keener-felt consciousness—and of a restless oblivion of
self-consciousness.

                                                                   jh.

                   *       *       *       *       *

This James Joyce book is the most beautiful piece of writing and the
most creative piece of prose anywhere to be seen on the horizon to-day.
It is consciously a work of Art in a way that _Jean-Christophe_ made no
effort to be; it is such head and shoulders above _Jacob Stahl_ or
Gilbert Cannan’s _Mendel_ that one must realize those books as very good
novels and this as something quite more than that. It can be spoken of
in terms that apply to _Pelle the Conqueror_, but only in this way: each
is a work of Art and therefore not to be talked of as lesser or greater;
but while _Pelle_ is made of language as it has been used the _Portrait_
is made of language as it will come to be used. There is no doubt that
we will have novels before long written without even as much of the
conventional structure of language as Mr. Joyce has adhered to—a new
kind of “dimension in language” which is being felt in many places and
which George Soule has illustrated beautifully in an article in _The New
Republic_.

But that isn’t the most important thing. The interest in _Pelle_ is in
the way its stories are told. The interest in the _Portrait_ is in the
way its æsthetic content is presented.

For instance, these fragments:

   He thought his face must be white because it felt so cool. He
   could not get out the answer for the sum but it did not matter.
   White roses and red roses: those were beautiful colours to think
   of. And the cards for first place and third place were beautiful
   colours too: pink and cream and lavender. Lavender and cream and
   pink roses were beautiful to think of. Perhaps a wild rose might
   be like those colours and he remembered the song about the wild
   rose blossoms on the little green place. But you could not have a
   green rose. But perhaps somewhere in the world you could....

   The corridors were darkly lit and the chapel was darkly lit. Soon
   all would be dark and sleeping. There was cold night air in the
   chapel and the marbles were the colour the sea was at night. It
   was cold and dark under the seawall beside his father’s house.

   There was a cold night smell in the chapel. But it was a holy
   smell. It was not like the smell of the old peasants who knelt at
   the back of the chapel at Sunday mass. That was a smell of air
   and rain and turf and corduroy. But they were very holy
   peasants.... It would be lovely to sleep for one night in that
   cottage before the fire of smoking turf, in the dark lit by the
   fire, in the warm dark, breathing the smell of the peasants, air
   and rain and turf and corduroy.

   The altar was heaped with fragrant masses of white flowers: and
   in the morning light the pale flames of the candles among the
   white flowers were clear and silent as his own soul....

                   *       *       *       *       *

   ... The air of the late March evening made clear their flight,
   their dark quivering bodies flung clearly against the sky as
   against a limp hung cloth of smoky tenuous blue.

   He watched their flight; bird after bird: a dark flash, a swerve,
   a flutter of wings. He tried to count them before all their
   darting quivering bodies passed: Six, ten, eleven: and wondered
   were they odd or even in number. Twelve, thirteen: for two came
   wheeling down from the upper sky. They were flying high and low
   but ever round and round in straight and curving lines and ever
   flying from left to right, circling about a temple of air.

   He listened to the cries: like the squeak of mice behind the
   wainscot: a shrill twofold note. But the notes were long and
   shrill and whirring, unlike the cry of vermin, falling a third or
   a fourth and trilled as the flying beaks clove the air. Their cry
   as shrill and clear and fine and falling like threads of silken
   light unwound from whirring spools....

   A soft liquid joy like the noise of many waters flowed over his
   memory and he felt in his heart the soft peace of silent spaces
   of fading tenuous sky above the waters, of oceanic silence, of
   swallows flying through the seadusk over the flowing waters.

                                                           M. C. A.

----------

   [1] _A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, by James Joyce. New
   York: B. W. Huebsch._




                         The Vers Libre Contest


At last after many months the prize contest has been decided. I know
very little about prize contests, but I imagine that there has never
been one in the history of poetry which could boast so many really bad
poems. Personally I think there are not more than four or five with any
suggestion of poetry in them: the rest are either involuntarily
humorous, like the one printed at the end, or pompously anachronistic
like the one which asks: “Shall I with frantic hands unloose the cord
that binds me to this life?”

The judges were Eunice Tietjens, Helen Hoyt, and William Carlos
Williams. They came to no unanimous decision as to which two poems were
the best, and the only two they voted for mutually are those printed
below. _Sea Poppies_ turned out to be by H. D., and _Images of
Friendship_ by Maxwell Bodenheim. (The former had not yet been published
in H. D.’s book).


                              Sea Poppies

                                 H. D.

   Amber husk
   fluted with gold,
   fruit on the sand
   marked with a rich grain,

   treasure
   spilled near the shrub-pines
   to bleach on the boulders:

   your stalk has caught root
   among wet pebbles
   and drift flung by the sea
   and grated shells,
   and slit conch-shells.

   Beautiful, wide-spread,
   fire upon leaf,
   what meadow yields
   so fragrant a leaf
   as your bright leaf?


                          Images of Friendship

                           Maxwell Bodenheim

   Grey drooping-shouldered bushes scrape the edges
   Of bending swirls of yellow-white flowers.
   So do my thoughts meet the wind-scattered color of you.

   The green shadowed trance of the water
   Is splintered to little white-tasseled awakenings
   By the beat of long black oars.
   So do your words cut the massed smoothness of thoughts of you.

   Split, brown-blue clouds press into each-other
   Over hills dressed in mute, clinging haze.
   So do my thoughts slowly form over the draped mystery of you.

The two prizes of $25 each go therefore to H. D. and Mr. Bodenheim.

But it may be interesting to print some of the others. For instance, not
a single judge mentioned the following:


                                 Stream

                           Richard Aldington


                                   I.

   Pebbles, that gleam dully,
   white, faint ochre, drab green:
   mosaic under pale sliding water.


                                  II.

   Foam;
   mobile crests leaping, sinking:
   thin fingers grasping round cold rocks.


                                  III.

   Pines, white ash-trees,
   black-thorns, winter grass,
   mirrored trembling in you, O vagrant,
   bending away from you and towards you:
   hesitating, importunate lovers.


                                  IV.

   Small blue waves straining to meet,
   never touching, always elusive:
   mocking, half-virginal lips.

Eunice Tietjens mentioned _Flower_ and _Foam_ with this qualification:
“Provided Richard Aldington wrote them. Otherwise not. My point is that
if he wrote them they are authentic as well as lovely, but if he did not
so flagrant an imitator ought not to be encouraged even if he is a
successful copyist.”


                                 Flower

                           Edward J. O’Brien

   Here by the pastures of Hybla
   Dreameth in azure stillness Daphne, a maiden.
   Her throat was softer than light and honey-haunted.


                                  Foam

   Here by the foaming sky with cloud-capped horses,
   I, a maiden, lie by the windy ocean,
   Dreaming of quiet waters
   Guarded by willows.

Dr. Williams’s first choice was _The Master_, “for the reason that it
has most imaginative charm while possessing at the same time a fairly
even unity of rhythm, a simple straight forward diction and a very
subtle depth of thought. The image is progressively developed to a fine
and natural conclusion with great simplicity and restraint, without
waste of materia, without redundancy of any kind.”

What or where is the subtle depth of thought? Almost every kind of
person in the world has had this thought: it is not even a poetic
thought. And what is there in the treatment to make it poetry?


                               The Master

                             Jeanne D’Orge

   In the dusk a child sits playing
   Five-finger exercises
   Up and down, down and up
   Jagged notes and even,
   Down and up, up and down
   Interminably.
   About him all unseen
   In the folds of the shadows
   Stand the great shades
   Bach ... Beethoven ... Brahms ...
   Listening with exquisite attention
   As to a master.

Helen Hoyt mentioned the following:


                             Autumn Ballet

                         Charles Wharton Stork

   Oh dancers in yellow!—
   Tall, saffron-garmented poplars with arms uplifted,
   Slender-limbed beeches
   Draped in a modester russet,
   Chestnuts, walnuts and sassafrasses,
   And ruffle-skirted maples—
   Why do ye stand at pause?
   When will the music begin
   For you, oh dancers in yellow?

Dr. Williams’s fourth choice is a poem of Charles Ashleigh’s which he
describes as “a spirited and well-constructed defiance.” I think it is a
very trite effort—one of those loose though rather happy expressions of
mood that has no more to do with art than a man’s exclamation that he
means to tramp in the woods on a bright spring day.


                           Once More—The Road

                            Charles Ashleigh

   The printed page
   Whispers vainly
   In my memory....
   The locomotive howls!

   Limping philosophies
   Murmur weakly
   And then are silenced
   By the laughter of wanderers.

   The sadness of creeds
   Dies
   Under tramps’ ribaldry.

   And my road-thirst,
   Avid and aching,
   Conquers the muttering
   Of puling scholarship.

   Let my heart blossom in journeying;
   And my maw be well stuffed
   With delectable incident!

Eunice Tietjens would have been willing to give _Lovescape_ a prize if
either of the other judges had chosen it, but they did not. And in spite
of its cadenced mounting and falling—which is an attribute of technique,
not necessarily of art—it remains merely a slight puff of poetic
feeling, not a good poem.


                               Lovescape

                              Adolf Wolff

   Sky
   Deep blue sky
   Clouds
   Thin clouds
   Drifting drifting
   Grass
   Soft cool grass
   Breeze
   Soft warm breeze
   Hands pressing
   Mouths mingling
   Love
   Passion
   Ecstacy
   Faintness
   Calm
   Resting
   Sky
   Deep blue sky
   Clouds
   Thin clouds
   Drifting drifting.

Helen Hoyt chose the two following for the prizes. Now I hope these
judges will not get provoked with me or feel that I am being personal or
any of the other things that one is usually accused of when one is most
impersonally talking his “cause.” I am simply overflowing with criticism
of their valuations and I must speak it out. These two poems are pretty
awful, I think. Where are the winged words that make poetry something
beyond thoughts or ideas of emotions?


                                Victory

                            Sarah Bard Field

   When we were lifted high on the crest of the wave
   And Passion made you oblivious,
   I reached above you for a star
   And caught it.
   When we sank deep into the trough of the wave
   And satisfied desire over-flooded you,
   I reached below you for a pearl
   And possessed it.
   You have nothing left from that night
   But a memory, chained to yourself.
   I have something left from that night
   That will one day fill his eyes with star-dust,
   Measuring the heavens,
   And tangle his feet in sea-weed,
   Searching the Ocean.
   Because of that night
   A thought stirs in you.
   It will grow weaker with Time
   It will be dead when you are dead.
   Because of that night,
   A child stirs in me.
   He will grow stronger with Time
   He will plant pansies on our graves
   When we are dead.


                              Art Is Born

                           Miriam van Waters

   My leisure has flowered: a new thing has come into my hands,
   Time has come. I possess time as though it were a thing.
   I lie still in the scented grass and the hours come into my hands.
   They float up as little balloons float from the hands of children,—
   Like golden, silken spheres sailing high into the air,
   One by one they mount slow and as fragile as dreams.
   The hours from my hands go up like kites,—
   I hold their slender thread,
   I move it faintly and they sway,
   Rocking in the clear blue of the sky.
   They do not return to me, but very gently they vanish....
   Somewhere,
   While I hold their silken, slender thread in my hands.

   My leisure has come sharp, like a crystal:
   It glows and is pointed,
   The poignancy of weapons has come into my leisure.
   I possess time as though it were a thing.
   The hours come into my hands like spears—
   Flashing crystal spars of light
   That is winged.
   I seize them as they come to me.
   I throw the weight of my body
   Into my stroke and boldly
   I hurl them into space,—into the heart of my enemy
   The Stillness who lurks there in the depths of the dark.

Dr. Williams says of _The Flower Smeller_: “It might have been a very
fine thing indeed had the author known how to come to a conclusion
properly. Parts of this poem have more promise than anything in the
whole batch of manuscript.” It is, obviously, better. But it isn’t a gem
by any means; it belongs rather with those almost fine things that make
you impatient because they didn’t turn out to be gems.


                           The Flower Smeller

                              L. R. Bonham

   Bubbles, mist and visions
   colored shapes winging against the sky
   a sip from a brown Venetian glass.

   Meseems
   gauze drops are pulled upwards
   and confetti flung into the past.
   A fairy queen in a crystal coach
   opens the door, she beckons,
   the painted crest looks familiar.

   Six little men with sticks
   pass by, one taller than the rest
   laughs and points at
   a junkheap of keepsakes.
   Distant music in the park
   you and I at the bay window,
   gossiping neighbors, a cool breeze,
   old second hand furniture, ice cream and moonlight
   all painted as in one stroke.

   Spirals of smoke, crushed tissue paper,
   colored ribbons and black masks,
   floor sweepings after a ball—
   I twirl a flower between thumb and index
   I feel golden dust on the tip of my nose—
   a futile occupation
   yet something has happened.

And this one, which was among Helen Hoyt’s choices, belongs also in the
exasperatingly “somehow good” school.


                           November Afternoon

                        Marjorie Allen Seiffert

   Upon our heads
   The oak-leaves fall
   Like silent benedictions
   Closing autumn’s gorgeous ritual,
   And we
   Upborne by warship
   Lift our eyes to the altar of distant hills.

   Beloved
   How can I know
   What gods are yours,
   How can I guess the visions of your spirit,
   Or hear
   The silent prayers your heart has said—

   Only by this I feel
   Your gods akin to mine,
   That when our lips have met
   On this last golden autumn afternoon
   They have confessed
   In silence
   Our kisses were less precious than our dreams.

   To-day
   Our passion drowned in beauty
   We turn away our faces toward the hills
   Where purple haze, like incense,
   Spreads its veil.

Here, I think, are two very interesting ones, the first of which Dr.
Williams considers worthy of special mention—“the image evoked is
charmingly successful.” The authors are respectively Fritz Peters and
his brother, Thomas Willing Peters.

   The wind blows hard
   No bird is there
   And the smoke is drowning in the lake.

                  (_Dictated at the age of two years and ten months._)

   When it rains it makes beautiful colors
   It makes red and blue and white
   And red and blue stripes on the water
   And the pier goes out to get the sky.

              (_Dictated at the age of three years and eight months._)

The following four were not mentioned by any of the judges, but in my
judgment they are better than many of the “honorable mentions.”


                              The Soldiers

                             Horace Holley

   Whom I long since had known,
   Long since forgotten;
   Who cast their names behind them like a dream,
   Like stagnant water spitting
   Their tasteless souls away;
   These are the soldiers,
   The nameless, the changelings,
   Monstrous with slow tormenting Number,
   Pestilent with unremitting Machine.

   Soldiers ...
   These are they whom I suspected, guilty and glorious,
   Crouching in my own thought’s background,
   Released by the whirlwind of fate
   To move as winds that scream about the Pole,
   As darkness of sea-depths,
   As meeting of ice and flame.
   Priests of the mystic sensual death,
   When shall they return?
   When shall they return, broken, from Hell?

   The fuse of a thousand years has burned:
   _Lord, quicken the groping hands of to-morrow!_


                              The Assault

                              John Cournos

   You come—
   black of wing,
   black of beak,
   flock on flock—
   ravenous, cawing.

   Your cries—arrows—
   shrill, clamorous, strident,
   pierce the heart.

   O wounded reverie
   on still water,
   white in faint mist,
   you spurt red drops.

   O white swan,
   shape of magnificent sadness,
   spread out your wings,
   flutter white through the air,
   disperse the black—the raucous.


                         Girl of Jade and Ivory

                            Mitchell Dawson

   Thru the dark arches of many nights
   Your voice has led me,
   Groping.
   Across the echoing pavements
   Of the nights that stretch before me
   And past the niches
   Where grotesque doubts
   Mock me for seeking,
   I shall follow
   The impalpable strands of your voice—
   Like thread fine-spun from melted pearls
   Drawn singing
   Thru the darkness,
   Until at last I shall find you
   In a deep hollow of that immeasurable rock
   From which all nights are hewn;
   And your eyes will bind me forever
   While your long white fingers caress me.
   I shall not heed the waiting days
   As they gutter and die out.


                               The South

                             Witter Bynner

         O the true difference!—
   The sun at last
   Gilds me again
   And my face is no more a white stalk of celery
   But a golden mango
   And the foot-tracked mud of my heart
   Is sunk deep down
   In the blue waters and purified with a scouring
   Of coral....
   Cranes carry peace to the east and the west
   And joy stands clear by the mangroves,
   A torch,
   A flamingo.

This last one may be printed as a sample of the rest of the contest, and
speaks for itself. It came with a little note saying “I hope it may win
one of the prizes in the contest, being original free verse and very
patriotic.”


                          A Mother’s Sacrifice

   The day has come, beloved son—
     When duty’s call resound,
   Your father fought, and laurels won
     He firmly held the ground.
   Now honor calls you to be true,
     To the dear flag, red-white-and blue
   Long may it wave o’er land and sea—
     Thou sweet land of liberty.

   I thank the God who gave to me,
     So true, so brave a son—
   Who on the field prefers to be,
     Until the battle’s won.
   The God on high alone doth know,
     The torture and the nag—
   In sacrificing all I own,
     To help protect the flag.

   Fare-well dear boy of loyalty,
     To country and to home—
   God will reward you royally,
     Wherever you may roam.
   And when the war is o’er—Oh joy,
     How proud I then shall be—
   To find my darling soldier boy,
     Come home unscathed to me.




                              Announcement


We are going to have a book store in connection with The Little Review.

This is not merely a plan to sell you books through a kind of mail order
system, which we tried once before and which did not work out very well,
but a regular book shop in the large front room of our office where you
can sit by a fire and choose your books and perhaps even drink a cup of
tea during your selection.

It will be a beautiful shop to look at and it will have all the books
you will want; or if you are the kind of person who wants books nobody
else wants we can guarantee to get them for you within half a day.

Also we can supply mail orders promptly to any of our subscribers. By
handling this part of the business directly we will avoid all the
confusion and delays inherent in our former arrangement.

We want to open our shop by May 1 if possible, and the next issue will
contain the complete announcement.

We cannot take any orders until that date, but if you will deluge us
with your patronage after that time we will be eternally grateful.

                          “THE LITTLE REVIEW,”
                          31 West 14th Street,
                             New York City.




                              “Surprise”!


The “surprise” I promised in the last issue is this:

Ezra Pound is to become Foreign Editor of “The Little Review.”

This means that he and T. S. Eliot will have an American organ (horrible
phrase) in which they can appear regularly once a month, where James
Joyce can appear when he likes, and where Wyndham Lewis can appear if he
comes back from the war. Also it means two or three other names of the
“young blood” who will contribute from time to time, and altogether the
most stunning plan that any magazine has had the good fortune to
announce for a long, long time.

It means that a great deal of the most creative work of modern London
and Paris will be published in these pages. So that by getting “The
Little Review” and “The Egoist” you will be in touch with the two most
important radical organs of contemporary literature.

It all goes into effect with the May issue, and I can promise that it
will not be “delayed on account of the war,” because the copy is already
here ready for the printer.

Now will all you subscribers help to bring in as many new subscriptions
as possible right away, and will all of you whose subscriptions are
overdue renew quickly, and will any of you who are overburdened with
money contribute a little toward our next issue? It is so terribly hard
to get started in a new city, though everything will go so much better
once we are fully started here. And though I have been looking for a
printer who would do our work for nothing, or even for a small
amount,—incredible as it may sound, I have not yet found him.




                           The Reader Critic


                            The March Issue

Harold Bauer, New York:

The only trouble with the last number of _The Little Review_ is that
there is not enough Bauer in it. Why drag in Mary?


                                  Note

H., Cleveland:

I believe you have largely proved your contention that you are producing
a magazine which has an understanding of what Art is by the splendid
recognition you award Mary Garden. Clarity, in comprehending her, has
been too frightfully rare.


                                To “jh”

Louise Gebhard Cann, Seattle:

I must love any one who can write as you write!

Even, if I were a revengeful soul I should be quite disarmed by your
full-skinned satin prose-ecstasy. It is as seductive as the rice-eating
women of Nippon. Such beauty brings tears to my eyes and I bend over it
insatiate as over a flower whose perfume tortures me with too much
delight and eludes the tentacles of my analysis.

I could have written like that once; but the indifference of editors and
publishers has taken the bloom off my expression. My enthusiasms have
turned cosmic. I love life’s bitterness; I love my critics. I love the
grotesqueness that I used to abhor; and nothing is hideous. The sensuous
airs of the world I have passed by. They are there but in them I taste
aloes and I hear cacophony. My zest is of clangors, the strident battles
of the intellect and the spirit, juiceless acrid food whose sweetness
comes only after long crushing. The implacable witch-forces of life have
put a spell upon me! I live through my own superabundance of being, not
through the abundance of others; amid my friends I am a strong hermit.
And so your luscious “Mary Garden” is my yesterday. I love it as I love
those sunny fruits of my past....

I want to say, too, how much I enjoyed Amy Lowell’s poem in this number
and how glad I am that you give us Richard Aldington. The more I read of
Amy Lowell the more she conquers me. She does not give me ecstasy; she
stabs me with wonder. She transfixes me with her polished swords,
gem-hilted, cold, glittering. I stare amazed as at a comet. Aldington
lifts me to the torment of too much bliss. I fear the spell he puts upon
me; I approach each new piece of his with reluctance, trying to avert a
devastating possession of my being. Then bravely I read and my head
swims. His aftermood is a long delicious intoxication, a deep rich dream
of a Hellas that never was.


                             Isadora Duncan

New York subscriber:

How we have looked forward to seeing Isadora Duncan dance! I was glad to
see you advertise her in that first splendid New York edition of yours.
I went to see her, of course. But——! It’s because I wonder if any people
felt the way I did the night of March 6 at the Metropolitan that I am
writing you....

I was grateful, of course, for the César-Franck—what human movements
will express this, I wondered. A dark blue empty stage. I have seen
darkness attempted on the stage before,—but the shadow thrown by the
orchestra light made this floor a blacker black—and a light lit up a
crouching figure. Redemption, a fragment from a César-Franck symphony.
This was only the first—I was willing to wait. Then Ave Maria and the
figure was standing with a too-brilliant glare accentuating something
that was not beautiful. The music goes on; the figure assumes some
rather striking statuesque poses: arms uplifted, one arm uplifted, head
thrown back—that too-glaring light again. She turns, the line of her
thigh and leg heavy—the modern sculptors have taught us to believe it
good. Then a Giotto figure she seemed; a minute later Mrs. Flyn coming
up from her wash-tub in the basement; a chord from the orchestra and the
Statue of Liberty is before us. Encore; and Botticelli’s nymph hastens
to Venus: she bows and a wilted Easter Lily bud which never knew full
blossom is before us.

Tschaikowsky _Pathetique_: adagio, to an empty stage; scherzo, and—!! I
wonder how many yards of cloth in that drop, are there two, or is it the
lights that changed the color? This woman’s thigh is atrocious! Those
must be real flowers she is using to scatter about; good pose there as
the curtains fall,—nice line from ankle to shoulder; but that costume!
Encore, and flowers. She trips in like a soubrette, the one whose place
in the chorus is assured forever because she knows the manager. Second
encore,—posing for the public with an uplifted white rose—this the great
dancer!

But, with the strains of the _Marseillaise_ she appeared from the rear,
right, in scarlet. And that part of the audience who claims France by
birthright rose, as also did the other part, by the assumed insolence of
pretense which says each man has two countries: the states and France!
Well, the audience rose and Isadora (we’re feeling chummy by this time)
pointed! At the finish of the air—which surmounted all despite the
figure on the stage—she disclosed what we suspected was there: an
American flag! And the orchestra played _Star Spangled Banner_ and she
kissed the flag, and the audience sang; and after “Bravos” she “danced”
the _Marseillaise_ again and the audience shrieked; and the orchestra
played _America_ off key and swung to _Star Spangled Banner_ again and
she unwound the flag from off her and danced the thing they were
playing,—in that costume of dark red she had worn when she danced the
Call to Battle and the Lamentations Following Triumph of the
_Pathetique_; and trampling on the red which was France, waving the flag
which was the U. S. A., in the costume representing Poland—she pointed!
And because she had _pointed_ skyward earthward and battleward, all in
the course of one evening, we left, saying: “Well, we have seen Isadora
Duncan dance!”


                                  _The
                                Novelist
                                 of the
                                Insects_


                                J. HENRI
                                 FABRE

           _Author of “The Life of the Fly”, “The Life of the
                             Caterpillar_”.

   The Latest Translation from Fabre’s Works by Teixeira is now out

   THE LIFE OF THE GRASSHOPPER

   You may think you care nothing about grasshoppers but Fabre’s
   story about the grasshopper reads like a romance.

   _Send for our little illustrated descriptive pamphlet on Fabre’s
   Life and Work, mentioning the Little Review_

   Dodd, Mead & Co., 4th Ave. & 30th St., N. Y.




                             The Greenwich
                            Village Theatre

   now in course of construction will open in September. Situated at
   the junction of Fourth Street and Seventh Avenue—it will have a
   seating capacity of 450 and a stage complete with modern
   equipment. The theatre is easily accessible. The new Seventh
   Avenue Subway near completion, has a station practically at its
   doors, while the Sixth Avenue L and the Fifth Avenue busses are
   only two blocks away. Books now open for subscribers. Full
   particulars from offices, 1 Sheridan Sq., N. Y. C.




                                 ARNOLD
                                 GENTHE


                              PHOTOGRAPHER

                                 STUDIO
                           1 WEST 46th STREET
                             THORLEY BLDG.
                        FIFTH AVE & 46TH STREET

                         TELEPHONE, BRYANT 2388




                                _Wanted_

   Will any one who has a fairly good violin for which he has no
   further use please give it to us? We want to give it in turn to
   an old man who is lonely.




                               LIPPINCOTT
                                 BOOKS

                               1792 1917


                            FOR SALE AT ALL
                               BOOKSTORES

                        J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY
                      MONTREAL PHILADELPHIA LONDON

                       Joseph Pennell’s Pictures
                         of War Work in England

   With an Introduction. By H. G. Wells. 51 plates. Lithograph on
   cover.

                               $1.50 net.

   Mr. Pennell secured permission through Lloyd George to make these
   remarkable pictures of War Work in England, the making of great
   guns, of shot and shell, the building of air crafts and war
   vessels. Mr. Pennell’s drawings leave an impression of a nation’s
   grandeur more vivid even than the pictures of armies and navies
   in actual combat.

                          Some Russian Heroes,
                           Saints and Sinners

        By Sonia E. Howe, Author of “A Thousand Years of Russian
                      History.” 44 illustrations.

                               $2.50 net.

   These stories are fascinating studies of Russia and present the
   intensely human side of a great people. They give one an
   understanding of Russian national life and character which is far
   more vivid than any historical work could possibly be.




                            Leading Books of
                           the Spring Season

   THE CHOSEN PEOPLE, by Sidney L. Nyburg. One of the outstanding
   novels of the season. Selected by H. W. BOYNTON, in N. Y. NATION,
   March 22nd.

   OH, MARY, BE CAREFUL, by George Weston. Establishes a record.
   Moving picture and dramatic rights sold within a month after
   publication.

   THE MARK OF CAIN, by Carolyn Wells, author of the Fleming Stone
   detective stories.

   THE BOOK OF THE PEONY, by Mrs. Edward Harding. The only work on
   this flower.

   JOSEPH PENNELL’S PICTURES OF WAR WORK IN ENGLAND. 51 plates.

                        (See Description Below)

   Sidney L. Nyburg is marked as a brilliant novelist. He writes
   with a pen unthwarted by false notions, but alive with sincerity
   and genuine artistic impulse.

                               $1.40 net.

                           The Chosen People

                            THREE PRINTINGS

   NEW YORK TIMES:—“A brilliant piece of work.... A story of
   distinction.”

   NEW YORK TRIBUNE:—“The author has an almost uncanny gift of
   piercing to the marrow of human motives.”

   NEW YORK WORLD:—“Mr. Nyburg has written living, stirring
   chapters.”

   BOSTON TRANSCRIPT:—“Of exceptional quality. It brings to life a
   little studied aspect of our civilization.”

   BALTIMORE EVENING SUN:—“The interest is unflagging from beginning
   to end.”




                           SOME IMAGIST POETS
                                  1917

                               including
                           RICHARD ALDINGTON
                                “H. D.”
                          JOHN GOULD FLETCHER
                              F. S. FLINT
                             D. H. LAWRENCE
                               AMY LOWELL

   “_Imagist poetry fills us with hope.... Old forms of verse are
   filled with ghosts.... The Imagist can, with his very form, purge
   himself from these.... So he can be more interesting than other
   poets._”—_London Times._

   Now ready, in binding uniform with the previous Imagist
   anthologists. 75c net at all bookstores.

                       OTHER IMAGIST ANTHOLOGIES
                 SOME IMAGIST POETS—3rd Edition—75c net
              SOME IMAGIST POETS, 1916—2nd Edition—75c net

           4 Park Street · Houghton Mifflin · Company Boston


                             Mason & Hamlin


                       The Stradivarius of Pianos




                           Mason & Hamlin Co.

                             313 5th Avenue
                                New York




                            I, MARY MACLANE

                         A DIARY OF HUMAN DAYS

                            By MARY MACLANE

   “So I write this book of Me—my Soul, my Heart, my sentient Body,
   my magic Mind: their potentialities and contradictions.”

   Here is a curtain drawn aside—disclosing a soul essentially rare
   and unusual, dwelling apart. Its attributes are lyric beauty;
   chaotic disregard of the conventionalities; passionate humanness;
   and a sense of humor which is elusive, creative, delicate.

   The frankest and most startling personal record of a woman’s life
   that has come up in generations. This book is an adventure of the
   spirit cast in heroic dimensions—an epic of struggle and victory,
   heights and depths, which will hold the reader spellbound.

   Gertrude Atherton says:

   “Mary MacLane’s book is as great a piece of literature as I felt
   sure it would be, absorbingly interesting, and so original that
   no one else in the world could have written it.”

                        _Cloth, 12mo, net $1.40_

                                   IN
                             THE WILDERNESS

                           By ROBERT HICHENS
                 _Author of “The Garden of Allah” etc._

   “Mr. Hichens’ wonderful descriptive talent which took the world
   by storm when displayed in “The Garden of Allah” once more works
   its spell upon the reader.... By far the best-constructed story
   the author has yet produced, worked out with the consummate skill
   of a true artist.”—_Philadelphia Ledger._

                        _Cloth, 12mo, net $1.50_

                            CHILDREN OF FATE

                           By MARICE RUTLEDGE

           For thinkers on both sides of the peace question—A
                      war novel that is different.

   “If races are to evolve into a higher state it must be through
   finer, cleverer methods than war. War is a stupid return for
   education.... Internationalism is a remedy.”

                        _Cloth, 12mo, net $1.35_

          Publishers · FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY · New York


                        GRAPHID PRESS, NEW YORK




                          Transcriber’s Notes


Advertisements were collected at the end of the text.

The table of contents on the title page was adjusted in order to reflect
correctly the headings in this issue of THE LITTLE REVIEW.

The original spelling was mostly preserved. A few obvious typographical
errors were silently corrected. All other changes are shown here
(before/after):

   [p. 3]:
   ... am dynamic but devastated, laid waste in spirit. ...
   ... I am dynamic but devastated, laid waste in spirit. ...

   [p. 5]:
   ... Isadore Duncan’s Misfortune ...
   ... Isadora Duncan’s Misfortune ...

   [p. 5]:
   ... Isadora Duncan ran jumped and skipped and stamped and swooned ...
   ... Isadora Duncan ran and jumped and skipped and stamped and
       swooned ...

   [p. 10]:
   ... peasants.... It would be lovely to to sleep ...
   ... peasants.... It would be lovely to sleep ...

   [p. 14]:
   ... Helen Hoylt mentioned the following: ...
   ... Helen Hoyt mentioned the following: ...






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE REVIEW, APRIL 1917 (VOL. 3, NO. 10) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


