The Project Gutenberg eBook of The care of the skin and hair
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The care of the skin and hair
        and other general health hints

Author: Morris Fishbein

Release date: August 17, 2025 [eBook #76693]

Language: English

Original publication: Girard: Haldeman-Julius Publications, 1927

Credits: Carla Foust, Tim Miller and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned images of public domain material from the Google Books project.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CARE OF THE SKIN AND HAIR ***





  LITTLE BLUE BOOK NO. 1242
  Edited by E. Haldeman-Julius

  The Care of the
  Skin and Hair

  And Other General Health Hints

  Morris Fishbein, M. D.

  Editor Journal American Medical Association
  and Hygeia, the Health Magazine.

  HALDEMAN-JULIUS PUBLICATIONS
  GIRARD, KANSAS




  Copyright, 1927,
  Haldeman-Julius Company.


  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                          Page

  Skin Diseases and Their Cure                               5

  Cosmetics                                                  7

  Skin Disease Quackery                                      8

  Magic of Plastic Surgery Replaces Scarring Knife          10

  Button in Savage’s Skull First Plastic Surgery            11

  Beware of Beauty Doctor Who Offers Guarantees             13

  Either Hair or Health Endangered by Dyes                  15

  Skin Eruptions Laid to Poison in Dyed Fur                 17

  Most Moles Harmless, But Watch Black Ones!                18

  Flowers Carry Poison                                      20

  Snow, Cold Water Best in Treating Frostbite               22

  Wash Your Neck Well to Ward Off Boils                     23

  Psoriasis One of Most Annoying Skin Faults                25

  Cauliflower Ears                                          26

  Flopping Ear Needs Careful Operation                      27

  Rubber “Reducers” Are Foes of Comfort But Not of Fat      29

  Be Careful in Use of Laxative Gums                        30

  Overeating Harmful After Middle Life                      31




CARE OF THE SKIN AND HAIR AND OTHER GENERAL HEALTH HINTS




SKIN DISEASES AND THEIR CURE


There are still persons who believe that every disease of the skin can
be successfully treated with a salve, a lotion or a powder. This belief
and the advertisements of nostrums for the treatment of skin disease
are a reflection of the actual knowledge of such conditions held even
by the medical profession a quarter of a century ago.

Today the methods of treatment of skin diseases include practically
every form of apparatus, every method of medical administration known
to medical science. This advance is a reflection of the application of
knowledge in physics, chemistry, biology and bacteriology to medicine,
and of a more thorough comprehension of the fact that the skin is not
merely a protective covering for the body but an organ whose condition
reflects that of the other tissues and influences them definitely.

Perhaps the greatest advance has been the X-ray and the knowledge that
application of its rays would affect not only tumors, whose cause is
unknown, but also inflammations and degenerations of the skin produced
by parasitic organisms. Not only the rays of the X-ray tube, but also
those of radium, of the sun and of the ultraviolet lamps are known
to have definite effects on the skin. Radium is used for destroying
cancer of the skin, masses of veins, birth marks, moles and similar
unsightly excresences. As Dr. Fred Wise indicated at a recent meeting
of specialists in diseases of the skin, the physician is no longer
limited to any single form of treatment, but may attack such growths
with any of the destructive rays that have been mentioned; he may
freeze them with carbon dioxid snow; he may remove them surgically with
the knife; he may dry them by passing an electric current through them,
or cut them with a needle whose cutting power depends on vibrations
produced by electric waves. In attacking certain parasitic diseases
of the skin, the specialist reaches them through the blood, injecting
combinations of dyes and metallic elements or specific drugs which
produce the immediate death of the parasitic organisms when they come
in contact with them.

There still remain infections and diseases of the skin which are not
easily amenable to treatment. Pemphigus, in which there are tremendous
wheals, blisters and similar eruptions, is not known to yield easily
to any form of treatment, although it may be benefited on occasion
by the use of drugs such as arsenic and quinine. Generalized changes
of the nature of the skin resulting from disturbances of the nervous
system and of the glands sometimes resist every form of medical attack.
Research in the field of skin diseases is one of the most promising
opportunities for investigation to the medical man with research
instincts.




COSMETICS


Since investigation has been undertaken by physicians and chemists
there is less and less likelihood of the sale or purchase of cosmetic
preparations, including face creams, powders and lotions, containing
poisonous ingredients, although at one time such metallic poisons
as lead, bismuth, or arsenic could be found as ingredients of such
beautifiers. Nowadays, the difficulty seems to be that there are a
multiplicity of preparations which have no real warrant, since they
differ only in unessential qualities from each other. There are, for
example, dozens of creams sold for application to the skin with claims
that they nourish the skin, when, as a matter of fact, there is no such
thing as a skin food. All of these creams essentially are cold creams,
modified by varying amounts of perfumes or other thinning or thickening
factors.

These statements do not apply, however, to the creams that are used as
depilatories. Most of the widely advertised ointments for this purpose
have as their basis a salt of the metal barium. Application of the
ointment removes the hair, but does not affect the growing end within
the skin. In most instances the new growth of hair is thicker and
coarser and darker than the original growth removed by the depilatory.
In some instances, superfluous hair is removed by the application of
the X-ray. It has been found, however, that X-ray machines seldom kill
the living cell from which the hair grows, unless it is applied in
dosage so strong as to produce definite changes in the skin itself.

Specialists in diseases of the skin are being called on to treat
thickening of the skin, or so-called precancerous keratosis, resulting
from the use of the X-ray for the removal of hair by inexperienced
persons. Those who give special attention to these problems are agreed
that the one certain method of removal of superfluous hair is the use
of the electric needle. It must be understood, however, that it is
possible to remove only a few hairs at a single treatment, and that the
method requires great expertness in its application.




SKIN DISEASE QUACKERY


Faith springs eternal in the human breast and credulity is not the
property of any single class. One finds our best educated citizens
just as easily susceptible to false and fraudulent claims as the
most ignorant. Indeed, in many instances, particularly in relation
to medical science, a little knowledge is a dangerous thing, since
its possessor is likely to be impressed with his own ability to make
suitable judgments.

Of particular interest in this connection are the many cosmetics
offered to women who seek eternally for artificial beauty. According
to an investigation recently made, the American public paid, in
1921, $150,000,000 for perfumery and cosmetics. There were purchased
240,000,000 packages of talcum and face powders and 18,000,000
packages of rouge.

Students of diseases of the skin constantly emphasize the difficulty
of determining the nature of any eruption. Red spots and slight
inflammations may be due to disturbances of digestion, to special
sensitivity to various food substances, to eczema, to any one of a
half-dozen infections, and possibly to tuberculosis or to syphilis.

Since the tendency of some minor conditions is to recover without
treatment, persons are likely to indulge in self-treatment and thus to
neglect the more serious complaints to a time when a cure is far more
difficult than when they are seen early. Cancer of the skin appears in
its beginning as a small and rather unnoticeable spot; if seen early,
it is easily controlled, but if stimulated by the use of all sorts of
caustic acids or pastes it may become so serious as to produce death.

The craze for beauty has also resulted in the tremendous rise of
the beauty parlor. It is easy to remember the time when our largest
cities could boast of but five or ten hair-dressing establishments.
Today in the Boroughs of Manhattan and the Bronx alone there are 1,177
hair-dressing establishments. Here women come not only for massages and
permanent waves but also, frequently, for the treatment of diseases
of the skin and for the removal of superfluous hair, moles, warts, or
tumors.

These beauty parlors are the outgrowth, in many instances, of
manufacturing establishments for the sale of cosmetics. Here cold
cream masquerades under twenty different names and women purchase for
considerable sums preparations which cannot possibly do the things that
are claimed for them.

One finds “rose leaf cleansers,” “skin fresheners,” “face moulding
creams,” “balsam tissue astringents,” “skin fatteners” and “skin
thinners,” cleansing creams and vanishing creams, regardless of the
fact that specialists in the disease of the skin have stated again and
again that all that any cream can accomplish is simply to make the skin
more pliable.




MAGIC OF PLASTIC SURGERY REPLACES SCARRING KNIFE


During the World War the mutilating injuries suffered by many of the
men were assuaged through the development of new features in surgical
technique.

Whereas formerly it was considered sufficient merely to sew up a wound,
to amputate a shattered limb or to save life regardless of appearance,
surgeons then began to consider operations with a view to the most
presentable appearance possible after repair.

The technique itself is difficult but the war yielded a few masters in
the medical service of each of the warring nations.

_Stitching and Filling In._--In addition to making wounds more sightly
by fine stitching, methods were evolved for filling in defects by
transplanting tissues from points elsewhere in the body.

For instance, a wound under the eye was repaired by moving some of the
loose tissue from the forehead or the cheek. This was left attached to
its original blood supply until new vessels had come in and then the
original attachment or pedicle was removed.

In one instance tissue taken from the upper part of the chest filled in
the side of the face. Here mutilations were made sightly and at least a
tolerable existence given to men whose lives otherwise might have been
an agony of sensitiveness.

_Transplanting Muscles._--In one case a man whose arm was lost at the
shoulder had not even enough of a stump to attach an artificial limb.

By transplanting muscles and tendons from neighboring parts, surgeons
were able to make a stump that served well for the attachment of an
artificial limb with which the man was able to earn a livelihood.

The economic aspects of the situation are, of course, even more
important than those relating wholly to the patient’s appearance.




BUTTON IN SAVAGE’S SKULL FIRST PLASTIC SURGERY


Even the ancient savages used to make holes in the skull to let out the
demons which they believed were responsible for disease.

Instances are recorded in which they also repaired such holes by the
insertion of buttons of bone previously removed. In attempting to
repair the ravages of disease, surgeons today sometimes fill in defects
with substances of various kinds. At the recent meeting of the American
Academy of Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology in Colorado Springs, one
entire session was devoted to the newest points in this fine surgical
art.

_Removing an Eye._--When an eye must be removed because of inflammation
or disease--and this sometimes done promptly to save the sight of the
remaining eye--the cavity that is left may be extremely unsightly.
Dr. Harold Gifford of Omaha told of various operations that are done
to secure a good appearance. When an artificial eye is to be worn
the socket must be made suitable to hold it. Sometimes paraffin is
employed to develop a proper cavity, although most physicians fear this
substance because its injection may produce irritations and overgrowth
more unsightly and certainly more dangerous than the condition the
paraffin was planned to correct.

Dr. Harry L. Pollock of Chicago told of several instances in which
cancerous growths had followed the injection of paraffin by beauty
doctors to relieve wrinkles or the sunken bridge of a nose injured by a
blow. The appearance seemed beautiful immediately after the injection
of the paraffin, but soon the irritation set in. Then the face became a
mass of humpy tumors which had to be removed by surgery and which left
serious scars.

Celluloid was tried for a while, but it also was discarded because the
results were unsatisfactory.

_Use of Ivory._--The newest and for the present apparently the best
substance to use for repairing defects is ivory--either natural or
synthetic. Dr. Pollock pointed out that this substance is more nearly
like bone in its composition than any other substance known. Both bone
and cartilage are used also, but Dr. Pollock’s experience inclined him
to favor ivory over either.

Obviously this work is not for the amateur, but for the experienced
worker. The so-called advertising beauty doctors seldom attempt it
because the conditions under which most of them work are not conducive
to successful surgery. They choose rather to delude their patients with
promises of rapid and easy relief that are never fulfilled.




BEWARE OF BEAUTY DOCTOR WHO OFFERS GUARANTEES


Recently there came to medical attention the case of a woman who had
been the victim of the search for beauty through surgery. She was the
wife of a prominent merchant in a foreign country.

When she was eight years old she was operated on for the relief of
tuberculous glands in her neck. She grew up, married successfully and
gave birth to a handsome son.

But in the meanwhile her life, comfortable enough otherwise, was
disturbed because the scars of her operation showed when she wore
evening dress.

_Tours Europe._--Finally she set out upon a tour of Europe. She arrived
in Paris, where she consulted several eminent surgeons, all of whom
advised against operation.

Then she heard, through the press notices of the theatrical papers,
that American beauty doctors were doing marvels in such cases. In this
country she reached finally a beauty doctor widely heralded through
paid publicity secured by publicity agents.

She was intrigued and coaxed into an operation by cleverly written
pamphlets detailing the success accomplished on worn-out actresses and
movie stars. She decided at last not only on an operation on her neck
but also on face lifting, face peeling, wrinkle removing and similar
procedures.

_No Anesthetic._--These operations were carried on in the office of
the beauty doctor, without an anesthetic and rather crudely in the
arrangements for cleanliness. A qualified surgeon works in a qualified
and reputable hospital. Advertising beauty doctors are not admitted to
reputable hospitals.

The woman finally left the ministrations of the beauty doctor. She had
unsightly scars, worse even than those for which she had originally
consulted him.

Her skin, irritated by the caustic chemicals used to peel it,
continued to give off fine scales. The lifting operations, the loss
of blood, the weeks necessary for recovery in a low-grade hospital in
which the beauty doctor finally placed her, left the woman nervous,
melancholy--mentally a wreck.

A reputable surgeon makes no guarantees of success in plastic surgery.
The disreputable beauty doctor relies on the shame of the patient and
her fear of ridicule to protect him when his surgery goes wrong, as it
so often does.




EITHER HAIR OR HEALTH ENDANGERED BY DYES


Ever since the first woman looked into a polished surface and decided
that her appearance would be greatly benefited by certain sophisticated
modifications, the feminine sex has been tampering with its natural
beauty.

Among the first of the features to receive attention has been the hair,
long known as “woman’s crowning glory,” and now merely an added source
of income to the tonsorial artist. The first hair dyes were made from
vegetable substances. Then came metallic, chemical compounds, and more
recently the synthetic dyes largely derived from coal tar products.

Among the vegetable dyes, henna is the best known example, but indigo
wood extracts, sage and camomile have also been popular. Hair dyed with
henna is light red, but one hour will make brown hair extremely red and
give to white and blond hair a quite peculiar orange color, extremely
artificial and unattractive.

The wood extracts and camomile produce all sorts of peculiar colors.
They are reasonably safe, but suffer from the disadvantage that the
dyes are difficult to prepare and the result not especially permanent.
Most of these dyes do not penetrate the hair shaft, but merely coat it
so that their repeated use tends to make the hair quite brittle.

Metallic dyes include combinations of lead, silver, copper, tin, and
other metals. All metallic hair dyes, according to Dr. McCafferty,
who has written extensively on the subject, must be considered as
potentially dangerous when used for any length of time. The material
may be absorbed into the body and the person so saturated with metallic
poison that he develops serious symptoms.

Most of the dye substances offered on the market and advertised in
publications are combinations of henna with metallic substances. The
dye action depends principally on the pyrogallol and on the metal, with
just enough henna present to permit the manufacturer to use the name
“henna dye.”

The most common dye used today is the synthetic drug known as
paraphenylene-diamine. Many persons are especially sensitive to this
drug and develop severe eruptions following its use. In certain
instances, eruptions on the back of the neck and on the arms follow
the wearing of fur dyed with this substance. In Germany, the dye must
always be marked with a “poison” label and most European countries have
followed that example.

In this country, legislatures are only beginning to consider
legislation of a similar character.

If a person is sensitive to paraphenylene-diamine, his scalp and face
will begin to tingle and itch after its application, and this will be
followed, in from 10 to 12 hours, by a swelling and blistering of the
skin. The eyelids also may swell to such an extent that the person is
unable to see.

Most of the cosmetic establishments use this dye for their work. The
treatment given by most physicians consists in wet dressings of boric
acid solutions and in small doses of X-ray to the region concerned.
Following the subsidence of the preliminary symptoms, soothing creams
are applied to the tissues. Dr. McCafferty points out that every
substance used as a dye remover is a dangerous poison, which, if it
does not injure the person using it, at least makes the hair extremely
brittle. It is his belief that dye removers should be legislated out of
the beauty shops.




SKIN ERUPTIONS LAID TO POISON IN DYED FUR


Every winter physicians who specialize in diseases of the skin are
asked to see cases of eruptions around the throat and wrists resulting
from poisoning with incompletely or improperly dyed furs.

The principal symptoms are blotches and swelling with itching and
burning, so severe in some cases that the person cannot sleep at night.

_Rabbit Becomes Beaver._--The trouble is found in most instances to
result from rabbit that is dyed to imitate beaver, although all sorts
of furs may be involved.

In these cases the poisonous substance is usually a compound of
paraphenylene-diamine, the same poisonous substance that causes
irritation of the scalps of those who attempt to dye gray hair black.

Many foreign nations have introduced laws to prevent the use of this
substance in hair dyes and to regulate the fur-dying industry. Similar
laws have been passed in some of our states, but there is as yet no
nation-wide regulation regarding the use of this substance.

_Investigate Cases._--Not all persons are equally sensitive to this
dye. Some may wear furs dyed in this manner without symptoms, but those
who are sensitive develop severe reactions.

Several investigative committees are attempting to secure a record of
all the cases of this type that occur.

If anyone knows of such an instance, the report may be sent to the
Committee on Dye Poisoning of the American Medical Association, 535 N.
Dearborn Street, Chicago.




MOST MOLES HARMLESS, BUT WATCH BLACK ONES!


It has been estimated that there are five moles on an average on every
person in the city of Chicago.

If all of these were to be removed, it would require more than
15,000,000 separate surgical operations.

The history of moles would be an extremely interesting topic, since
they were long regarded as of great significance--sometimes considered
the work of evil spirits; sometimes thought to be due to the influence
of the moon or the stars, and occasionally thought to be of importance
in determining configuration of the body.

_Superstition._--Charts of moles were prepared so that one might tell
by observation of those that were visible where to expect others that
might be invisible. Needless to say, all of this was superstitious and
without the slightest scientific importance.

As long as a mole does not disfigure the appearance, it is best
disregarded, unless under certain circumstances it becomes irritated
and subject to the unusually rapid growth that is characteristic of
cancer.

If a mole is extremely brown or black, it has in it an unusual amount
of a pigment called melanin, which is responsible for giving the color
to the hair, the eyes, and the deeper layers of skin.

Somehow, the presence of this substance seems to be associated with
dangerous possibilities, so that a severe injury or irritation of a
deeply pigmented mole may cause it to suddenly develop rapid growth.

_Watch Black Ones._--The most dangerous moles are those that are jet
black. If these are situated where they are constantly rubbed or
irritated by collars, garters, shoes or other garments, they should be
most carefully watched.

The danger signs have been listed by some doctors as: (1) a gradual
increase in the size of the mole; (2) deepening or spreading of the
color; (3) ulceration or infection; (4) pain or soreness in the mole.

If any of these symptoms appear, the person concerned should promptly
consult a physician. If they do not appear, the mole should be left
alone and not teased by irritation, rubbing, picking, scratching, or
half-hearted attempts at its removal.




FLOWERS CARRY POISON


Some persons are especially sensitive to contact with toxic substances
derived from plants. The poison ivy, oak, and sumac may cause severe
eruptions of the skin in persons susceptible.

When mah-jong first became popular, many persons had eruptions of the
fingers and of the skin of the face from contact with the lacquer on
the mah-jong boxes, due to a special sensitivity that they possessed
to a poison in the lacquer which it was discovered had been made by
utilizing the juices of certain Japanese plants.

_Handling of Bulbs._--Now a British physician has discovered eruptions
on the hands of some persons from the handling of flower bulbs, and has
given the name “lily rash” to this type of disturbance.

It followed the cutting of the stems of the flowers, chiefly the
narcissus, and from handling bulbs of the hyacinth, daffodil,
narcissus and tulip.

An investigation was made in several establishments devoted to the sale
of bulbs, and a small proportion of packers and sorters of bulbs were
found to be suffering from an eruption extending under the nail, where
splitting of the skin caused considerable pain.

The longer the nails were worn, the more severe was the condition.
Moreover, the inflammation of the skin, which occurred after a few
days’ work in handling the bulbs, was progressive until the worker
began to use gloves.

All the workers were inclined to blame the tulip bulbs. Some of the
observers thought that the eruptions were due to friction from the
rough sides of the bulbs, and were ready to place the responsibility on
the hyacinth, narcissus and daffodil.

An investigation showed, however, that the tulip bulb is surrounded
with a single layered covering which spreads easily and that it holds
a somewhat acrid juice. When this juice was applied to the skin
underneath the finger nail it promptly produced irritation, even
without any breaking of the skin due to rubbing.

The obvious suggestion is that persons who are likely to handle tulip
bulbs in any considerable numbers ought to wear protective gloves.




SNOW OR COLD WATER BEST IN TREATING FROSTBITE


When a portion of the body not properly protected is exposed to
intense or extreme cold, the tissues become affected. If the cold is
sufficiently intense and the exposure is sufficiently prolonged, the
part becomes frozen.

When the circulation of the blood is sluggish, as in the very young,
the old and the sick, suffering from cold is likely to be more severe.

In the same way those parts of the body in which the circulation is
least active, and which are least protected by clothing, as the ears,
the hands and the feet, are most likely to be affected.

_Blisters May Form._--In mild frostbite there usually is merely
tingling and slight pain. If the cold is more intense and the exposure
more prolonged, blisters form with serum or blood inside of them.

If the freezing is still further prolonged, the entire part becomes
gangrenous because of the congealing of the blood within. Then the
tissues appear bluish, shrunken or wrinkled and are without sensation
or the power of motion.

The best treatment for frostbite at first is friction with snow or cold
water in a cold room, the changes to a warmer atmosphere being brought
about gradually.

After the friction the feet or hands should be swathed in cotton-wool
held in position by loose bandages. If there are blisters or any
discolorations of the tissues, a physician should be seen promptly.

On the speed with which proper treatment is given may depend the saving
or loss of a limb.

_Chilblains._--Chilblains, which also are associated with a sluggish
circulation, usually produce burning heat with itching and redness, and
are likely to follow prolonged exposure to cold combined with dampness.

They may be prevented by wearing warm, loose woolen stockings and warm
shoes. The feet should be bathed in warm water daily, and after the
bath should be rubbed briskly, quickly dried and dusted with a plain
dusting powder.




WASH YOUR NECK WELL TO WARD OFF BOILS


Those frequent and unwelcome visitors--boils--always are due to skin
infection. The greatest preventive is constant cleanliness of the skin,
particularly of the back of the neck or other parts commonly affected.

In men the back of the neck is the part most commonly affected, usually
because of the constant rubbing of the collar on the hair of the lower
part of the back of the head.

_May Be Serious Signal._--Certain diseases, such as diabetes, seem
to predispose the person to infection with boils, and the constant
recurrence of boils should be the signal for a visit to the doctor.

The person who succumbs readily to skin infections lacks bodily
resistance. This resistance of the skin is associated with the presence
in the blood of substances that will overcome bacteria.

The constantly recurring warning to keep the body in the best
physical state by proper diet, proper cleaning and prompt attention
to infections in the ear, nose and throat is here of the greatest
importance.

When a boil occurs the parts around it are usually shaved, since the
infection spreads from one hair follicle to another. All sorts of
antiseptics may be applied and fail to control the boil unless the
tissues of the body wall it off and cause it to “come to a head.”
Heat aids this process by bringing a good supply of blood to the part
affected.

_Surgical Attention._--A boil should not be opened by some friend who
happens to think himself a surgeon merely because he does not faint
at the sight of blood. Improper opening or drainage of a boil may be
exceedingly serious by spreading the infection to the body generally.

The surgeon will open the boil with proper precautions against
extension of the infection and will see to it that the boil drains
properly.

The germs that cause boils are small round organisms, commonly seen in
clusters when stained and studied with a microscope. Some physicians
build up the resistance of the chronic sufferer from boils by preparing
a vaccine from the patient’s own bacteria.




PSORIASIS ONE OF THE MOST ANNOYING SKIN FAULTS


Of all of the diseases of the skin that affect the human body, one
of the most annoying is called psoriasis. In this disease, the skin
becomes inflamed and there develop round patches which are red at their
base and which are covered by dry, white scales.

These patches slowly enlarge, never developing into blisters, but
continuing to give off scales. The disease usually begins on the back
of the arms and the front of the legs, just below the elbows and knees,
and may involve also the scalp and the lower part of the back, but
seldom appears on the face.

The disease continues for months and years, sometimes better, sometimes
worse. The patient is seldom disturbed in general by the condition,
except by its annoying appearance and the development of the scales.

A disease of this type has been treated by all of the methods known to
medical science, and the fact that so many methods have been suggested
is an indication that none has proved especially satisfactory. Any good
specialist in diseases of the skin is able to clear up the lesions
temporarily by the use of proper drugs, and usually recommends a change
in the diet involving reduction of protein substances and of meat.

In a recent consideration by the leading specialists in diseases of
the skin of Great Britain, it was pointed out that the best results
today are secured by local treatment, with attention to the general
hygiene of the body, and that the value of the various special forms of
treatment mentioned in medical literature have not yet been established.

A person who suffers with this disease will do well to select a
specialist in diseases of the skin and to follow the general routine
laid down.

The chronic character of the disease and its apparent incurability
cause persons affected to travel from one specialist to another, and
to consult all sorts of fads and quackery in their search for relief.
Until some specific curative method is discovered, they will in this
way merely waste funds which might better be conserved for useful
treatment.




“CAULIFLOWER EARS”


Among the first of the beauty operations to attract public attention
was the correction of what the pugilists call a cauliflower or “tin”
ear. This term is applied to the result of a powerful force sharply
administered to the appendages on the sides of the prizefighter’s
visage. Immediately thereafter the blood vessels beneath the skin burst
and the blood pours out into the membranes which cover the cartilage
or gristle of the ear. The blood distends the tissues of the ear to
the extent of the blood pressure and until the blood coagulates. The
swelling thus formed may gradually be absorbed and the ear return to
its normal state, but in many instances tissue forms out of the mass
and when this contracts the ear is distorted into the cauliflower
shape. Dr. Samuel Iglaur has pointed out that it is the left ear that
is usually of the cauliflower variety, since this ear receives most
of the wallops from the right fist of the opponent. Cauliflower ears
are also seen frequently in wrestlers, and before the development of
headgear were not unusual in football players.

After the pugilist develops affluence and is ready to retire to the
stage or the screen he is usually ready to submit himself to remodeling
and decorative surgical art. If he develops this vanity previous to his
retirement, the revamped ear is likely to become a special target for
the opposition the moment he steps into the ring.




FLOPPING EAR NEEDS CAREFUL OPERATION


Next to the cauliflower ear, no other deformity of this particular
organ is so frequently the subject of correction as the outstanding
ear. This is usually a congenital development and one which is likely
to give much distress, particularly to a girl who is otherwise
handsome. Many persons have thought that outstanding ears could be
corrected merely by sewing the ear to the skin back of it. However, in
practice it has been found that the skin will stretch promptly and the
ear sag into a new and perhaps more undesirable position. The operation
is, therefore, most intricate, involving actual transplantation of part
of the cartilage of the ear to the bony covering of the skull behind
the ear.

Such decorative surgery is comparatively recent in medicine. Perhaps
the first operation for correction of outstanding ears was devised in
1861. Nowadays, with the increasing prosperity, publicity and vanity,
such operations have become fairly frequent.

The reliable cosmetic and plastic surgeon is usually associated with a
hospital that has been classified by the American Medical Association
and the American College of Surgeons as a reputable institution. His
work is done under the best surgical conditions, with the assistance of
well trained nurses and with all of the cleanliness that is absolutely
necessary if surgery of any type is to be successful.

It has been said that the persons who seek cosmetic surgery are likely
to be dissatisfied with any result short of perfection, and that they
submit to operation after operation, falling more and more into the net
of the unprincipled surgeon, if they happen to have begun their quest
for beauty with an advertising quack.

The great campaign of education about quackery carried on for many
years has resulted in the development of new methods of advertising by
the unprincipled surgical impresario. He is far too shrewd to indulge
himself in purchased advertising space in newspapers or periodicals.
He, therefore, secures a publicity agent who is as likely as not to be
a reporter on some local newspaper, willing to eke out a narrow income
by playing both ends against the middle. This enterprising journalist
takes payment from the beauty surgeon for securing space for him in the
daily press, and submits to his newspaper news items regarding weird
operations performed by the beauty surgeon on actors, pugilists and
other notorious persons. The result is to bring a flood of less notable
but equally simple kitchen mechanics, stenographers, elderly housewives
and other shallow-minded searchers for beauty into the net.




RUBBER “REDUCERS” ARE FOES OF COMFORT BUT NOT OF FAT


In the craze for reduction which agitated most of the women of the
United States during the past few years, many of them undertook all
sorts of exercises, diets and the use of all kinds of apparatus to
remove what they considered superfluous weight.

Among the most widely advertised articles were corsets and brassières,
made of pure gum rubber, which were supposed to be worn next to the
skin. It was perhaps the notion of those who promoted these devices
that they would squeeze the flesh into a more solid form, perhaps
causing the body to eliminate the superfluous matter from inside.

There is not, of course, the slightest scientific reason to believe
that such apparatus could do anything of the kind. The chief effect
of wearing rubber garments next to the skin is that they prevent
perspiration from evaporating. Since the perspiration is rubbed into
the skin, it is likely to produce irritation.

Some persons have severe irritation of the skin from contact with
the rubber itself. The rubber garment does not increase the sweat,
but simply causes it to remain on the surface. Certainly it does not
cleanse the skin, but rather tends to make it accumulate deposits of
waste products.

The sweat regulates the temperature of the body by evaporation from
the surface. It also keeps the skin soft by keeping it moist and well
lubricated. Rubber garments prevent evaporation of the sweat, which
produces laceration of the skin.

Certainly they cannot in any way aid the lubrication of the skin, since
retention of salts and other substances is likely to make it drier and
to cover it with crusts.




BE CAREFUL IN USE OF LAXATIVE GUMS


It is safe to say that more proprietary medicines of a laxative
character are sold in this country than in any other.

The vogue of chewing gum is also particularly an American institution.
It is not surprising therefore that a manufacturer has begun the sale
and distribution of chewing gum into which is incorporated a quantity
of a well known laxative drug.

_Caution in Usage._--While chewing gums thus medicated may be safe as
laxatives, there are excellent reasons why this drug should not be sold
indiscriminately. Samples were distributed in the streets of some
cities, until boards of health prevented such distribution because the
samples fell into the hands of children and there were serious results.

Besides, some persons are especially sensitive, and react with severe
inflammation of the skin when they take even a small dose of this
remedy.

The second use to which chewing gum has been put has been to
incorporate drugs alleged to have special properties for reducing
obesity.

_Thyroid Extract._--Anti-fat chewing gums contain thyroid extract,
which is dangerous; drugs that irritate the stomach and disturb the
appetite, which are also dangerous, and drugs which have no power
whatever, which is foolish. The United States government has recently
issued fraud orders against several chewing gums of this character.

The person who uses the gum is told that in addition to taking the
remedy she should walk five miles a day, go through certain exercises,
and cut down the diet. These practices will bring about a reduction in
weight just as well without chewing the gum.




OVEREATING HARMFUL AFTER MIDDLE LIFE


Most of the illnesses that afflict the man beyond middle age are due to
the fact that he does not realize his intestinal limitations.

The most pernicious misdemeanor after middle life is overeating. The
person who works out-of-doors is, of course, able to dispose of more
and heavier food than does the brain-worker.

The brain-worker who tries to eat meat three times a day will find
himself, in most instances, in better condition if he eats meat only
once each day, but in this condition quantity of food is more important
than its nature.

_Cooked Foods._--The human being gradually has been adapting himself to
more and more refined and thoroughly cooked foods. Nevertheless, it is
not desirable for him suddenly to change to foods that are coarse and
indigestible.

These perhaps will aid elimination, but at the same time they will
irritate the delicate lining of the intestines and permit the more easy
entrance of bacteria into the body.

Too much starch, protein or fat is harmful because it will not
be digested fully and will encourage the growth of bacteria in the
intestines. As one becomes older his tolerance for sugars becomes
less, and if he eats too much sweet or starchy foods, he is likely to
develop disorders of sugar elimination.

_Insurance Records._--All health authorities are agreed that the
greatest danger for the man beyond middle age is overeating. The
records of great insurance companies show that the life expectancy of
the man slightly underweight at this age is greater by far than that of
the man who is overweight.

As the old farmer expressed the matter, pigs would live longer if they
did not make hogs of themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s note


Minor punctuation errors have been changed without notice.

Spelling was retained as in the original except for the following
changes:

  Page 3: “Hademan-Julius Company”       “Haldeman-Julius Company”
  Page 3: “UNITED STATES OF AMER”        “UNITED STATES OF AMERICA”
  Page 19: “with dangerous possibities”  “with dangerous possibilities”
  Page 32: “proteins or fats is”         “protein or fat is”
  Page 32: “sweets or starchy foods”     “sweet or starchy foods”





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CARE OF THE SKIN AND HAIR ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


