The Project Gutenberg eBook of Twenty-five years of the Philadelphia Orchestra, 1900-1925
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Twenty-five years of the Philadelphia Orchestra, 1900-1925

Author: Frances Anne Wister

Release date: June 2, 2025 [eBook #76214]

Language: English

Original publication: Philadelphia: Women's Committees for the Philadelphia Orchestra, 1925

Credits: The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY-FIVE YEARS OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA, 1900-1925 ***





Transcriber’s Notes:

  Underscores “_” before and after a word or phrase indicate _italics_
    in the original text.
   Small capitals have been converted to SOLID capitals.
   Illustrations have been moved so they do not break up paragraphs.
   Typographical and punctuation errors have been silently corrected.




                           Twenty-five Years
                                of the
                        Philadelphia Orchestra

                               1900-1925

                                 _By_
                          FRANCES ANNE WISTER

                    PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF
                      THE WOMEN’S COMMITTEES FOR
                      THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA

                            COPYRIGHT 1925
                          FRANCES ANNE WISTER

                     EDWARD STERN & COMPANY. INC.
                        PRINTERS AND ENGRAVERS
                             PHILADELPHIA

                                  TO
                    ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, ESQ.

                              DEVOTED TO
                    THE CAUSE OF MUSIC IN THIS CITY
                                  AND
                            FIRST AND ONLY
                               PRESIDENT
                                  OF
                      THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                              ASSOCIATION




FOREWORD


This story of the Philadelphia Orchestra has been written during the
past few months, for the friends and supporters of the Philadelphia
Orchestra Association.

My endeavor has been to give the account in a simple form and to
use the Appendix for the statistics which should be recorded at a
Twenty-fifth Anniversary.

                                             FRANCES ANNE WISTER
    OCTOBER, 1925




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


    With much appreciation of their assistance
    I desire to thank:

    The Board of Directors of the Philadelphia
    Orchestra Association
                      and
    The Women’s Committees for the Philadelphia
    Orchestra, who have made it possible to
    publish this book.

    Mr. Arthur Judson, Mr. Louis A. Mattson,
    Miss Ruth O’Neill, Miss E. M. Russell of
    the Philadelphia Orchestra Office.
    Dr. Edward I. Keffer.
                            FRANCES ANNE WISTER
    OCTOBER, 1925




       Twenty-five Years
            of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra
           1900-1925




CONTENTS


                            PART I

    CHAPTER I                                                    3
           A ROAD ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY YEARS LONG

    Music in Philadelphia before 1900.


    CHAPTER II                                                  16
                  THE LAST TURN OF THE ROAD

      The finding of Fritz Scheel at Woodside Park. The
      Philadelphia Symphony Society. The Philippine
      Concerts. First Concert 1900. Sketch of Scheel. The
      formation of the Philadelphia Orchestra Association.

    CHAPTER III                                                 31
                         EARLY YEARS

      Financial difficulties. Incorporation 1903. The
      Beethoven Cycle. The Richard Strauss Concerts.
      Popular Concerts.

    CHAPTER IV                                                  47
                    THE WOMEN’S COMMITTEES

      The Women’s Committees in Harrisburg, Allentown,
      Lancaster and Trenton. The Women’s Committee and
      the First Ten Thousand. The Germantown and Chestnut
      Hill Women’s Committee. The West Philadelphia
      Women’s Committee. The Media, Chester and West
      Chester Women’s Committee. Committees in Delaware
      (Wilmington), Baltimore, Washington and Atlantic County.

    CHAPTER V                                                   62
            THE GUARANTORS AND THE GUARANTEE FUND


    CHAPTER VI                                                  71
                  THE DEATH OF FRITZ SCHEEL

      Illness and Death of Fritz Scheel. The Memorial
      Tablet to Scheel. The Musical Record.

                           PART II

    CHAPTER I                                                   89
                        THE NEXT STEP

      Engagement of Carl Pohlig as Conductor. Sketch of
      Pohlig. The Musical Record.

                           PART III

    CHAPTER I                                                   99
               THE COMING OF LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI

      The engagement of Leopold Stokowski 1912. First
      programme. The Mahler Symphony. The Philadelphia
      Orchestra Chorus.

    CHAPTER II                                                 113
                THE SEVEN YEAR ENDOWMENT FUND

      Dissatisfaction with the Guarantee Fund. The
      proposition of the “Unknown Donor,” 1916.

    CHAPTER III                                                116
              THE ORCHESTRA DURING THE WORLD WAR

      Presentation of Flags by Women’s Committees. Concert
      at Camp Dix. Red Cross Benefit Concert. The Liberty
      Loans.

    CHAPTER IV                                                 122

             THE TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY MILLION DOLLAR
                     ENDOWMENT FUND CAMPAIGN

    CHAPTER V                                                  139
                   TWENTY YEARS OF PROGRESS

      Twentieth Anniversary 1920. Presentation of Silver
      Tankard to the President.

    CHAPTER VI                                                 143
                      MUSICAL NEIGHBORS

      The co-operation of musical associations with the
      orchestra. Philanthropic undertakings.

    CHAPTER VII                                                148
               THE SUPPORT OF THE PUBLIC PRESS

    CHAPTER VIII                                               150
                        THE LISTENERS

    CHAPTER IX                                                 155
                 THE TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY

      A General Survey.

    CHAPTER X                                                  163
                    THE POINT OF THE STORY

    IN MEMORIAM                                                170

                           APPENDIX

    APPENDIX A                                                 178
      CHARTER OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA ASSOCIATION

    APPENDIX B                                                 180
      EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                              1900-1901

    APPENDIX C                                                 181
            OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS OF THE PHILADELPHIA
                 ORCHESTRA ASSOCIATION 1900-1925

    APPENDIX D                                                 191
           THE GUARANTORS OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                      ASSOCIATION 1900-1901

    APPENDIX E                                                 193

         SUMMARY OF CONCERTS BY THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
             SEASONS 1900-1901 TO 1924-1925 INCLUSIVE

    APPENDIX F                                                 201
                            CONDUCTORS
           PERSONNEL OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA 1900-1925
       PERSONNEL OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA CHORUS 1920-1921
                               MANAGERS
                           OFFICE STAFF

    APPENDIX G                                                 216
              ASSISTANT CONDUCTORS. GUEST CONDUCTORS
        ORGANIZATIONS THAT HAVE APPEARED WITH THE PHILADELPHIA
              ORCHESTRA. SOLOISTS WHO HAVE APPEARED WITH
                    THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA

    APPENDIX H                                                 228
           SOME OF THE PRINCIPAL PLAYERS IN THE VARIOUS
              SECTIONS OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA

    APPENDIX I                                                 232
       PARTIAL LIST OF “FIRST PERFORMANCES” IN AMERICA

    APPENDIX J                                                 234
                 PROGRAMMES OF SIX CONCERTS OF THE
                 PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA 1900-1901

    APPENDIX K                                                 237
                  THE WOMEN’S COMMITTEES FOR THE
                      PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA

    APPENDIX L                                                 242
             ANNOUNCEMENT OF CHILDREN’S CONCERTS

    APPENDIX M                                                 244
            PHILADELPHIA PERMANENT ORCHESTRA PROSPECTUS
                          MARCH 3, 1899

    APPENDIX N                                                 250
                   LITERATURE OF EARLY DAYS




ILLUSTRATIONS


    ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, ESQ.                 _Opposite_  16
    FRITZ SCHEEL                                   _Opposite_  31
    MRS. ALEXANDER J. DALLAS DIXON                 _Opposite_  48
    SCHEEL MEMORIAL TABLET                         _Opposite_  85
    CARL POHLIG                                    _Opposite_  90
    LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI                              _Opposite_ 100
    PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA AND MAHLER CHORUS       _Opposite_ 105
    ENDOWMENT FUND MEMORIAL TABLET                 _Opposite_ 126
    ENDOWMENT FUND MEMORIAL TABLET                 _Opposite_ 128




PART I

Twenty-five Years of the Philadelphia Orchestra 1900-1925




CHAPTER I


         A ROAD ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY YEARS LONG
          “_Time Was unlocks the riddle of Time Is_”
                 “BY PARTICULAR DESIRE[1]

    “On Tuesday next, the 25th inst., at the Assembly Room
    in Lodge Alley will be performed a Concert of Music,
    under the direction of Mr. John Palma; to begin exactly
    at six o’clock.

    “Tickets to be had at the London Coffee House, at one
    Dollar each; and no person to be admitted without a ticket.”

[1] O. G. Sonneck: “Early Concert Life in America.”

Such in January, 1757, was the announcement of the first public concert
in Philadelphia of which there is record. So began the approaches to
the Philadelphia Orchestra, like the approaches to a great bridge which
begin hundreds of feet away from the span.

There had been music in private and other entertainments previous to
this public concert and in spite of the disapproval of the Society of
Friends and of a number of religious sects music found its first refuge
in the church. As early as 1701 Justus Falckner, a German Lutheran,
wrote as follows:

    “I will here take occasion to mention that many
    others besides myself who know the ways of the land,
    maintain that music would contribute much toward a
    good Christian service. It would not only attract and
    civilize the wild Indians, but it would do much good in
    spreading the Gospel truths among the sects and others
    by attracting them. Instrumental music is especially
    serviceable here. Thus a well-sounding organ would
    perhaps prove of great profit, to say nothing of the
    fact that the Indians would come running from far and
    near to listen to such unknown melody, and upon that
    account might become willing to accept our language and
    teaching, and remain with people who had such agreeable
    things; for they are said to come ever so far to listen
    to one who plays even a reed-pipe (rohrpfeiffe): such
    an extraordinary love have they for any melodious and
    ringing sound. Now as the melancholy, saturnine, stingy
    Quaker spirit has abolished (relegiert) all such music,
    it would indeed be a novelty here, and tend to attract
    many of the young people away from the Quakers and
    sects to attend services where such music was found,
    even against the wishes of their parents. This would
    afford a good opportunity to show them the truth and
    their error.”[2]

When Falckner was ordained in Gloria Dei Church in 1703, the Hermits of
the Wissahickon played on the viol, hautboy, trumpets and kettledrums
(Pauken) and the service was opened with a voluntary on the little
organ, all of which he doubtless arranged and enjoyed. Gradually a
number of other churches followed suit and installed organs.

In regard to secular music in private houses, letters testify to its
existence early in the 18th century; and Whitefield on his arrival was
an ally to its opponents. One of his followers printed this information
for the public in 1740, although the statement was later denied:

    “Since Mr. Whitefield’s Preaching here, the Dancing
    School, Assembly and Concert Room have been shut up,
    as inconsistent with the Doctrine of the Gospel: and
    though the Gentlemen concern’d caus’d the Door to be
    broke open again, we are inform’d that no Company came
    to the last Assembly night.”[3]

[2] J. F. Sachse: “The Missive of Justus Falckner of Germantown,
Concerning the Religious Condition of Pennsylvania in the Year 1701.”

[3] Robert R. Drummond: “Early German Music in Philadelphia.”

But music was craved by some of the inhabitants or a sensation would
not have been made by the Musical Clock:

    “The Unparallelled Musical Clock, made by that great
    Master of Machinery, David Lockwood. It excels all
    others in the Beauty of its Structure and plays the
    choicest Airs from the most celebrated Operas with
    the greatest Nicety and Exactness. It performs with
    beautiful graces, ingeniously and variously intermixed,
    the French Horn, Pieces, perform’d upon the Organ,
    German and Common Flute, Flageolet, etc., Sonata’s,
    Concerto’s, Marches, Minuetts, Jiggs and Scots Airs,
    composed by Corelli, Alberoni, Mr. Händel and other
    great and eminent Masters of Musick.”

It was not until Mr. Palma’s concert however, that there seems to have
been any music for which the public could buy tickets. This pioneer
effort was followed by others. The “Subscription Concerts of Musick”
became fashionable in 1764; and later the fortnightly “City Concerts”
under John Bentley at the City Tavern. The Amateur and Professional
Concerts were a popular series. Groups of men fostered music as the
years passed. Francis Hopkinson and his friends both professional and
amateur assembled regularly to play “Concerti Grossi.” This group of
about twelve musicians probably formed Philadelphia’s first Orchestra.

The first real musical impetus came undoubtedly from Francis Hopkinson,
signer of the Declaration of Independence and later member of Congress.
He was besides, a teacher, organist, poet, harpsichordist, essayist,
improver of the harpsichord and the first American composer. Among his
works are the song, “My Days have been so wondrous free,” the earliest
American secular composition extant; and “Seven Songs” dedicated to
Washington. John Adams described him as:—“One of your pretty, little
curious, ingenious men. His head is not bigger than a large apple.
I have not met with anything in natural history more amusing and
entertaining than his personal appearance, yet he is genteel and well
bred, and is very social.”[4]

[4] Sonneck: “Francis Hopkinson and James Lyon.”

Other composers were not lacking as is seen by the announcement of John
Gualdo, in 1769, of a concert in which five out of thirteen numbers
were composed by him. This is the first recorded composers’ concert in
this country and his name appeared with those of the famous composers
of Europe of the day, as Philadelphia was never far behind.

Benjamin Franklin interested himself in the art and constructed an
improved Armonica or Musical Glasses. Thus two important public men of
the time gave music their sanction and assisted its cause.

As the city grew the people began to feel the need of instruction in
music. From early times Philadelphia had its share of music teachers,
the first one to publicly advertise, being a woman. Among them were a
number of excellent Englishmen who presented at concerts the works of
the great masters of Europe; and there were a few Germans. One of these
was an accomplished person if the following announcement which appeared
in 1755, be true:

    “The subscriber proposes to open a school on Monday
    next, in the house where the late Mr. Quin formerly
    dwelt, for the instruction of Gentlemen and Ladies, in
    the following accomplishments:

    “First, The French, Italian and German languages, in a
    method concise and easy.

    “Secondly, To play on the violin after the Italian
    manner, with a peculiar method of bowing and shifting
    in solos or concertos.

    “Thirdly, Drawing and miniature painting with colours,
    flowers, insects, etc.... Likewise to draw patterns for
    embroidery, or any kind of needle work....

    “He has a variety of music, composed by the most
    eminent masters, for the violino solo, concembalo et
    violoncello, to be disposed of on easy terms.

                                    “JOHN MATTHIAS KRAMER”

Another German was H. B. Victor, who described himself as follows:

    “Mr. Victor, Musician to her late Royal Highness the
    Princess of Wales, and Organist at St. George’s in
    London, lately arrived here, takes this method of
    acquainting the Musical Gentry in general that he
    gives instructions on the Harpsichord, or Forte Piano,
    Violin, German Flute, etc., especially in the thorough
    Bass both in theory and practice, for that his pupils may
    soon come to a fundamental knowledge of that fine science.

    “N. B. Mr. Victor intended to give a concert, and to
    perform on his new musical instruments, but is obliged
    to postpone it for want of able hands; the one he
    calls Tromba doppia con Tympana, on which he plays
    the first and second trumpet and a pair of annexed
    kettledrums with the feet all at once; the other is
    called cymbaline de amour, which resembles the musical
    glasses played by harpsichord keys, never subject to
    come out of tune, both of his own invention. He is to
    be met with at his house in Callowhill street near
    Water street.”[5]

[5] Drummond: “Early German Music in Philadelphia.”

The many quaint advertisements of those times give an idea of the
musical activities of the people. Amateurs often assisted professionals.

Joseph Cézar, pupil of Viotti, in 1792, announced that: “Many amateurs
of the first eminence being so kind as to honor him with their
patronage, will perform,” etc. Again we hear of “a young lady who
has never before appeared in public and therefore craves protection
from all manner of insult.” Often the professional was “assisted by a
gentleman.” Infant prodigies, who were always under ten, were numerous
and they had invariably appeared before the crowned heads of Europe.

Organ dealers, spinet, harpsichord and piano makers, as well as
dealers in musical merchandise began to appear. Michael Hillegas,
first Treasurer of the United States and first music dealer in
Philadelphia, dealt in organs as early as 1753. His stock of music
embraced all the popular and standard compositions of the day, and
included those of Tartini, Tessorini, Pepush, Corelli, Händel, Vivaldi,
Burney, Stamitz, Barbella, and Scarlatti. Besides sheet music,
many other articles were to be had at his shop as we see from this
advertisement:

    “To be sold by Michael Hillegas, at his House in Second
    street, opposite Samuel Morris, Esq., an extraordinary
    good and neat Harpsichord with four stops; a good
    Violin-cello, an Assortment of English and Italian
    Violins, as well as common ones, as double lined, of
    which some extraordinary; a parcel of good German
    Flutes, imported here from Italy. Also imported in the
    last ships from London, a large Assortment of Musick,
    of the best Masters, viz: Solos, Overtures, Concertos,
    Sonatas, and Duets, for Violins, German Flutes,
    Hautboys, French Horns, Violoncellos, and Guitars,
    Voluntaries, Lessons for Organs and Harpsichords, ruled
    paper of various Sorts for Musick, and Musick Books,
    Tutors or Books of Instructions to learn to play on the
    Violin, German Flute, Hautboy, or Common Flute, without
    a Master, Song Books, Cantatas, Songs on Sheets, and
    a Choice Parcel of Violin Strings, etc.”
    (Penna. Gazette, 1759.)

John Behrent has the honor of being the first piano forte maker in this
city. In 1775 his advertisement in the Pennsylvania Packet informed the
public that:

    “John Behrent, Joiner and Instrument-Maker living in
    Third street continued in Campington, directly opposite
    Coate’s Burying-ground, Has just finished for Sale, an
    extraordinary fine instrument, by the name of Piano
    Forte, of Mahogany, in the manner of an harpsichord,
    with hammers, and several changes: He intends to
    dispose of it on very reasonable terms: and being a
    master of such sort of work, and a new beginner in this
    country, he requests all lovers of music to favour him
    with their custom, and they shall not only be honestly
    served, but their favours gratefully acknowledged, by
    their humble servant, John Behrent.”[6]

[6] Drummond: “Early German Music in Philadelphia.”

Familiar professional names in the early days were James Bremner,
teacher of Hopkinson, John Gualdo, Stephen Forrage, George
d’Eissenburg, Philip Roth, Philip Phile, John Bentley, Henri Capron,
A. Juhan, Andrew Adgate, and Victor Pelissier, nearly all of whom
were teachers as well as performers and were strong influences in the
musical life of Philadelphia and in the training of the young who were
early taught to crave the best musically.

The American Revolution caused concerts and other entertainments to be
almost entirely abandoned, with the exception of the Mischianza and
other affairs in which the British were the leading spirits. Little
occurred during this period to advance musical art.

With the country again at peace and with the dawn of a new century,
interest in music revived and early in 1820 eighty-five men organized
the Musical Fund Society, so far Philadelphia’s greatest musical
achievement. The officers and directors chosen on January 29th, 1820,
were:

    Dr. William P. De Wees, _President_
    Dr. Robert Patterson, _Vice-president_
    Daniel Lammot, _Treasurer_
    John K. Kane, _Secretary_

Managers of the Fund: James W. Barker, Thomas Artley, Francis G. Smith,
Edward Hudson, Benjamin Carr, William Strickland, Henry P. Barrekens,
William Hawkins, Charles A. Poulson, Benjamin Say, George Schetky and
Andrew Farrouihl.

The Charter states “That the essential objects of the said corporation
shall be the relief of decayed musicians and their families and the
cultivation of skill and diffusion of taste in music.” Four years
later Musical Fund Hall was built at Eighth and Locust streets.
For over thirty years this building was the centre of all music in
Philadelphia, except opera. The Society maintained an orchestra and a
chorus, and conducted an Academy of Music, which was the first school
in Philadelphia permitted by Charter to confer Academic degrees in
music. The orchestra of the Musical Fund Society was composed of its
members, professional and amateur, and there were strict regulations
as to rehearsals. They were players of no mean attainments for their
time, and it is to be regretted that the influx of dazzling foreign
performers was permitted to quench the ardor of the audiences and
finally their own. The quality of the music performed was of a high
order and compared favorably with that of Europe and of other American
cities of that period. The “Creation” was chosen for the first concert,
but the music could not be procured in Baltimore, New York or Boston,
or even in Europe, so the plan was abandoned. When it was first
produced trombone players were engaged to come from Bethlehem, as there
were none in this town. Indeed, the instrument itself was unknown and
aroused much curiosity. Later at these concerts (1845), Beethoven’s
Symphony No. 1 was given in full. It was announced as “The Entire Grand
Symphony of Beethoven,” and between the movements were vocal numbers
serious and comic. During the next season the Second Symphony was given
in the same way, and two years later came the “Eroica,” the Overture to
Oberon, and the Midsummer Night’s Dream.

When the period of the great visiting virtuosi, Jenny Lind, Henriette
Sontag, Vieuxtemps, Wilhelmj, Ole Bull, Sivori, Malibran, Lagrange,
Alboni, Hensler, Gottschalk and others arrived, the excitement over
their first appearances caused a decrease in interest in home talent
and achievements, and the activities of the Musical Fund Society were
maintained with less and less enthusiasm, until finally the Academy and
then the orchestra were abandoned. Another reason for this decline was
the growing popularity of opera, to the detriment of personal musical
effort by Philadelphians.

During the early years of the nineteenth century, as in the preceding
one, Philadelphia was the abiding place of a number of excellent
and hard working musicians. These carried on the labors of their
predecessors by teaching the young, leading choirs and guiding the
musical opinion of the city. Little recognition has been given these
men, who included among their number, Alexander Reinagle, George
Shetky, Benjamin Carr, Benjamin Cross, Raynor Taylor, Thomas Loud,
Charles P. Hupfeldt, and later Charles Jarvis and his son, Charles J.
Jarvis.

In our own time among the many musicians who have fostered music
here by their own example and by training others, four should be
particularly mentioned:

Dr. Hugh A. Clarke, for fifty years Professor of Music at the
University of Pennsylvania, whose sway has been felt through the many
students who have studied under him; Wm. W. Gilchrist, his pupil;
Michael H. Cross, and Richard Zeckwer. These men wielded so potent an
influence over music students and music lovers, that Philadelphians
owe them a heavy debt. They received the musical laying on of hands
and transmitted the traditions that have existed here for two hundred
years.

The important undertaking of the middle of the century was the building
of the American Academy of Music.

With the growth of population and the increasing number of visiting
opera companies, a demand arose for an opera house of adequate size and
equipment. In 1852 the project was launched and a Charter obtained,
but the amount of money needed, $400,000, was difficult to procure,
and it was not until January 26th, 1857, that the Academy was opened
with a grand ball. This eclipsed in size and brilliance any assemblage
hitherto seen in Philadelphia, and was followed on February 25th, by
the first performance of opera in the new house. “Il Trovatore” was
presented with Gazzaniga, Aldini, Brignoli and Amodio, and this marked
the beginning of the splendid career of the Academy of Music. Gradually
other musical events were transferred to the Academy, which became, and
still remains, the musical centre of the city.

Now the days of modern orchestral development are at hand. The first
visiting orchestra of note was the Steiermärkisches Orchestra, of
twenty musicians, under the leadership of Henri Riha, which came from
Germany in 1838.

Ten years later the Germania Musical Society, from Berlin, appeared
under the leadership of Carl Lenshow. Pecuniary losses caused it to
disband and the members scattered. Later the Society was reorganized
under Carl Bergmann. It had the honor of appearing at Sontag’s concert,
in 1852.

The Germania Orchestra, instituted in 1856 and incorporated in 1860,
succeeded this Society and for over forty years was an important
part of Philadelphia’s musical life. Carl Sentz, the drummer of the
Steiermärkisches Orchestra, became the first leader. Its concerts were
given on Friday afternoons at Musical Fund Hall, at the price of two
concerts for twenty-five cents, and packages of eight tickets for a
dollar, which price was later raised to twenty-five cents per concert.
Sentz was succeeded by Charles M. Schmitz, the cellist, who in turn was
followed by William Stoll, Jr. Unlike the custom of today the Germania
was governed by a conductor and officers chosen by its members. The
performances were not confined to classical concerts, but it played
engagements for private dances, balls, festivals, oratorios, fairs,
commencements, and other miscellaneous entertainments. Besides the
performances at Musical Fund Hall, concerts were given on Thursday
afternoons at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, from 1879
until 1895, inclusive. It was then customary to play one movement of
a symphony each week for four weeks and at the fifth concert to play
the whole. Charles M. Schmitz, who so long gave Philadelphians the
satisfaction of hearing symphonic music which was their own, was the
son of Adolph Schmitz, of Düsseldorf, player of the French horn. He
taught woodwind and brass instruments in the Academy of the Musical
Fund Society, and had the distinction of being the first musician
brought to America for the purpose of teaching.

The Germania Orchestra finally disbanded and orchestral ventures were
undertaken at Musical Fund Hall, Witherspoon Hall and the Academy of
Music. Mr. Henry Gordon Thunder and Mr. Wm. Stoll, Jr., were active
in these efforts, but lack of money hampered the results. Tickets
were sold at five for one dollar and twenty for four dollars. The
programmes included one or two movements of a symphony or concerto and
miscellaneous selections now no longer played.

An interesting enterprise in the musical world was the Philadelphia May
Festival, in 1883, of which Mr. S. Decatur Smith was President, Mr.
F. T. Sully Darley, Vice-president, and Mr. George Burnham, Jr. and
Mr. Hartman Kuhn among the directors. Wm. W. Gilchrist and Charles M.
Schmitz were the musical directors. Aside from the advantages derived
from this series of concerts, it is worthy of record that Mr. Darley
was the first Vice-president of the Philadelphia Orchestra Association
and Mr. Burnham and Mr. Kuhn were charter members, while Mr. Smith was
one of the original guarantors.


The Philadelphia Symphony Society 1893-1900.

The need of more orchestral concerts was evidently felt, for in 1893
the Philadelphia Symphony Society was organized by amateurs and
incorporated for the purpose of “the cultivation of the higher order of
Orchestral Work and the fostering of all matters tending to promote the
cause of music.”

The Society was fortunate in procuring as its first leader, Dr. Wm.
Wallace Gilchrist, founder of the Mendelssohn Club in 1875, and its
conductor for forty years. Members paid no fees or dues and the three
concerts given each year in the Academy of Music were supported by the
Associate membership. The two upper galleries were reserved for music
students in the public schools and conservatories, and about fifteen
hundred such tickets were distributed for each performance. The Society
possessed a musical Library and a Reading Room. Rehearsals were open
to accredited music students, much to the benefit of those who were
studying orchestration. It also fostered chamber music by bringing the
Kneisel Quartette to Philadelphia during sixteen seasons.

After the resignation of Dr. Gilchrist, Fritz Scheel became the
conductor. The list of works performed under both leaders was of the
highest standard and would do credit to any professional orchestra. The
place of this amateur orchestra in the symphonic succession is a noble
one and one of immense influence in this community. The incentive that
it gave to young players was worth all the expense and effort involved.
Scheel had hesitated when asked to become leader of an amateur
organization for fear of endangering his reputation. Therefore, when
the Philippine Concerts were arranged, a separate committee was formed
having no connection with the Philadelphia Symphony Society.

In 1900 the Society disbanded and sold to the Executive Committee of
the Philadelphia Orchestra its library, a set of kettledrums and its
music desks, and issued the following circular to its members:

    “The Society, always active in promoting the musical
    interests of Philadelphia, gave its earnest and hearty
    assistance to the organizing of the Philadelphia
    Orchestra, which, now established on a firm basis and
    fortunate in its splendid personnel of professional
    musicians, is in a position to continue orchestral
    work in Philadelphia and carry it to a point beyond
    the possibilities of amateurs. For this new orchestra,
    which aims to do and can do so much for music in
    Philadelphia, the Society asks from its associate
    members the same generous support that heretofore has
    been given to our amateur organization.”

Thus ended the only connection that ever existed between the
Philadelphia Symphony Society and the Philadelphia Orchestra, which
was that Fritz Scheel led this amateur orchestra for one season before
the formation of the Philadelphia Orchestra, composed entirely of
professional Philadelphia musicians.

Besides the impetus given to music in Philadelphia by the Musical Fund
Society, the Germania Orchestra, and the Philadelphia Symphony Society,
another group of musicians has been important in this community since
1893. The Manuscript Music Society founded by Dr. Gilchrist for the
encouragement of native composers, continues to have a far-reaching
effect on our musical life and is of fundamental value.

Years passed and the fact became more and more accentuated in the
minds of musicians that Philadelphia, a city of 1,500,000 people,
was dependent on visiting orchestras for the performance of great
orchestral works. But while they were despairing of ever seeing in
this city an orchestra akin to the modern ones in Europe and in
other American cities, a seed was germinating. Philadelphia had
had a taste of what a modern orchestra was, as far back as 1876,
when Theodore Thomas played at the Centennial Exhibition, under the
auspices of a Women’s Committee, headed by Mrs. E. D. Gillespie. The
concerts were given up for lack of support, but a sip of ambrosia
can never be forgotten. It is to Mr. Thomas and to Mrs. Gillespie,
pioneers in the modern orchestral world, that we owe the Philadelphia
Orchestra today. Mrs. Gillespie made another effort in 1881, on her
return from a sojourn in Germany, for she realized that there were
no musical advantages for students in Philadelphia to compare with
those in Germany or in Boston, where Mr. Higginson had lately founded
the Boston Symphony Orchestra. She invited Theodore Thomas to come
to Philadelphia, give a series of symphony concerts, and share the
profits. A few musicians supported this enterprise, but for the
majority the programmes were severe and boring, and when after four
seasons the profits were found to be $28.00, the attempt to establish a
large modern orchestra in this city was abandoned. Thomas was lost to
Philadelphia because the time was not ripe. This be said to our regret,
not to our shame. As Mrs. Cornelius Stevenson remarked many years
afterwards, one cannot feed meat to babes. Even twenty years later
the majority of Philadelphia citizens felt that the season was being
forced, when after a number of unsuccessful attempts the Philadelphia
Orchestra was founded.

However, memories of Theodore Thomas, father of American orchestras,
lingered in the minds of a few music lovers, and their longing was
increased by regular visits from the Boston Symphony Orchestra, which
gave five and later ten concerts each season. Many people can bear
witness to the joy that they felt when Gericke and Nickisch brought
that orchestra here. Soon the jealousy of Philadelphia was aroused at
hearing that Theodore Thomas was to settle in Chicago. The West had
seized the pioneer leader whom we might have had. Philadelphia’s eyes
also turned to New York City, where Dr. Leopold Damrosch and his son,
Walter, and Anton Seidl led orchestras; and where the Philharmonic
Society had long had an honorable career. Still Philadelphia made no
move. Then, in January, 1899, it occurred to a group of women to raise
a fund of $100,000 and bring to Philadelphia as a nucleus the New York
Symphony Society under Mr. Walter Damrosch; fill it out with the best
available musicians and call it the Philadelphia Orchestra. A circular
to this effect was issued with the result that a storm of protest arose
headed by another group of women, during which much newspaper publicity
was given to the subject of an orchestra for this city. Finally the
matter was adjusted and a committee of women issued a prospectus for a
Philadelphia Orchestra of which the principal points are quoted:[7]

[7] For full text of Prospectus, see Appendix M.


PROSPECTUS OF PHILADELPHIA PERMANENT ORCHESTRA

       *       *       *       *       *

    “In order to establish an orchestra such as would be a
    distinct credit to the city, it is necessary to have a
    paid-up fund of not less than $250,000.

       *       *       *       *       *

    “1. Subscribers shall not be bound by their
    subscriptions unless the sum of $200,000 shall have
    been subscribed.

    “2. The fund shall be used only for the purpose of
    establishing and maintaining a Permanent Philadelphia
    Orchestra, and it shall be applied for that purpose by
    the following Trustees:

    C. WILLIAM BERGNER          CHAS. C. HARRISON
    JOHN H. CONVERSE            C. HARTMAN KUHN
    SAMUEL A. CROZER            SIMON A. STERN
    GEO. W. CHILDS DREXEL       JAMES F. SULLIVAN
                  THOS. B. WANAMAKER

    The Trustees shall invest $200,000 of the fund, using
    only the interest thereof and the additional $50,000
    shall be used for current expenses of the first few
    years, when the expenses will be heavier and the
    deficit greater.

    “3. The orchestra shall be composed, first, of the best
    musicians resident in Philadelphia; then, of the best
    musicians obtainable either in this country or abroad.

       *       *       *       *       *

    “4. The Board of Trustees, when it considers that the
    completion of the fund is assured, shall select the
    leader upon the careful and unbiased consideration of
    the merits and records of all candidates submitted to
    it.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Subscriptions towards this immense sum of money—$250,000[8]—did not
come in fast, and finally the proposition was abandoned under the
prospect of a Philadelphia Orchestra formed on a very different
and much more modest plan. There are two ways of embarking on an
enterprise, one is to procure the funds in advance on faith; the
other is to start the undertaking on faith and hope for the best to
pay the bills. The first plan failed, the second succeeded; and after
twenty years of effort, an orchestra was financially established in
Philadelphia.

[8] After a year of work the total sum promised was $50,000.




CHAPTER II

THE LAST TURN OF THE ROAD


The last turn of the road was a long one. It led from Germany to New
York, to the World’s Fair in Chicago, to San Francisco, back to New
York and to Woodside Park, Philadelphia. The turn was made by Fritz
Scheel.

The beginning of the Philadelphia Orchestra was the moment in July,
1899, when Mrs. Innes, wife of Bandmaster Frederic N. Innes, showed
some programmes to Dr. Edward I. Keffer and asked whether he had heard
Fritz Scheel and his orchestra at Woodside Park. At that moment the man
for whom Philadelphia had been waiting was found; and when the place
and the man come together the hour has come. Was it chance or was it
fate that caused that question to be asked? Who shall determine?

Dr. Keffer speedily went to Woodside Park[9] and was so pleased with
what he heard that he recommended his friends to go to hear Scheel’s
masterly leading and fine concerts, besides mailing several hundred
programmes to the musicians of his acquaintance. He found to his
surprise that in one week a Wagner Night, a Beethoven Night and a
Symphony Night were included. Many of the listeners were convinced
that Scheel was the man to organize an orchestra in Philadelphia. He
was competent to do it, he had no permanent position and he saw the
opportunity. Mr. John Fasshauer, an active member in Mr. Thunder’s
orchestra, succeeded in arranging a meeting of professional musicians,
who consented to enter into a liberal agreement as to salaries and
services. Still a guarantee fund seemed to be a necessity. The plan
proposed was to continue the Friday afternoon concerts, long a feature
here, under Fritz Scheel at the Academy of Music. A conference was held
at the University Club with Mr. John H. Converse, Mr. George Burnham,
Jr., and Mr. Thomas a’Becket. The question of a fund was discussed and
Mr. Converse, a trustee of the proposed Permanent Orchestra, suggested
that the Women’s Committee for that orchestra should co-operate. This
plan did not succeed, however, and the idea of a Friday afternoon
series was abandoned.

[9] At this time Willow Grove Park, fifteen miles out of Philadelphia,
was the foremost summer musical center.

[Illustration: © The Phillips Studio

ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, ESQ.]

Finally, after much effort, terms were agreed to by which Mr. Scheel
consented to remain in Philadelphia. He was to conduct three different
enterprises during the winter:

    1. The Philadelphia Symphony Society, a
    well-established amateur orchestra organization (with
    weekly rehearsals and three public performances).

    2. The Opera Class (an amateur chorus meeting weekly at
    Mrs. Alexander J. Cassatt’s house).

    3. A week’s series of Popular Concerts during October
    at the National Export Exposition at the Commercial
    Museum in West Philadelphia.

He was to receive $1000 from each of these associations. He accepted
with the provision that at the end of the season he should be given the
opportunity to conduct two concerts with an orchestra of professional
musicians.

The winter passed and in the early spring Scheel asked to have this
part of the contract fulfilled. Like the ogre in the fairy tale, who
always claims the beautiful princess, it must have seemed to the men,
who had no idea how they were going to keep that promise. Scheel had
given this as his only reason for staying, for he wanted a chance to
show what he could do with professionals. However, having given their
word, a committee was formed consisting of Mr. John H. Ingham, Mr.
Oliver Boyce Judson, Dr. Edward I. Keffer, Mr. Edward G. McCollin
and Mr. Oscar A. Knipe. Scheel selected his players by visiting the
theatres and making notes each evening about the various musicians in
the orchestras. At this point his task was easy compared to that of the
Executive Committee who were responsible for the financial side of the
concerts. Various benefits were contemplated and finally a decision was
arrived at through the presence in Philadelphia of Lillie Langtry, who
was acting for the benefit of the families of soldiers fallen in the
Boer War. Why should not this undertaking be a patriotic one likewise?
Why not assist the families of soldiers and sailors fallen and disabled
in the Philippines? No sooner said than done. Mrs. Alexander J. Cassatt
had a son in the army, and was speedily interested in a plan to raise
money for the families of our own men in the service. She embraced
the idea with enthusiasm, formed a committee of prominent women and
carried the concerts through brilliantly and efficiently. The Executive
Committee managed the musical end, and Mrs. Cassatt’s Committee of
Women advertised the concerts, procured the support of musical and
social organizations, secured the patronesses, and filled the house.
The tickets were sold at auction with much profit.

The concerts were advertised as follows:

                      “Our Soldiers and Sailors.
                           Academy of Music
            Thursday, March 29th and April 5th, 3.30 P. M.

           Two Orchestral Concerts under the direction of
           Mr. Fritz Scheel will be given for the Relief of
           the Families of the Nation’s Heroes killed in the
           Philippines.

                    Soloist for the first concert:
                    M. VLADIMIR DEPACHMANN

                          PROGRAMME
        WEBER                    Overture “Euryanthe”
        GOLDMARK         Symphony, “A Rustic Wedding”
        CHOPIN                    Concerto in F minor
        SCHUMANN                          “Abendlied”
        BIZET                     Scherzo, Suite Roma
        LISZT               Rhapsodie Ongroise, No. 2

                  Soloist for second concert:
                     M. EDOUARD DE RESZKE

         Contributions to the Cause may be sent to Mrs. F. A.
          Packard, Treasurer, No. 110 S. Eighteenth Street.“

                       “Our Soldiers and Sailors
                      On April 5th, at 3.30 P. M.
               Second Concert by an Orchestra of Eighty
                        Philadelphia Musicians

           Under the Direction of MR. FRITZ SCHEEL

     For the Relief of the Families of men killed in the Philippines.
     MR. EDOUARD DE RESZKE, the famous Basso, will sing.”

                          PROGRAMME
    BEETHOVEN                                Symphony “Eroica”
    MEYERBEER Aria,   “O Jours Heureux” (from L’Étoile du Nord)
    WAGNER                                Vorspiel, “Lohengrin”
    HOFMANN                                   “Im Sonnenschein”
    VERDI                             Aria, “Infelice” (Ernani)
    LISZT                             First Hungarian Rhapsody

                 “THE PHILIPPINE CONCERTS[10]
                    MARCH 29, 1900-APRIL 5
                    UNDER THE PATRONAGE OF
                800 PHILADELPHIA MEN AND WOMEN

[10] Programme of March 27th and 28th, 1925.

    “Philadelphians generally do not know that The
    Philadelphia Orchestra first appeared in this City
    of Brotherly Love in disguise, a patriotic one, but
    none-the-less, a disguise. Had it tried to stalk boldly
    through the city gates, it would have been riddled by
    the guns of a critical public which disagreed at every
    point when a permanent orchestra was discussed.

    “The fact was not made public that these concerts for
    the benefit of the families of American soldiers and
    sailors fallen in the Philippines were a preliminary
    experiment, but on November 16, 1900, as a result of
    their success, the first concert of The Philadelphia
    Orchestra took place.

    “The Committee of Women which launched the concerts,
    hardly realized that through their efforts a new era in
    Philadelphia music was being inaugurated. The Executive
    Committee of men behind the project had such an end in
    view, but they preferred to remain unknown.

    “The concerts were devoted to a popular benefit. They
    were also the means of carrying out with Fritz Scheel,
    leader of the amateur Philadelphia Symphony Society, a
    contract that he should have a public appearance with
    an orchestra of professional musicians.

    “The concerts were brilliantly successful and realized
    a net profit of $10,252.73. The musicians played at
    less than Union rates for thirty-six rehearsals and two
    performances, and Mr. Scheel gave his services.

    “The attitude of the public during these years is
    revealed in the fact that it seemed natural for a group
    of women to sponsor concerts for war heroes; but in
    1904 it seemed an unheard of innovation that women
    should organize to further the interests of a permanent
    orchestra.

    “Many people who prize The Philadelphia Orchestra
    as the greatest treasure we possess, remember only
    too well the days when Philadelphia was dependent on
    visiting orchestras. Young people today have the good
    fortune to live in a town where an orchestra of the
    highest artistic standards under a leader of world-wide
    reputation is now firmly established. Music lovers and
    citizens generally, are grateful to the men and women
    of courage, who gave Fritz Scheel his first opportunity
    in Philadelphia.”


“COMMITTEE OF WOMEN

Mrs. Alexander J. Cassatt, Chairman; Miss Harriet Buchanan, Secretary;
Mrs. Frederick A. Packard, Treasurer; Mrs. C. William Bergner, Mrs.
Henry C. Boyer, Mrs. Edward Coles, Mrs. Joseph G. Darlington, Mrs.
Frank H. Rosengarten, Mrs. Barclay H. Warburton, Mrs. Charles S.
Whelen, Mrs. J. B. Sands, wife of Captain Sands, of the Naval Home; and
Miss Meade, daughter of the late General George Gordon Meade.


                   “EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

    MR. JOHN H. INGHAM, of the Melody Club
    MR. OLIVER BOYCE JUDSON, of the Operatic Society
    MR. EDWARD I. KEFFER, of the Philadelphia Symphony Society
    MR. EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN, of the Orpheus Club
    MR. OSCAR A. KNIPE

The _Philadelphia Times_, March 30, 1900:

    “When Johnny comes marching home again from the
    Philippines he will find that the girl he left behind
    him has had a place in the hearts of Philadelphia
    matrons at least. That interest was evidenced in the
    first of the two widely heralded concerts in the
    soldiers’ and sailors’ aid, which took place at the
    Academy yesterday afternoon. Society turned out bravely
    and filled the whole of the auditorium and the balcony,
    but there, unfortunately, it stopped, and the upper
    part of the house, though the labors of the ladies
    interested have been unflagging and strenuous, had
    plenty of room.

    “Pacing up and down the corridors were privates from
    the Arsenal and tars from the Navy Yard. In braided
    dress uniforms of brilliant blue, shining helmets and
    buttons that glistened like molten gold, the soldiers
    stalked to and fro, their belted waists giving pointers
    to the masculine followers of the latest fad, and their
    shoulders putting to shame the well cottoned ones of
    the ‘swells’ standing near. The tars in their flapping
    breeches and spreading collars, were a picturesque
    element among so many landsmen, and they, too, sold
    programmes, and made good salesmen. On the stage guns
    were stacked at the sides and colors dipped from the
    stacks.”

It is well to reiterate here that the Philadelphia Orchestra is not and
never was a continuation of the amateur Philadelphia Symphony Society.
Only one member of that organization played at the Philippine Concerts.

These concerts were so successful and so warmly received, that steps
were taken to organize a committee to continue concerts by Philadelphia
musicians. Later in the spring of 1900, a meeting was called in the
Orpheus Club Rooms by Dr. Richard J. Dunglison, President of the
Musical Fund Society. Officers of various musical organizations,
representatives of the press and prominent men in civic affairs were
present. A plan for organization was discussed and the necessity for
a Guarantee Fund was emphasized. The same committee of gentlemen
was appointed, with the addition of Mr. John C. Sims, as Treasurer.
Within four weeks of the second Philippine concert, the first circular
announcing the plan for forming a Philadelphia Orchestra was mailed by
this Committee:


             “A PLAN TO DEVELOP THE ORCHESTRAL
                RESOURCES OF PHILADELPHIA

    “The plan briefly outlined herein is addressed to all
    those people who are interested in good music and have
    at heart a desire to propagate musical culture in
    Philadelphia.

    “Much interest has been aroused by the successful
    result attained in the symphony concerts recently given
    for the benefit of the sufferers through the Philippine
    War. It is thought that these concerts proved the
    availability or many of our resident players, and that
    the experiment might well be followed by a series of
    concerts during the season of 1900-1901, conducted upon
    the same general plan.

    “The project of a permanent Philadelphia Orchestra is
    at present not sufficiently advanced to permit of the
    hope that such a body can be organized in time to be
    heard next season; therefore, the series of concerts
    herein proposed will not conflict with, but will
    further that movement, because it will provide the
    resident players with a season’s training in symphonic
    work and thus enable them better to fill positions
    in the permanent orchestra when it shall need their
    services.

    “The proposed plan embraces a series of about six
    evening and possibly two afternoon concerts, to be
    given in the Academy of Music, at customary concert
    prices. It has been ascertained that each concert with
    its rehearsals will cost about $2000, an expense that
    will be covered by a sale of two-thirds of the house.

    “Hitherto it has been impracticable, when concerts have
    been given by local orchestral players, to arrange for
    a sufficient number of rehearsals. As a rule it has
    been impossible to obtain more than a single rehearsal.
    The present scheme contemplates at least five or six
    rehearsals for each concert.

    “Mr. Scheel’s reputation abroad, where he was a
    colleague of von Bülow, Brahms, Joachim, Sarasate,
    D’Albert and Wilhelmj, and conductor of orchestras in
    Schwerin, Chemnitz and Hamburg, was a guarantee of what
    was to have been expected of him here. The professional
    musicians of Philadelphia are virtually unanimous in
    expressing hearty admiration for his rare ability as
    a leader; they acknowledge that his work among them
    this winter has been a real stimulus to the advancement
    of their art, and they therefore desire to secure the
    advantage of his services next season.

    “In order to insure the financial success of the
    proposed concerts, it has been deemed advisable to
    raise a guarantors’ fund of at least $10,000. No
    payment of money is asked for at the present time; but
    all who are willing to become guarantors are requested
    to send in their names and addresses to the Secretary
    of the Committee, Mr. John H. Ingham, 505 Chestnut
    Street, stating the amount of their subscription,
    which, however, shall not be binding until the total
    sum of at least $10,000 shall be reached.

    “As the Committee wishes particularly to obtain a large
    number of subscribers to the fund, it will be glad to
    accept contributions of any amount not less than five
    dollars.

       *       *       *       *       *


       “Committee:
                      HENRY WHELEN, JR.
                      JOHN C. SIMS
                      EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
                      OSCAR A. KNIPE
                      DR. EDWARD I. KEFFER
                      OLIVER BOYCE JUDSON
    April 30, 1900    JOHN H. INGHAM”

A Guarantee Fund of $15,000 was raised from one hundred and twenty
people[11], a difficult task in those days, for an untried plan; and six
evening concerts were given during the winter of 1900-1901.

The Committee invited four thousand women to be patronesses, and issued
many circulars. It was the personal work, however, that accomplished
the result in 1900, and that has continued to accomplish results
during twenty-five years. Guarantors and patronesses were accorded the
privilege of securing seats, for which there was no demand, in advance.

                       PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA[12]
                     MR. FRITZ SCHEEL, _Conductor_
                            _First Concert_
              Friday, November 16th, 1900, at 8.15 P. M.

                          PROGRAMME
    CARL GOLDMARK                         Overture “In Spring,” Op. 36
    LUDWIG VON BEETHOVEN               Symphony No. 5, C minor, Op. 67
           I. Allegro con brio                               2-4
          II. Andante con moto                               3-8
         III. Allegro                                        3-4
          IV. Allegro                                        4-4
    PETER ILITSCH TSCHAIKOWSKY          Concerto for Pianoforte No. 1,
                                                  B flat minor, Op. 23
           I. Allegro non troppo e molto maestoso            3-4
          II. Andantino simplice                             6-8
         III. Allegro con fuoco                              3-4
    KARL MARIA VON WEBER             “Invitation to the Dance,” Op. 65
                                    Orchestration by Felix Weingartner
    RICHARD WAGNER                    Entry of the Gods in “Walhalla,”
                                                 from “Das Rheingold.”

                                Soloist
                        MR. OSSIP GABRILOWITSCH

This concert was herald as a musical and social event and the
newspapers were highly commendatory and friendly in tone.

[11] See Appendix D.

[12] For remaining programmes see Appendix J.

            “ORCHESTRA CONCERTS OPEN AUSPICIOUSLY
        “PHILADELPHIA GETTING IN LINE WITH BOSTON, CHICAGO
            AND NEW YORK IN HAVING HOME ORGANIZATION.
                    “OSSIP GABRILOWITSCH,

    “The Russian pianist made his Philadelphia début last night.

    “The series of concerts by the Philadelphia Orchestra opened under
    notably happy auspices in the Academy of Music last evening. The
    musical and social interests engaged constituted the occasion an
    exceptional one.

    “From the results evinced in the performance of the programme
    under Mr. Scheel’s direction it must be regarded as well as marking a
    distinct period in the musical advancement of the city. Not the least
    interesting evidences of general sympathy with the movement to
    place Philadelphia in line with Boston, Chicago, and other cities in
    the possession of an established orchestra was the fact that Mr.
    William Stoll, Jr., and Mr. Henry Gordon Thunder, both identified
    with the endeavor to advance this branch of work in the past, figure
    in the present movement, the one as a violinist in the organization,
    the other as a guarantor.

    “The Philadelphia Orchestra, as it exists, is, with slight
    exception, what its name purports, engaging practically all the
    best orchestral performers in the city. A portion of this material
    was under disadvantage, both as to individual training and the
    fact that a few men, fulfilling the demands of an orchestra in a
    theatre, are mainly required to play as loud as possible, with
    corresponding absence of any approach to phrasing.

    “Considering these facts and in view of the works accomplished in
    last evening’s programme, the results must be regarded as little
    short of notable, not only as to the outcome of a training by a man
    of exceptional thoroughness in this direction, but in the aspect of
    an enthusiastic response on the part of the performers. It is only
    in case of entire sympathy, between those engaged that an outcome
    corresponding with that demonstrated in the first programme can be
    attained.”

                “THE ORCHESTRA AT THE ACADEMY
        “PHILADELPHIA’S NEW ORGANIZATION UNDER HERR SCHEEL
                         MAKES ITS DÉBUT
                  “GABRILOWITSCH THE SOLOIST

    “The Young Russian Heard in Tschaikowsky’s Concerto in B. Flat
    Minor. A Brilliant Audience Greets Orchestra and Enjoys an
    Interesting Program.

    “With unequal forces at his command in the orchestral choirs, Herr
    Fritz Scheel, by the sheer effect of personality, was able to carry
    artistic conviction home to the brilliant audience at the Academy
    of Music last evening, when the Philadelphia Orchestra made its
    first appeal. By wise choice of program, by the happy selection
    of a soloist and by the spirit which pervaded the interpretation
    of the numbers read, the leader made a deep impression and the
    orchestra, when at its best achieved a decided success. It has
    in it the promise of a new era musically, and its work of
    last evening is an earnest of better things to come. Certain
    readjustments are inevitable. The strings show up finely. There is
    high finish and excellent tonal quality in all they do. They are,
    indeed, the backbone of the orchestra. The brasses, on the whole,
    met the demands of the leader and music, but the horns need as keen
    a concern for time as for tone, and while these choirs in no wise
    seriously interfered with an adequate realization of the beauty of
    the work so interpreted, the same cannot be said for the woodwind
    which was not up to the standard in several particulars, though the
    bassoons were notably efficient and in fine trim.

                   “HERR SCHEEL’S GOOD WORK

    “All this was, however, to be expected. Every one present who is in
    and of the new movement, which started off with such flying colors,
    knew the limitations and accepted them in the right spirit. With
    this said and understood one can speak enthusiastically of the
    really amazing results obtained by Herr Scheel in so short a time.
    There were moments when the orchestra played with a brilliancy
    and dash and with a finish that was completely satisfying. Herr
    Scheel’s dynamic range is extensive, his palette of color is rich
    and his contrasts are striking and yet fully in the spirit of the
    work. The orchestra was particularly effective in the Goldmark
    overture, in the “Entry of the gods into Walhalla” and in the Weber
    music. Weingartner, instead of paraphrasing the famous “Invitation
    to the Dance” rondo for the ballet, as Berlioz did, has written
    what is really a brilliant open-air concert version which taxes
    the full orchestra, and which Herr Scheel carried out in splendid
    spirit, giving a chance for all the choirs to do their best, the
    harp coming in for some crisp work that was very brilliantly done.
    All these three highly colored numbers were set off against the
    more trying classical demands of the Fifth Symphony. It the reading
    it received revealed the individual weaknesses of the orchestra
    as now made up, it was at least a revelation of the great advance
    the band has made. There was decision and emphasis and grace in
    phrasing and a keen discrimination in the shading. If Herr Scheel
    had his view of the traditional tempi the final effect was to
    reveal the work in its noble proportions and to make every one feel
    the true import of this great masterpiece.
                    “AUDIENCE ENTHUSIASTIC

       *       *       *       *       *

    “The enthusiasm of the audience was most unrestrained and generous.
    It was marked at the close of the symphony and fairly overwhelmed
    Gabrilowitsch, and this, with the splendid turnout from
    top to bottom, was a tribute to the committee and the guarantors
    who made the concert possible.”

The first venture having been successfully concluded, business matters
were attended to by issuing the first call of the Philadelphia
Orchestra to the guarantors, combined with which was the announcement
of the formation of The Philadelphia Orchestra Association, on May
17th, 1901, with the following officers and directors:

                    _President_
             ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER

                 _Vice-president_
                F. T. SULLY DARLEY

                    _Secretary_
                  JOHN H. INGHAM

                    _Treasurer_
                 HENRY WHELEN, JR.

               _Board of Directors_
    A. J. CASSATT          C. HARTMAN KUHN
    JOHN H. CONVERSE       EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
    ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.    THOMAS MCKEAN, JR.
    F. T. SULLY DARLEY     CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
    WILLIAM L. ELKINS      JAMES W. PAUL, JR.
    MISS MARY K. GIBSON    MRS. F. H. ROSENGARTEN
    CLEMENT A. GRISCOM     EDGAR SCOTT
    MRS. A. C. HARRISON    SIMON A. STERN
    JOHN H. INGHAM         MISS ANNE THOMPSON
    OLIVER B. JUDSON       HENRY WHELEN, JR.
    EDWARD I. KEFFER       A. VAN RENSSELAER
    OSCAR A. KNIPE         P. A. B. WIDENER

               _Executive Committee_
    JOHN H. INGHAM         EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
    OLIVER B. JUDSON       A. VAN RENSSELAER
    EDWARD I. KEFFER       HENRY WHELEN, JR.
    OSCAR A. KNIPE

Who was the conductor of this new orchestra, who until eighteen months
before was unknown in Philadelphia?

Fritz Scheel was born in Lübeck, Germany, in 1852. His father and
grandfather were orchestral conductors and his mother was a highly
talented singer, from whom he inherited his remarkable memory and fine
ear.

Fritz was the oldest of a large family and worked for his own and his
family’s support from an early age. He received his education from the
city, in return for playing in orchestras and at concerts and operas.
As a boy he often had to fill sudden vacancies, and he was also able to
play the horn, trumpet, trombone and tuba. He was the principal teacher
of his four brothers, all musicians. As his father was a practical
musician, Scheel had had from his childhood an intimate experience
with the details of orchestral instruments. As a boy he conducted an
orchestra of his own formation, giving subscription concerts in nearby
towns which were well attended. At fifteen he appeared as a violin
soloist.

Scheel’s first appearance as a conductor was when he was the youthful
trumpeter in the town band of Chemnitz. Like other municipal bands of
Germany, this one furnished the music for all occasions and happened
to be playing for the circus. The leader was taken ill, and one of the
men was selected as a substitute. When the ring master heard of it, he
said, “No, let that boy conduct. It is he who watches the horses’ feet,
when they dance, and it is he who sets the time for the music.” Scheel
became the leader of the band, and later on was employed by the town as
instructor of all the band and orchestral instruments. This experience
gave him an expert knowledge of technique, which proved valuable later.

In an interview given during the first season here, Scheel described
conducting his first opera, shortly after receiving a life appointment
as first violin in the Court Orchestra at Schwerin.

    “Do I recall the first performance that I conducted?”
    said Mr. Scheel. “Yes, and it was an opera. Meyerbeer’s
    ‘Robert Le Diable.’ I was exactly nineteen and a half
    years old, and a lost orchestra score led to it. I
    was the concertmaster then in the Chemnitz Orchestra,
    which in summer played for the opera performances
    in Bremerhafen at the Court Theatre. The opera of
    ‘Robert Le Diable’ was announced, and when the morning
    of the first rehearsal came it was discovered that
    the entire second act of the conductor’s score had
    been lost. Herr Pohl, the conductor, a young man of
    thirty-three, refused to go on with the opera. It was
    too late to think of getting another score in time
    for the rehearsals necessary for the performance. The
    only way out of it seemed to be the withdrawal of the
    opera. Some of the singers, who had noticed the cue
    for their phrases that I had given them on the violin,
    asked whether I would not conduct. ‘If the conductor
    invites me I will,’ I said. When this was repeated to
    the conductor he promptly gave the invitation, and it
    was a pressing one, for they wished to give the opera
    and keep faith with the public. That entire second act
    I had to conduct from the first violin part, memory
    supplying the rest. The performance went without a
    break. That settled my career. Three days later I
    conducted Gounod’s ‘Faust,’ and immediately afterward
    ‘L’Africaine,’ of Meyerbeer, Herr Pohl himself
    supplying the harp part on a piano. In the years that
    followed many were the performances that I conducted,
    including the entire ‘Niebelungen Ring’ of Wagner. But
    I never hear a fragment of Meyerbeer’s ‘Robert Le Diable’
    without smiling to myself at the recollection of the time
    when I conducted the second act from the first violin part.”

After nine years at Schwerin, Scheel went to Chemnitz as Kappelmeister,
winning the appointment over thirty-five competitors, as successor
to Hans Sitt. There he also played weekly solos and conducted for
the most famous virtuosi, such as Hans von Bülow, Sarasate, Wilhelmj
and Joachim. He once prepared the orchestra for a Beethoven Concert
under Von Bülow’s direction in an hour and a half, the programme being
the Leonore Overture No. 3, the Eroica Symphony and a Concerto. The
Chemnitz Orchestra was often called to different cities in Saxony,
such as Dresden, Leipzig, etc., to play before crowded houses. Scheel
was also elected leader of the Sitt Chor Gesangverein, a Chorus of
400 mixed voices. With this Chorus and the excellent City Orchestra
he obtained marvelous results, and produced among other great works,
Bach’s “Mattheus Passion” and “Trauer Ode”; Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony
and his Missa Solemnis; Schumann’s “Faust Scenes,” Liszt’s “Christus”
and Händel’s “Samson.” The Choral works of Mendelssohn, Schumann, and
Gade were also performed, as well as many small choruses. In 1885
a Music Festival lasting three days was given to celebrate the two
hundredth anniversary of Bach’s birth, and he kept in the vanguard of
musical events in Germany.

During this period, Scheel spent four summers in conducting opera at
a Russian watering place. Four different operas were given each week,
and the repertoire included: “Tannhäuser,” “Lohengrin,” “The Flying
Dutchman,” “Rienzi,” “Euryanthe,” “Der Freischütz,” “Faust,” the
standard Italian operas of Verdi, Rossini, etc., for which he also
trained the chorus.

After nine years at Chemnitz, Scheel was called by von Bülow to
Hamburg to drill the orchestra for concerts which he and the pianist
alternated in conducting. He was a devoted admirer of von Bülow and
the great pianist showed his appreciation in many ways. Years later,
after von Bülow had retired, he offered to play at a concert given in
honor of Scheel. “I do it once more,” he said, “as gratitude for a true
colleague and friend.” He played the piano Concerto in E flat major,
by Beethoven, and the Hungarian Fantasie, dedicated to him by his
father-in-law, Franz Liszt. This was one year before his death and was
his last public appearance as a pianist. Scheel also knew well Brahms,
Tschaikowsky and Rubinstein.

In 1892 Dr. Ziegfeld engaged Scheel to go to Chicago the next year and
give historical concerts at the World’s Fair. The enterprise failed. He
then took an orchestra to the Mid-winter Fair in San Francisco, under
the name of the “Vienna Prater Orchestra,” in the winter of 1893. Later
he gave daily concerts, and, during two seasons, cycles of Afternoon
Symphony Concerts. For a season he was engaged by Oscar Hammerstein
and then he became the first leader of the San Francisco Orchestra.
He introduced the great classical and modern works to the people of
that city, who still speak admiringly of him and remember his success.
After five years in San Francisco, Scheel came to Philadelphia, and was
discovered at Woodside Park, conducting his “New York Orchestra.” The
newspaper criticisms were most flattering.

The following pen picture of Mr. Scheel has been given by a man who
played under his leadership and saw him under many conditions.

    “A tall man, robust, large-framed, something more than
    spare, a little less than stout; a back and broad
    shoulders in strikingly good proportion, and a head
    poised upon them in easy dignity. The large hands
    are full of character, delicately formed, refined,
    noticeably plastic and adaptable.

    “A dark-brown military moustache and a prominent
    nose stand out clearly under a typical, high, German
    forehead and coiffure.

    “In his brown eyes an infinite variety of expressions
    are lurking. From humorous twinkles that are
    irresistible, to flashes of fire and scorn that never
    miss the mark, they assume new and rapidly fleeting
    phases with every phase of music or speech.”

Many stories are told of Fritz Scheel’s early efforts with amateurs
and with a group of musicians, strange to him, for in those days
the requirements for orchestral players were not the present ones,
and there were many obstacles to overcome. His ear was absolutely
correct, and he often told the players when tuning was needed. He was
on occasion obliged to use mechanical strategies to insure the proper
intonation. A close friend of his tells the following anecdotes:

    “At the first rehearsal for the Philippine concerts,
    one of the numbers contained a difficult trumpet part,
    which seemed impossible for the first trumpet player,
    to play. Scheel postponed the rehearsal of this number
    until the next day, to allow him time to practice, but
    next day he could do no better. So the part was given
    to the second trumpet very much to the humiliation
    of the first player. But though very stern, Scheel
    was also very sympathetic with his musicians, and he
    realized what the feelings of the man must be. He
    therefore addressed the orchestra, in his usual formal
    way, and called for the attention of the players. Then
    turning to the first trumpet player, he remarked:
    ‘I have been listening to your playing for the last
    two days, and I feel sure it is not your fault that
    you could not play that one part in the composition.
    I notice that whenever you play a note in which the
    middle valve of your instrument is used, you have no
    difficulty in playing the part which you were unable
    to do before.’ This incident was told by the player,
    who took his trumpet to his instrument-maker and had
    one-sixteenth of an inch taken off the middle valve;
    with the result that he could play parts that he never
    could play before. He then remarked, ‘It matters not
    what happens between Scheel and me; I will always take
    off my hat to him, and say ‘Master’.’

    “On another occasion the tympanum was not in tune.
    Scheel stopped the orchestra and asked the tympanist to
    tune his instrument. When the man started to turn the
    keys, Scheel said, ‘No, it is not on that side; it is
    on the right-hand side of the drum,’ showing that he,
    at the distance of a great many feet, could tell that
    the false vibrations were coming from the right side of
    the drum.

    “At one of the rehearsals the harp player had trouble
    with her part. Scheel said, ‘Skip that one chord and
    you will only have to change your pedals twice in place
    of five times.’

    “He also had the peculiar faculty of being able to
    get the effect of instruments that were not in the
    orchestra by the combination of other instruments that
    would give the same tone. The writer remembers very
    distinctly Scheel’s using the French horn and the
    ’cello together to play the third bassoon part.”

This brief account of the first leader of the Philadelphia Orchestra
explains why the Executive Committee pinned its faith to Fritz Scheel.

As the beginnings of the orchestra are recorded, how delightful it is
to music lovers to know that the Musical Fund Society, itself a bold
pioneer eighty years before, sponsored this most daring enterprise of
our musical history. Dr. Dunglison, its president, presiding in the
Orpheus Rooms on a spring afternoon in 1900, gave the blessing of the
first Philadelphia Orchestra to the present Philadelphia Orchestra.
Like Brünnhilde, herself shorn of godly powers, sending forth her hero
to do great deeds, so the Musical Fund Society, no longer composed of
active musicians, sent forth the young orchestra to conquer the musical
world. No magic rings, or swords, or helmets were given to aid it in
surmounting difficulties. The only magic formulas known to all the
people interested were hard work and an invincible spirit.

[Illustration: © Allen Drew Cook FRITZ SCHEEL]




CHAPTER III

EARLY YEARS


With the first steps safely passed and the Philadelphia Orchestra
organized, the period of financial difficulty began. In 1901-1902
fourteen pairs of concerts in the regular series, and a total of
fifty-two concerts for the season were given. The deficit jumped from
$14,000 to $72,000. Everything was quadrupled except the audience. That
remained almost stationary. Twenty years after Theodore Thomas’s time
Philadelphia was still not ready to attend symphony concerts or support
an orchestra at any general sacrifice to its own purse. The general
attitude was that such a project must be supported by a few persons who
had time and money to spend. Indifference was widespread.

Scheel early saw the need of traveling to make the orchestra known,
especially in New York and Boston, as he realized that the saying about
the prophet held good for orchestras as well as for persons. He was
faced with the fact that the Association could not see its way to send
the orchestra to large cities. Appearances out-of-town were undertaken
as early as 1901-02, in cities in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. During
the next season New York, Baltimore and Washington were visited.

He well knew, however, that his work with soloists would bring
the orchestra fame, and much effort was expended in preparing
accompaniments. A case in point was the time that Ysaye was the soloist
and was playing a Bach Concerto. At the end the violinist stood like
a statue until the orchestra had finished. When Scheel went off the
stage, Ysaye kissed him on both cheeks and said that the accompaniment
was the finest he had ever had. Shortly after this a member of the
Boston Orchestra told one of our violinists that Ysaye had been booked
to play the Bach Concerto with his orchestra; but after starting it he
stopped the rehearsal and said: “Not after the Philadelphia Orchestra
will I play the Bach Concerto,” and another concerto was substituted.

With artistic ambitions ever growing, it was discovered that some of
the needed instruments were not to be found in the city and in addition
to this a number of players would not accept the terms of the contract.
The situation became acute, so in the summer of 1901, and again in
1902, the conductor was commissioned to seek musicians in Europe.

When it became evident that the Philadelphia Orchestra was going to
be permanent, application was made in 1902 for a Charter[13] for the
Association, which was granted on January 5th, 1903, to the following
persons, only nine of whom are now living:

    GEORGE BURNHAM, JR.        EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
    A. J. CASSATT              THOMAS MCKEAN
    JOHN H. CONVERSE           CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
    ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.        JAMES W. PAUL, JR.
    WILLIAM L. ELKINS          MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN
    MARY K. GIBSON             RICHARD ROSSMÄSSLER
    CLEMENT A. GRISCOM         EDGAR SCOTT
    MRS. ALFRED C. HARRISON    SIMON A. STERN
    JOHN H. INGHAM             ANNE THOMSON
    OLIVER B. JUDSON           ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
    EDWARD I. KEFFER           HENRY WHELEN, JR.
    C. HARTMAN KUHN            P. A. B. WIDENER

[13] For Charter see Appendix A.

From the beginning Scheel inaugurated the polity continued ever
since, of putting the orchestra in the lead artistically. “First,”
performances began almost immediately. Three years after the formation
of the orchestra he gave the first complete Beethoven Cycle ever
presented in Philadelphia. Five successive concerts were devoted
to this, ending with the Ninth Symphony, in which the Mendelssohn
Club participated. This event was preceded by a series of five Young
People’s Educational Concerts with lectures, by William J. Henderson,
William F. Apthorp, Louis C. Elson, Hugh A. Clarke and Henry E.
Krehbiel, whose subject was “Beethoven.” Other lectures were given on
the same subject on the days of the concerts.

                   PROGRAMMES OF THE BEETHOVEN CYCLE
                First Concert, Friday, March 20th, 1903

    1. Overture                   “Egmont,” E major, Opus 84
    2. Symphony No. 8                       F major, Opus 93
    3. Symphony No. 3         E flat major (Eroica), Opus 55

              Second Concert, Saturday, March 21st, 1903

    1. Overture               “Coriolanus,” C minor, Opus 62
    2. Symphony No. 1                       C major, Opus 21
    3. Symphony No. 6           F major (Pastorale), Opus 68

            Preceding lecture by HUGH A. CLARKE, MUS. DOC.,
         at 3 o’clock, Saturday afternoon, at the Broad Street
                Conservatory, 1329 South Broad Street,
                     GILBERT R. COMBS, _Director_

               Third Concert, Tuesday, March 24th, 1903

    1. Overture                  “Fidelio,” C major, Opus 72
    2. Symphony No. 2                       D major, Opus 36
    3. Symphony No. 5                       C minor, Opus 67

               Preceding lecture by PHILIP H. GOEPP, at
          3 o’clock, Tuesday afternoon, at the Assembly Hall
        of the Sternberg School of Music, 10 South 18th Street

              Fourth Concert, Wednesday, March 25th, 1903

    1. Overture            “Leonore” No. 2, C major, Opus 72
    2. Symphony No. 4                  B flat major, Opus 60
    3. Symphony No. 7                       A major, Opus 92

            Preceding lecture by HUGH A. CLARKE, MUS. DOC.,
                  at 3 o’clock, Wednesday afternoon,
                  at the Broad Street  Conservatory.

               Fifth Concert, Thursday, March 26th, 1903

    1. Overture            “Leonore” No. 3, C major, Opus 72
    2. Concerto for Piano and Orchestra      E flat, Opus 73

                       Constantin von Sternberg

    3. Symphony No. 9                      D minor, Opus 125

               Preceding lecture by PHILIP H. GOEPP, at
                    3 o’clock, Thursday afternoon,
                   at the Sternberg School of Music

       *       *       *       *       *

_Musical Courier_, New York, March 25th, 1903:

    “The cycle was to crown the third season of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra’s successful existence, and for
    many months, the leader, the orchestra, the manager
    and the committees have been busy in the endeavor to
    make these five concerts matchless in performance and
    memorable in historical significance.

    “The cycle was projected as an art undertaking pure
    and simple. Profit was a secondary consideration.
    Flamboyant advertisement was eschewed. There were
    announcements dignified and to the point. The prices
    were put within the reach of the student and the poor
    lover of music. Society was asked to patronize at
    the box office, but not on the programme. It is thus
    apparent that never in the musical life of America
    has there been conceived a project more ideal, more
    artistic and more utilitarian than this Beethoven Cycle
    in the City of Brotherly Love. Fritz Scheel is not
    overshadowed even by the great Joseph Joachim, who
    together with three famous fellow musicians, proposes
    next summer to play all of Beethoven’s string quartets
    at a musical festival in Germany.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Beethoven’s ‘Coriolanus’ overture was played by the
    New York Philharmonic Orchestra this season. The
    Filharmonic Fathers should have been provided with
    free transportation to Philadelphia in order to learn
    how one conductor can mar and another make the same
    composition. This Philadelphia Coriolanus was a hero
    indeed, who walked with erect head and proud chest.
    There was no rheumatism in his knees and there was no
    crick in his back. When his mother pleaded she spoke in
    accents human and loving. Her voice was softly attuned.
    It sang a song that Coriolanus did well to heed.
    Scheel’s graphic characterization made the Philharmonic
    performance appear in the memory like almost a
    travesty.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Musical Courier_, April 1, 1903:

    “At the end, when the composer abandons absolute music
    and turns to song, Philadelphia’s own distinguished
    choral body, the Mendelssohn Club, came to the support
    of the musicians, and the beautiful ‘Hymn of Joy’ was
    brilliantly sung. As a quartet for the solo part, Mrs.
    Marie Kunkel-Zimmerman, Mrs. Osborne, Nicholas Douty
    and Mr. Schurig did brilliant work. Altogether the
    playing of this Ninth Symphony formed a fitting climax
    to this memorable week devoted to the great master’s
    own musical history.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “After the performance of the overture, Scheel was
    presented with a floral wreath, lyre and harp, and
    John H. Converse on behalf of the Directors of
    the orchestra, bestowed upon him a bronze bust of
    Beethoven, in well chosen words of compliment and
    congratulations.”

Scheel’s one thought was the artistic development of the orchestra.
The story is told of a time when new members of the Board found that
the concerts were being given at a tremendous loss. They at once
criticised the quality of the music, and said, “The programme must be
changed; you are giving too high-class music for the people, and they
won’t stand it.” The Executive Committee therefore decided that Mr.
Scheel should put waltzes on his symphony programmes; and a meeting
was arranged with him. This was in the early days when his English was
less fluent than later, and his understanding of the language less
keen. It took him some minutes to find out the real purpose of the
Committee. Then he expressed himself in a very formal way—somewhat in
this wise: “Gentlemen, I am the head of the department of music of this
association. I am elected by you. You represent the business end of
this association; I stand for art. I cannot allow any one to interfere
with my programme. If my programme and my management of the musical
side of the association does not meet with your approval, you may get
another conductor; but as long as I am conductor of the Philadelphia
Orchestra, waltzes will not be played on a symphony programme.” He
spoke so emphatically that there was no recourse and the subject of
waltzes at the regular series was dropped.

After this decision, however, Mr. Scheel suggested giving popular
concerts. The committee immediately accepted this offer, and plans were
made for five. At the last minute, when the sale at the box office was
found to be exceedingly small, it was considered necessary to call upon
outside organizations to make the concerts a financial success, so they
were given for the benefit of various charitable organizations, such as
the University Hospital, Hahnemann Hospital, St. Christopher’s Hospital
for Children, and others.

The first Popular Benefit Concert for the Men’s Medical Ward of the
University Hospital was put in charge of the “Benevolent Aid Society”
of that ward. This committee, with Mrs. William W. Arnett, as Chairman,
and Mrs. S. Naudain Duer, as Vice-chairman, at ten days’ notice secured
one thousand patronesses and sold out the house, David Bispham having
been secured as soloist, and a popular programme having been announced.
This was the first time people representing a so-called “Opera
Audience” had heard the Orchestra. In 1905 this same Committee secured
the orchestra and gave an afternoon of Music in the Horticultural Hall.
Tea was served at tables, and two programmes, with an intermission,
were given. In each of these events about one thousand dollars each
was cleared by the orchestra and the Men’s Ward. While these efforts
were not entirely consistent with the dignity of a great orchestra,
the financial situation in which the management found itself made such
overtures for money making and advertising advantageous.

_The Press_, November 12th, 1902:


                 “PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA

    “FIRST POPULAR CONCERT A GREAT SUCCESS—BISPHAM THE SOLOIST

        “The first popular concert of the Philadelphia
        Orchestra at the Academy of Music last evening
        was a great success, not only from the financial
        point of view—the proceeds being for the benefit
        of the University Hospital—but from the artistic,
        the soloist, Mr. David Bispham, coming in for a
        special word by reason of his familiar finesse as an
        interpreter of aria and song.”

                         PROGRAMME
        CARL GOLDMARK                        Overture “In Spring”
        WAGNER                 Pilgrim’s Chorus from “Tannhäuser”
        (a) WAGNER               “Evening Star” from “Tannhäuser”
        (b) VERDI                       Page Song from “Falstaff”
        JOHANN STRAUSS                    “Danube Maiden’s Waltz”
        BRAHMS                      Hungarian Dances Nos. 1 and 2
        BEETHOVEN                Overture “Leonore” No. 3, Op. 72
        (a) SCHUMANN                         “The Two Grenadiers”
        (b) SCHUBERT                       “Hark, Hark, the Lark”
        GRIEG                     “Ase’s Death,” “Anitra’s Dance”

                     (_For String Orchestra_)
        (a) GOUNOD                   “Oh That We Two Were Maying”
        (b) H. H. WEIZLER                         “Killiekrankie”
        (c) DAMROSCH                                “Danny Dever”
        LISZT                          “Hungarian Rhapsody” No. 2

                      MR. DAVID BISPHAM, Soloist

In the early days rehearsals were held in the banquet room of Musical
Fund Hall, and in the room of the Commercial Museum, through the
courtesy of those organizations. Later Odd Fellows Hall was rented, but
since 1912 the rehearsals have been held at the Academy of Music, by a
special arrangement with the management, which has always co-operated
to the fullest extent with the Association.


THE STRAUSS CONCERTS

During the fourth season of the orchestra’s existence, the Executive
Committee took the bold step of engaging Richard Strauss to appear
with it in Philadelphia. Later, two appearances in Boston with the
Philadelphia Orchestra were added, as it was learned that no guest
conductor was permitted to conduct the Boston Symphony Orchestra.

Strauss’s first American concert was in New York, where the practice of
sending substitutes to rehearsals was common. In the middle of “Don
Juan” the orchestra broke down and they had to stop and begin again.
Therefore, when Dr. Strauss reached Philadelphia, he was prepared for
another such occurrence. He arrived for rehearsal in a perturbed state
of mind, and proceeded brusquely to the conductor’s stand. Mr. Scheel,
however, had spared no pains in preparation for the great event. The
rehearsal was held at Odd Fellows Temple, in a small room, where the
reverberations in the fortissimo passages were tremendous. After simply
bowing to Mr. Scheel, Dr. Strauss began to lead. He had played but a
few measures before he discovered an orchestra thoroughly proficient
and well-rehearsed in his numbers. After playing a few bars he dropped
his arms and allowed the orchestra to play on. There was an entire
change in his manner. He turned to Scheel, and, throwing both arms in
the air, exclaimed, “Famos!” Every few moments he cried, “Wunderschön!”
“Ausgezeichnet!” After making one or two corrections in the parts, he
stopped the rehearsal and became highly enthusiastic over the playing
of the orchestra.

                      THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA

                       FRITZ SCHEEL, _Conductor_
            Increased to 100 Performers for these Occasions

                          DR. RICHARD STRAUSS
                 Conducting his own Compositions, and

                         FRAU STRAUSS-DE AHNA
             Dramatic Soprano, accompanied by DR. STRAUSS

                              PROGRAMMES
                    Friday Afternoon, March 4, 1904

    1. FRANZ LISZT      A Faust Symphony in Three Pictures
                                     (after Goethe)
                  I. Faust (Allegro)
                 II. Gretchen (Andante)
                III. Mephistopheles (Scherzo, Finale)

    2. RICHARD STRAUSS
           Songs with Orchestra:
                  a. “Das Rosenband”
                  b. “Liebes-Hymnus”
                  c. “Morgen”
                  d. “Cäcilie”

                         FRAU STRAUSS-DE AHNA
                       Conducted by the Composer

    3. RICHARD STRAUSS    “Tod und Verklärung,” Tone Poem, Op. 24

                       Conducted by the Composer
                   Saturday Evening, March 5th, 1904

    1. JOHANNES BRAHMS         Symphony No. 2, D. major, Op. 73
                  I. Allegro non troppo
                 II. Adagio non troppo
                III. Allegro grazioso (Quasi Andantino)
                 IV. Allegro con spirito

    2. RICHARD STRAUSS
          Songs with Orchestra:
            Three Mother-Songs
                 a. “Meinem Kinde”
                 b. “Muttertändelei”
                 c. “Wiegenlied”

                         FRAU STRAUSS-DE AHNA
                       Conducted by the Composer

    3. RICHARD STRAUSS    “Till Eulenspiegel and his Merry Pranks,”
                                                           Op. 28

                       Conducted by the Composer

Great preparations were made for this event and much money was spent,
for Strauss not only received a large fee, but much had to be used for
advertising.

PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER, March 5th, 1904:

              “RICHARD STRAUSS AT THE ACADEMY

          “FIRST APPEARANCE OF THE FAMOUS COMPOSER MADE
         YESTERDAY AFTERNOON. HE CONDUCTS A FINE PERFORMANCE
                           OF HIS OWN

         “DEATH AND TRANSFIGURATION,” AND HIS WIFE SINGS
                           FOUR SONGS

    “There was a very large audience at the Academy of
    Music yesterday afternoon, when the Philadelphia
    Orchestra gave its last Friday afternoon performance
    for the current season. The occasion was made notable
    by the first appearance in this city of the famous
    composer, Richard Strauss, who had arranged to
    guide the orchestra through the mazes of the tone
    poem entitled, “Death and Transfiguration,” one of
    his best and most characteristic works; and it was
    rendered additionally interesting and important by the
    Philadelphia début of Mme. Strauss-de Ahna, who has
    the reputation of being an exceptionally skillful and
    sympathetic interpreter of her distinguished husband’s
    songs.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “After his wife had finished her group of songs, and
    the enthusiastic and long continued applause which her
    work had elicited had died away, Mr. Richard Strauss
    returned to the platform to conduct his own “Tod und
    Verklaerung.” He is a singularly modest and unobtrusive
    looking man, with an appearance more suggestive of a
    school teacher than of a musician, and with nothing
    about him to betray any large estimate of his own
    consequence, but there can be no question as to his
    ability as a conductor. That had already been indicated
    in the manner he played the accompaniments to his
    wife’s singing, but it was conclusively demonstrated by
    the way in which he conducted the orchestral feature
    of the programme. In its lucidity and balance, in its
    delicate sense of proportion; in its wide and pregnant
    variations of light and shade; in the splendor of its
    climaxes and the salient force with which each detail
    was projected and each nuance given its proper value,
    his performance of “Death and Transfiguration” has
    certainly never been equalled in this city. It was
    a very great achievement and the audience rightly
    recognized it as such.”

       *       *       *       *       *

        _Philadelphia Ledger_, March 5th, 1904:
          “STRAUSS CONCERT A GREAT SUCCESS
    “WARM GREETING FOR THE COMPOSER AND HIS WIFE

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Strauss has a very precise beat, ordinarily quiet
    and undemonstrative and making very little use of his
    left hand; but when he wants a big climax for the
    brasses—and he is not afraid of noise—he conducts
    with his whole person. The orchestra knew the music
    perfectly and was absolutely responsive to every nuance.”

_City and State_, March 10th, 1904:

    “The highest point, not only of the winter, but in
    a certain sense of all previous musical seasons was
    reached last week.

    “To have the most eminent musician—we use the
    word advisedly in the strictest sense—interpret
    his compositions with our own orchestra in two
    concerts, certainly marks Philadelphia as one of the
    self-dependent musical centers of the world. But it
    was much more significant to hear the unstinted praise
    which Mr. Strauss bestowed on the orchestra after the
    concerts. On Friday, after the exalting performance
    of “Death and Transfiguration,” the composer seemed
    to forget his audience in the heartiness of his
    acknowledgments to the orchestra. Indeed, we see no
    impropriety whatever in publishing the fact that Mr.
    Strauss was immeasurably better pleased with the
    work of our orchestra than with that of the New York
    orchestra, which he conducted last Thursday evening.
    On Tuesday he declared himself entirely contented
    with the single rehearsal for the Friday concert. It
    seems almost a pity that we Philadelphians cannot
    discover for ourselves this excellence of our own
    enterprise—that we must have the most distinguished
    musician of the day come from Berlin to tell us that
    we have a splendid orchestra, and, it may be added,
    splendid conductor. At any rate, the fact ought not
    only to be taken to heart by all of us, but we ought
    not to hesitate to boast bravely of this advantage of
    ours over New York.”

These concerts were repeated in Boston on March 7th and 8th, where
they had been well advertised and both houses sold out. But when the
programmes were announced there was a cry of protest from the critics
and musicians of that city. “Why should Boston have to listen to
Fritz Scheel conduct a symphony on each programme?” The Executive
Committee replied firmly that Boston had refused to have Dr. Strauss
lead the Boston Symphony Orchestra, and now the Philadelphia Orchestra
Association was giving Boston an opportunity to hear Dr. Strauss
conduct as guest conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra. The programme
was not changed, but Philadelphia had to explain the stand she had
taken even after the orchestra had reached Boston.

Then a real contretemps occurred, trying enough to shake the strongest
nerves. In those days, either moving orchestras was more difficult, or
the Philadelphia Orchestra was still too inexperienced a traveler to do
so efficiently. When the hour for rehearsal in Symphony Hall arrived,
there was no music and there were no instruments. They had been lost
en route. The explanation arrived at after much telegraphing was that
these valuable possessions had been placed in a car too high to pass
under the bridges on the regular route, so it had been re-routed and
would probably not arrive until evening. This was a predicament for a
young orchestra, none too easy in its mind at the prospect of playing
in the city of the Boston Symphony Orchestra; and now deprived of
rehearsal in a hall new to the conductor, as well as to every player.
The day passed, evening came, the audience assembled, and still no
instruments. Twenty minutes after the concert hour, heavy teams were
heard outside. The day was saved, the instruments were hurriedly put
in place, the men went on, and the symphony, Brahms’ No. 2, began. The
Philadelphians present say that the orchestra never played so well,
and at the end of the symphony Scheel was recalled six times. Mr.
Elson, a most friendly critic, who had given a dinner for our conductor
the night before, rushed behind, saying, “Scheel, you have conquered
Boston.” At a reception given for the two conductors after the concert,
Mr. Philip Hale said of Scheel: “He has the right arm of Thomas and the
left arm of Nikisch.”

_Boston Herald_, March 8th, 1904 (Philip Hale):

    “The performance of the orchestra under Mr. Scheel was
    admirable.... Here is a conductor to be respected for
    many qualities, for his mastery of mechanism and for
    his genuine and poetic feeling.... There is no doubt
    that Mr. Scheel is an accomplished drill master. His
    patience and intelligence in rehearsal were shown by
    the fine performance of the supple orchestra under his
    direction.”

_Boston Evening Transcript_:

    “Mr. Scheel is unquestionably a conductor of parts,
    whom one would gladly know better.... The wonderful
    beauties in the scoring of Liszt’s symphony were all
    made the most of, and under the hands of Mr. Scheel the
    dull passages became less hopeless than usual. Of the
    dramatic points Mr. Scheel took full advantage and with
    the advent of the Gretchen theme in the third movement
    he made an electrifying effect.”

_Boston Daily Advertiser_ (Louis C. Elson):

    “Musical Boston was waked up last night! Those who
    braved the elements were rewarded by a concert which
    for novelty, for excitement and for educational value
    has seldom been equaled even in our symphonic city.

    “The Philadelphia Orchestra proved itself to be the
    best that has visited Boston since Theodore Thomas
    brought his band here.

    “Its conductor, Fritz Scheel, is an orchestral genius.
    He evidently knows his Brahms thoroughly, and by the
    time he had finished the first movement of the D major
    symphony, he was clasped to the Bostonian heart. To win
    a triumph in Brahms in a city where all our conductors
    are Brahms scholars (and our auditors too, for the
    matter of that), means very much. Mr. Scheel was
    recalled with enthusiasm.... The Philadelphia Orchestra
    has proved itself one of the important orchestras of
    the United States.”

A delightful anecdote is told about this visit to Boston. After the
success of the evening concert, Dr. Strauss, full of enthusiasm, told
Mr. Scheel that he must play the Domestica Symphony at its first
performance in New York, and they arranged to play it together on the
piano from the orchestral score in Symphony Hall the next morning.
Scheel took the score home with him and the next morning the first
playing of the Domestica in America began, Dr. Strauss taking the
treble and Scheel the bass. In Strauss’s excitement he knocked the
music off the rack just as the fugue started in the bassoons, but
Scheel continued to play. Strauss turned to watch him, but still he
played. The music was replaced and they finished the symphony. Dr.
Strauss then discovered that Scheel had spread the score on a trunk and
studied it all night, only closing the book at daylight.

Shortly after this Dr. Keffer received the following letter:

    “Esteemed Doctor Keffer:

    “You wish from me a leaf for your Album. I could not
    give same a more beautiful contents than to give again
    expression of my greatest pleasure over the splendid
    performance of the Philadelphia Orchestra, with which I
    was so fortunate to obtain such extraordinary successes
    in Philadelphia and in Boston.

    “But the greatest merit of this success belongs to your
    excellent Kapellmeister Fritz Scheel, who had trained
    his young and music-loving orchestra so eminently, and
    who had prepared so well for my concerts, that I was
    able to give the performance, satisfying my strongest
    wishes, of my difficult works, after _only one_
    repetition. Therefore, to Mr. Scheel, my special
    thanks and felicitation to which I join my heartiest
    wishes for further flourishing and prospering of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra under his energetic guidance.

    “With especial esteem and best greetings also from my Wife,

            “Yours sincerely devoted,
                        “(Signed) DR. RICHARD STRAUSS
    “New York, the 28th of March, 1904.”

The next event out of the ordinary in which the orchestra took part was
the Special Concert conducted by Felix Weingartner, about a year later.

                   THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                    FRITZ SCHEEL, _Conductor_
              Special Concert, February 16th, 1905
              FELIX WEINGARTNER, _Guest Conductor_

    LISZT           Symphonic Poem “Triumph and Death of Tasso”
    WEINGARTNER                    Symphony No. 2, E flat major
    GLÜCK                                  Overture “Iphigenia”
    MOZART                               Overture “Zauberflöte”
    WEBER                                     Overture “Oberon”

He was well received by the audience and by the critics, one of whom
wrote thus:

_Public Ledger_, February 17th, 1905:

                     “WEINGARTNER CONCERT”
        GERMAN COURT CONDUCTOR’S FIRST APPEARANCE HERE
           DIRECTS PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA IN HIS OWN
               “SECOND SYMPHONY” AND OTHER WORKS

    “One of the incidental advantages of a permanent
    concert orchestra is the opportunity afforded from time
    to time to invite distinguished musicians to conduct
    performances of their own compositions, or of other
    works for which they may have a particular penchant.
    We had an interesting example of this last season
    in the concerts of the Philadelphia Orchestra at
    which Richard Strauss directed that expert band of
    executants in his own interpretation of some of his
    tone poems. Last evening in the Academy of Music, Felix
    Weingartner—less widely known as a composer than as a
    chief orchestral authority in Germany at the present
    day—similarly conducted the orchestra in a performance
    of his latest symphony, with an accompanying programme
    of his own choice, representing classic, romantic and
    modern music.

    “In the remarkable organization of accomplished and
    enthusiastic musicians which has grown up within a few
    seasons under Fritz Scheel’s masterful direction, the
    leader of the Berlin Court Orchestra found a perfect
    instrument of expression ready to his hand. It is not,
    of course so large an orchestra as that to which he is
    accustomed, but there could be no doubt that it played
    the music exactly as the conductor wished it played.
    While last evening’s concert was thus in one sense a
    glorification of the Philadelphia Orchestra and its
    distinguished leader, the interest of the occasion was
    centered entirely in the guest and what he might have
    personally to express.

    “Herr Weingartner is a tall, slim man, erect and
    precise, but with a winning personality that puts him
    at once in harmony both with the orchestra and his
    audience. His manner in conducting is usually quiet
    and firm, but he employs a great variety of detailed
    gesture that is expressive and obtains its results. He
    plays everything with a strongly marked accent, with
    more care for clarity and precision than for suavity,
    and makes very strong and abrupt contrasts with
    tremendous climaxes and with sharp periods. There is
    not a great deal of attention to grace of phrasing or
    delicacy of nuance, but evidently the strong effects he
    gets are what he thinks important.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Weingartner owes much to Liszt and the Weimar days and
    it is natural that he should give a fine performance
    of the “Tasso” with which the concert opened. This
    symphonic poem is one of so great dignity and beauty as
    to deserve more frequent hearing. The illness of Saal,
    the first ’cellist, left a note lacking in the beauty
    of the performance, though the intrinsic worth of the
    music made it a pleasure to hear.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “After the concert a reception was given to the guest
    conductor at the home of Mrs. Spencer Ervin.”

During this season Mr. Scheel presented his first programme of House
Music at a reception held in his honor, and the next winter he gave six
such concerts at the residence of Mrs. Spencer Ervin, as a compliment
to the Women’s Committee. These concerts much resembled the concerts
given by Francis Hopkinson and his friends in the early days of
Philadelphia, but were a complete and delightful novelty in 1905.

The most important evening of this kind was the concert given by Mr.
Scheel and Philadelphia Orchestra musicians for Mrs. Roosevelt and her
guests.

                               PROGRAMME
                          House-Music Concert
                  THE WHITE HOUSE, WASHINGTON, D. C.
                  Monday Evening, January 29th, 1906

    VOLKMANN   Serenade No. 3, D minor, Opus 67. Violoncello Solo:
                          Alfred Saal
    BEETHOVEN  Rondino  for two Oboes, two Clarinets, two Horns
                          and two Bassoons
    MOZART     From the Quintet, Opus 108. For Clarinet and String
                          Quartet
    SVENDSEN   From the Octet, Opus 3, for four Violins, two Violas
                          and two Violoncellos
    STRAUSS    Serenade (E flat major) Opus 7, for two Flutes, two
                          Oboes, two Clarinets, four Horns, two
                          Bassoons, and Contra-Bass or Bass Tuba

       *       *       *       *       *

           “DIRECTOR SCHEEL AND THIRTY-TWO MEMBERS OF
      PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA DELIGHT MR. AND MRS. ROOSEVELT
                    AND GUESTS AT WHITE HOUSE
                 CHARM PRESIDENT BY THEIR MUSIC

    “Thirty-two members of the Philadelphia Orchestra,
    and Director Fritz Scheel, made a big impression on
    administrative, diplomatic and social Washington last
    Monday evening, when they gave one of their house-music
    concerts in the White House, and if you ask anyone of
    those thirty-three men what they think of President
    Roosevelt you will hear enough compliments to fill
    several bulky volumes.

    “They had a delightful time, did these Quaker City
    symphony players, and so favorably were they received,
    that it is probable that they will be heard in the
    White House several times before the big orchestra
    disbands for the summer and the members scurry away to
    all parts of the earth.

    “The full orchestra was not taken to the White House.
    Instead Director Scheel took his baby orchestra,
    consisting of six first violins, four violas, four
    cellos, two double basses, two flutes, two oboes, two
    clarinets, one bass clarinet, three bassoons and the
    horn quartet, and in that party there was but one
    American. Most of the players were Germans. The horn
    players were Frenchmen.

    “President and Mrs. Roosevelt gave a small dinner party
    and afterwards a musicale. The dinner guests numbered
    about twenty, while over four hundred came for the musicale,
    including many of the most prominent men and women
    in Washington. It was a gay scene with all the army
    and naval officers, and the members of the various
    Diplomatic Corps in their gaudy full evening dress. The
    only Philadelphians there were Mrs. A. J. Dallas Dixon
    and Miss Frances A. Wister.

    “The orchestra men drove to the White House at 9.30 P.
    M. and at 10.15 they entered the East Room, where all
    the guests were assembled. President Roosevelt and Mrs.
    Roosevelt sat in the front row and listened with the
    gravest attention.

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Then Mr. Scheel played his rat-a-tat-tat baton solo on
    his stand, and the thirty-two men broke into harmony as
    easily and gracefully as a flock of sea gulls lights
    upon the ocean.

    “The concert was to last one hour—no more and no
    less—and during that hour the audience was treated
    to Volkmann, Mozart, Svendsen, Beethoven and Strauss
    in solos, quintets, octets, sextets and altogethers.
    Alfred Saal was the soloist—he with the long blonde
    hair and the marvelous cello. He played as only Saal
    can play and his serenade in D minor by Volkmann was
    one of the most delightful numbers of the evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Immediately after the closing number, President
    Roosevelt expressed the wish to meet the musicians, and
    so one by one the men marched up and shook hands with
    the greatest American of the day. Each man received
    some kind word from the President, especially Director
    Scheel, and to the latter he expressed his deepest
    thanks and congratulations for having furnished such a
    delightful concert.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “The next afternoon the full orchestra played a concert
    in Columbia Theatre before an audience that crowded the
    house and again won decided success. Just before the
    concert, Director Scheel received a huge box of roses
    and carnations from President and Mrs. Roosevelt.”

All was not smooth sailing during the early years or for years to come.
Scheel had enemies, so did the orchestra. Many people were not pleased
when plans other than their own succeeded, and there was unpleasant
comment from time to time. This was gradually overcome by the sincere
attitude and the industry of the conductor and the improvement in the
playing of the orchestra. The Beethoven Cycle, the Strauss concerts and
the appearance of Weingartner were helps to popularity, not a sudden
popularity, but one achieved by real worth. Scheel was fast making a
place for himself in the musical life of the city, and in 1905 he was
engaged as leader of the Orpheus Club and of the Eurydice Chorus to
succeed Dr. Frank Damrosch. This put added burdens onto him, but it was
not understood then that the strain of leading an orchestra is enough
for one man.

Recognition also came from outside of Philadelphia. Scheel had the
compliment paid him of being invited to lead two concerts in New
York in place of Theodore Thomas, who had recently died, which
concerts were to mark the semi-centennial of Thomas’s connection with
the Philharmonic Orchestra. Unfortunately, conflicting dates made
acceptance impossible. He was even spoken of as a possible successor to
Thomas by Mr. Louis Elson, of Boston, who said:

    “There is a most thorough and progressive musician, who
    is perfectly fitted for the Chicago position—Mr. Fritz
    Scheel of Philadelphia. This conductor, although he has
    been in America but a short time, has already won his
    spurs and proved his right to the highest orchestral
    position. He is not too conservative, an essential
    point with an orchestral conductor of the present.”

In the meantime the concerts in Philadelphia were constantly improving,
and the number had increased from six single concerts to eighteen
pairs in six years. Out-of-town concerts in nearby places had been
attempted with varying financial results. The Board of Directors, the
Executive Committee and various Sub-committees worked hard to advance
the interests of the orchestra.

The standard of excellence was kept at a high point. Fritz Scheel, ever
ambitious for this venture in America, and possessing a keen artistic
sense, produced programmes of excellence, which equalled and sometimes
surpassed those of older American orchestras.




CHAPTER IV

THE WOMEN’S COMMITTEES FOR THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA


To the Philadelphia Orchestra Association belongs the distinction of
first having promulgated the idea of procuring assistance from Women’s
Committees.

These were formed to promote out-of-town concerts in Harrisburg,
Lancaster, Allentown and Trenton. In 1902-03, during the second season
of concerts in those cities, it became evident that help was needed to
increase interest in the concerts and procure a larger audience. Miss
Mary Sergeant, sister of Mrs. A. J. Dallas Dixon, of Philadelphia,
undertook this work in Harrisburg; Miss Hall became the Chairman in
Trenton; Mrs. A. J. Steinman, in Lancaster; and Mrs. Robert E. Wright,
in Allentown. These committees worked hard to make the Philadelphia
Orchestra concerts successful.

No help of this kind seems to have been thought of for Philadelphia
until the financial situation became so acute in 1904, as to endanger
the life of the orchestra.


THE WOMEN’S COMMITTEE FOR THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA AND THE FIRST TEN
THOUSAND

Each year had become more difficult financially and while the orchestra
was learning many tunes the Board of Directors could remember but one.
They constantly repeated the same question: “Where shall we get the
money?” with variations. The Academy was not sold out; if it had been
it would not have paid expenses. Nobody wanted to hear the Philadelphia
Orchestra. The general attitude was that there were too many concerts,
that even the Boston Symphony Orchestra gave only five in a series,
and that only a few extreme musical enthusiasts went to the two Boston
series, a total of ten. The Executive Committee and the Board of
Directors spent hours discussing means of procuring more guarantors to
meet the increasing deficit. Every improvement in players or special
soloists meant money.

The Guarantee Fund for a three-year term expired in the spring of 1904,
and there would be an extra deficit of $16,000. The Association was
facing a crisis. No contracts could be made without some financial
background.

Just at this moment an idea occurred to Mrs. Edward G. McCollin, wife
of a member of the Executive Committee. After approaching several
friends on this subject and failing to interest them, Mrs. McCollin
one day spoke to Mrs. A. J. Dallas Dixon, who persuaded Mrs. C. Stuart
Patterson to call a meeting. The result was that a number of women met
at Mrs. Dixon’s house, 709 Pine Street, to discuss plans to assist the
orchestra, on March 11th, 1904. Mrs. Dixon was elected president and on
March 13th, a Women’s Committee of twenty was formally organized. The
officers and directors were:[14]

        MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON, _President_
        MRS. SPENCER ERVIN, _First Vice-president_
        MRS. THOMAS S. HARRISON, _Second Vice-president_
        MRS. E. G. MCCOLLIN, _Corresponding Secretary_
        MRS. E. COLEMAN LEWIS, _Recording Secretary_
        MRS. ALFRED REGINALD ALLEN, _Treasurer_

                    _Directors_
    MRS. S. NAUDAIN DUER     MRS. GEORGE A. HUHN
    MRS. THEODORE N. ELY     MRS. EDWARD I. KEFFER
    MRS. SAMUEL S. FELS      MRS. W. L. MCLEAN
    MRS. SIMON B. FLEISHER   MRS. JOHN B. MILES
    MRS. J. M. GAZZAM        MRS. N. DUBOIS MILLER
    MISS BEULAH HACKER       MRS. MORRIS PFAELZER
    MRS. WALTER HORSTMANN    MRS. GEORGE D. WIDENER
                    MISS FRANCES A. WISTER

[14] For present membership see Appendix K.

Later the following Honorary Vice-presidents accepted:

Mrs. Wm. W. Arnett, Mrs. George F. Baer, Mrs. Alexander W. Biddle,
Mrs. John Cadwalader, Mrs. Alexander J. Cassatt, Mrs. Charles B. Coxe,
Miss Mary K. Gibson, Mrs. Austin S. Heckscher, Mrs. Charles Edward
Ingersoll, Mrs. Thomas McKean, Jr., Mrs. C. Stuart Patterson, Mrs.
Frank Rosengarten, Mrs. Cornelius Stevenson, Miss Anne Thomson, Mrs.
Alexander Van Rensselaer, Mrs. Henry Whelen, Jr.

[Illustration: MRS. ALEXANDER J. DALLAS DIXON]

The original of this letter is preserved in the archives of the
Committee:

    “MRS. MCCOLLIN
    “Dear Madam:

    “I wish to say on behalf of the Executive Committee
    of the Philadelphia Orchestra that our Committee is
    in hearty sympathy with the effort to form a Women’s
    Committee, and fully appreciates the kindness of the
    ladies who propose to form such a Committee in coming
    to the assistance of the Association, at a rather
    critical time. We fully endorse any measures you see
    fit to take in carrying out your plans.

                Yours very truly,
                                JOHN H. INGHAM, _Secretary_
                                     333 South 16th Street

    “March 13, 1904.”

Committees on Guarantors, Boxes and General Subscriptions were formed
and their labors began.

The first work which the women undertook at the request of the
Executive Committee was to secure $10,000, in new guarantees within the
first month of its existence; the Executive Committee feeling that the
best indication of a desire to continue the orchestra would be shown by
an increase in the Guarantee Fund.

The Committee at once went to the musical critics of the various
Philadelphia newspapers and secured their hearty co-operation in the
work of rousing the public to an appreciation of the musical and civic
importance of the orchestra. Within the allotted time the Committee had
not only secured more than $10,000 in new guarantees, but had received
new orders for $5,000 worth of seats and boxes for the next season. The
Association thereupon decided to continue the orchestra for one more
year, hoping that public interest would continue to increase.

The Guarantee Committee appointed by Mrs. Dixon to raise this sum was
composed of Mrs. Spencer Ervin, now Mrs. Harold E. Yarnall, Chairman;
Mrs. Morris Pfaelzer, Mrs. Edward I. Keffer, Mrs. George D. Widener and
Miss Frances A. Wister, Secretary. A careful plan was made for this
attack upon the public purse and all the members of the Committee threw
themselves into the task of raising this large sum for a little known
and unpopular cause.

Lists of prospective guarantors were compiled and each woman was
assigned her quota of people to approach. The time was short, the pace
was quick and the excitement was great. To at least one member it was
a first experience at raising a large amount, but the novelty quickly
wore off in the face of the continuous needs of the Association.

The Committee on Seats and Boxes became active at once, and Mrs.
McCollin as Chairman of the Press Committee attended most ably to the
publicity. Numberless articles appeared describing the Committee and
its activities, and the help of the papers was very valuable.

Another way of making the orchestra and the Committee known was the
parlor meetings. These were held in various places, with speakers
of influence in the community. The first of these took place at the
residence of Mrs. Thomas S. Harrison. Addresses were made by Dr. Alfred
C. Lambdin, Mr. Constantin von Sternberg, Miss Esther Kelly and Miss
Wister. No money was asked for at these meetings which were held in
all sections of Philadelphia and vicinity during many seasons. The
fact that Philadelphia had an orchestra was the point emphasized, as
there was general ignorance of its existence. Then its importance to
the musical life of the city and its needs were mentioned. Perhaps
the most useful work next to procuring guarantors was the formation
of the Auxiliary. These women were elected and asked to become season
seat holders. The reports of the sale of boxes and season seats show
thousands of dollars secured in new orders during the first years and
frequent comment is made upon the improved appearance of the house
through the filling of the boxes. The Friday house has been sold out
for a number of years, but the Saturday house was a more difficult
problem and only recently has been filled by season subscribers.

The list of activities was never-ending, and included visits to music
schools, circulars, appeals, the co-operation of libraries, orchestra
clubs, special rates for students, parlor meetings, of which Mrs.
Keffer became Chairman in 1905, letters to friends in other cities
where the orchestra was to appear and many more. The results were
good. Between 1904-05 and 1907-08, the total sales of new orders for
seats and boxes amounted to $29,670.00, and new guarantees amounted to
$37,500.


THE GERMANTOWN AND CHESTNUT HILL WOMEN’S COMMITTEE

The activity of the Women’s Committee during its first year of
existence and the great need of the Association brought about the
formation of a second Committee in Germantown and Chestnut Hill, on
March 28th, 1905, under the leadership of Mrs. Francis Howard Williams,
a woman prominent in every good cause.

    MRS. FRANCIS HOWARD WILLIAMS, _President_[15]
    MISS ANNA HAZEN HOWELL, _Recording Secretary_
    MRS. HENRY W. RAYMOND, _Corresponding Secretary_
    MRS. AUGUSTUS STOUGHTON, _Treasurer_
    MISS FRANCES A. WISTER, _Secretary_ for the Guarantee Fund

No sooner were these women organized than they threw themselves
enthusiastically into work in their section and have since co-operated
with the Women’s Committee in every undertaking. They raised $26,825
for the Million Dollar Endowment Fund.

Mrs. Williams declined to be a candidate for the presidency in 1916 and
was succeeded by the Countess of Santa Eulalia, who still holds that
office. The Committee has recently celebrated its Twentieth Anniversary.


THE WEST PHILADELPHIA WOMEN’S COMMITTEE

Shortly afterwards, on April 6th, 1905, the spirit moved the women of
West Philadelphia to form a third Committee. Mrs. C. Lincoln Furbush,
daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Wm. Burnham, staunch supporters of the
orchestra, organized it at her mother’s house, and became its first
president and the youngest of Women’s Committee presidents.

The officers were:

    MRS. C. LINCOLN FURBUSH, _President_[16]
    MISS MARGARETTA HINCHMAN, _Vice-president_
    MISS HELEN FERGUSSON, _Corresponding Secretary_
    MISS EDITH SCHOFF, _Recording Secretary_
    MISS GRACE ATLEE, _Treasurer_

After one year of service Mrs. Furbush, Miss Schoff and Miss Atlee
resigned, and Mrs. Monroe Smith, now Mrs. L. Howard Weatherly, Mrs.
Charles L. Mitchell and Mrs. Samuel S. Fels succeeded them and still
hold those offices.

[15] For present membership see Appendix K.

[16] For present membership see Appendix K.

This active Committee has constantly been inaugurating new plans.
In 1915, to commemorate its Tenth Anniversary, it presented to the
Association the stage setting completed in 1918, which was used until
the new plans of Mr. Stokowski made a complete change of size and shape
necessary.

Entertainments of many kinds have been given and the Twentieth
Anniversary was celebrated in May, 1925.


THE MEDIA, CHESTER AND WEST CHESTER WOMEN’S COMMITTEE, SINCE 1923, THE
DELAWARE COUNTY WOMEN’S COMMITTEE

At the Annual Meeting of the Women’s Committees and their Auxiliaries
in April, 1911, Mrs. J. Claude Bedford, an active amateur musician,
then living in Media, proposed that a Women’s Committee should be
formed in Delaware County. She had become convinced that work of value
could be done there and with the help of Mrs. Arnett, she formed a
Committee with members from nine towns within twenty-five miles of
Philadelphia, including West Chester, Glen Mills, Media, Wallingford,
Swarthmore, Primos, Lansdowne, Darby and Chester.

The task was a hard one. Many residents of the district were unable,
on account of the distance and of poor train service, to attend the
concerts. Yet there was enthusiasm and much hard work in Delaware
County. After several years, Mrs. Bedford was obliged to relinquish
her position, and Mrs. Matthew H. Cryer, of Lansdowne, succeeded
to the office of President, which she still retains. The work of
this Committee has been extraordinary and beset with obstacles. No
enterprise has ever been entered into by the other Committees, in
which the Delaware County Committee has not done its share and more,
including bringing in its quota of $20,000 for the Million Dollar
Endowment Fund. The Tenth Anniversary was celebrated in May, 1911, by a
reception given at the house of Mrs. Cryer.

These four Committees are actively engaged in working for the
Philadelphia Orchestra in Philadelphia, but they have been instrumental
in helping the out-of-town concerts by persuading women in other places
to foster concerts given there. The first of these was formed in
Wilmington, Delaware.


    WOMEN’S COMMITTEES IN OTHER PLACES

            DELAWARE COMMITTEE
                WILMINGTON
          FORMED JUNE 29TH, 1905
                 OFFICERS

Mrs. Lewis C. Vandegrift, President; Mrs. Joseph Swift, Vice-president;
Mrs. William Betts, Secretary; Miss Annie T. Flinn, Treasurer.

Concerts were given in Wilmington as early as the season of 1902-03,
but they were not thriving as they should. The Women’s Committee
therefore sent a mission to Wilmington, where Mrs. Joseph Swift, a
composer and an amateur musician of prominence, called a meeting at her
house. Mrs. Dixon, Mrs. McCollin and Miss Wister were the emissaries
and the visit resulted in the formation of the Delaware Committee, with
the above officers and twenty-three Directors.

For fifteen years this Committee continued its active work under the
successive leadership of Mrs. Lewis C. Vandegrift, Mrs. Swift, and Mrs.
Robert B. Bird. It was active in selling seats, procuring the Guarantee
Fund for the Wilmington Concerts, without which the orchestra could
not appear, in arousing interest by giving receptions for our leaders
and in other ways. It was of immense help to have an organized group
of people furthering the interests of the orchestra in Wilmington. The
Committee continued its labors until the concerts had to be given up on
account of the press of engagements. This Committee was affiliated with
the Philadelphia Women’s Committee, and always sent a representative to
the Annual Meetings.


THE BALTIMORE COMMITTEE FORMED MAY, 1906

Baltimore and Washington were considered fruitful fields and
Philadelphia’s by right of propinquity. The Boston Symphony Orchestra
had established a large clientele in these cities, but it had years
of reputation, and of artistic achievement, with which to attract
audiences. Not so with a new and little known orchestra. Mrs. Dixon,
Miss Wister and Mrs. Thomas S. Kirkbride, Jr., paid a visit there in
December, 1905, on the occasion of an afternoon concert at the Arundell
Club, at which two members of the orchestra, with Mrs. Kirkbride at
the piano, played trios. In the following spring, Miss Mary B. Shearer
organized a Committee and became the Chairman[17].


THE WASHINGTON COMMITTEE

In Washington, Miss Aileen Bell, after a meeting at which Mrs. Dixon
spoke, organized a group of women to assist in popularizing the
orchestra, and also secured many patronesses.[18]

Washington, the abode of representatives of foreign countries and with
a fluctuating population, was an easier field than Baltimore. Neither
of these Committees has been active lately, because the necessity is
past, but their help was much appreciated then.

[17] See Appendix K.

[18] See Appendix K.


THE ATLANTIC COUNTY COMMITTEE

This Committee, which was affiliated with the Women’s Committee, was
formed in Atlantic City, after a concert by the Philadelphia Orchestra
in 1912, and was active until 1915.

A Committee of five women was appointed, with Mrs. Joseph H. Ireland as
President, to take charge of a permanent series of concerts in Atlantic
City. During the three years of its existence, they sold the tickets,
carried on educational work in the schools, arranged for special
students’ tickets, distributed programmes in advance as a basis for
study, managed the publicity and indulged in other forms of activity.

The Women’s Committees for the Philadelphia Orchestra have been an
important part of the work at home and abroad. There have been twelve:

    1902: Women’s Committees in Harrisburg, Lancaster,
          Allentown, Pennsylvania, and Trenton, New Jersey.

    1904: The Women’s Committee for the Philadelphia Orchestra.

    1905: The Germantown and Chestnut Hill Women’s Committee,
          the West Philadelphia Women’s Committee, the Delaware
          Committee.

    1906: The Baltimore Committee, the Washington Committee.

    1911: The Media, Chester and West Chester Women’s Committee
          (now Delaware County Committee).

    1912: The Atlantic County Committee.


THE TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE WOMEN’S COMMITTEE

The Women’s Committee, pioneer of the four in Philadelphia, celebrated
its Twentieth Anniversary in March, 1924. The event was marked by
a series of entertainments, beginning with a luncheon given by the
Officers and Directors of the Philadelphia Orchestra Association
on March 11th. After a number of speeches an anonymous gift of one
thousand Dollars to the Pension Fund from a member of the Committee,
in honor of the occasion, was presented to the President of the
Association. By vote of the Board of Directors this has been placed in
a separate fund bearing the donor’s name and the Women’s Committee has
the privilege of designating a special use for the income each year.

The next event was the reception given by the Women’s Committee, in
the Foyer of the Academy of Music, on March 14th, in which the members
of the Auxiliary joined, and at which the guests of honor were the
Officers and Directors of the Association, Mr. Leopold Stokowski and
the members of the Philadelphia Orchestra.

The Treasurer’s Report at the Twentieth Annual Meeting in 1924, showed
that since 1904, for dues and subscriptions to special entertainments
and gifts by the Committee, $11,432.00 had passed through her hands.
While for special funds such as the Scheel Memorial Bas-relief,
the Philadelphia Orchestra Chorus and the Opera Supper Dances, an
additional amount of $25,335.00 was received and expended, making a
grand total in twenty years of $36,759.00. This does not include any
money for the Guarantee or Endowment Funds, or money for tickets sold
by the Committee. Two interesting items are those of $6,456.00 for the
Fritz Scheel Memorial raised by the three committees; and of $7770
raised for the Philadelphia Orchestra Chorus in 1921-22.

“The time has come to talk of many things” when an account of the work
of the women is to be given; for the things they have done have been
as diverse as the “ships and shoes and sealing wax and cabbages and
kings” which so puzzled “Alice in Wonderland.”

They have ranged from guarantors, ticket selling and parlor meetings,
to balls, dances and selling post cards. Not to mention the two
Endowment Funds and the silhouettes, the contribution toward the Chorus
in 1921, and the receptions for the various conductors and soloists
during twenty-one years. While thousands of dollars have passed through
the Women’s Committees for the maintenance of the orchestra, apart from
the tickets they have sold, the women had no fund to fall back on until
1921, when the Women’s Committees Fund was established, to which the
proceeds of the Opera Supper Dances are added each year.

In speaking of the Endowment Funds it should be recorded that the first
gift ever made for such a fund came to the Women’s Committee in 1906,
from Mr. Theodore N. Ely.

         “RESOLUTION ADOPTED DECEMBER, 1906

    “RESOLVED: That this Committee send to Mr.
    Theodore N. Ely, their most sincere and appreciative
    thanks for his most generous contribution towards the
    cause for which this Committee exists.

    “And further resolved, that the Committee appoint a
    Sub-committee of four, to urge upon the Executive
    Committee of the Philadelphia Orchestra, the
    desirability and great appropriateness of starting the
    Permanent Endowment Fund for the perpetuation of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra, with this generous contribution
    in memory of one of the first members of the Board of
    Managers of the Women’s Committee, Mrs. Theodore N. Ely.

    “And further resolved, that copies of this resolution
    be sent to Mr. Ely, and to the Executive Committee of
    the Orchestra.

    “In pursuance of this, our President has appointed
    the following ladies a Committee to confer with the
    Executive Committee of the Orchestra concerning this
    matter, Mrs. Yarnall, Mrs. Widener, Miss Wister and
    Mrs. McCollin.”


THE AUXILIARIES

With the exception of raising money for the various funds the most
important feature of the four Women’s Committees is their Auxiliaries,
now numbering 1985 women, attending the three Philadelphia series. It
was through these that the Friday audience was built up, for Auxiliary
members must have season seats. There are no dues and no other duties;
but some of the best work done for the Endowment Fund and for the
Anniversary Ball, was done by Auxiliary members, who for years have had
a deep regard for the orchestra. All women season ticket holders are
eligible.

The Women’s Committees have given many entertainments, beginning with
a reception in honor of Fritz Scheel on March 6th, 1905, followed by
House Music under Mr. Scheel’s direction.

Others have been given in the following order:

Mr. Carl Pohlig, 1908;

Mme. Pohlig and her daughter Mme. Maillard, 1909.

Mr. and Mrs. Leopold Stokowski, 1912.

Luncheon to celebrate Tenth Anniversary of the Women’s Committee, March
6th, 1914.

Reception to Mr. Stokowski and soloists and members of the Mahler
Chorus, March 4th, 1916.

Supper for Mr. Stokowski and assisting artists, March 4th, 1916, at
which many out-of-town guests were present.

Receptions at the houses of Mrs. Alexander J. Cassatt, the Countess of
Santa Eulalia, Mrs. Weatherly and Mrs. Cryer, in the interest of the
Seven Year Endowment Fund, October, 1916.

Reception to Mlle. Guiomar Novaes, 1917.

Receptions for Mme. Olga Samaroff, M. Alphonse Catherine, M. Sergei
Rachmaninoff, 1919.

Luncheon to celebrate Fifteenth Anniversary of the Women’s Committee,
April 14th, 1919.

Reception at house of Mrs. Matthew H. Cryer, Lansdowne, to celebrate
Tenth Anniversary of the Media, Chester and West Chester Women’s
Committee, 1921.

Musicale and reception at the house of Mrs. L. Howard Weatherly, to
celebrate Tenth Anniversary of the West Philadelphia Women’s Committee,
May, 1915.

Luncheon for Mr. Frederick A. Stock, guest conductor, January 19th,
1924.

Reception to celebrate Twentieth Anniversary of the Women’s Committee,
March 14th, 1924.

Reception to Mr. Igor Strawinsky, January 30th, 1925.

Luncheon to celebrate Twentieth Anniversary of Germantown and Chestnut
Hill Women’s Committee, March 31st, 1925.

Reception to celebrate Twentieth Anniversary of West Philadelphia
Women’s Committee, May 13th, 1925.

Among the artists whom the Women’s Committees have entertained, the
most popular one is Mme. Olga Samaroff. She is beloved by all the
members, and admired, not only because she is a great artist, but on
account of her unusual and delightful personality. The women will never
forget what she did for the orchestra during her years of residence in
Philadelphia.


THE ANNIVERSARY BALL FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE CHORUS

No mention of the entertainments of the Committees would be complete
without an account of this. It was held January 24th, 1921, to mark the
Sixty-fourth Anniversary of the opening ball of the Academy of Music,
on January 26th, 1857. It should be called a study in co-operation, for
besides the four Women’s Committees, almost the whole city joined to
make it a beautiful affair and a success. The feature of the evening
was the quadrille in the costume of the period to which a number of
persons contributed sets, as well as the following organizations.

The Co-operating Societies were:

Matinee Musical Club, Mendelssohn Club, Musical Art Club, Musical
Fund Society, Philadelphia Music Club, Philadelphia Orchestra
Chorus, Philadelphia Choral Society, Treble Clef, Fortnightly Club,
Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, Sketch Club, School of
Industrial Art, School of Design for Women, Plastic Club, T Square Club.

Old trunks were overhauled and old papers assiduously read to get the
local color of the time, so that when row after row of the dancers
began to march down from the dais at the back of the stage and take
their places on the floor there was a scene of beauty which brought
forth rounds of applause. Mr. Charles S. Morgan, Jr., impersonated Mr.
Hlasko, Master of Ceremonies, and took charge of the quadrille which he
had trained.

A Loan Exhibition of much interest was held in the Foyer for which many
treasures were unearthed, including “Miss Ethel Newcome,” of London,
the doll dating from the Sanitary Fair. Various business firms assisted
by contributing materials and allowing the Committees to use their
windows for publicity of a unique kind, such as dolls and jewelry of
the period. Twenty years before such a joint undertaking would not have
been possible, and it was a mark of the general good will felt for the
Philadelphia Orchestra.


THE OPERA SUPPER DANCES

A word should be said about these Dances, the Sixth Series of which
has just begun. They are held in the Foyer of the Academy, after
performances of the Metropolitan Opera Company. The subscription and
supper are moderate in price and the affairs are much patronized. The
object is to raise money yearly and have a fund that can be used when
necessity arises.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the war came a loss of interest might have been expected, but it
was the reverse. Not only the weekly respite at the concerts proved
a boon, but the activities of the Committees were a relief from the
anxiety and rush of war work.

The Women’s Committee has had good friends in the Board of Directors.
When they had no means of support, Mr. Richard Y. Cook for many years
contributed towards their expenses. Without his assistance they would
have been in a serious situation.

Mr. Wm. Jay Turner, the Vice-president, was an important person at the
Anniversary Ball which he led with Miss Frances A. Wister, president of
the Committee.

Mr. Edward W. Bok spurred the women on to victory for the Fund with
a kind but firm hand. Mr. Andrew Wheeler is always friendly and
interested, and so the story might go on naming every director.

First and last is Mr. Van Rensselaer, who has never lost an opportunity
to assist the women’s enterprises and who is regarded as the patron
saint of the Women’s Committees. Mrs. Van Rensselaer’s interest has
been a great help.

The members of the Committee deserve individual mention, but space is
lacking. In the early days Mrs. McCollin and Mrs. Keffer were untiring.
Mrs. Yarnall and Mrs. Allen have held office for twenty-one years.
Mrs. Henry is an adept at managing entertainments. Mrs. Cassatt was a
most valuable officer, possessing courage and judgment and her loss
is constantly felt.[19] Mrs. Arnett’s direction of the work for the
Auxiliary, passed on from Mrs. McCollin, has been a quiet labor with
little public notice. The Recording Secretaries, Mrs. Ashton and Mrs.
Wood, have been efficient in keeping the minutes.

[19] See In Memoriam.

The woman who bore most of the burden of the pioneers was Mrs.
Alexander J. Dallas Dixon, whose recent death has left a gap in
their ranks. Although she gave up the presidency some years ago, her
influence was always noticeable and her fulfillment of the task was
appreciated. A special meeting was held on October 8th, 1925, to pass
resolutions for Mrs. Dixon.[20] At the concert of October 16th, these
were inserted in the programme and the audience stood while the Chopin
Funeral March was played, in memory of the first president of the
Women’s Committee.

The four Committees and their Auxiliaries have an Annual Meeting each
April, and the President of the Women’s Committee presents a general
report to the Association in May. The names of some of the reports are
indicative of the work, for instance: “A Calm Sea and a Prosperous
Voyage,” “The Adventures of the Women’s Committees, or How We Financed
the Chorus,” “Twenty Years at Hard Labor, a Motion Picture, with a
Prologue and an Epilogue and Continuous Music by the Philadelphia
Orchestra.” Their work has been strenuous, but the women have had
many thrills and good times in the doing of it. There are pleasures
in the chase only known to those who hunt, even when the quarry is an
Endowment Fund.

Women are needed in every household to attend to the personal side of
life, the entertainment of guests, the timely gifts, the flowers and
many other things. They have even been known to help to support the
establishment when the struggle seemed too hard for the men. This has
been much the position occupied by the Women’s Committees during the
last twenty-one years. Their entertainments have made many artists
welcome to this city. Their gifts have come at just the right time:
the share in the loving cup to Mr. Van Rensselaer; the silver plates
to Mr. Stokowski on the completion of his tenth year as conductor; the
silver vase to Dr. Rich after eighteen years of service; the porringer
to little Sonia Marie Noël Stokowski, engraved with a verse from
Wordsworth, all give a human touch to the Association. And when the men
were spent in the battle, the women worked to support the establishment.

[20] See In Memoriam

The Women’s Committees rejoice in the work they have done for the
Philadelphia Orchestra, and in blazing the trail for women elsewhere.
When the first was formed twenty-one years ago it was a pioneer and a
unique organization, unknown anywhere in connection with a permanent
orchestra. Many persons looked on it with, at least, a question. Now
the questions are of a different nature, and come from other cities
where orchestras are being formed.

The value of women’s efforts in fostering music, and in making
orchestras popular, seems to be recognized. Women’s work for art in
America is rapidly expanding; the torch has been borne by the Women’s
Committees for the Philadelphia Orchestra.




CHAPTER V

THE GUARANTORS AND THE GUARANTEE FUND


There are a few satisfactory ways of financing an orchestra, but
there are a number of unsatisfactory ways, and maintaining or trying
to maintain a Guarantee Fund is one of them. The devotion of the
guarantors of the Philadelphia Orchestra through sixteen years of
financial embarrassment is a part of the story of which Philadelphia
may be proud. A group of one hundred and twenty men and women[21]
constituted the first guarantors in 1900-1901.

[21] See Appendix D.

At the close of the season this notice was issued:

                “THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                  “FRITZ SCHEEL, _Conductor_
              “CALL FOR THE FIRST GUARANTEE FUND
                “Philadelphia, June 15th, 1901

    “Dear Sir:
    “The accounts of the Treasurer of the Philadelphia
    Orchestra Association, for the season just closed,
    shows a total expenditure for all purposes of
    $27,729.33, and total receipts from all sources of
    $14,429.85, leaving a deficit of $13,299.48, to be met
    by the Guarantee Fund.

    “A copy of the report of the Auditors is hereto
    appended.

    “The Guarantors are to be congratulated upon the
    success of this experimental season—made possible only
    by their generous support. The musical success of the
    concerts has surpassed the most sanguine anticipation,
    but the most important and far-reaching result of the
    undertaking has been the formation of the recently
    organized Philadelphia Orchestra Association, with
    its well-assured plans for weekly concerts and public
    rehearsals during the winter seasons of the next three
    years.

    “The total Guarantee Fund amounts to $15,720.00, upon
    which a call of 84.61 per cent is necessary to meet the
    above deficit. Will you, therefore, please mail to Mr.
    John H. Ingham, Assistant Treasurer, No. 505 Chestnut
    Street, your check drawn to his order, for $—— being
    84.61 per cent of your subscription of $——

                        “Very truly yours,
                                         “JOHN H. INGHAM
                                        OLIVER B. JUDSON
                                        EDWARD I. KEFFER
                                          OSCAR A. KNIPE
                                      EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
                                       HENRY WHELEN, JR.
                                 “_Executive Committee_”


                        “REPORT OF THE AUDITORS

                                  “Philadelphia, 12th June, 1901.
    “The undersigned, being two of the Guarantors for the first series
    of Concerts of the Philadelphia Orchestra, and having been requested
    to act as Auditors, have examined the accounts of the Treasurer and
    the vouchers for disbursements.

    “We find same in order and correct, and are satisfied that the
     business management of the Orchestra has been efficient, and that
     the expenditures were proper and necessary.

    “The accounts show receipts from sales of tickets and incidentals
    amounting to $14,429.85, and payments as per receipted vouchers
    amounting to $27,729.33, leaving a deficit of $13,299.48.

                                              “JOHN H. CONVERSE
                                               “C. HARTMAN KUHN
                                                   “_Auditors_”

When the business of this season was settled, a new fund had to be
procured; forty-three Philadelphians were found who were willing to
risk a three-year pledge for an untried experiment, and a number more
for shorter terms.

When this three-year guarantee expired the Association was facing a
crisis and was on the point of disbanding the orchestra. Then the newly
formed Women’s Committee was appealed to with the information that an
addition of ten thousand dollars to the Guarantee Fund, secured within
two weeks, was the only hope of saving the orchestra. An account of
this first effort by the women has been given in a previous chapter.
They succeeded in securing a number of new guarantors for one, two and
three-year terms, and completed the amount within the required time.

The story of the next sixteen years is one of constant begging on the
part of everybody connected with this institution. Many methods were
used to explain the financial condition. The Minutes, the programme
book, and the numerous letters issued bear witness to this fact. Many
were the meetings called “to consider the financial status of the
Association.”

    “Dear Sir or Madam:
    “At the end of the second season the Directors of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra find that the deficit will
    practically be the same as at the end of the first
    year, viz: $68,000 or $70,000. The expense of managing
    the organization has been reduced as much as possible,
    and if the organization is to be maintained on the same
    standard of excellence, the management feel that a
    large guarantee fund is necessary.

    “It is proposed to increase the guarantee fund from
    $40,000 to $100,000, and by so doing we would not have
    to call on the entire guarantee fund, possibly 50 per
    cent of such fund would be necessary. The prices of
    admission for boxes and seats in the various parts of
    the house are as low as it is possible to make them, so
    that the concerts are within easy reach of students of
    music.

    “The Orchestra during the past year has completed a
    season of 20 weeks, having given 71 concerts in all,
    43 in Philadelphia and 28 outside of the City. In
    addition to these performances the orchestra or a large
    number of them have appeared at concerts of the Orpheus
    Club, the Choral Society, the Temple Chorus and the
    Maennerchor under their several conductors.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “The management have done their utmost to make the
    orchestra a success, being aided in their efforts by
    the excellent conductorship of Herr Scheel. Private
    individuals and those interested in music have
    generously contributed, but it is to the public that we
    now look. By an increased season sale the receipts will
    be greatly increased, and consequently there will be
    more money to defray the expenses.

    “If you have not as yet become a guarantor of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra, will you not aid us by doing so
    and communicate with Mr. John Ingham, Secretary, 505
    Chestnut Street, who will furnish you blanks for that
    purpose. The guarantee fund covers a period of three
    years only.

    “If the orchestra is to be continued, and it would be a
    disgrace to Philadelphia to allow a fine organization
    of its kind to slip away from us, two things are
    necessary: a larger guarantee fund and the support of
    the public by an increased season sale. The outlook for
    the latter, we are glad to say, is most encouraging for
    next season.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Of course, it must be understood, that unless a
    sufficient guarantee fund be raised, they would
    not feel justified in continuing the Orchestra
    indefinitely.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Hoping you will, if you have not already done so, aid
    us in furthering and maintaining this orchestra, we
    remain
                     Yours truly,
    “GEORGE BURNHAM, JR.      A. J. CASSATT
    JOHN H. CONVERSE          ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.
    WM. L. ELKINS             MISS MARY K. GIBSON
    JOHN H. INGHAM            OLIVER B. JUDSON
    EDWARD I. KEFFER          C. HARTMAN KUHN
    EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN        THOMAS MCKEAN
    CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD        JAMES W. PAUL, JR.
    MRS. F. H. ROSENGARTEN    RICHARD ROSSMAESSLER
    EDGAR SCOTT               SIMON A. STERN
    MISS ANNE THOMSON         A. VAN RENSSELAER
    HENRY WHELEN, JR.         P. A. B. WIDENER
                CLEMENT A. GRISCOM”

    “To the People of Philadelphia:                                 1903

“The management of the Philadelphia Orchestra Association, at the end
of the third season of concerts, feel that they may now claim that they
have fulfilled their original promise to supply the community with an
orchestra of the first class. There are but three other orchestras of
this rank in the country, those of Boston, Chicago and Pittsburg.

“A great orchestra is as much a civic institution as a great library or
art museum. It is the backbone of the whole musical organism. No large
city can afford to be without one.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“The artistic success of the past season is unquestioned, the work of
the orchestra under Mr. Scheel, a leader admittedly second to none in
the country, received flattering comment wherever it has been heard,
both at home and in other cities, New York especially envying us the
possession of an orchestra of the first rank.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“The deficit is practically the same as that of the preceding season,
viz: sixty-eight to seventy thousand dollars. While this is a large
sum, it compares favorably with the deficits of the three other large
orchestras of the country during their initial seasons, and is not a
cause for discouragement.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“An orchestra of the first class, however, can never be entirely
self-supporting, and must be dependent upon the guarantees or
contributions of those who take pride in their city and look upon its
work as necessary to the education of the community.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“Up to the present time the amount of the deficit over and above the
guarantee fund has been paid by a few (three or four) generous and
public-spirited members of the Association. It is not fair, however,
that the burden of such an undertaking should be borne by a few when
the whole community is benefited, and the Directors appeal to the
public generally to aid in this work.

“In a city of the size, wealth and culture of Philadelphia, it does
not seem unreasonable to hope that a sufficient number of people can
be found to assist in retaining the orchestra and increasing its
usefulness. One hundred additional subscriptions of a Thousand or
Five Hundred Dollars each, per annum, for three years, would go very
far toward enabling the management to establish the orchestra on a
permanent paying basis, but without such support from the public, the
Directors do not feel that they would be justified in continuing the
orchestra indefinitely.”

       *       *       *       *       *

“As it is impossible to ascertain and approach personally all who are
interested in the cause, those who wish to subscribe to the guarantee
fund are requested to write to the Secretary, Mr. John H. Ingham, 505
Chestnut Street, for blanks. The intention is to raise a fund for three
years.

“On the success of this appeal will depend the future of the orchestra.”

                      (_Signed as before._)
             “PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA ASSOCIATION

                                 “Philadelphia, April 15, 1905.
    “TO THE GUARANTORS OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA ASSOCIATION:

    “In closing the Fifth Season of the Philadelphia Orchestra, the
    Executive Committee think it is proper to report the result of the
    season to the Guarantors and to the members of the Association.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “The total cost this season, including salaries
      of musicians and conductor, office expenses,
      rental of Academy of Music, etc.,
      amounted to                                $99,746.28

    “The total receipts from all sources were     45,877.57
                                                  ----------
      Showing a DEFICIT of                         53,868.71

    “The Guarantee Fund is                        48,627.50
                                                  ----------
      Leaving a DEFICIT of                        $ 5,241.21[22]

[22] See Page 69.

    which we have every reason to believe will be provided
    for in the near future.

    “The loss in season 1903-04 amounted to $58,530.23, so
    that we can show a distinct gain this year of $4661.52.
    The gain, however, was really much greater, inasmuch
    as our fixed charges were increased nearly $5000 due
    to increase in salary of conductor, increased rent of
    Academy of Music and increased charges for advertising, etc.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Owing to the unflagging energy and enthusiasm of our
    Women’s Committee, not only has our Guarantee Fund been
    substantially increased, but the season’s sale of boxes
    and seats, etc., was larger than for any previous year.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “All this is very gratifying, but the fact remains that
    an efficiently maintained orchestra will always cost in
    the neighborhood of $100,000, with the possibilities of
    only $60,000 _maximum_ receipts secured from full
    houses at every performance.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “There is no question whatever that the Orchestra is
    gaining in prestige and popularity among the people of
    this city, and it is the earnest hope of the Committee
    that the work should spread and that the Orchestra
    should be put on a permanent basis.

    “It has been decided to re-engage Mr. Scheel, and
    contracts have been authorized with the members of
    the Orchestra, so that as far as possible the present
    personnel may be retained.

    “It is the hope of the Committee that you will continue
    to favor the organization with your support as before,
    and that you will renew your subscription to the
    Guarantee Fund.

         “By Order of the _Executive Committee_
               “(Signed) A. VAN RENSSELAER, _President_”

                        PROGRAMME BOOK

           “THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA ASSOCIATION
           OWES MUCH OF ITS SUCCESS TO THE DEVOTED
                   LABORS OF THE FOLLOWING
                      WOMEN’S COMMITTEES

         ANY MEMBER OF WHICH WILL BE GLAD TO RECEIVE
               YOUR SUBSCRIPTION OF TWENTY-FIVE
                   DOLLARS, OR MORE, TO THE
                        GUARANTEE FUND
                            OF THE
                    PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA

             “WHAT THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA IS DOING
                        FOR PHILADELPHIA”

    “The breadth of a city’s culture is measured by its
    point of view toward the arts that interpret life.
    Music is one of them—with Painting and Literature. It
    is the function of THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
    to carry forward the musical tradition that has been
    Philadelphia’s for five generations—

    “And more, to keep its musical consciousness alive
    and virile, by presenting the noblest works of the
    composers of today—composers who are expressing life
    in the terms of the present day.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “It has warm friends, enthusiastic audiences, the
    appreciation of musicians. Its influence is far more
    than local.

    “But more than this—it needs financial support.

    “It is not a private enterprise for private gain, but a
    public organization for public service.

    “In the nature of things such an institution cannot be
    self-supporting. Its box office receipts are fixed by
    the customary scale of prices—while its expenses are
    the creatures of time and circumstance.

    “The resulting deficit is made up each season by The
    Philadelphia Orchestra Association, whose members
    guarantee sums ranging from $25 to $5000 each,
    annually, for this purpose.

    “The Association is thus the instrument through which
    any one may help to perform this public service. It
    needs more members—of whom you are invited to be one.

    “THE INFLUENCE OF YOUR NAME AND YOUR MONEY ARE NEEDED.”


                    PROGRAMME BOOK
                “A CALL TO PATRIOTISM

    “THE CALL TO CIVIC PRIDE IS IN THE AIR. ‘Learn
    to know Philadelphia and work for her,’ is heard on
    every hand, and our people are urged to form and join
    ‘Patriotic Societies,’ all of which is good, and well
    worth-while.

    “BUT DO YOU KNOW that for several years a
    zealous Patriotic Society—one that evinces the truest
    Patriotism, the Patriotism of the Pocket-book and Bank
    Account—has been quietly at work doing all it could in
    its own way for the good name of Philadelphia and for
    the enjoyment and welfare of her citizens?

    “THE MEMBERS OF THIS SOCIETY have demonstrated
    the soundness of their Patriotism, the reality of their
    Civic Pride, and their zeal for the people’s good,
    without boasting and without complaint, by contributing
    from their private means, in the past nine years,
    approximately $468,000 to maintain and operate THE
    PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA, an institution of which
    every good Philadelphian has reason to be proud.

    “THE MEMBERSHIP OF THIS SOCIETY of liberal and
    public-spirited citizens known as THE PHILADELPHIA
    ORCHESTRA ASSOCIATION, numbered 43 in the season
    of 1901-02. Last season there were 263 members.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “WILL YOU NOT SHOW YOUR PATRIOTISM, your Civic
    Pride, your desire ‘to know and work for Philadelphia,’
    by joining the honorable roll of this Association? A
    subscription of Twenty-five Dollars, or more, toward
    the Guarantee Fund, will make you a member.

           “YOUR NAME AND MONEY ARE NEEDED!
                 “THEY ARE NEEDED NOW!

    “Write today to the Manager for a Subscription Blank.”

One of the difficulties was the attitude of business men who felt
that after a few years the orchestra should be making a return on the
investment, or at least be self-supporting. Their opinion was that an
institution which was a constant expense did not deserve the support of
the community. Fortunately for music, the people of Philadelphia now
understand that an orchestra never can be anything but a public charge.

Beginning with 1904 the number of guarantors ranged from two hundred
and fifty to three hundred and sixty per season. The Guarantee Fund
ranged from forty-five to fifty thousand dollars. During some seasons
there was that most intolerable of all things, an extra deficit: during
a few, a certain per cent of the fund only was called upon.

The discouraging part of the Guarantee Fund method of financing an
orchestra lay in the fact that the work was never-ending. A certain
number of guarantees expired each season and the guarantors had to be
persuaded by all the arts of man and woman to renew their pledges. The
fact that their money was to be immediately spent, militated, in the
minds of many people, against the Fund. It is so much pleasanter to
think of one’s gift safely ensconced in a permanent fund yielding an
income year after year for a favorite cause.

The Women’s Committees worked hard for the Fund. Besides procuring
new guarantees each year for twelve years, amounting to thousands of
dollars, they obtained renewals of old guarantees or made good the loss
by new ones. In 1905, they defrayed the extra deficit of $5300.00; no
doubt taxing everybody’s generosity and patience to the utmost.

Much of the financial burden in the first years was borne by a few
men and women, who time after time put their hands deep into their
pockets. Among these may be named Mr. Alexander Van Rensselaer, the
president; Mr. Thomas McKean, Jr., for some years vice-president; Miss
Anne Thomson and Miss Mary K. Gibson, directors. The treasurer, Mr.
Henry Whelen, Jr., was always optimistic and advanced money constantly.
What the result would have been if Mr. Whelen had not done this is
problematical. His untimely death in 1907 robbed the orchestra of a
devoted friend.

Mr. Whelen was succeeded as treasurer by Mr. Arthur E. Newbold, of
Drexel and Company, who arranged loans and advanced money and took
endless trouble for the Association. The same can be said of Mr. Robert
K. Cassatt, the present treasurer, who attends to many details of
business.

From 1905-06 until 1910-11, Mr. Horace Churchman was the Controller
of the finances, which he administered with ability and much to the
satisfaction of the Board.

A glance at the figures is all that is needed to learn the story of
those years so discouraging from a business point of view.

    Résumé of the Guarantee Fund, 1900-01-1915-16

                                     Number of     Amount       Extra
    Season     Concerts     Total   Guarantors   Collected     Deficit
    1900-01     6          $15,720     120      $13,299 (84%)  $40,000
    1901-02    14 pairs     32,000      43       32,000         30,000
    1902-03    14  ”        38,000     113       38,000         16,000
    1903-04    14  ”        42,000     137       42,000          5,300
    1904-05    15  ”        48,000     259       48,000
    1905-06    18  ”        50,000     315       47,000 (95%)
    1906-07    20  ”        46,840     281       41,900 (90%)
    1907-08    22  ”        42,285     273       40,100 (95%)
    1908-09    22  ”        45,125     352       42,800 (95%)
    1909-10    22           44,800     359       44,800
    1910-11    25           42,400     311       42,400
    1911-12    25           42,100     309       42,100
    1912-13    25           43,200     314       43,200
    1913-14    25           46,000     335       46,000
    1914-15    25           45,300     323       45,300
    1915-16    25           49,100     310       49,100
                                               --------
                                   Total       $618,699

During these distressing days Scheel was asked to dine at the
Rittenhouse Club to meet some prominent men of affairs, at a time when
desperate efforts were being made to procure guarantors. The hour
arrived, but no Scheel and it was learned that he had not gone home
to dress. His friends started out to find him, and he was discovered
teaching the second bassoon player to play a syncopated passage in
a Tschaikowsky symphony. The dinner was entirely forgotten in the
absorption of the lesson, but he rushed home to dress and arrived only
thirty minutes late. The result of the dinner, however, was an addition
of several thousand dollars to the Guarantee Fund.

The total number of guarantors who defrayed the annual deficit
during sixteen years was about seven hundred and fifty, and to them
Philadelphia music lovers are deeply in debt. Many sighs of relief were
heard when this unstable way of financing an orchestra was ended by
the offer of the “Unknown Donor,” which made possible a more permanent
method.




CHAPTER VI

THE DEATH OF FRITZ SCHEEL


But while the Board of Directors was in a continuous state of anxiety
about the expenses; and the guarantors were being kept up to the mark;
and the three Women’s Committees then in existence were straining every
nerve to help; and the orchestra was constantly improving through
the untiring efforts of the conductor, all was not well with Fritz
Scheel. In looking back over his term of leadership of the Philadelphia
Orchestra, his friends realize now that his illness began at least one
year, and perhaps more, before the final breakdown came. He became
irascible with his players, erratic in conduct, and his good judgment
in matters musical seemed to forsake him. During the first months of
1907 his programmes had to be constantly supervised to guard against
excessive severity; and on one occasion he had to be restrained from
playing five symphonies at one concert.

The first knowledge the public had that he was in a peculiar
mental condition was at a concert of the Eurydice Chorus, held in
Horticultural Hall on February 6, 1907. He had been much upset by the
death of a violinist in the orchestra, who disappeared and was found
drowned. During the concert he asked the audience to rise and then
played a funeral march in memory of this man. He constantly talked to
the audience and to the singers. It was immediately seen that he was
not responsible for his actions, and a specialist was consulted. He was
taken to Atlantic City for a week, but did not improve.

The news of Scheel’s illness brought forth universal expressions of
regret, as witness the following:

                                             March 3, 1907.
                        “FRITZ SCHEEL”

    “Fritz Scheel’s illness is not only a personal tragedy;
    it is a public calamity. The fine orchestra which he has
    created for Philadelphia, and into which he has poured
    to exhaustion his own nervous energy, remains the pliant
    instrument he made it, ready to the hand of whatever
    master may be found to carry on his work, if he should not
    return to it. But the orchestra has been so peculiarly the
    expression of Scheel’s artistic personality, that his
    withdrawal at the end of what had been a most prosperous
    and buoyant season leaves the great constituency built up
    for it in these seven years with a sense of bereavement and
    depression.

    “Mr. Scheel is a remarkable instance of a concentrated
    musical temperament, that views all life and thought through
    its own medium alone. In the years that he has spent
    in Philadelphia, he has been scarcely known beyond the
    immediate circle of the orchestra and the musical societies
    that he has directed.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “It is not enough to refer to the wide field of modern
    music that he has made familiar to us, through his lucid
    presentation of the works of the French, the Russian and
    other Continental composers, including the most recent
    Germans, such as Strauss, whose recondite music he read
    with a clearness and significance that the composer himself
    failed to convey. Scheel’s peculiar insight is still more
    expressed in that fact that he has made Brahms a popular
    composer in Philadelphia, and he has triumphantly shown
    that the great ‘classics’ are not antiquated, but that real
    musical thought may speak to modern ears as well through
    ancient as through modern forms, if felt and interpreted
    with modern understanding.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “The orchestra, of course, goes on, and the best present
    hope is that Scheel may be restored to health before another
    season. No doubt another conductor will be found if this
    hope should fail, but he will necessarily be different and
    there is no one now known in this country whom with an
    equally broad musical outlook, could be counted upon to
    make all the work of the orchestra so unfailingly and often
    surprisingly interesting as Scheel has done. Such artists as
    he are rare in any time or place, and it is to the honor of
    Philadelphia that he has received not only from the few, but
    from the many, some measure of the appreciation that is his
    due.”

_Public Ledger_, February 10, 1907

    “... Scheel’s collapse, however, came as a shock to
    everyone connected with the orchestra, and yet they all
    realized that he could not endure for a much longer
    time. For three weeks he had been unable to sleep.

    “Never a moment of freedom did he allow himself. In Odd
    Fellows’ Temple each morning he rehearsed one group
    of players, in the afternoon another group and in the
    evening the entire orchestra. At his meals he arranged
    the sugar bowl so that it would keep the score of some
    symphony or other in an upright position where he could
    study while eating.

    “In Harrisburg, only three weeks ago, Scheel had the
    grip, and when the business manager, Charles Augustus
    Davis, went to see him, he found the leader lying in
    bed with water bags over his heart and a score in front
    of his eyes. All this time Scheel was also attending
    to his work as leader of the Eurydice and the Orpheus
    Clubs, rehearsing and leading at concerts.”

       *       *       *       *       *

                   “LOOKS HAGGARD”

    “Mr. Scheel was seen by the _Public Ledger_
    correspondent as he returned to his hotel after a swift
    stroll down the boardwalk with his physician. He looked
    haggard and spoke in an excited, almost hysterical tone.

    “‘Please tell my friends in Philadelphia that I am not
    a sick man,’ and greeted the newspaperman effusively.
    ‘All this talk about my mental condition is absurd. I
    needed a rest, that was all, and the directors very
    kindly allowed me to come to the seashore. I will be
    all right in a few days, won’t I, doctor?’

    “The concluding sentence was directed to Doctor
    Goodman in a tone of pitiful appeal. Dr. Goodman
    nodded good-naturedly, as he does to all the proposals
    and plans that the sick musician unfolds in his
    illusions, when he talks about purchasing several beach
    play-houses for great music festivals.”

After conducting a last concert in Reading, Scheel was taken to a
sanitarium where he died of paresis on March 13th, 1907.

One of his last hallucinations was to write letters to prominent
musicians in Europe, offering them large sums to come to Philadelphia
and teach in a conservatory that he was about to found. During his stay
at the sanitarium he organized the nurses and orderlies into a chorus
and made them sing part songs, grouped about his bed. This was a unique
occurrence in the conduct of sanitariums, and he was soon much beloved
by the attendants, whose tears at his funeral bore witness to their
feeling for him.

“Fritz Scheel, Fighter,” would have been a good name for the first
leader of the Philadelphia Orchestra. His death was generally
attributed to overwork, but modern psychologists insist that no man
ever came to his death by work. It was the strain of conquering,
handicapped by the financial condition of the Association, that killed
Scheel—conquering first his musicians, then the musical public, then
the opposition to a Philadelphia Orchestra, and last the general
apathy, most difficult foe of all to subdue. If he had not been a
fighter, the Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the Philadelphia Orchestra
would still be several years ahead.

_Philadelphia Inquirer_, March 14, 1907:

     “SCHEEL, MARTYR TO ORCHESTRA HE CREATED, IS DEAD.
      CONDUCTOR KNOWN THROUGHOUT THIS COUNTRY AND EUROPE
                  SUCCUMBS TO PNEUMONIA

    “Fritz Scheel, conductor and creator of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra, who during the seven years
    which he headed that organization won the affection of
    local music lovers as no other musician ever gained it,
    died shortly before one o’clock yesterday afternoon in
    Dr. Francis X. Dercum’s sanatorium, at 1929 Wallace
    Street. Double pneumonia was the direct cause of his
    death.

    “There is little doubt that the real cause of the
    sudden end of the brilliant career of Mr. Scheel was
    his devotion to the orchestra, of which he was the
    conductor, for had it not been for the nervous and
    physical breakdown of a month ago, brought on by
    overwork, his ordinarily sturdy constitution in all
    probability would have shaken off the pneumonia which
    conquered him in his weakened condition.

    “During the month before his nervous breakdown, Scheel,
    encouraged by the artistic and financial success which
    was attending the season’s performances, redoubled his
    efforts to make the remaining concerts even outshine in
    brilliancy and attendance the preceding ones.

    “There is no doubt that he would have succeeded, for he
    had not only imbued both the musicians in the orchestra
    with his zeal, but had also wrought the music lovers of
    Philadelphia up to a high pitch of enthusiasm.”

_Philadelphia Press_, Thursday, March 14, 1907:

    “MAGIC OF SCHEEL’S BATON STILLED BY LEADER’S
    DEATH”

    “Double pneumonia ends life of gifted musician who
    brought the Philadelphia Orchestra to a high plane of
    excellence.

    “Philadelphia music lovers suffered perhaps the
    severest loss in the city’s musical history yesterday,
    when Fritz Scheel, director of the Philadelphia
    Orchestra, succumbed to double pneumonia.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “The news was received with sorrow among rich and
    poor alike, among those who were regular subscribers
    to the season of symphony concerts, as well as among
    those, who loving music, waited patiently in line for
    the doors to the family circle and amphitheatre of the
    Academy of Music to open, to hear the diverse program
    which it was Scheel’s wont to perform.

    “The maestro had made a brave fight for his life, his
    vitality, according to his physicians, having been
    remarkable.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Mr. Scheel added to the technical equipment, which
    is the natural product of German life and training,
    a poetic temperament and a broad outlook on matters
    musical, which not only gave great vivacity and variety
    to his programmes, but which made for such insight in
    the matter of the meaning of any given composition, as
    to produce the most illuminating and inspiring results.

    “A course of seven seasons under his baton was,
    therefore, not only pleasurable in the highest sense
    of the meaning of the word, but instructive and
    educational to a marked degree, the entertainment
    however, marked, being as it were, incidental to a
    greater purpose of not only creating, but of satisfying
    the desire for the higher things in the most glorious
    of arts. In this sphere of endeavor Mr. Scheel’s
    singleness of purpose was well known. His devotion to
    musical ideals was manifest in everything he did, and
    his concentration on what he considered his lifework
    was of so energetic and absorbing a character as to
    make serious inroads on his health and strength. His
    death places the musical world peculiarly in his debt,
    since he arrived in Philadelphia at a critical period
    in our musical history and met the situation admirably.

    “It is natural that those interested in music should
    feel a personal loss, but there is also a larger loss,
    in that every city must conserve those influences which
    keep the fire burning for the finer things of life.
    Hence, although those who are not of the musical world
    may not so realize it, they are also the losers through
    the passing of so striking a personality, for nothing
    is more certain than that any community does not live
    for or by bread alone, and it is a hopeful sign when
    any city is the scene of activities which include men
    and movements that look beyond mere material comforts.

    “It is fortunate that at this juncture Philadelphia has
    a large group of self-sacrificing citizens who realize
    this. Mr. Scheel had his reward in life in their
    support and appreciation, and the best tribute to him,
    now that he is dead, will be that the good work will go
    on on the lines laid down by him, so that what he stood
    for shall not be lost, and the vantage ground attained
    to be held in all certainty.”

Funeral services for Fritz Scheel were held on March 16th in the
Lutheran Church of the Holy Communion, on Chestnut Street above
Twenty-first. The immense gathering was a tribute to the conductor and
a proof of his personal, as well as musical, popularity in Philadelphia.

The list of honorary pall-bearers was a long one and included
representatives from almost every branch of musical activity in
Philadelphia:

    Executive Committee of the Orchestra: Mr. Thomas
    McKean, Mr. Henry Whelen, Jr., Mr. Richard Y. Cook, Mr.
    John H. Ingham, Mr. Andrew Wheeler, Jr., Dr. Edward I.
    Keffer, Mr. Edward G. McCollin, Mr. A. J. D. Dixon.

    Orchestra Guarantors: Mr. F. T. S. Darley, Mr. S.
    Decatur Smith, Mr. Richard S. Brock, Mr. John H.
    Converse.

    Business Office: Mr. Chas. A. Davis, Mr. Horace
    Churchman.

    Orchestra Members: Mr. Thaddeus Rich, Mr. Anton Horner,
    Mr. Jan Koert, Mr. C. Stanley Mackey.

    Philadelphia Symphony Society: Mr. Charles A. Braun,
    Mr. J. H. Michener, Jr., Mr. Joseph M. Mitcheson.

    Orpheus Club: Mr. Charles W. Baily, Mr. Arthur L. Church.

    Eurydice Club: Mr. Louis F. Benson, Mr. F. H.
    Rosengarten.

    Mendelssohn Club: Dr. W. W. Gilchrist.

    Choral Society: Mr. Henry Gordon Thunder.

    University of Pennsylvania: Dr. Hugh A. Clarke.

    Philadelphia Press: Dr. A. C. Lambdin, Mr. Max Heinrici,
    Mr. George Rogers, Dr. Martin Darkow.

    Philadelphia Musicians: Mr. Philip H. Geopp, Mr.
    Maurice Leefson, Mr. Richard Zeckwer, Mr. Wassili Leps.

    Personal Friends: Dr. Victor Leser, Dr. John H. Musser.

Besides these, the Board of Directors of the Association and the
Women’s Committees for the Philadelphia Orchestra attended in two large
groups.

Although the orchestra had disbanded for the summer enough of the
musicians were still in Philadelphia to play the slow movement of the
Eroica symphony as the cortège entered the church. The Orpheus Club
sang “The Long Day Closes,” by Arthur Sullivan, and “Holy Peace,” by
Abt. At the grave the horn quartette of the orchestra played Mozart’s
“Ave Verum.” His baton and the score of the Ninth Symphony were buried
with him.

Telegrams and messages of sympathy poured into the offices of the
Association from musicians in all parts of the country and from foreign
artists, sojourning here.

A special meeting of the Board of Directors was held on March 14th,
1907, and this resolution adopted:

    “The untimely death of Fritz Scheel has deprived this
    Association of the services of a Conductor, who, by
    his genius and devotion to his art, has successfully
    forwarded our efforts to establish an orchestra that is
    a credit to Philadelphia and to the contributors whom
    we represent.

    “Artistic both by temperament and inheritance, the
    devotion to his profession by which this community has
    profited so much has been indirectly responsible for
    the untimely ending of his career. Had he been less
    insistent upon the full performance of every detail
    involved in a complete and conscientious fulfillment of
    his duties, the great drain upon his powers that left
    him without sufficient vitality to withstand the attack
    of his last illness, might have been avoided.

    “If it be for us to write his epitaph, we would place
    devotion to his art as his most prominent trait of
    character, and loyalty to his orchestra and to our
    Association as its closest companion.

    “In many respects the Philadelphia Orchestra stands as
    a monument to his work and memory, for he must long be
    remembered as its first, and for seven years its only
    Conductor.”

Scheel’s devotion to Beethoven was well known, and if he had been told
to arrange his last concert no doubt he would have chosen a Beethoven
programme. Was it more than coincidence that the following programme
was his last?

                          BEETHOVEN PROGRAMME
                        February 7 and 8, 1907
                      DR. OTTO NEITZEL, _Pianist_

                                QUARTET
                   MARIE KUNKEL-ZIMMERMAN, _Soprano_
                   EMILY STUART KELLOGG, _Contralto_
                        NICHOLAS DOUTY, _Tenor_
                        FREDERIC MARTIN, _Bass_

                         THE MENDELSSOHN CLUB
        (Through the courtesy of Dr. W. W. Gilchrist, Director)

                   LUDWIG VON BEETHOVEN (1770-1827)

    1. Phantasie for Piano, Orchestra and Chorus, Op. 80
         Adagio      _Piano_
         Finale
            Allegro
            Allegro molto
            Adagio ma non troppo
            Marcia assai vivace       _Piano and Orchestra_
        Allegretto ma non troppo
        Presto                _Piano, Orchestra and Chorus_

          Prefatory Remarks by Dr. Otto Neitzel

    2. Quartet from “Fidelio” (“Mir ist’s so wunderbar”)
                               For Two Sopranos, Tenor and Bass

    3. Symphony No. 9, in D Minor (Choral), Op. 125
                  Finale on Schiller’s “Ode to Joy”
                  For Soli, Chorus and Orchestra
          Allegro ma non troppo, un poco maestoso
          Molto vivace
          Adagio molto e cantabile
          Allegro assai              _Quartet and Chorus_

                 Prefatory Remarks by Dr. Otto Neitzel

The predicament of the Board of Directors during Scheel’s illness and
after his death can hardly be described. Apart from the feeling of
personal loss, the Association was pledged to give a series of concerts
in Philadelphia and elsewhere. All the best conductors in America were
engaged in mid-season and the best European ones, if available, were to
be had only at impossible prices.

The concerts of February 7th and 8th during the first week of his
illness were conducted by August Rodemann, the assistant conductor and
first flutist; and Dr. Otto Neitzel, who was included in the programme
as lecturer, directed the Ninth Symphony. The remaining ones were led
in an atmosphere of sadness and apprehension by Leandro Campanari.


THE SCHEEL MEMORIAL TABLET

Immediately after the death of Fritz Scheel the Women’s Committee
proposed to raise a fund for a memorial to him to be placed in the
lobby of the Academy of Music. A committee was appointed with Mrs. Wm.
W. Arnett as Chairman. The circular printed below was sent out, to
which there was an immediate and generous response.

              FRITZ SCHEEL MEMORIAL FUND

                 UNDER THE AUSPICES OF
    THE WOMEN’S COMMITTEE FOR THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA

     “The Women’s Committee for the Philadelphia Orchestra
     has decided to erect in the Academy of Music a
     life-sized bronze bas-relief portrait of the late Fritz
     Scheel, three-quarters length figure, at a cost of
     $5000; $2000 of which has already been contributed.
     This memorial will have great value as a work of
     art, as it will be executed by Mr. Charles Grafly,
     of Philadelphia, the eminent American sculptor. It
     will also be a lasting and visible monument to the
     first conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra, who was
     beloved by the musical public not only of Philadelphia,
     but of other neighboring cities. It is right and
     fitting that so great a man, representing so great an
     organization, should have an adequate monument in our
     historic Academy of Music.

     “The music-loving public is asked to help erect this
     monument to Mr. Scheel, and all lovers of Art who have
     the interest of the great enterprise of their city at
     heart, will wish to have their part in this Memorial.

     “Messrs. Drexel & Co., Fifth and Chestnut Streets, have
     kindly consented to receive contributions to the ‘Fritz
     Scheel Memorial Fund,’ as also have Heppe & Son, 1115
     Chestnut Street, and Theodore Presser, 1712 Chestnut
     Street. Contributions may also be sent to the office
     of the Philadelphia Orchestra Association, Room 1313,
     Pennsylvania Building, Fifteenth and Chestnut Streets,
     or to Mrs. Alfred Reginald Allen, Treasurer, 111 South
     Twenty-first Street, Philadelphia. Contributions of any
     amount, large and small, are solicited.

     “It is important that all contributions be made by June
     1st in order that the bronze may be completed before
     the termination of the next Orchestra season.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Charles Grafly had taken a death mask of Scheel and produced a
fine work of art and a most excellent likeness of the man. The setting
was designed by Mr. Edgar V. Seeler. The Tablet cost six thousand
dollars, and enough money was raised in addition to purchase a lot in
West Laurel Hill Cemetery, and to place on Scheel’s grave a suitable
tomb-stone and some shrubbery. Perpetual care was arranged for, a great
satisfaction to Miss Scheel and to all his friends and admirers. For
many years the Women’s Committee has placed a wreath on the memorial
tablet on the anniversary of Scheel’s death, thus keeping alive the
memory of the man and what he did for music here.

One year after Scheel’s death a memorial meeting was held at the
Academy of Music at which time the tablet was unveiled.

     PROGRAMME OF CEREMONIES

     “FRITZ SCHEEL MEMORIAL
        “ACADEMY OF MUSIC
    WEDNESDAY, MARCH ELEVENTH
        NINETEEN HUNDRED
            AND EIGHT
        AT THREE O’CLOCK”

          “FRITZ SCHEEL
           “A TRIBUTE
    “By Florence Earle Coates

    “He gave his life to Music—gave—
      For love, not hire—himself denying;
    His body rests, o’er wearied, in the grave,
      But Music lives and gives him life undying.

    “In the deep silence, may he hear
      Such harmonies as he could wake,
    And O, may some faint accents reach his ear
      From the great City’s heart that sorrows for his sake!”

        “IN MEMORIAM
    “By Harrison S. Morris

    “Broken in twain the ordered sum of years,
      The baton fallen, the chords forever stilled;
    Vanished the master, mourned of human tears,
      Enduring what to Art his spirit willed.

    “The hand that swept the strings
      Like unto dust shall be;
    The stricken chords vibrate
      Eternally.”

                     “PROGRAM

                    “IN MEMORIAM
                   “FRITZ SCHEEL
    “BORN LÜBECK, 1852; DIED PHILADELPHIA, 1907”

       *       *       *       *       *

       “RICHARD WAGNER—VORSPIEL, “PARSIFAL”
                     “ADDRESS
                  “MR. OWEN WISTER
       “RICHARD STRAUSS, TONE POEM, OPUS 28,
                               “TOD UND VERKLÄRUNG,
                       “(Death and Transfiguration).”

       *       *       *       *       *

         “UNVEIL MEMORIAL TO FRITZ SCHEEL”

    GREAT THRONG AT ACADEMY OF MUSIC TO PARTICIPATE IN
    HONOR OF FIRST CONDUCTOR OF PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA

    “One of the greatest tributes ever paid to a musician
    in this city was the Fritz Scheel memorial celebration
    at the Academy of Music yesterday afternoon. It was a
    tribute to a man who was much beloved for the years
    of hard work he had done in bringing the Philadelphia
    Orchestra to its present perfection, as well as a
    tribute to his own personality, which won for him hosts
    of very warm admirers here.”

             “GREAT CROWD GATHERED”

    “The memorial services at the Academy yesterday, modest
    and impressive as they were, were remarkable for the
    vast crowd that assembled to honor the master. Long
    before the doors were opened, hundreds of people had
    gathered at each of the entrances, which were rapidly
    increased to thousands and when admission was finally
    gained, it was only a short time before every bit of
    available space was taken, with sufficient people on
    the outside to fill the place twice over.

    “That the Academy was filled to capacity was announced
    at the different entrances by attachés of the Academy,
    and although hundreds turned away disappointed, an
    equal number of them remained during the entire hour
    of the memorial services, and to repay them for their
    patience, they were finally allowed admission, not to
    get a chance to hear any of the ceremonies, but to view
    the handsome tablet.

    “The tablet was unveiled while the audience listened to
    the brief but impressive address of Mr. Owen Wister.”

       *       *       *       *       *

          “MRS. ROOSEVELT SENT A WREATH”

    “Encircling the tablet was a festooning of laurel sent
    by the Women’s Committee, and underneath a large wreath
    of beautiful white roses sent by Mrs. Roosevelt.

    “Mr. Wister’s address was a brief but eloquent effort.
    After a few introductory remarks, he said among other things:

    “‘Great poems survive the poets who wrote them; great
    pictures and statues survive their creators, as
    symphonies survive the masters who composed them. In
    all these arts the work of genius lives on, while the
    brain where it was born goes to dust. Not so is it
    with another sort of artist, the interpreter. He who
    interprets—the actor, the singer, the player—be he
    never so great, be he Garrick, or Mario or Paganini,
    still must he perish with the generation that heard
    him, and sometimes he does not even leave a name.

    “‘The lot of the orchestral conductor is the same,
    for he belongs to the class of interpreters, with the
    Garricks, the Marios, the Paganinis. No matter what
    magic comes from the baton that he waves, once that
    baton is laid down, the magic is dead.’

    “REVIEWED MR. SCHEEL’S WORK”

    “Mr. Wister then went on to sketch briefly the work of
    Mr. Scheel from the time he came to this country and of
    his residence in Philadelphia for nine years, beginning
    with the conducting of the Amateur Symphony Orchestra
    and including the years he was at the head of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra. He said:

    “‘Arduous were the pioneer steps, but between each one
    lie many struggles, many examples of generosity, of
    munificent giving on the part of private citizens; some
    gave their time and some their purse and some both.
    Without their persmission (for they would refuse it),
    let the names of the pioneers be mentioned:

    “‘Mrs. A. J. Cassatt and that hardworking committee
    of four: Messrs. Edward Keffer, Edward McCollin,
    John Ingham, Oliver Judson. Let us remember next the
    boundless generosity of Alexander Van Rensselaer and
    Thomas McKean, who poured their thousands out like a
    royal gift; nor let us ever forget Miss Anne Thomson
    and Miss Mary Gibson; to let any of these names go in
    silence today, would be to fail in due appreciation.
    And for Henry Whelen, his untiring devotion of time and
    purse, let a special word of remembrance be said.’

    “‘But for the loyal help of all these we might not be
    here—nor should we, if, in a dark hour, when masculine
    endurance gave out, feminine energy had not stepped in.’

    “Mr. Wister then followed with a eulogy of Mr. Scheel,
    the ‘artist’ as well as Mr. Scheel the ‘man.’ In
    conclusion he said:

    “‘So did his work end. Many must be sitting here today
    who well remember those years when Theodore Thomas
    played to a mere handful of listeners in this house;
    when tickets were given away by the dozen and the
    fifty, in order that there might not be a desert of
    empty seats.

    “‘But it was not a barren field that Theodore Thomas
    sowed the seed in. He made it ready for the Boston
    Orchestra, and thus at length arrived the man and the
    hour for a Philadelphia Orchestra. We have grown to
    understand the great value of such music, not only the
    pleasure it gives, but its educational and civilizing
    importance; and, although now and again some benighted
    voice is raised against systematic musical instruction
    in our schools, the day of the municipal savage draws
    to its close!

    “‘Older governments assist symphonic art, liberally
    subsidizing it; but in our Republic it is proper for
    the citizens to take this upon themselves, and all
    over the country they are beginning to do so. But
    Philadelphia’s progress since the days of Theodore
    Thomas is the most extraordinary of all, and her
    citizens will see that it goes on.

    “‘And so Fritz Scheel passes from this desk into
    bronze, where the artist has caught his look with
    admirable and living skill; the very look he had so
    often when he turned half round the moment before he
    raised his baton. At this desk now stands his eminent
    successor, worthy to perfect the work so worthily, so
    loyally begun. At future concerts when we come in we
    shall see Fritz Scheel looking down from his bronze,
    and imagine upon his face a look of serenity and
    approval.’

    “Mr. Wister was heartily congratulated for his address,
    and the ladies of the committee in charge of the
    memorial celebration received many favorable comments
    as to the admirable way in which they had carried out
    their work, not only in the collecting of the money,
    but in providing such a fitting tribute to the late
    conductor.”

       *       *       *       *       *


    _Evening Bulletin_, March 11, 1908:

                        “THE MEMORIAL TABLET”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “The seats in the parquet circle, with the exception of
    the boxes, had been reserved for the subscribers to the
    Fritz Scheel Memorial Fund, and the Guarantors for the
    Philadelphia Orchestra.

    “The balcony and family circle were for the regular
    ticket holders of both series of concerts, while
    tickets for the amphitheatre had been distributed
    to the music students of the various musical
    conservatories.

    “Proscenium Box No. 2 had been reserved for Mr. and
    Mrs. A. J. Dallas Dixon, Miss Margaret Scheel, Mr. and
    Mrs. Alexander Van Rensselaer, Mr. and Mrs. Andrew
    Wheeler, Jr., Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Newbold, Dr. and Mrs.
    Edward I. Keffer and Miss F. A. Wister.

    “Proscenium Box No. 3 for Mr. and Mrs. Thomas McKean,
    Mr. John H. Ingham, Mr. Clement B. Newbold, Mr. and
    Mrs. Edgar Scott, Mr. E. T. Stotesbury, and Miss Anne
    Thomson, representing the Board of Directors of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra Association.

    “Proscenium Box No. 4 had been allotted to the
    following ladies representing the Honorary
    Vice-Presidents of the Women’s Committee for the
    Philadelphia Orchestra: Mrs. George F. Baer, Mrs.
    Alexander W. Biddle, Mrs. John Cadwalader, Mrs. Charles
    B. Coxe, Miss Mary K. Gibson, Mrs. Clement A. Griscom,
    Mrs. Austin S. Heckscher, Mrs. C. E. Ingersoll, Mrs.
    Frank H. Rosengarten, Mrs. Cornelius Stevenson, Mrs.
    Theodore Voorhees and Mrs. L. C. Vandergrift and Mrs.
    Oscar R. Jackson of Wilmington, Del.

    “The parquet circle and balcony boxes were reserved
    for the officers of the Women’s Committee for the
    Philadelphia Orchestra and their guests. The list of
    Philadelphia guests included the following: Mr. and
    Mrs. John E. Reyburn, Mr. and Mrs. Edward H. Coates,
    Mr. and Mrs. Charles Grafly, Mr. and Mrs. C. C.
    Zantzinger, Mr. and Mrs. Charles L. Borie, Mr. and Mrs.
    Edgar V. Seeler, Mr. and Mrs. Harrison S. Morris, Mr.
    John Luther Long, Mrs. Owen Wister, Jr., Mr. and Mrs.
    H. B. Fine, of Princeton, N. J., Miss Alice Nevin,
    Lancaster, Pa., Mr. and Mrs. Frederick Martin, of
    Harrisburg, Pa.

    “The following ladies had charge of the memorial
    services: Mrs. W. W. Arnett, chairman; Mrs. A. J.
    Dixon, Mrs. H. E. Yarnall, Mrs. Thomas S. Harrison,
    Miss Anne Thomson, Miss Nina Lea, Mrs. F. H.
    Rosengarten, Mrs. George Widener, Mrs. John B. Miles
    and Mrs. W. L. McLean.


THE FUTURE

The Board of Directors immediately began to look for a successor to
Fritz Scheel. Various proposals were made, among them one to Franz
Kneisel, who was forced to decline by a storm of protest from his
New York admirers. At the Annual Meeting held May 14, 1907, this
announcement was made:

“Though the association has sustained a great loss in the death of Mr.
Scheel, who labored with untiring zeal, achieving successful results
in bringing our orchestra to a high plane of musicianship, the public
may be assured that his place will be worthily filled. At the present
moment, however, the Executive Committee is compelled to face a
question of some embarrassment in selecting the successor to the late
Mr. Scheel. Fortunately, your committee is in receipt of applications
that include many of the representative conductors in the world of
music, and, in consequence of this wealth of material from which to
select a conductor, the question of arriving at a decision is rendered
somewhat puzzling. The public may rest assured, however, that a
conclusion may be speedily reached, and a conductor named who will meet
with the approval of all.”


THE MUSICAL RECORD

1900-1907

Fritz Scheel’s musical achievements were outstanding, considering that
he was organizing a new orchestra under difficulties, both artistic and
financial. The list of important works presented by him is of interest,
for besides the compositions of European composers, he also brought
forward those of American and Philadelphia musicians.

    1900-01: Edward A. MacDowell: Concerto for Piano.

    1901-02: Dvorak: “Heldenlied.”[23]

    1902-03: Beethoven Cycle, including Ninth Symphony with
             Chorus; Mozart, Aria for Contralto piano and orchestra.
             Martinus’ Van Gelder[24] Symphony, A major (dedicated to
             Mr. Scheel).

    1903-04: Beethoven: Ninth Symphony; Jan Sibelius,
             Swan of Tuonela;[25] Frank G. Cauffman,[26] “Salammbo;”
             Camille W. Zeckwer,[27] Concerto for piano and orchestra
             (composer at the piano).

    1904-05: Vincent d’Indy, Second Symphony, B flat.[28]

    1905-06: Mozart Programme:
              One Hundred and Fiftieth Anniversary of the
                           Birth of Mozart.
                         January 26-27, 1906.

    Soloist: Mme. Charlotte Maconda, Soprano

    1. Symphony, G minor
    2. Recitative and Aria from “The Marriage of Figaro”
    3. A Short Serenade (Eine kleine Nachtmusik) for two
       violins, viola, violoncello and bass
    4. Aria from “The Magic Flute”
    5. Overture to “The Magic Flute”

       *       *       *       *       *

        Wassili Leps;[29] “Andon” (poem by John Luther Long[30]).
    1906-07: Beethoven: Ninth Symphony.

Scheel possessed a fine music library, which was an asset to an
orchestra just starting out in an almost penniless condition. It
contained standard orchestral scores of symphonies, overtures, violin
and piano solos with orchestra, as well as music suitable for popular
concerts, operatic selections, and smaller orchestral works. He was
never handicapped on account of the lack of music for besides this the
Association was constantly purchasing what was needed. In addition to
first performances in America, there were constant novelties at the
concerts and the artistic standard was high from the outset. A glance
over the programmes shows that while on occasion minor works were
presented which are now not generally played, the works of the great
masters predominated. In this way the taste of the audience was trained
and for this education Philadelphia owes to Fritz Scheel much of its
ability to appreciate and enjoy music today.

[23] First performance in America.

[24] Philadelphian.

[25] First performance in America.

[26] Philadelphian.

[27] First performance in America.

[28] Philadelphian.

[29] Philadelphian.

[30] Philadelphian.

[Illustration: SCHEEL MEMORIAL TABLET]

                        A TRIBUTE

    “The man who really made The Philadelphia Orchestra
    from a musical standpoint is Fritz Scheel. I never knew
    him personally, but he must have had very high musical
    ideals. They are evident in everything he did. Also,
    he must have had a wonderful faculty for choosing the
    highest type of artists for the orchestra; he set a
    standard then which has been difficult to live up to
    musically. Such artists as Rich, Horner, and Schwar (to
    mention only a few of the many who are still remaining
    in The Philadelphia Orchestra from Fritz Scheel’s time)
    are absolutely in the first rank for their instrument,
    not only in America but in the whole world. It was
    Scheel’s vision that laid such a wonderful foundation
    for this orchestra; that was very difficult, but in
    most cases I feel that we have at last succeeded; but
    we never can sufficiently recognize the debt we owe to
    Fritz Scheel; the good work he did and the influence of
    his ideals seem to live on forever.
                                         LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI.”




PART II




CHAPTER I

THE NEXT STEP


The Board of Directors was now obliged to find a new conductor for the
Philadelphia Orchestra. A survey of America did not bring fruitful
results. Orchestral conductors were few in this country in those days,
and the Board was determined to engage no man but one competent to
carry on the work so well begun. Therefore it was decided to send
the business representative of the Association, Charles A. Davis,
abroad on this quest. After visiting Steinbach in Cologne and Mottl in
Munich, who both recommended Carl Pohlig, Mr. Davis went to Stuttgart,
where Pohlig was the director of the Court Orchestra of the King of
Würtemberg. After consultation with the officers, an offer was made to
him to become the leader of the Philadelphia Orchestra for a term of
three years, which was accepted.

Carl Pohlig was born at Teplitz, Bohemia, in 1864. Like Robert
Schumann, he was the son of a bookseller. His first musical studies
were at the piano. Early in life, while attending the gymnasium at
Weimar, the talented boy was cordially received by Franz Liszt, and was
permitted to accompany the master on his journeys to Rome, Budapest and
other cities, this privilege being shared only by Tausig, von Bülow and
Rubinstein. He thus learned many Liszt traditions.

After having toured Germany, Austria, Russia, Scandinavia and Italy,
he became Kapellmeister at Graz. Later he was associated with Mahler
at the Opera in Hamburg: then at Covent Garden, and Bayreuth, where
he trained artists for the Wagner Festival. Pohlig conducted symphony
concerts following this operatic experience and appeared in Coburg,
Stuttgart, Berlin, Frankfort, Munich and other cities. Finally he
was offered the position of First Court Kapellmeister to the King of
Würtemberg, whence he came, by permission, to Philadelphia.

The “Neue Musik Zeitung,” one of the best musical journals in Germany,
speaks thus of Carl Pohlig as conductor:

    “In the symphony concerts he directs with equal fervor
    the works of Beethoven, Mozart and Haydn, as well as
    the creations of the later great masters. It goes
    without saying that Liszt is especially dear to him.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Pohlig directs with fire and deep feeling, and with
    a certain clearness that can only spring from a quiet
    insight into the innermost content of the music; into
    the finest fibre of its design.”

The new conductor entered upon his duties in Philadelphia in the autumn
of 1907, presenting for his first concert the following programme:

                  THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                    CARL POHLIG, _Conductor_

                FIRST AFTERNOON SYMPHONY CONCERT
          Friday Afternoon, October 18th, 1907, at 3.00

                 FIRST EVENING SYMPHONY CONCERT
          Saturday Evening, October 19th, 1907, at 8.15

                           PROGRAMME

    1. LUDWIG VAN BEETHOVEN (1770-1827)
           1. Overture “Fidelio”
           2. Overture “Leonore No. 3”
           3. Symphony No. 5, in C minor, Op. 67
                 I. Allegro con brio
                II. Andante con moto
               III. Allegro-Allegro, Presto

    2. RICHARD WAGNER (1813-1883)
           4. Vorspiel, “Meistersinger”
           5. “Siegfried Idyll”
           6. Overture, “Tannhaeuser”

[Illustration: © Haeseler CARL POHLIG]

Pohlig was warmly received by the audience and acclaimed by the critics
as the following will show:

_North American_, October 19, 1907:

     “SOCIETY, FASHIONABLE AND CULTURED, CHEERS POHLIG.
        MUSIC LOVERS TURN OUT IN FORCE TO HEAR THIS
      SEASON’S PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA’S FIRST CONCERT

    “Conductor Carl Pohlig came, waved his baton and
    conquered at the Academy of Music, yesterday
    afternoon—the first concert of the Philadelphia
    Orchestra’s regular season. The new musical director’s
    local début was a brilliant success and an artistic
    triumph.”

    “The house was crowded. It was apparent almost from
    the outset that Conductor Pohlig was a master artist
    and craftsman. He knew his business—‘the first among
    German conductors,’ as Felix Mottl styled him. The
    great audience, representing fairly Philadelphia’s
    highest artistic culture, quickly recognized the new
    orchestral director’s high and rare quality. By the
    time the ‘Leonore’ Overture was ended, mystic cords
    of sympathy between conductor and audience were flung
    out and firmly fastened. The immortal Fifth Symphony,
    mightiest of musical creations—was awaited with
    pleased expectation.”

       *       *       *       *       *

              INTERPRETATION OF WAGNER

    “Mr. Pohlig’s initial programme was too long—two hours
    of solid music. He does not think so—he broke his
    watch crystal in an energetic explanation.

    “There was some weariness over the Wagner music—Mr.
    Pohlig has not yet got his band keyed up to the
    marvelous complexion of the master of Bayreuth. But
    again it was quite clear that conditions of Wagnerian
    interpretation were as familiar to him as were the
    canons of classical music.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “There was no uncertainty of tempo, and when the
    tremendous finale of the ‘Tannhaeuser’ prelude was
    stilled, the people rose in their seats and acclaimed
    the new conductor in vociferous accents.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Name and date of newspaper unknown:

      “CITY TAKES COMMANDING PLACE IN COUNTRY’S MUSICAL
          GROWTH. CARL POHLIG, NEW SYMPHONY CONDUCTOR,
          THINKS AMERICA’S FUTURE PLACE WILL BE FIRST

    “A dozen years ago, a symphony concert in Philadelphia
    meant the arrival of an out-of-town organization, and
    the gathering of a sparse audience, dismally scattered
    through the Academy of Music. The writer remembers when
    on one occasion, in 1899, the Boston Symphony Orchestra
    played to a handful of people in our city because of
    inclement weather. The reports of the inception of
    orchestras like the Pittsburgh, the Chicago, the New
    York Philharmonic and others reveal what an uphill
    struggle was forced upon these musical bodies because
    of the lack of interest in music in the various large
    communities.

    “So different is the story today, that one is almost
    puzzled to account for a change, which has led
    Herr Pohlig, the new Conductor of the Philadelphia
    Orchestra, to remark: ‘Musically speaking, Germany is
    the land of the setting sun; America the land of the
    rising sun.’ His enthusiasm is not the result of the
    newcomer’s optimism, for Europe has kept track of our
    musical progress, and is acquainted with the fact that
    in a few years Philadelphia has been able to inaugurate
    season upon season of successful concerts given by its
    own orchestra, that Chicago’s magnificent organization
    created by Theodore Thomas, is now on a self-supporting
    basis, and that Pittsburgh, Boston, New York and
    Minneapolis are musical communities of great
    importance.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Asked about his plans for the concerts to be given
    this winter, Mr. Pohlig talked unhesitatingly and with
    enthusiasm. The first question put to him involved the
    type of music he would arrange for Philadelphia music
    lovers, and was a query whether this would be of the
    same nature he would have furnished a German audience.
    He said promptly: ‘Of course, Philadelphia should get
    the best and previous programmes show it has been
    getting it. And, of course, it must get everything. All
    schools of music should be represented. If anything, a
    modern conductor must be cosmopolitan.’

    “His mode of arranging his programmes will be new to
    Philadelphia concert-goers, who have been accustomed
    to a programme with the symphony either at the opening
    of the concert or at the end. Mr. Pohlig will have the
    symphony divide the programme into two, where it serves
    the purpose of balancing the music of the recital. He
    intends, if the opportunity offers, to combine with
    local singing organizations for the production of
    music for chorus and orchestra hitherto unheard in
    America. His belief in the great spirit of modern music
    will give Philadelphians the chance of hearing the
    compositions of European contemporaries....”

       *       *       *       *       *

Pohlig’s first New York concert on November 5th, 1907, did not meet
with approval, which considering the programme presented is not
strange, but the comments were of such a nature as to call down the
wrath of at least one Philadelphia newspaper which retorted in kind. As
New York has since capitulated this can be inserted.

A Philadelphia Newspaper, November 7th, 1907:

    “POHLIG IN NEW YORK. FLINGS BY MUSICAL CRITICS AT THE
        PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA AND ITS NEW CONDUCTOR

    “The views of the musical critics of New York
    concerning Carl Pohlig upon his first appearance with
    the Philadelphia Orchestra in that city on Tuesday
    evening are not altogether flattering. The _Sun_,
    as might be expected, leads in its light-hearted
    attack. Pohlig ‘is employed in the pleasant city of
    Philadelphia, where he conducts the local orchestra.
    Its work was so rough as to cause wonder that the
    organization should have been brought all the way
    across the State of New Jersey.’

    “The _Times_ says that ‘the orchestra is a good
    assemblage of musicians that clearly brought all of Mr.
    Pohlig’s intentions to realization. He is a strenuous
    conductor of advanced view as to the treatment not only
    of Liszt but also of Beethoven.’

    “The _Tribune_ says: ‘It was a rather unfortunate
    conjunction that of the Philadelphia Orchestra with its
    new conductor, Carl Pohlig; Richard Buhlig, pianist;
    and Carl Klein, violinist; at Carnegie Hall yesterday
    afternoon. Coming alone, and at a more opportune time,
    each might have won a more dignified hearing and more
    serious consideration than were possible under the
    conditions which prevailed yesterday.’

    “The New York public is ‘already booked for three-score
    and ten of the kind of concerts which it gives.’
    However, Mr. Pohlig ‘presented himself as a conductor
    of quite admirable capacities so far at least as
    a command of the technics of his art is concerned
    (leaving all questions of interpretation open).’

    “The _World_ speaks of the incapacity of the
    orchestra, who seriously hampered the soloist, by
    as wicked an accompaniment as was ever heard at a
    first-class concert.

    “‘Provincial was writ large over the whole proceeding,
    and one felt tempted to inquire: “Why Herr Pohlig; why
    the Philadelphia Orchestra; why Richard Buhlig?”—at
    any rate in New York.’

    “In Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony, however, Herr Pohlig
    ‘effectually removed previous impressions and stamped
    himself at once as a thorough musician, a graphic
    conductor of real distinction, possessing authority,
    temperament, magnetism, poetic feeling and imagination.
    One could quarrel with his rather slow tempi and
    liberties of phrasing, if inclined to be captious,
    but the interpretation of this great work was so
    well planned and coherent, that it aroused decided
    enthusiasm.’”
                           EDITORIAL

The Same, November 7th, 1907:

                 “NEW YORK SNOBBERY”

    “It is not pleasant to utter harsh judgments against
    a neighboring city, but New York does much constantly
    to deserve them at the hands of Philadelphians. The
    smug self-sufficiency of the three or four millions
    of people who reside on or in contiguity to Manhattan
    Island, is comical to witness, and we are again
    reminded of this attitude by the unjust criticism which
    the newspapers have launched against the Philadelphia
    Orchestra upon its first visit to New York under its
    new conductor. This accomplished musician has had
    the leadership of excellent organizations in Europe,
    where this form of art was more or less known and
    enjoyed while New York was inhabited by the Indians.
    He came here not without some right to a respectful
    hearing, and since his arrival has received it in this
    city from a public, which, we venture to say, is as
    discriminating as any that can be assembled upon the
    tongue of land which is bounded by the Hudson River and
    Long Island Sound. Remarks such as we reprint elsewhere
    today do not fall under the head of criticism. They are
    a form of cheap wit, which is supposed to be demanded
    by the inhabitants of this arrogant and insular
    community at the expense of the people, the products
    and the institutions of Philadelphia.

    “The slurs of the press at our music, books, art and
    much besides, do this city no particular harm. We are
    above any need of the endorsement of the self-centered
    elements which congregate in New York. The support
    which it gave to the Union during the war was notably
    reluctant. Its patriotism was always in doubt. It was
    the centre of disloyal conspiracy. A spirit of selfish
    commercialism rules its affairs, and it was only by
    force made to observe its national duty. Since that
    time it has been under foreign government, and it is
    without a doubt the least American of our cities. It
    has less love for our history as a nation; it is more
    willing to sell its birthright for a joke or a dollar
    than any community which has yet been established
    within American borders, and its swaggering air causes
    it to be loved by the citizens of other portions of the
    Union about as much as they love a produce market or a
    Midway Plaisance.

    “It is nothing at all to Philadelphians whether New
    Yorkers like our orchestra, our books, our poets,
    our historical personages, our pictures, our homes,
    or anything else that is ours. They may go on their
    sneering way amusing themselves from day to day, as
    they see fit. They will find, if they make the effort
    to inquire, that most of the mind and the soul, as well
    as the body of this nation have lain and still lie in
    lands that they do not dominate. They may say what they
    will, but their manners might be mended to their own
    conspicuous advantage. That is all.”

At the expiration of Pohlig’s contract the Association renewed it for
three years more.

Pohlig was a fine-looking man of German military style, more popular
in America previous to 1914 than it has been since. His platform
manner was excellent and his appearance was elegant, and he made a
good impression on his audience. He was, however, of a difficult
disposition, which made dealings between him and the musicians, and the
Board of Directors, trying and difficult. This was the final cause of
his resignation, presented on June 10th, 1912.


THE MUSICAL RECORD, 1907-1912

Under the direction of Carl Pohlig, the orchestra continued to develop
and improve. He was a competent and well-trained musician, and was on
his mettle to do his best in an artistic way to keep up the precedents
established by the first conductor. He continued to give unusual
performances and to keep abreast of the day by producing modern works,
among them his own symphony, “Per Aspera ad Astra” (“A Hero’s Death and
Apotheosis”), in which members of the Eurydice Chorus took part.

    1907-08: Carl Pohlig, Symphony, “Per Aspera ad Astra.”

    1908-09: Frank G. Cauffman[31], “Legende”; Philip H.
             Goepp[32]: Academic March.

    Feb. 26th-27th, 1909: Mendelssohn Centenary: Midsummer
             Night’s Dream with Ben Greet Players. Chaminade:
             Concertstück, piano and orchestra (composer at the piano).

    1909-10: November 26th-27th, 1909: Rachmaninoff,
             Symphony No. 2, E minor, conducted by the composer;
             Moussorgsky, “La Nuit sur le Mont Chauve,”
             Rachmaninoff, guest conductor; Wm. W. Gilchrist[33],
             Symphony No. 1, C major, conducted by the composer.

    1910-11: November 11th-12th: Schumann: to commemorate
             the One Hundredth Anniversary of his birth 1810,
             Symphony No. 1, B flat major; Henry Hadley,
             guest conductor, Cantata “The Culprit Fay,” Op.
             62, after Joseph Rodman Drake, conducted by the
             composer; November 11th and 12th, 1910, St. Saëns,
             Symphony No. 3, in honor of seventy-fifth birthday
             of composer; Louis von Gaertner[34], Tone Poem “Macbeth,”
             Celeste D. Heckscher[35], “Dances of the Pyrenees.”

    1911-12: October 27th-28th: Liszt Centenary.
             Henry Hadley, Symphony No. 3, B minor.

    March 8th-9th: Brahms Symphony No. 3, F major, to celebrate
                   seventy-ninth anniversary of his birth,
                   March 7th, 1833. Herman Sandby, Prelude to
                  “The Woman and the Fiddler” (play by Mrs. Sandby).

[31] Philadelphian.

[32] Philadelphian.

[33] Philadelphian.

[34] Philadelphian.

[35] Philadelphian.




PART III




CHAPTER I

THE COMING OF LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI


The summer of 1912 brought the Board of Directors, for the second time
in five years, face to face with the problem of securing a conductor.
Again the place was waiting for the man, but under far different
conditions from those in the summer of 1899, when Fritz Scheel was
found at Woodside Park. Philadelphia had a good orchestra, a growing
audience tended carefully by the four Women’s Committees, and a
Guarantee Fund in a more or less satisfactory condition. It was an
opportunity. The Board of Directors looked around the field again. They
had heard of a young man, Leopold Stokowski, recently conductor of the
Cincinnati Orchestra, and heard well of him. Mr. Andrew Wheeler knew
him and suggested approaching him. He was then in Europe, so he was
cabled to, and accepted the position.

The first concerts under Mr. Stokowski took place on October 11th and
12th, 1912, with the following programme, which inaugurated the third
period of the Philadelphia Orchestra, and one which has been a story of
constant artistic development, until now this orchestra ranks with the
great orchestras of the world.

                THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA ASSOCIATION
                            (INCORPORATED)
                              MAINTAINING
                      THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                            (Founded 1900)
                    LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI, _Conductor_
                    FIRST PAIR OF SYMPHONY CONCERTS
        Friday afternoon at 3.00      Saturday Evening at 8.15
                      October 11th and 12th, 1912

                               PROGRAMME

    1. LUDWIG VAN BEETHOVEN          Overture, “Leonore No. 3”
        (1770-1827)
    2. JOHANNES BRAHMS      Symphony No. 1, in C minor, Op. 68
        (1833-1897)

            I. Un poco sostenuto; Allegro (6/8)
           II. Andante sostenuto (3/4)
          III. Un poco allegretto e grazioso (2/4)
           IV. Adagio-piu andante; Allegro non troppo,
                                          ma con brio (4/4)

    3. MICHAEL IPPOLITOW-IWANOW   “Sketches from the Caucasus”
          (1859-    )

            I. In the Mountain Pass
           II. The Mountain Village
          III. March of the Sirdar
                   (First Time at These Concerts)

    4. RICHARD WAGNER                    Overture “Tannhäuser”
          (1813-1883)

_Public Ledger_, October 12th, 1912.

          “NEW CONDUCTOR OF PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                TENDERED OVATION IN ACADEMY

    “Leopold Stokowski made his début yesterday afternoon
    at the Academy as conductor of the Philadelphia
    Orchestra, in the opening concert of its thirteenth
    season. Every seat was taken and the extra chairs
    had been placed within the orchestra rail. There was
    much enthusiasm, manifesting itself at the beginning
    in prolonged applause as Stokowski came forward
    with bowed head, evidently pondering the content of
    his musical message. Those who went forth to see a
    hirsute eccentricity were disappointed. They beheld
    a surprisingly boyish and thoroughly business-like
    figure, who was sure of himself, yet free from conceit,
    who dispensed with the score by virtue of an infallible
    memory, and held his men and his audience from first
    note to last firmly in his grasp.

    “Mr. Stokowski has known the players, and they have
    known him, for only four days of actual rehearsal, and
    it was not to be expected that the organization at the
    outset would manifest the homogeneity to be expected
    later. Yet in this brief time the new leader has been
    surprisingly successful in welding the several choirs
    into a single coherent entity. They played yesterday
    with a unity of purpose—particularly among the first
    violins—not usually attained until mid-winter. They
    brought out the full value of the lights and shadows.
    The climaxes were duly accentuated, the pianissimos
    with the utmost delicacy and refinement were contrasted
    with the full throated polyphony.

              “METHODS OF CONDUCTOR

    “Mr. Stokowski’s conducting is after the order of
    Nikisch, whom he frankly admires. He does not tear a
    passion to tatters. He holds his thunders and the winds
    of Aeolus in a leash. His gestures are graphic, the arcs
    and parabolas he describes tell of a kind of
    geometrical translation going on in his mind, whereby
    he visualizes the confluent rhythms in outward action.
    At impassioned moments his movements have the freedom
    of a violinist’s bow arm; at other instants he
    brings his fists against his shoulders with vehement
    concentration, or his uplifted eloquent left hand
    pleads with some suppressed choir to come forward and
    assert itself in power. There is, from first to last,
    no languor or slackened moment; he directs with a fine
    vigor and intensity that mounts to ecstasy yet does not
    lose its balance or forget its sane and ordered method.

       *       *       *       *       *

    “TRIBUTE PRESENTED”

    “At the close of the symphony a laurel wreath was laid
    on the dais ere Mr. Stokowski found his way to the
    footlights in response to the tumultuous applause. The
    wreath was so large that he stood in it while he called
    upon his musicians to rise, himself applauding their
    efforts and modestly disavowing his leonine share of
    the credit.”

[Illustration: © R. T. Dooner LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI]

It soon became apparent that Philadelphia had something very unusual in
Leopold Stokowski. He was young, but rarely gifted, and he dedicated
himself to reaching a high artistic goal for the Philadelphia
Orchestra. His plans were of a daring character and at times almost
took away the breath of the Board of Directors; for instance, when the
idea of giving Mahler’s Eighth Symphony was presented and Mr. Stokowski
announced that it would cost $14,000. There was much discussion, as the
Board was convinced that this performance would be unpopular and not a
success from a financial point of view. However, the desire to have the
name of the orchestra connected with productions of an unusual nature
and to keep ahead of the times musically, won the day, and it was
decided in 1915 to produce this gigantic choral work in March 1916.

The story of this production is dramatic from the moment that Leopold
Stokowski, after having secured the rights for the first American
performance, escaped from Munich in August, 1914, with the score in a
handbag, all he had time to pack. Mr. Stokowski was at that time still
a British subject, having only taken out his first papers for American
citizenship.

Having secured the consent of the Board of Directors to produce this
symphony, this announcement was issued.

                      THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                    LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI, _Conductor_

           First Performances of the Mahler Eighth Symphony
                    Academy of Music, Philadelphia
          Thursday Evening—Friday Afternoon—Saturday Evening
                          March 2, 3, 4, 1916
                  Metropolitan Opera House, New York
                     Sunday Evening, April 9, 1916

        With Orchestral and Choral Forces of Over One Thousand
                      and the Following Soloists:

                  FLORENCE HINKLE, Soprano
                  INEZ BARBOUR, Soprano
                  SUSANNA DERCUM, Contralto
                  REINALD WERRENRATH, Baritone
                  ADELAIDE FISCHER, Soprano
                  MARGARET KEYES, Contralto
                  LAMBERT MURPHY, Tenor
                  CLARENCE WHITEHILL, Basso

         First Chorus—The Philadelphia Orchestra Chorus, 400
                        Children’s Chorus, 150

     Second Chorus—Philadelphia Choral Society, Mendelssohn Club
                     and the Fortnightly Club, 400

    “The Philadelphia Orchestra Association takes pleasure
    in announcing three performances in Philadelphia of
    Gustav Mahler’s Eighth Symphony and, under the auspices
    of the Society of Friends of Music, one performance in
    New York. The first Philadelphia performance is the
    first presentation of this work in America, and is
    given under an exclusive contract with the publishers.
    Although other famous organizations had approached
    the Universal-Edition in Vienna, to the Philadelphia
    Orchestra fell the honor and artistic responsibility of
    presenting this work for the first time to the American
    public. The production of the work, requiring three
    choruses aggregating 950 voices, an orchestra of 110,
    and 8 soloists, entails a cost for the Philadelphia
    performances alone of approximately $15,000.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “The New York performance owes its possibility to the
    public spirit and generosity of the Society of Friends
    of Music, and will be given with the complete forces
    employed in Philadelphia. This single production will
    cost approximately $12,000.

    “Owing to the great magnitude of the work and the great
    demand which it makes on the musical forces employed,
    it is extremely doubtful whether it can receive many
    performances in America. Two years have been spent
    in preparation in order that the rendition of the
    work might realize the ideals of the composer. That
    the value of the work is appreciated is shown by the
    fact that orders for seats have been received from
    all over the eastern and middle western sections of
    this country. The Friday and Saturday performances in
    Philadelphia are sold out and many mail orders have
    been received for Thursday night. An early application
    for seats should be made.

     “PRICES OF TICKETS FOR THE FIRST PERFORMANCE AT THE
      ACADEMY OF MUSIC, THURSDAY EVENING, MARCH 2, AT 8.15

    Parquet and Balcony Box Seats                                $3.00
    Parquet and Parquet Circle, first two Rows in Balcony         2.50
    Remainder of Balcony and first two Rows in Family Circle      2.00
    Third and Fourth Rows, Family Circle                          1.50
    Remainder of Family Circle                                    1.00
    Amphitheatre, First Two Rows                                  1.00
    Amphitheatre (Unreserved)                                      .50

       *       *       *       *       *

    (The Friday Afternoon and Saturday Evening performances being
     already sold out, no orders can be taken for these two concerts.)

     ARTHUR JUDSON, _Manager_       LOUIS A. MATTSON, _Asst. Manager_”

Work with the two choruses which sang in German and in Latin began in
October, 1915. Hitherto the orchestra had had no chorus of its own,
but was obliged to depend on the good will of Philadelphia choral
organizations to co-operate in producing choral works. Now for the
first time the name “Philadelphia Orchestra Chorus” appeared, and, as
the first chorus of 400 members, was trained by Mr. Stokowski. The
second chorus of 400 voices was rehearsed by Mr. Henry Gordon Thunder.

The requirements were severe as to personnel and rehearsals. The spring
was occupied in the selection of voices. When rehearsals began in
October, men and women were rehearsed separately until January. After
that they had weekly rehearsals together. Singers who were inattentive
or who skipped rehearsals were not retained, and towards the end
everybody was over-worked and wrought up to a pitch of excitement.


                             NINETEENTH PROGRAMME

         Friday, March 3rd, at 3.00      Saturday, March 4th, at 8.15

                          THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                        LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI, _Conductor_

                                   PROGRAMME
                    Symphony No. 8           GUSTAV MAHLER
                                                (1860-1911)

                    Part I. Hymn, “Veni, Creator Spiritus”
             Part II. Final Scene from Part II of Goethe’s “Faust”
                        (First performance in America)

                          ASSISTING FORCES:
              Una Poenitentium, FLORENCE HINKLE, Soprano
              Magna Peccatrix, INEZ BARBOUR, Soprano
              Mater Gloriosa, ADELAIDE FISCHER, Soprano
              Mulier Samaritans, MARGARET KEYES, Contralto
              Maria Aegyptiaca, SUSANNA DERCUM, Contralto
              Doctor Marianus, LAMBERT MURPHY, Tenor
              Pater Ecstaticus, REINALD WERRENRATH
              Pater Profundus, CLARENCE WHITEHILL, Basso

                          Augmented Orchestra of 110

                                 First Chorus:
                    THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA CHORUS, 400

                                Second Chorus:
                 PHILADELPHIA CHORAL SOCIETY, MENDELSSOHN CLUB
                         and THE FORTNIGHTLY CLUB, 400

                           CHILDREN’S CHORUS OF 150
       The English version (by Mr. Philip H. Goepp) of Specht’s Analysis
                 may be obtained in the lobbies of the Academy

              MR. CONSTANTIN VON STERNBERG at the Piano
              MR. HENRY GORDON THUNDER at the Organ
              MR. WILLIAM SILVANO THUNDER at the Harmonium
              MR. HEDDA VAN DEN BEEMT at the Celesta

While there were varying opinions about the musical value of this
symphony, the manner of producing it evoked but one. In order to make
the event national in character, prominent musicians from all parts
of America were invited to be present at the first performance. Among
the many notable persons from other cities were: Mr. and Mrs. Ossip
Gabrilowitsch, Mr. and Mrs. Harold Bauer, Mr. and Mrs. Josef Hofmann,
Mr. and Mrs. Ernest Hutcheson, Dr. and Mrs. Ernest Kunwald, Mr. and
Mrs. Harold Randolph, Mr. and Mrs. Ernest Schelling, Mr. and Mrs. David
Mannes, Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Untermeyer, Mr. and Mrs. Gustav Strube,
Judge and Mrs. J. Butler Woodward, Mr. and Mrs. J. Fred Wolle, Mrs.
Werrenrath, Mrs. William M. Bannard, Miss Kitty Cheatham, Dr. A. G.
Rolfe, Oscar G. Sonneck, Albert Spalding, Kurt Schindler and Theodore
Spiering.

[Illustration: © Bell & Fischer

THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA AND MAHLER CHORUS]

_Public Ledger_, March 3rd, 1916:

           “MAHLER’S WORK AND STOKOWSKI SCORE TRIUMPH

    THOUSANDS AT ACADEMY OF MUSIC AROUSED TO HIGH PITCH OF
       ENTHUSIASM. NOTED MUSICIANS GIVE PRAISE TO PRODUCTION
          PROMINENT PERSONS FROM ALL OVER COUNTRY ATTEND
                        RENDITION HERE

    “Every one of the thousands in the great building was
    standing, whistling, cheering and applauding, when
    Leopold Stokowski, his collar wilted, and his right arm
    weary, but smiling his boyish smile, finally turned to
    the audience in the Academy of Music last night.

    “He had scored, so famous musicians agreed, the
    greatest triumph of his career, the greatest triumph
    the Philadelphia Orchestra has known in its sixteen
    years of life and he had done it on a stupendous scale
    with the American première of Gustav Mahler’s Eighth
    Symphony. He carried along with him to triumph an
    orchestra numbering 110 pieces and a chorus of 958
    singers, to say nothing of the city’s music lovers and
    scores of musical pilgrims from other cities.

    “For every one who is any one in musical America was
    here for the Mahler American première last night or
    will be here when the tremendous work is repeated this
    afternoon and tomorrow night. The boxes were filled
    with famous musicians and musical authorities. One and
    all stood, applauding Mr. Stokowski and the symphony,
    while the orchestra members blared a ‘touché’ in honor
    of their leader.

    “The scenes at the Academy set nerves tingling. Two
    weeks before the performance every seat had been sold.
    Fifteen minutes before Mr. Stokowski swung his baton
    upon his augmented orchestra and upon the great chorus,
    banked 24 tiers high, horns blew a fanfare in the foyer
    of the Academy of Music, following an ancient custom at
    Bayreuth. The curtain rose and the audience gasped.

    “The 958 singers filled the great stage from footlights
    to roof and the orchestra was upon an apron that has
    been built out into the house.

    “The first twelve rows of singers were women, dressed
    in white. Above them were twelve rows of men, with a
    gardenia-like spot of girls, members of the children’s
    chorus, pinned, it seemed in their midst.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Alexander Van Rensselaer presented a wreath for the
    orchestra. It was inscribed ‘To Leopold Stokowski in
    commemoration of the first performance of Mahler’s
    Eighth Symphony in America, March 2nd, 1916.’

          MR. VAN RENSSELAER’S REMARKS

    “In presenting the wreath, Mr. Van Rensselaer said:

    “‘The directors of the Philadelphia Orchestra
    Association feel that the presentation of this Eighth
    Symphony of Mahler this evening, for the first time
    in America, marks an epoch in the musical history of
    Philadelphia to which no other event is comparable.

    “‘This occasion is memorable not only because the
    Mahler Symphony is such an extremely difficult work,
    but because we have here in Philadelphia been able to
    follow out the precise instructions of the composer in
    welding into one vast instrument these great choral
    and orchestral forces which are here assembled. These
    two choruses of 400 trained voices each, together
    with the large chorus of boys and girls selected from
    the best choirs of this city, the eight soloists of
    metropolitan reputation, and the augmented orchestra of
    120 instruments, all have been trained into one vast
    harmonious instrument by you.

    “‘We of Philadelphia are indebted for the production
    of this great work to you, our brilliant and talented
    conductor. It was you who first conceived the idea
    more than two years ago of producing this work; it was
    you who made the arrangements with the publishers and
    guaranteed to them that we would produce it in the
    manner indicated by the composer and obtained from
    them the rights for the first performance in this
    country; it was you who chose and trained Chorus No.
    1 and intrusted Chorus No. 2 to the able direction of
    Henry Gordon Thunder, to whom our thanks are also due;
    it was you who arranged with the best choirmasters of
    Philadelphia to train this large body of boys and girls
    in their respective parts and it was you who brought
    together these large agencies and trained them in the
    final ensemble of this great work.

    “‘We feel that not only the musical public of
    Philadelphia, but the entire city, owe you a debt
    of gratitude that never can be repaid. And as a
    testimonial from the Board of Directors of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra Association, and as an
    expression from them of their thanks to you for the
    successful completion of this grand work, I have
    pleasure in presenting the victor’s crown of laurel,
    made in perpetual bronze.’

               REPLY OF MR. STOKOWSKI

    “Mr. Stokowski lifted the wreath, and when the applause
    died down, turning to Mr. Van Rensselaer, said:

    “‘It is impossible for me to put into words my emotions
    tonight. This stupendous and noble work was written six
    years ago. For six years I have been meditating the
    possibility of its performance and hoping, some day, to
    have the opportunity of giving it, although I knew the
    requisite forces would be extremely difficult to obtain.

    “‘Through a generosity for which I can never
    sufficiently express my gratitude, Mr. Van Rensselaer
    and the directors of the Philadelphia Orchestra
    Association made the great undertaking possible at
    last. The dream still would have remained unfulfilled,
    however, had it not been for the hard work and
    willingness of the orchestra; of all these dear people
    in the chorus, who have worked for more than a year,
    training for this night; of all the soloists, and of
    Henry Gordon Thunder, who has supported and helped me
    with most wonderful generosity. To the committee that
    tried thousands of voices, choosing this magnificent
    chorus, we are particularly indebted.

    “‘My final and greatest debt, a debt so great that I
    feel I never can express it, is to you, the public, for
    your warmth and understanding at the first hearing of
    this great work. It is a great inspiration.’

        OFFERS OF $100 TO OBTAIN SEATS

    “Popular interest in the Mahler Symphony’s American
    première was evidenced by offers of $100 a seat,
    reported from several of the large hotels, just
    before the Academy doors were thrown open, and by
    more than 1000 persons, lucky holders of general
    admission tickets who stood in Locust Street, or sat
    on newspapers spread on the Academy steps, for hours
    before the performance was scheduled to start. At
    least 100 persons were waiting at 3.30 o’clock in the
    afternoon, braving the drizzle, for a chance at a good
    seat.

    “From 7 until 8 o’clock there was a steady stream
    of automobiles stopping at the Academy doors. All
    society and all musical Philadelphia streamed into the
    building. The stage door was besieged by the nearly
    1000 chorus members, who were marshaled without a
    hitch or the raising of a voice into their places.
    Necessary readjustments on and off the stage, seating
    arrangements, provisions for the wardrobing of the
    great chorus and the engaging of understudies for each
    of the eight soloists cost, it was said, close to
    $4000. This sum, of course, did not include the great
    expense entailed in training the voices during the last
    twelve months.

    “Mr. Stokowski was given two great demonstrations;
    the first during the intermission, the second at the
    conclusion of the performance. Both lasted for more
    than five minutes. The noise was so great that the
    Academy doormen said it could be heard across Broad
    Street in the foyer of the Walton.

         MISS FLORENCE HINKLE APPLAUDED

    “Mr. Stokowski bowed until it seemed his back would
    break. Then he led forward Henry Gordon Thunder,
    William Silvano Thunder, Constantin von Sternberg and
    Hedda van den Beemt. The audience wanted more. They
    wanted the soloists, so forward came the eight of
    them, and as they went back Florence Hinkle, who was
    being wildly applauded by the great chorus, kissed her
    fingertips to them. Above the crescendo of applause
    could be heard members of the chorus, crying, ‘Hinkle!’

    “One of the most interested persons present was Mrs. J.
    F. D. Lanier, president of the Society of Friends of
    Music, the New York woman chiefly responsible for the
    invasion of New York with the Mahler Symphony on April
    9. She sat in the same box with the pianist, Harold
    Bauer.

    “In a nearby box was the pianist, Ernest Schelling.
    Aline van Barentzen, the pianist, also was on hand.
    Ernest Hutcheson, Harold Randolph, Joseph Hofmann,
    Ossip Gabrilowitsch, Director Bodansky, of the
    Metropolitan Opera and of the Cincinnati Symphony, are
    expected to be present at today’s performance. Other
    prominent guests were entertained last night and will
    be entertained today by the Women’s Committee of the
    orchestra.

    “It was announced last night that all seats for the
    extra performance of the Mahler Symphony on April 4th
    have been sold.”

    After the third performance the Women’s Committees
    for the Philadelphia Orchestra gave a reception to
    Leopold Stokowski, and the soloists, in the foyer
    of the Academy. This was followed by a supper at
    the Bellevue-Stratford in their honor and for a few
    distinguished guests.

    The news of this production spread over America and
    Europe, and in Philadelphia created more excitement
    than had arisen in a generation. The demand for seats
    was so great, that it became necessary to announce
    extra performances in this city, and four more were
    given, making a total here of nine, including two
    public rehearsals. After the last, orders for seats,
    amounting to over $10,000 in Philadelphia alone, had to
    be refused. The dress rehearsal on Wednesday was open
    to the families of the performers and some others at a
    special price. A dress rehearsal was later given for
    public school children. The first performance was on a
    Thursday night, and then followed two in the regular
    season series. By the time four audiences had heard the
    symphony, all who had not heard it were seized with an
    overpowering desire to witness this extraordinary event.

           THE NEW YORK PERFORMANCE

    Such a journey was never before undertaken in musical
    circles here or abroad. Twelve hundred people left
    Philadelphia by private trains, totalling seventeen
    cars, about noon on Sunday, April 9th, reached New
    York in time to have a rehearsal and dine and dress at
    a hotel and at 8.15 appeared before a packed audience
    which included all the musicians then in America.

    It was an inspiring occasion and one long to be
    remembered. That evening New York unreservedly
    acclaimed the Philadelphia Orchestra. Scenes of
    enthusiasm followed the first half, after a tremendous
    burst of applause when the curtain rose. But at the
    end the audience let itself go in a way never seen in
    Philadelphia.

    There were many musicians in the house, including
    Ignace Paderewski, the members of the Flonzaley
    Quartet, Mme. Alma Glück and Efrem Zimbalist, Pablo
    Fasals, Henry Hadley, Mr. and Mrs. Ossip Gabrilowitsch,
    Rubin Goldmark, Dr. Frank Damrosch, Victor Harris,
    Harold Bauer, George W. Chadwick, Mischa Elman, Emma
    Eames, Leopold Godowsky, Rudolph Ganz, Arthur Foote,
    David Bispham, Percy Grainger, Arthur Hinton, Alfred Hertz,
    Franz Kneisel, Daniel Gregory Mason, Ernest Schelling, Walter
    K. Spalding (Department of Music, Harvard University),
    Josef Stransky, Arthur Whiting, Marcella Sembrich,
    Antonio Scotti, Cornelius Rübner (Columbia University),
    Fritz Kreisler, Mme. Schumann-Heink, and others.

_New York Sun_, April 10th, 1916:

          “EIGHTH SYMPHONY BY MAHLER HEARD

     “SOCIETY OF FRIENDS OF MUSIC GIVES CONCERT AT
         THE METROPOLITAN. SENT BY PHILADELPHIA

    “The Society of the Friends of Music, which has
    performed a valuable function in the artistic musical
    life of this metropolis by bringing to the notice of
    a circle of trained listeners compositions not to
    be heard at public entertainments, emerged from its
    privacy to give an ambitious concert last evening in
    the Metropolitan Opera House. The novelty chosen was
    Gustav Mahler’s Eighth Symphony, which recently had its
    first hearing in this country in Philadelphia.

    “When the huge symphonic and choral creation of Mr.
    Mahler was produced in Philadelphia, it was praised
    with emotion and thanksgiving, the interpretation was
    considered with reverence and rapture, and the concert
    had to be—or at any rate was—repeated several times.
    Upon the heels of this excitement, the whole show came
    to New York.

    “The entire cast, chorus, orchestra and conductor
    were brought across New Jersey. The Philadelphia
    Orchestra, numbering for this occasion 110 players; the
    Philadelphia Orchestra Chorus, a Children’s Chorus, the
    Philadelphia Choral Society, the Mendelssohn Club and
    the Fortnightly Club, constituted the choral forces.
    The presiding genius of all was Leopold Stokowski,
    the gifted and accomplished young conductor of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra.

            “NOT A BOX OFFICE SYMPHONY

    “Mahler’s Eighth Symphony quite properly belongs to
    the class of compositions sought by the Society of
    the Friends of Music. It does not court the attention
    of musical directors, who must consider the wishes of
    the general public or the demands of the box office.
    New Yorkers may regret that a local orchestra and
    local choruses were not chosen for the presentation
    of the work; but only by preparing for more than one
    performance could the projectors of this production
    have hoped to complete their undertaking without
    losses too heavy to confront. Mahler was not troubling
    himself with practical considerations when he wrote the
    composition. He had a purpose, which he carried out in
    the seclusion of his study. And if Hector Berlioz might
    write a requiem mass fit only for festival occasions,
    why not Mahler an Eighth Symphony?”

    “After the New York performance, W. J. Henderson
    said: “If Philadelphia believes that Mr. Stokowski is
    essential to her musical development, let her decline
    to permit him to conduct great concerts in New York.
    This is a piece of perfectly disinterested advice.

    “The _Sun’s_ musical chronicler would be delighted
    to see Mr. Stokowski a New York conductor. He has
    personality, force, authority, temperament, scholarship
    and imagination. His conducting of the Mahler Symphony
    was masterly. He would be a valuable factor in the
    musical life of New York.”

Although the Philadelphia Orchestra is a serious working organization,
it has its moments of relaxation and pleasure. Such a one was the
reception and dinner given by Mr. Van Rensselaer to the members of the
Mahler Chorus on March 16th, 1916, at which the following programme was
presented:

                          HORTICULTURAL HALL
                      BROAD STREET, PHILADELPHIA

                             PROGRAMME OF
                    MR. ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER’S
                             BUFFET DINNER

            Thursday Evening, March 16th, at Seven o’Clock
            Given to the Members of the Mahler Choruses and
                      the Philadelphia Orchestra
                             (dismembered)

                        Philadelphia Orchestra
                               Soloists

                     Horsecar Schwer!!! that’s all
                      Ham Byndler!! Solo-Killest

                               PROGRAMME


    Symphony “Ein Musikalischer Spass”             MOZART
                                             1787, German
                     Allegro
                     Minuetto Maestoso
                     Adagio cantabile
                     Presto

            (Ten Minutes Intermission at this Concert Only)

             Concerto Brosso (1916)       Composer unknown
             Probably an American, Philadelphian Preferred
                    (First time at these concerts)
                          Adagio
                          Andante Soustenuto
                          Large-o

             Tone Poem “Tausend Künstler”           Schreiner
             (Augmented Orchestra)        1850-1916, Bavarian

             Conductor             Sig ad Lib. RIDDEUS THATCH,
                                           _Actor-conductor_

    “Note—Owing to the exceptional acoustic properties of
    the Hall, the Audience is requested to refrain from
    hilarity as the slightest murmur might be disconcerting
    to the performers. It is earnestly requested by the
    ‘Damagement’ and the ‘Board of Erectors’ that all
    vegetable offerings and tokens be of a firm nature.

    “The personality of the orchestra will be found on
    the next page among the Programme notes composed by
    Professor YEPP.

           Yes, my dear! The Piano is a Steamway

    “The next ‘Mahler-ia’ concert will take place next week
    at 2 o’clock. Owing to the Philadelphia Blue-laws a
    very limited number of tickets will be available. The
    Knaben-chor will be heard to great advantage at this
    concert.
                         “ANDREW WHEEL-HER, _Secretary_”

                   SPECIAL MAHLERATE PROFUNNYGRAM
                         HORTICULTURAL HALL
                           March 16, 1916

                           PROGRAMME NOTES
    “Ein Musikalischer Spass”                        MOZART
                                       Born 1756, died 1791.

     “This symphony pictures Mozart in his most happy mood.
     Where he got his inspiration from I do not know. What a
     pity he cannot be with us tonight; he would surely have
     an inspiration. But who knows what kind!

     “The symphony, or, rather, first movement, opens with
     ‘_Some Chords_.’ However, they are in the key
     of ‘C’, so we are pretty safe. These opening chords
     are for the ‘FULL’ orchestra and are very
     effective, provided they are ’FULL ENOUGH.

       *       *       *       *       *

    “The second movement is a minuet. You will notice that
    there is three in a bar, but six in the orchestra, so
    you see we are at least mathematically even, which
    ought to insure a fine rhythm—SOMETIMES (?).
    There is much fervor in this movement and some wrong
    notes in the horns, but why worry; they are printed in
    the score, and are consequently correct.

       *       *       *       *       *

       “Tausend Künstler”                   Schreiner
                                             Bavarian
                  (First time in America)

    “This work really requires ‘more men,’ but Herr Schwer
    thinks he can handle it alone. The principal theme is
    of a martial and military nature. Mr. Schwer only had
    one rival, and that man died long ago. You will not
    have much difficulty in following Mr. Schwer, for in
    this work the performer is very much in evidence at all
    times. He is very familiar with all of the instruments
    required for this composition. He has ‘hit them’ very
    often and possesses an unusual amount of originalitye.
    ‘TO SEE IT IS TO APPRECIATE IT.’ Mr. Schwer
    will depict thunder claps, echoes, bombardments,
    combats, cavalry charges, charge accounts, railroad
    wrecks, and many other scenic effects while performing
    this work.”

       *       *       *       *       *

                  PERSONNEL OF ORCHESTRA

    “Mozart Symphony
                J. K. WITZEMANN, Schroon Lake, N. Y.
                F. W. COOK, Hampton Beach, N. H.
                EMIL HAHL, Willow Grove, Pa.
                LOUIS BOEHSE, Profile House, N. H.
                ANTON HORNER, Stone Harbor, N. J.
                JOSEPH HORNER, Tent City, Cal.
    “Conductors—(negotiations pending).”

This occasion was much enjoyed by about 1200 guests, to whom an evening
of musical fun was somewhat of a novelty.

After the production of the Mahler Symphony the Philadelphia Orchestra
became the most talked of orchestra in America. Its reputation was
made. This success, however, did not bring about any abatement in the
conductor’s zeal, or make him relinquish his aims for the perfection of
the orchestra.

On the part of the Board of Directors the result was a determination
to put the orchestra on a firm financial basis. This desire was so
great on the part of one of them, who wished to remain unknown, that he
planned a course of action which involved a large expenditure on his
part, but which with the co-operation of 1200 Philadelphians made it
possible to roll up in seven years a fund of approximately $800,000.




CHAPTER II

THE SEVEN YEAR ENDOWMENT FUND, 1916


The question of placing the Philadelphia Orchestra on a firm financial
foundation had been under consideration for a long time by the Board
of Directors. Each year the Guarantee Fund was becoming more difficult
to secure and more of a burden; besides which hand-to-mouth financing
is not a very creditable path to travel indefinitely. When these
discussions arose, the first question always was “How can we solicit
money for a permanent fund and beg for a Guarantee Fund at the same
time?” That question always ended against a blank wall. No answer
suggested itself until in May, 1916, Mr. Van Rensselaer received a
communication from a person who wished to remain unknown, so he later
received the title “Unknown Donor.”

The proposition was accepted by the Board and later by the Association,
and was issued in a circular of which a copy is printed below.


                 “ENDOWMENT FUND

    “TO THE FRIENDS OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA:

    “A friend of the Philadelphia Orchestra Association,
    who desires to remain unknown, has offered to meet
    any deficit of the Orchestra for each of five years,
    beginning with the season of 1916-1917.

    “The conditions under which this gift will become
    available are as follows:

    “1. That an Endowment Fund of $100,000 yearly for five
    years shall be created by the Orchestra Association, so
    that the total Fund may be $500,000 at the end of this
    period.

    “2. That the contract of the present conductor, Leopold
    Stokowski, shall be extended to cover this period of
    five years.

    “3. It is earnestly desired that each friend of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra will pledge a generous amount in
    order to create this Endowment Fund. Heretofore, all
    subscriptions to the Philadelphia Orchestra have been
    spent year by year, to meet the annual deficit. Under
    this offer the money now contributed will not be so
    spent, but will be invested to insure the permanency of
    the Orchestra as an institution of Philadelphia.

    “The Orchestra is a civic asset. If it is to fulfill
    its destiny and place Philadelphia in the front rank
    among the musical cities of the world, it must be
    endowed. In order to do this, the Orchestra Association
    must depend upon the generosity of its friends. We ask
    that the enclosed blank be signed and returned to us
    at your earliest opportunity. While it is hoped that
    all gifts may be for a period of five years, yearly
    contributions will be gratefully accepted. Payment of
    subscriptions will be on November 1st and March 1st of
    each year, beginning with November, 1916.

                                “ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                                 FRANCES A. WISTER
                                 EDWARD W. BOK
                                    _Endowment Committee_”

The way out was found—at least the beginning of the solution was in
sight.

The proposal was widely circulated and everybody connected with the
Association began to work to raise the amount, which was to reach
$500,000 in five years. This was later extended to seven years and now
bears the name of “Seven Year Endowment Fund.” All persons connected
with the Association threw themselves enthusiastically into the work of
fulfilling the agreement with the Unknown Donor.

A meeting was called of the four Women’s Committees and their
Auxiliaries, at the auditorium of the Curtis Building through the
courtesy of Mr. Bok; the plans were explained and met with a vigorous
response. The women were to raise money in two ways. One was to procure
five-year subscriptions of large sums. The other was to secure small
subscriptions by the Group Plan. This idea was suggested because the
business management could not arrange to take care of sums of less than
$25.00. The accumulation of such, therefore, was undertaken by the
women, with Mrs. Arnett as Chairman. This piece of work was as trying
as any ever entered upon, on account of the detail of keeping small
accounts yearly for so long a period.

A group might include any number of persons but the minimum amount for
each group could not be less than $25.00 yearly, for five years. The
sum of $14,632.00 was raised by seventy-nine Groups, including two
Junior Groups; but the most important feature of the plan was that it
secured the interest of a number of hundred people who would otherwise
have been deprived of the pleasure of assisting this cause. This was
of infinite value to the Association. To Group Captains, who kept up
their quotas of $25.00 yearly for five years, the orchestra owes much,
for members often had to be replaced. The Women’s Committees have long
acted on the principal that the active interest of many people was a
necessity in building up an orchestra, and never was their belief more
justified than at that time.

The work of the women was prosecuted with enthusiasm and the response
was remarkable, not only from Philadelphia, but from Pennsylvania towns
as far west as Harrisburg and in New Jersey as far south as Atlantic
City.

Other ways of raising money were resorted to, such as chains of card
parties, inaugurated by Mrs. John B. Thayer, Jr., whose own chain
amounted to $2870, and various entertainments and concerts given by
young people. These were necessarily gifts for one year and could not
be included in the required $100,000.

The amount including large subscriptions and groups collected by the
four Women’s Committees was a total for five years of $186,000, this
being twenty-five per cent of the Fund.

In November, 1916, it was announced that the amount guaranteed for
five years was over $500,000, more than stipulated under the contract
with the Unknown Donor. It was then decided to ask the contributors to
extend their yearly subscriptions two years longer, and many responded
heartily. The name was changed to Seven Year Endowment Fund, and in
1923, the total had reached $788,400. About twelve hundred individuals
contributed at this time, and through the groups over five hundred more.

The “Unknown Donor” disclosed himself in 1920, and proved to be Mr.
Edward W. Bok. The satisfaction was great of knowing at last the name
of this generous friend of music, who had enabled the Philadelphia
Orchestra to place itself on a firm foundation.




CHAPTER III

THE ORCHESTRA DURING THE WORLD WAR


One year after the offer of the Unknown Donor had been accepted by
the Board of Directors, the United States was in a state of war. The
condition of Europe during the past three years had in a way been
disturbing in orchestral circles, because no men could leave Europe
and players were scarce. Also, foreign men were called home, leaving
vacancies that were difficult to fill. Still, the orchestra had
flourished and continued to advance artistically under Mr. Stokowski’s
guiding hand.

In April, 1917, however, musical organizations in America were facing
a different and a serious situation. In everybody’s mind the questions
lingered and would not be put away: “How is the Philadelphia Orchestra
going to survive a war?” “Will there be any players, and will there
be any money for music?” Philadelphians spoke not these words aloud,
but they feared for the existence of the city’s most beloved art
organization.

In December, 1917, the four Women’s Committees were desirous of making
a patriotic demonstration with the orchestra, and at the suggestion of
Mrs. J. Sellers Bancroft, an American flag was presented at each of a
pair of concerts.

                          “PRESENTATION OF FLAG

        To the Philadelphia Orchestra Association by the Women’s
                Committees for the Philadelphia Orchestra
                          Presentation of Flag
                   MISS FRANCES A. WISTER, _President_
          The Women’s Committees for The Philadelphia Orchestra
    The audience is requested to join in singing the National Anthem:
                        The Star Spangled Banner
                                (1 verse)

     Acceptance of Flag for The Philadelphia Orchestra Association:
                MR. ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, _President_
                 The Philadelphia Orchestra Association
             Acceptance of Flag on behalf of the Orchestra:
                   MR. LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI, _Conductor_
         The audience is requested to join in singing ‘America’
                               (2 verses)”

_Ledger_, December 23rd, 1917:

    “Viewed in the light of all that has been written, said
    and done regarding the relation of the musical art and
    its interpreters to the war and the conception of the
    majority as to what constitutes patriotism, the public
    action of the Women’s Committee of the Philadelphia
    Orchestra last week, on December 14th and 15th, when
    their president, Miss Frances Wister, introduced by
    Alexander Van Rensselaer, president of the Philadelphia
    Orchestra Association, presented the orchestra with a
    flag which was accepted by Leopold Stokowski, seemed
    full of deepest significance. In presenting the flag,
    Miss Wister made a graceful little speech about the
    relation of patriotism and art and said, among other
    things:

    “‘In order to express our loyalty to our country’s
    cause and to the Association which we have fostered so
    long, and to testify to our belief in the necessity for
    music as a mighty inspiration, a profound solace during
    times of stress, we take pleasure in presenting to the
    Philadelphia Orchestra Association and to the Orchestra
    a flag.

    “‘This is the visible demonstration of the patriotism
    of this organization and of the Women’s Committees
    during our period of national peril.’

    “Both Mr. Van Rensselaer and Mr. Stokowski spoke words
    of appreciation of the Women’s Committees’ offering.
    The former read the resolutions adopted by the
    Association, and the most popular of musical leaders,
    Mr. Stokowski, on behalf of the orchestra announced
    that he and the men meant to give their services in
    a concert for the benefit of the American Red Cross,
    which statement naturally was greeted with responsive
    applause by the huge audience.

    “The remarks by which Mr. Stokowski declared the
    Orchestra’s loyalty to the United States were
    gracefully made, and his action necessarily was
    profoundly appreciated by his many friends and admirers
    whose numbers have already increased accordingly.

    “The ceremonies closed with two verses of ‘America’
    in which everyone joined heartily. The effect was
    thrilling. Many eyes were moist and many hearts were
    moved.

    “These are trying times that test men’s souls and
    it does not take much to force to the surface deep,
    pent-up emotions that long training had suppressed.”

       *       *       *       *       *

At a special meeting of the Board of Directors, December 13th, 1917,
the following Resolution was unanimously adopted:

    “WHEREAS the Women’s Committees for the
    Philadelphia Orchestra are presenting to the
    Philadelphia Orchestra Association and the Philadelphia
    Orchestra two American flags as an expression of the
    patriotic spirit animating their organization of two
    thousand women,

    “BE IT RESOLVED by the Board of Directors of
    the Philadelphia Orchestra Association in behalf of the
    fifteen hundred contributing members of the
    Association, that these flags be accepted in the
    spirit with which they are given, with the thanks of
    the Association, and that the management be instructed
    to display them on the stage of the Academy at each
    concert given by the Orchestra.

    “BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED by the Board of
    Directors, that it pledges the loyalty of the
    Association to the Government and people of the United
    States in this crisis in the affairs of the nation,
    and offers its services to be made use of in any way
    in which the Government of the United States may deem
    wise.”

The next patriotic demonstration was the concert at Camp Dix, N. J.

_Public Ledger_, January 3rd, 1918:

           “ORCHESTRA PLAYS FOR CAMP DIX MEN

         100 MUSICIANS UNDER LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI
                ENTERTAIN 3000 SOLDIERS

    “The Philadelphia Orchestra, led by Leopold Stokowski,
    aroused more than 3000 khaki-clad men here in the big
    Y. M. C. A. auditorium to outbursts of enthusiastic
    applause, when they concluded an entire Tschaikowsky
    programme, including the Symphony Pathétique, the
    famous ‘Nutcracker’ Suite, and the stirring overture
    Solennelle. The concert was made possible through the
    courtesy of the Philadelphia Orchestra Association.

    “The large auditorium was crowded to the doors with
    the privates in training for the National Army, while
    the officers occupied a square patch of seats in the
    center. Alexander Van Rensselaer, President of the
    Orchestra Association, and Edward Bok and Charles
    D. Hart, directors, were among the officials who
    accompanied the orchestra. With the party also was Noah
    Swayne of the Orpheus Club. The party arrived in Camp
    on a special train, and the musicians were escorted to
    the Y. M. C. A. hostess house and served a luncheon by
    society girls.

    “Mr. Van Rensselaer, Mr. Bok, Mr. Stokowski and Mr.
    Swayne were entertained at the division headquarters
    mess.

    “When Mr. Stokowski took his place at the stage, he was
    given an ovation, and throughout the four movements of
    the symphony, the men watched the discipline of the
    players with an interested eye.

    “The contrast of the dark evening suits of the
    orchestra with the mud-stained puttees and brown
    uniforms of the thousands of enlisted men formed a
    novel sight. One officer was overheard saying to
    another:

    “‘How would you like to be captain of those collective
    artistic temperaments?’

    “After the first movement of the symphony was ended in
    a crash of tympani, the same officer said:

    “‘Well, if we can train a million men of the National
    Army to such precision and such discipline as that, we
    will have no trouble in beating the Huns.’

    “During the intermission, the entire audience did
    a sort of ‘eyes right’ when a group picture of the
    concert was taken.”

Besides this concert, men in the service stationed at Philadelphia were
given many opportunities to enjoy the orchestra. Beginning in November,
1917, subscribers were requested through a notice in the programme to
send tickets that they could not use to the manager, to be placed at
the disposal of soldiers and sailors and it was a common sight to see
men in uniform at the Saturday evening concerts.

On January 23rd the promised Red Cross Concert was given at the
Metropolitan Opera House before a large audience. The affair was most
successful financially, the amount turned over being $7045.00.


LIBERTY LOANS

The subject of Liberty Loans was more and more occupying the public
mind and soon claimed the attention of musicians.

The first booth during the Third Liberty Loan of May, 1918, was in
front of 1427 Chestnut Street, and was presided over by Mr. and Mrs.
Stokowski on two Saturday mornings. A quartet of trombones from the
orchestra offered their services at the booth and attracted large
crowds. The result of these two mornings was $114,000.

During the next loan, the Fourth, the booth, which was a shell
dug-out in front of the Union League, was in charge of the four
Women’s Committees. For the first time in their existence the
Committees diverted their minds from the orchestra for a brief space
to participate in a patriotic act. This loan occurred at the time of
the influenza epidemic and the women who served did so at some risk.
No member, however, contracted the disease, or was the worse for the
experience.

The booth was open for two weeks only, but with the assistance of
members of the orchestra, the amount collected was $896,000.

When the Victory Loan was announced for May, 1919, the Women’s
Committees were asked to again take charge of a booth for three weeks
at the same place. Miss Frances A. Wister acted as Chairman for the
second time, and they were assisted by a Committee of Musicians from
the orchestra, when their engagements permitted; and a Committee from
the Business Management. Seventy-six members of the Women’s Committees
served during the Loan, as follows: Women’s Committee 27; Germantown
and Chestnut Hill, 13; West Philadelphia, 22; Media, Chester and West
Chester, 14. The total number of subscriptions received was 825,
amounting to $691,300.

This, added to the total of $896,000 for the Fourth Loan and that of
$114,000 at the Third Loan, made a grand total of $1,701,300.

Music at the booth was furnished without expense by members of the
Philadelphia Orchestra, and ten other well-known artists, including Mr.
David Bispham. Mr. Albert N. Hoxie gave a patriotic demonstration one
day, with a parade and a chorus of one thousand, and the First Regiment
Marine Corps Band.


THE TRIBUTE TREES

Another patriotic enterprise in which the Board of Directors and the
Women’s Committees took part was the planting of tribute trees in honor
of men in the service, on Fairmount Parkway, at the invitation of
the Civic Club of Philadelphia. Fifty-five trees were planted on the
Parkway at Twenty-second Street, and the Board and the Committees were
represented at the ceremonies on April 25th, 1919.

The Association did all in its power to assist in war time. Nearly
$300,000 of the Endowment Fund was invested in Liberty Loans. On
account of railroad congestion traveling was largely eliminated, but
this was the only American orchestra permitted to cross the Canadian
border, which journey was made for the Toronto Festival.

The audience was not allowed to forget the nation’s situation, as
Mr. Stokowski had at the first concert of the season inaugurated the
ceremony of playing the Star Spangled Banner, orchestrated by himself,
at the beginning of every concert, while the house stood. Later he
organized and led a band of nearly two hundred pieces at Franklin
Field, when funds were being raised for a special War Chest, and he did
the same for the Service Star parade.

Eight of the musicians went into the service.

To mark the signing of the Armistice, special ceremonies were held
at the concert of November 15th, 1918. Representatives of the Allied
Nations appeared on the stage with their flags while their national
anthems were played. The audience stood during the playing of
MacDowell’s “Dirge,” from the Indian Suite, which was played in memory
of those Americans who had died in the war.

When Philadelphia realized that the orchestra had survived in its
full strength and with little curtailment of its schedule, except for
out-of-town concerts, and the postponement of two pairs of Philadelphia
concerts on account of the epidemic, there was a sigh of gratitude.
After such labors to procure an orchestra for Philadelphia, its
abandonment would have been a tragedy and a calamity.




CHAPTER IV

THE TWENTIETH ANNIVERSARY

MILLION DOLLAR ENDOWMENT FUND, 1919


During the war the Seven Year Endowment Fund continued to be paid in
showing that Philadelphians were learning to prize what they had. But
the Board of Directors was now faced with another problem, the fact
that the increased cost of everything in life made it evident that even
the Seven Year Fund was going to be insufficient to meet the yearly
deficit. Mr. Edward W. Bok then suggested that the Association should
conduct a campaign to raise $1,000,000 during the month of October,
1919, in honor of the twentieth season of the Philadelphia Orchestra.
This was in January, 1919, and after the Board of Directors had decided
to take this bold step, a Campaign Committee was appointed by Mr. Van
Rensselaer, of which Mr. Bok was made chairman; in such fashion do
one’s sins return to one.

This Committee met at intervals during the winter, and Mr. Bok, fertile
in ideas, formulated his plan of action. This was to have a Committee
of Fifty Campaign Chairmen, men and women, each of whom should raise
$20,000. Luncheons were to be held twice each week during the month at
which reports were to be made. Chairmen having less than $2000 were
obliged to announce “No report.”

A circular was widely distributed in order to inform the public of the
plans of the Association.


“THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA ENDOWMENT CAMPAIGN

    “The next season of the Philadelphia Orchestra marks
    the Twentieth Anniversary. To mark this event, the
    people of Philadelphia will be asked to complete the
    Endowment Fund begun in 1915, which was interrupted by
    the war. For nineteen years, a group of Philadelphia
    men and women have sustained the annual deficit of the
    Orchestra. This group has maintained the Orchestra
    until it reached its present unquestioned position as
    the leading symphony orchestra in the United States.
    The Association now feels that the Philadelphia
    public should place the Orchestra, once for all, on
    a permanent financial basis. This can be done by
    completing the Endowment Fund.”

           “THE ENDOWMENT FUND AS IT STANDS

    “The present Endowment Fund consists of $500,000. In
    addition to this, there are pledges not yet matured
    which will bring the amount, within two years, to
    $800,000. Carefully invested, this total fund will
    insure the Orchestra a net income of approximately
    $36,000 a year. This is not sufficient to carry the
    annual deficit.

          “THE ORCHESTRA’S ANNUAL DEFICIT

      The cost of the Orchestra per season is   $304,000
      The income per season is                   238,000
      Last year’s deficit was, therefore          66,000

        “With increasing costs, the estimated deficit for
         future years will be $80,000.

      “WHAT THE COMPLETE ENDOWMENT FUND WILL MEAN

    “To the present Endowment Fund, therefore, must be
    added ONE MILLION DOLLARS. This would mean
    an estimated income of $81,000, on a total fund of
    $1,800,000.

    “It is this additional

                     One Million Dollars

    that it is now proposed to ask the Philadelphia public
    to subscribe.

      “It should be borne in mind that not a penny of this
      amount is spent; all is permanently invested, and
      only the interest therefrom is used to maintain the
      Orchestra.

                  “WHERE THE MONEY GOES

    “93 cents out of every dollar of income is spent on the
    Orchestra; put back into the Orchestra, in other words,
    in order to increase its efficiency:

    Salaries of Orchestra members                 55.61%
    Expense of rentals, etc., of concerts at
       Philadelphia and out-of-town               34.61%
    Miscellaneous expenses (Orchestra music,
       insurance, etc.)                            2.78%
    Administration expenses                        7.00%

      “THE SMALLNESS OF THE ORCHESTRA DEFICIT

    “The annual deficit of the Philadelphia Orchestra of
    $66,000 is one of the smallest of any of the large
    symphony orchestras of the United States. These
    deficits average from $85,000 to $125,000 per year. And
    yet, with one exception, the Philadelphia Orchestra is
    the largest symphony orchestra in number of musicians,
    in the United States, and plays a longer season.

       “THE DETAILS OF THE CAMPAIGN TO RAISE
                 ONE MILLION DOLLARS

    “It will begin October 1st, 1919, and continue
     throughout the month.

    “The amount to be raised is One Million Dollars.

    “There will be 50 Committees, each Committee to raise a
     minimum of $20,000.

    “These 50 Committees will be under the general
     chairmanship of Dr. Charles D. Hart.

    “The headquarters will be, during October, at the Hotel
     Ritz-Carlton, Broad and Walnut Streets.

    “The territory for the campaign will include the
     counties of Philadelphia, Montgomery, Delaware, Chester
     and Bucks.

    “Pledges will be payable in cash (much preferred) or
     50% payable January 1, 1920, and 50% payable May 1st,
     1920.

    “The Depository for the Fund will be Messrs. Drexel &
     Company, to whom all checks should be drawn.

    “All pledges should be delivered to Dr. Charles D.
     Hart, or Miss Frances A. Wister, at the Ritz-Carlton
     Headquarters.

      “THE ENDOWMENT CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE
                   EDWARD W. BOK, _Chairman_
                   JOHN F. BRAUN
                   SAMUEL S. FELS
                   DR. CHARLES D. HART
                   EFFINGHAM B. MORRIS
                   ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                   MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                   CHARLTON YARNALL

             _General Chairman of Committees_
                   DR. CHARLES D. HART”

Mr. Joseph E. Widener provided the Campaign Headquarters in the
Ritz-Carlton Hotel where an office force was installed and the
bi-weekly luncheons held.

Dr. Hart worked hard to procure the fifty Chairmen and fifty-three
people consented to serve, but some dropped by the wayside. At the
opening campaign luncheon, on September 29th, 1919, there were in
actual service only forty-two. As was to be expected, some collected
more than their quotas and some less. Women chairmen predominated,
there being twenty-eight of these to fourteen men. Their names should
be recorded.

CHAIRMEN

Messrs. Edward W. Bok, John F. Braun, Charles D. Hart, Henry McKean
Ingersoll, Alexander Van Rensselaer and Andrew Wheeler of the Board of
Directors; and from outside, Messrs. Henry G. Brengle, W. W. Fry, J. B.
Henkels, Jr., George I. Bodine, G. H. Lang, Maurice Speiser, Herbert J.
Tily and Wm. Jay Turner.

WOMEN CHAIRMEN

Mrs. Alfred Reginald Allen, Mrs. Wm. W. Arnett, Mrs. Thomas G. Ashton,
Mrs. Charles Carver, Mrs. Herbert L. Clark, Mrs. Matthew H. Cryer,
Mrs. Joseph M. Gazzam, Mrs. Charles W. Henry, Mrs. Henry S. Jeanes,
Miss Lea, Mrs. Joseph Leidy, Mrs. Wm. S. Newcomet, Mrs. Thomas Robins,
Countess of Santa Eulalia, Mrs. Wm. A. Slaughter, Mrs. John B. Thayer,
3rd., Mrs. L. Howard Weatherly, Miss F. A. Wister, Mrs. Harold E.
Yarnall and Mrs. Camille Zeckwer, all members of the Women’s Committees.

In addition to these women, able assistance was given by Mrs A. J.
Dallas Dixon, Mrs. L. Chandler Williams, and six women who had not up
to this time been connected with the Philadelphia Orchestra, except as
enthusiastic patrons. These were Mrs. Frederic W. Abbott, in charge
of the Matinee Musicale Club Committee, Mrs. Frank T. Griswold, Mrs.
Joseph N. Snellenburg, Mrs. John B. Thayer, Mrs. J. William White, and
the Motor Messenger Service under Mrs. Thomas L. Elwyn.

The Germantown and Chestnut Hill and the Media, Chester and West
Chester Committees acted under their own presidents. The work of this
committee under Mrs. Cryer and that of Mrs. Wm. A. Slaughter in West
Jersey deserve special mention on account of the distances covered.

                   SYNOPSIS OF THE RESULTS:

    Twenty members of the four Women’s Committees,
      as individual chairmen                            $396,292.36
    Women Chairmen outside of Women’s Committees         191,832.55
                                                        -----------
      Total for 28 Women Chairmen                       $588,124.91

This was 53% of the Fund, but the women Chairmen were two to one
against the men.

Besides the collections made by the Committee of Fifty, amounts came
in from other sources, such as, members of the Philadelphia Orchestra
Chorus, the Van Rensselaer Tribute, the two Wister Tributes, the Van
Rensselaer-Bok Telegram to business firms, the Telephone Circular, the
Main Line Bonds, other Liberty Bonds, contributions received at the
office, etc.

A unique feature of the campaign was the memorials and tributes which
gave people an opportunity to place the names of family or friends on
special tablets to be placed in the Academy of Music. No less than
$1000 was accepted for each memorial.


                   MEMORIALS AND TRIBUTES
                             in
          THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA ENDOWMENT FUND
                            1919

    MEMORIALS TO THE FALLEN IN THE WORLD WAR
    MAJOR ALFRED REGINALD ALLEN, U. S. A.
    THE AMERICAN HEROES IN THE GREAT WAR, UNKNOWN AND UNSUNG
    LIEUTENANT MORTIMER P. CRANE, B. A.
    LIEUTENANT WILLIAM BOULTON DIXON, U. S. A.
    ENSIGN GEORGE B. EVANS, JR., U. S. N. Air Service
    LIEUTENANT ROBERT H. GAMBLE, U. S. A.
    LIEUTENANT WILLIAM B. KUEHN, U. S. A.
    LIEUTENANT PAUL BORDA KURTZ, U. S. A.
    RALPH LESLIE MELVILLE, B. A.
    MAJOR TALBOT MERCER PAPINEAU, M. C.
    CORPORAL ABRAM K. STREET, U. S. A.
    LIEUTENANT ARTHUR RICHMOND TABER, U. S. A.
    MEMBERS OF STRAWBRIDGE & CLOTHIER CHORUS
    ARTHUR HOWELL WILSON, U. S. A.
    TWELVE PHILADELPHIA BOY SCOUT HEROES

               TRIBUTES OF THANKSGIVING
                for the safe return of

    LIEUTENANT WILLIAM CURTIS BOK, U. S. N.
    HAMILTON DISSTON CARPENTER, U. S. A.
    LIEUTENANT LEONARD E. POWELL
    LIEUTENANT SYDNEY THAYER, JR., U. S. M. C.
    LIEUTENANT GEORGE BOWEN, U. S. M. C.
    JOHN FREDERICK SIEBERLING, U. S. A.
    HAROLD FRANCIS WESTON, B. A.

       PERSONAL MEMORIALS AND APPRECIATIONS
                  In Memory of

    JOSEPHINE L. S. ADAMS        G. MARTIN BRILL
    BLANCHE BALDWIN              RICHARD VAUX BUCKLEY
    BEULAH HECKER BANCROFT       WILLIAM BURNHAM
    GEORGE BARRIE                LOIS BUCHANAN CASSATT
    MAUDE ECKERT BENSON          WILLIAM T. CARTER
    RUDOLPH BLANKENBURG          FREDERICK TAYLOR CHANDLER
    JOSEPH B. BLOODGOOD          MRS. ANNA L. COMEGYS
    MARY FRANCES BLOODGOOD       RICHARD Y. COOK
    SIEKE GERTRUDE BOK           HUGH CRAIG, JR.
    ELIZABETH S. BRAUN           MICHAEL H. CROSS
    LOUIS BRÉGY                  CHARLES HOWE CUMMINGS
    ARTHUR BROCK                 HARRY K. CUMMINGS
    CHARLES HALL BROCK           LOUISE KNAPP CURTIS

    EDWARD TONKIN DOBBINS        RICHARD ROSSMÄSSLER
    FRANKLIN DUANE               EDWARD COLLIN ROSSMÄSSLER
    GEORGE W. ELKINS             JOHN C. SCHAEFER
    ADAM H. FETTEROLF, LL. D.    FRITZ SCHEEL
    SIMON B. FLEISHER            MRS. FRANCIS SCHROEDER
    ROBERT H. FOERDERER          MRS. WILLIAM SIMPSON, JR.
    REV. FREDERIC GARDINER       HENRY M. STEEL
    DR. W. W. GILCHRIST          JOHN M. STEFFAN
    ANNE STARR GRISCOM           JOHN B. STETSON
    HARRY B. HALL                DR. REUEL STEWART
    JOHN WILLIAM HALLAHAN, 3RD   WILLIAM STOLL, JR.
    GEORGE W. HARRAH             ROLAND LESLIE TAYLOR, JR.
    THOMAZINHA E. HARRAH         ARCHIBALD GRAHAM THOMSON
    MARIA AMES HARTE             FRANK THOMSON
    SARAH KENT HOW               JAMES TILY
    MAX LIVINGSTON               S. LETITIA TILY
    HARRIET ANNE LUCAS           EDWARD K. TRYON, JR.
    MABEL ELEANOR MCCAHAN        ALICE DOUGLAS TURNER
    JOHN R. MCDOWELL             ISABEL G. WALKER
    HENRY J. MARIS               FREDERICK WEBER
    DR. CHARLES MOHR             J. WILLIAM WHITE, M. D.
    JOHN PAUL MORRIS             ELEANOR MERCER VANDERBILT
    JOHN THOMPSON MORRIS         WILLIAM F. VACHE
    HARLAN PAGE                  MARY CHANNING WISTER
    RIEHLÉ MEMORIAL FUND         WILLIAM BREWSTER WOOD
    HELEN HAMILTON ROBINS        HAROLD ELLIS YARNALL
    THEODORE ROOSEVELT

                   IN APPRECIATION OF
    EDWARD W. BOK                ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
    LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI            FRANCES ANNE WISTER
    OLGA STOKOWSKI

[Illustration: ENDOWMENT FUND MEMORIAL TABLET]

Miss Wister’s name was placed on the tablet by the contribution of
two large amounts, one from the Women’s Committee and one from the
Auxiliary.

The tablets beautifully designed by Mr. Paul Cret, the noted architect,
are placed on each side of the entrance to the inner lobby.

The delightful luncheons held bi-weekly instilled in the workers much
enthusiasm and were attended by from 300 to 400 people each time. At
these the following well-known public and private individuals and
artists appeared, all giving freely of their time and often of their
money to help the great cause:

Miss Margaret Anglin, Mr. David Bispham, Mrs. A. J. Cassatt, Mrs.
Edward H. Coates, Mr. Cyrus H. K. Curtis, Mr. Walter Damrosch, Mrs.
Minnie Maddern Fiske, Sir Johnston Forbes-Robertson, Mr. Walter
Hampden, Dr. John Grier Hibben, Mr. Josef Hofmann, Miss Estelle Hughes
(Winner of Stokowski Medal), Mr. Sascha Jacobinoff, Mr. Otto H. Kahn,
Mr. Hans Kindler, Rabbi Krauskopf, Mme. Matzenauer, Miss Violet Oakley,
Judge Patterson, Bishop Rhinelander, Dr. Thaddeus Rich, Mme. Samaroff,
Mr. Oscar Schwar and a group of men from the orchestra.

The thrill of these occasions will never be forgotten by the
campaigners. Only those who participated can have any idea of the
enthusiasm and excitement prevailing among the workers who eagerly
awaited the reports. After speeches and music of a very delightful
nature, the chairmen were called by name and saw their totals written
on a large black-board. Many of them went to bed the night before with
nothing in their pockets and arrived at headquarters in the morning to
find their able assistants had brought in the required two thousand and
more. It is marvellous that Mr. Bok could, besides running a campaign,
manage such brilliant affairs as these were, twice each week. It was no
unusual sight to see four hundred men and women come in exhausted and
discouraged, and go forth with renewed vigor to beg money. The spirit
of excitement ran through it all, for raising money is as uncertain as
gambling in that the pursuer never knows when he accosts a victim what
the outcome will be, large, small, or nothing, and many surprises were
experienced. The competition was great, for Mr. Bok had offered $1,000
each to the first ten committees to raise their quotas.

The Officers and Directors and the members of the Women’s Committees
and their Auxiliaries swarmed at the Ritz. Over it all was the
influence of Mr. Van Rensselaer, with a courteous and cheerful word for
all the harassed.

             _Philadelphia Press_, September 28th, 1919:

    “400 ENLISTED FOR CAMPAIGN TO SAVE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA.

         VOLUNTEER WORKERS WILL RECEIVE FINAL INSTRUCTIONS
                   AT RITZ-CARLTON LUNCHEON TOMORROW

                     $1,000,000 FUND THE GOAL

                FAILURE MAY MEAN LOSS TO CITY OF ASSET
                        OF INCALCULABLE VALUE

      “Musical Philadelphia is watching with a great deal of
      interest and anxiety, the movement on foot to ‘make
      the Philadelphia Orchestra safe for Philadelphia’ by
      raising the endowment of $1,000,000, for otherwise,
      it has been announced that this organization must be
      seriously curtailed in its activities.”

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ENDOWMENT FUND MEMORIAL TABLET]

    “Many cities sustaining an orchestra are greatly aided
    by the work and philanthropy of one or two men, but in
    the case of the Philadelphia Orchestra, the burden of
    making up the yearly deficit is distributed among a
    number of people.

    “The Committee of fifty Chairmen who will meet tomorrow
    at the ‘get-together luncheon’ are each pledged to turn
    in for his Committee a sum of $20,000. Each Chairman
    has a group of co-workers, including prominent social
    and philanthropic leaders of this city.

               ORCHESTRA’S VALUE TO CITY

    “The campaign to save the Orchestra for Philadelphia
    has set loose a flood tide of arguments as to the
    value of this organization to the city’s life. To
    business men the argument that the Philadelphia
    Orchestra is a great advertisement to the city will
    make the strongest appeal, while to the great number
    of people interested in the artistic life of the city
    the argument that its pre-eminent place in the world
    of music merits their greatest support will naturally
    serve to stir them to action.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “The realization that the possession of an orchestra
    of high standing is a great commercial as well as a
    great civic asset to a city, has caused a number of
    cities to build up an organization similar to the one
    Philadelphia already possesses.”

       *       *       *       *       *

             RANKS WITH WORLD’S BEST

    “By a most consistent plan of development under the
    direction of Alexander Van Rensselaer, the Philadelphia
    Orchestra, now in its twentieth year, has earned the
    reputation of being ‘the first orchestra in America.’
    No less a critic than H. T. Parker, of Boston, writing
    in the Boston _Transcript_ says, ‘there can no
    longer be any doubt that the Philadelphia Orchestra is
    today the first of all American orchestras. In fact, it
    may be said now to rank among the five great orchestral
    organizations in the world.’ Mr. Ossip Gabrilowitsch,
    famous no less as a conductor than a pianist, says that
    ‘it is now a most important factor in the musical life
    of this country, and has set a standard of excellence
    which all other symphony orchestras in America, no
    matter how famous, must bear in mind, if they wish to
    maintain their places in the front rank.’”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Under Stokowski the Orchestra has made a rapid step
    forward. The first performance in America of the Mahler
    Symphony, using a chorus of over one thousand singers,
    made the whole country ‘sit up.’”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “One element that the committee in charge of this
    endowment fund campaign must combat, is the confidence
    that the $1,000,000 can be easily raised. This is
    unpsychological. This same notion has frequently
    spoiled some of the best organized campaigns for
    endowing other worthy institutions in this city.”

The publicity for the campaign was brilliantly conceived and executed
by Mr. Bok.

In the spring “The Orchestra News” began to appear monthly, with
the idea of making the story of the organization much more widely
known than it had heretofore been. Its pages were “instructive and
entertaining” as the expression was in old times. So were the various
folders and leaflets sent out during the campaign itself. Persons of
importance in the business world helped with the publicity as well as
with large contributions.

                    “THE ORCHESTRA NEWS

    “PUBLISHED EVERY ONCE IN A WHILE IN THE INTERESTS OF
                 THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA AT THE
              PENNSYLVANIA BUILDING, PHILADELPHIA

               “WHY I CAME TO PHILADELPHIA

    “BECAUSE—America was fast becoming (and has since completely
    become) the great music-making country of the world.

    “BECAUSE—Fritz Scheel (with his instinct for choosing exactly the
    right artist for each position in the orchestra) had laid the
    foundation of a wonderful orchestra. Since then many fine artists
    have been added but the main structure of the personnel remains as
    Scheel created it.

    “BECAUSE—I felt in Philadelphia the existence of a warm hearted
    and genuinely music-loving public which I believed would grow.
    This it has done amazingly in the last few years.

    “It is my ardent hope that this development will continue, and
    that we may soon welcome among us the great number of music lovers
    in Philadelphia, who have not yet come to us.
                                                     “LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI”

           “TO THE BUSINESS MEN OF PHILADELPHIA

    “We are convinced that the Philadelphia Orchestra
    is entitled to the support of the business men of
    Philadelphia. The Orchestra is now the leading symphony
    orchestra in the United States, and has become a
    distinct civic asset of signal value to Philadelphia.
    The impression made by the Orchestra in the largest
    cities in America which it visits and where it plays
    before 100,000 persons during each season has been
    proven to be of the most pronounced advertising value
    to our city. To place this Orchestra on a permanent
    financial basis such as the Endowment Fund of One
    Million Dollars now asked will accomplish, is a
    distinct investment for the business interests of the
    city. To compel so valuable a municipal asset to be
    discontinued for lack of this fund cannot be considered.

    “We ask, therefore, that the business men of Philadelphia will
      join us in the support of the Orchestra in this campaign.

               “SAMUEL REA             “W. W. ATTERBURY
                EFFINGHAM B. MORRIS     E. PUSEY PASSMORE
                JOHN GRIBBEL            JOHN H. MASON
                SAMUEL T. BODINE        JAMES CROSBY BROWN
                SAMUEL M. VAUCLAIN      SAMUEL S. FELS
                CYRUS H. K. CURTIS      ELLIS A. GIMBEL
                WILLIAM A. LAW          WILLIAM P. GEST”

                       “WE DO IT IN NEW YORK
                          By OTTO H. KAHN

    “A business man should realize that he makes a definite
    investment, yielding interest to him and to his city in
    civic and business advantage, when he supports a worthy
    art organization in his community.

    “In New York we have come more and more to realize the
    value, the merit and the obligation of such investments.

    “The Metropolitan Opera, for instance, and our several
    symphony concert organizations were started and have
    always been and are now being supported financially by
    business men.

    “These and similar art enterprises have become not
    only genuine assets in the lives of the people who
    support and patronize them, but distinct and profitable
    business assets to the city.

    “Of late, another organization, the Philadelphia
    Orchestra, has entered into friendly and successful
    rivalry with the old-established symphonic
    organizations of New York.

    “The public and press of New York are one in
    acknowledging gladly and cordially that Philadelphia
    has now in its Orchestra, under its eminent leader, one
    of the greatest organizations of the kind in the United
    States, or, indeed, anywhere.

    “Its visits to New York are welcomed and looked forward to.

    “It has taken an honored place in the musical life of
    New York.

    “In what it has achieved, it has served and proclaimed
    Philadelphia.

    “It carries the message of Philadelphia wherever it
    appears: a high and fine message of credit and renown
    to the city which gave it being and supports it.

    “The civic value and the business value of the
    investment which is represented by the Philadelphia
    Orchestra are definite and great.

    “The eminent position and conspicuous reputation which
    it has attained are assets of great price to its home city.

    “The business men of Philadelphia should take pride in
    coming forward unhesitatingly and generously to the
    full support of the splendid musical organization which
    bears the name and enhances the fame of Philadelphia.
                                              “OTTO H. KAHN.”

The newspaper publicity was very fine and the programme books were
also pressed into service, to further the campaign. Mr. Bok’s and Mr.
Stokowski’s clever appeals kept the subject well in the minds of the
audiences during that month by the following appeals:

                     “A PERSONAL INVITATION

    “Much as we would like to do so, we cannot naturally
    reach personally every resident of Philadelphia for
    their contribution to the Million Dollar Endowment Fund
    to save the Philadelphia Orchestra.

    “In case we have not reached you, will you regard this
    as a personal invitation to help in our efforts to save
    our beautiful Orchestra by filling in the blank below
    and mailing it to the address given?

    “Please remember that not a penny of your money will
    be spent: every dollar is carefully invested, and
    will work year in and year out, for all time, only
    the interest being used to pay the expenses of the
    Orchestra. Your subscription, therefore, is a legacy to
    yourself, your children, the Orchestra and the city.

    “THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA ENDOWMENT CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Programme, October 17th, 1919:

          “A PERSONAL MESSAGE FROM MR. STOKOWSKI

    “We are facing two possibilities today:
        “One: Shall we continue the Orchestra as it is?
        “The other: Shall we reduce it?
        “Let me tell you exactly what these two things mean,
         so that we will know exactly what we are leading to.

    “Suppose we reduce the orchestra: which we must do if
    we do not raise this Endowment Fund. That means that
    your first men in the orchestra, the chiefs of each
    section, would not remain, because there are orchestras
    being formed all over the country now, and these
    orchestras will naturally take away the splendid first
    men that we have in our Orchestra.

    “You would naturally have to replace those men with
    second-class men. You would have to do this because the
    relation of supply and demand of orchestral players
    is tremendously intense. There is far more demand
    than there is supply of really great players. Having
    second-class men in those positions—I must speak
    frankly to you now—you would have a second-class
    orchestra.

    “Now, whoever you have for conductor cannot possibly
    give you really first-quality results if he has a
    second-quality orchestra. That is impossible.

    “Then you could not allow such an orchestra to go
    outside of Philadelphia. You could not permit a
    second-class orchestra bearing the name of the city to
    travel to the West, to New York, Washington, Baltimore,
    Pittsburgh, Toronto, and the various places where we
    play. It would be too much to our shame. We could not
    do it. So all the tours would have to be cut out.

    “In Philadelphia itself we should not be able to give
    concerts of the first quality, and you would naturally
    become dissatisfied. And after these second-rate
    concerts had gone on for one or two seasons, you would
    say to yourself, this must stop; we must have again an
    orchestra like what we used to have; we must have a
    first-class orchestra. You would begin all over again
    to rebuild your Orchestra once more, and do you realize
    how long it takes to build or rebuild an orchestra?

    “Do you realize that it took me personally all the
    seven years that I have been in Philadelphia to get
    three first-class artists for just one section of
    the Orchestra? And you have ninety-seven men in your
    Orchestra! That gives you just an idea of the work
    involved.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Will Philadelphia give its Orchestra its needed fund,
    avoid the calamity I have tried to outline and let the
    Orchestra go on as it is, and as the generations go
    on, and we go from this life, we will have the feeling
    that its influence will go on; that it will accumulate
    tradition; that it will go on maturing; and that it
    will become more and more beautiful.
                                  “LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI.”

    “P. S. In the above I have tried to tell you what must
    happen if the Orchestra fails to secure the Endowment
    Fund for which it asks.

    “In the programme for next week’s concerts, I want to
    tell you what will happen if we do get the Fund; the
    plan that we have so long had in mind for the Orchestra
    and Philadelphia.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “TO THE FRIENDS OF
     THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA

    “We have reason to believe that it is in the hearts of
    a number of the friends of the Philadelphia Orchestra
    to leave a legacy in their wills to the Orchestra.
    Appreciative as we are of this beautiful thought on
    the part of these friends, we hope we may not be
    misunderstood if we suggest the thought that were such
    legacies now given to the Endowment Fund when the
    Orchestra stands at the cross-roads of its career, and
    when the next fortnight must determine its continuance
    or its dissolution, the service rendered would be
    greater than may be possible at any other period in
    its history. If ever the Orchestra has need of the
    kindliest thoughts of its friends it is at this time
    when the prestige of this superb organization may be
    maintained, its present excellence continued, and its
    strength conserved: when it is here to support and when
    the generosity of those who believe in it can save it
    and make it the permanent institution of Philadelphia
    that it deserves and should be.”

       *       *       *       *       *

              Programme, October 24th-25th, 1919:

    “It is not a campaign-slogan: it is the truth when we say:

                   SAVE THE ORCHESTRA

    “If the Endowment Fund fails, this will be the last
    season that the Orchestra can remain at its present
    strength of excellence.

    “Is that to be your gift to it on its twentieth
    birthday?”

          “WHAT WILL HAPPEN IF WE SUCCEED
                By LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI

    “In last week’s programme I tried to tell you how we
    would have to curtail the Philadelphia Orchestra, if we
    failed to get the Endowment Fund for which we are all
    striving; how we would have to let our best artists go;
    how we would, for very shame, stop traveling to other
    cities because we had a second-class orchestra. All
    this is absolute.

    “Just as absolute, however, is the other side of the
    picture if Philadelphia will give its Orchestra this
    fund.

    “We would naturally not only continue the Orchestra as
    it is, but we would go on developing it every season to
    a higher quality, for in art there is no end, since, as
    soon as you reach the horizon which you saw a year ago,
    new horizons appear and new fields of beauty. The end
    never comes, because you are never satisfied; that is
    the wonderful thing about art.

    “Let us in Philadelphia go forward; not backward! Let
    us carry this fund through.

       *       *       *       *       *

    “We are not asking for a fund that is raised and
    spent. Not a penny of the Million Dollars is to be
    spent; every dollar is to be invested and put away.
    Twenty, thirty, forty years from now it will still be
    there, always working, bearing interest. And only this
    interest is to be spent.

    “Is this not a good investment for yourself, your
    children and your city?

    “Upon this twentieth anniversary I plead for this
    birthday gift to the Orchestra.
                                  “LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI.”

The appeal sent to telephone subscribers ran as follows:

         “THE PRESENT YOU CAN MAKE WITH TWO DOLLARS
                 FOR YOURSELF AND CHILDREN

    “A handful of people, for nineteen years, have paid
    all the bills of the Philadelphia Orchestra; until now
    the foremost artists and the leading music critics
    have proclaimed it to be the greatest orchestra in the
    United States, and one of the five great orchestras of
    the world.

    “The expense of the orchestra is now too great for a
    few to continue to pay. This year the orchestra will
    be twenty years old, and, as a birthday present, it is
    now asked that the people of Philadelphia, as a whole,
    will make the orchestra permanent by completing its
    Endowment Fund, each contributing only two dollars,
    making it in a true sense the orchestra of the people.

       YOUR TWO DOLLARS WILL NEVER BE SPENT

    “It will be carefully invested, and only the interest
    used for the Orchestra. Your gift is, therefore, one
    for all the years to come: a permanent gift to a
    permanent institution.”

In December two concerts were given for these contributors who numbered
several thousand.

When October 31st arrived and the million dollars was neither in hand
nor in sight, the campaign was extended for one week. The appeals
became more and more urgent.

Programme October 31st, November 1st.

         “FOR LACK OF HELP THE CAMPAIGN MAY FAIL!

    “Owing to a lack of sufficient workers, the Million
    Dollars necessary for the proper Endowment of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra has not been raised.

    “Tired, but full of courage, those who are working have
    decided to extend the campaign for another week.

    “Campaigns usually fail because the money cannot be
    had. Here the money is in sight, but the friends of the
    Orchestra have not come forth in sufficient numbers to
    collect the funds.

    “Is the campaign to fail for this unusual reason?

    “Will you not, man or woman, give a day, two days of
    this extra week to help us collect the last $250,000
    necessary to complete the fund?

    “You cannot, at this time, render a greater service to
    the Orchestra. You can, at this most critical time, do
    your part to

                 SAVE THE ORCHESTRA.”

       *       *       *       *       *

                 “WILL YOU NOT?

    “May we ask you, as a final appeal for the Orchestra,
    to give to it
               JUST ONE LIBERTY BOND
    of any denomination, as your contribution to save the
    Orchestra for yourself and the city at this critical
    time in its history?

    “Whether you have given previously or not, will you not
    do this one more act?

    “The Bond you give will not be sold: it will not be
    spent. Not a penny of it. It will be put away under a
    Deed of Trust, and only the interest on it will be used
    to maintain the Orchestra.

    “Could you put a Bond in a better, more permanent
    place?”

                 “FACE TO FACE
    “We now stand face to face with the question whether
    our Orchestra is to be preserved as it is or reduced to
    a second-class orchestra.

    “The Million Dollars necessary for its preservation
    have not been raised.

    “The campaign will, accordingly, be extended for one
    week.

    “But the question, after all, is—Will you give? Will
    you help?

    “We need some $250,000 more.

    “The workers have done their best. Hundreds of the
    friends of the Orchestra have not done their part as
    yet. Less than 5000 have contributed!

    “Is the truth clearly realized without the mincing
    of words: If this remaining sum is not raised, the
    Orchestra must be reduced; it cannot remain the
    glorious thing it is today.”

        “THE TRUTH IS SIMPLE AND DIRECT
    “We must tear down the beautiful Orchestra that has
    been so patiently and skilfully built up unless the
    Million Dollar Endowment Fund is raised. Only one week
    remains in which to do it. Whatever that tells is the
    answer.”

Finally the goal was won and the event was celebrated by a great dinner
at which there was much enthusiasm and rejoicing, when it was announced
that $1,100,000 had been contributed.

The twenty-eight women Chairmen expressed their appreciation of Mr.
Bok’s leadership in the following letter, which was read:

          “PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA ASSOCIATION
                   COMMITTEE OF FIFTY

    “EDWARD BOK, ESQ., _Chairman_,
       Twentieth Anniversary Endowment Fund Campaign Committee

    “Dear Mr. Bok:
       “The Women Chairmen of the Committee of Fifty desire
     to express their appreciation of your leadership as
     Chairman of the Twentieth Anniversary Endowment Fund
     Campaign for the Philadelphia Orchestra.

     “The luncheons alone, as arranged and presided over by
     you, have been the most unique and inspiring series of
     affairs ever conducted in Philadelphia. But these have
     been only a part of your labors and a detail in the
     large plans which you have undertaken and carried out.

     “We thank you for your unfailing courtesy toward us
     and for your words of encouragement at moments when
     the result of the battle seemed to be in doubt. Your
     imagination and enthusiasm have led us to victory and
     it has been a pleasure to co-operate with you in the
     important work of placing the Philadelphia Orchestra on
     a permanent foundation.

                  Yours sincerely,
                        (Signed)

     HELEN WARREN ALLEN        KATHARINE E. NEWCOMET
     ELIZABETH H. ARNETT       MARIE R. ROBINS
     MARY L. H. ASHTON         COUNTESS OF SANTA EULALIA
                                             per E. V. W.
     MARETTA VERNON CARVER     IRENE H. SNELLENBURG
     ELIZABETH CONWAY CLARK    FLORENCE LEWIS SLAUGHTER
     MARTHA G. CRYER           MARIAN M. THAYER
     MARGARETTA S. DIXON       LOIS C. THAYER
     NELLIE ANDREWS GAZZAM     CAROLINE CLARK WEATHERLY
     ALICE GRISWOLD            LETITIA WHITE
     SALLIE HOUSTON HENRY      LOUISE CHANDLER WILLIAMS
     CORA BAIRD JEANES         FRANCES ANNE WISTER
     NINA LEA                  ADÈLE G. YARNALL
     HELEN C. LEIDY            HORTENSE L. ZECKWER

                  Matinee Musical Club,
                  CLARA BARNES ABBOTT, _Chairman_
                  Motor Messenger Service,
                  NATALIE J. ELWYN, _Chairman_
     Victory Dinner, Philadelphia
     November 10th, 1919.”

The campaign under the able leadership of Mr. Bok was inspiring and
exciting to a degree. He gave time and money, but best of all, he
gave ideas, and he proved himself an accomplished beggar and a clever
general.

The Association was not unmindful of his masterly achievement. At
a meeting of the Board of Directors held November 26th, 1919, this
resolution was passed:

    “WHEREAS the Directors of the Philadelphia
    Orchestra Association recognize that the splendid
    services of Mr. Edward Bok, Chairman of the Campaign
    Committee of the Philadelphia Orchestra Endowment Fund,
    were largely responsible for the triumphant success of
    the Campaign,

    “BE IT RESOLVED that the Directors of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra Association place on record such
    belief, and, further, their appreciation of the energy,
    resourcefulness and self-sacrificing devotion with
    which he led the Campaign to success, together with a
    real expression of their regard for him.”

Also this one passed at the Annual Meeting of the Association, May
25th, 1920:

    “Mr. Edward W. Bok as Chairman of the Twentieth
    Anniversary Endowment Fund Campaign Committee was
    successful, in October, 1919, in procuring from the
    people of Philadelphia and vicinity, a fund of One
    Million Dollars for the Philadelphia Orchestra. This
    fund, when added to the Endowment Fund of 1916, will
    place the Orchestra on a permanent foundation.

    “In no piece of work hitherto undertaken by Mr. Bok
    has he shown more decided talents of leadership,
    executive ability and resourcefulness, than in this
    brilliantly executed campaign. Future generations,
    only, can measure the value of the establishment of a
    great orchestra in this city, but certain it is that
    the raising of this magnificent sum for music is an
    achievement the like of which Philadelphia has not
    previously witnessed.

    “Therefore be it RESOLVED:

    “That the thanks of the Philadelphia Orchestra
    Association be hereby expressed to the Chairman of the
    Endowment Campaign Committee, Edward W. Bok, together
    with our appreciation of his great service to the
    Philadelphia Orchestra, to the cause of music, and to
    the people of Philadelphia.”

Gifts ranged from one penny, given by a blind child, to $100,000. Many
men and women of moderate means deprived themselves of necessities in
order that the orchestra might live. Others gave time and others again
gave both time and money, but never one word of regret has been heard.

The Chairman’s parting shot appeared in the programme book a week later:

    November 14th-15th, 1919:

                         “THANK YOU!

    “The Million Dollar Endowment for the Philadelphia
    Orchestra has been secured with the goal passed by
    a generous margin. The result ensures not only the
    permanency of the present Orchestra but the expansion
    of its influence.

    “To each and all who worked and gave and encouraged, we
    extend, individually and collectively, our heartfelt
    thanks.

    “We asked you to save the Orchestra!

    “The Orchestra IS saved!

    “Thank you!
                                THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                              ENDOWMENT CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE
    November 14th, 1919.”

Thus the creation of an Endowment Fund was achieved by the most
extraordinary campaign ever conducted in Philadelphia, and through
the contributions of more than 13,000 people who wished to place a
Philadelphia musical institution on a permanent foundation.




CHAPTER V

TWENTY YEARS OF PROGRESS


The Twentieth Anniversary of the Philadelphia Orchestra was celebrated
on November 19th and 20th, 1920; and great was the rejoicing that this
city possessed an orchestra of such attainment, brought to its present
high state by a distinguished conductor, and endowed by a large number
of citizens of Philadelphia and vicinity. The long labors of the
officers and directors, and of the Women’s Committees, were bringing
their recompense. The occasion was celebrated by the playing of the
first programme given by Fritz Scheel in 1900; and the presentation
of a silver loving cup, bearing the following inscription, to Mr. Van
Rensselaer:

                       “ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                          First President of
                The Philadelphia Orchestra Association
         on the Occasion of the Twentieth Anniversary Concerts
                     November 19th and 20th, 1920
    With gratitude and deep appreciation of his invaluable services
                                 from
            The Board of Directors, the Women’s Committees
         The Philadelphia Orchestra, the Business Management”

       *       *       *       *       *

            THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA[36]

    “With the concerts of November 19th and 20th, 1910,
    the Philadelphia Orchestra celebrates its twentieth
    year; a year auspiciously opened in November, 1919, by
    completing the Endowment Fund.

    “To have sustained an honorable career during twenty
    years is no mean attainment for a business enterprise,
    a school or an institution. But for a group of people
    to support an orchestra for twenty years—years
    artistically certain, but financially uncertain—is a
    memorable achievement and a cause for congratulation
    and rejoicing.

    “The first concert of The Philadelphia Orchestra was
    played on November 16th, 1900, and was one of the
    series of six evening concerts given during the season
    of 1900-1901. The names of the founders, Dr. Edward I.
    Keffer, Mr. Edward G. McCollin, Mr. John H. Ingham,
    Mr. Oliver Boyce Judson, and Mr. Oscar A. Knipe, who
    formed the Executive Committee, did not appear on the
    programme. Neither was it publicly known that this was
    the Committee which had asked Mrs. Alexander J. Cassatt
    to arrange the so-called Philippine Concerts about
    six months earlier, which gave Fritz Scheel his first
    opportunity to conduct in Philadelphia an orchestra
    composed of professional musicians.

    “On the programme for the second series of concerts,
    consisting of fourteen pairs, during the season of
    1901-02, the names of the above gentlemen appear with
    the additional names of Mr. Alexander Van Rensselaer,
    President, and Mr. Henry Whelen, Jr., Treasurer.

    “The talents of Mr. Scheel, who died after seven
    years of devotion to the cause, soon placed the new
    organization among the first in America; and the work
    thus begun has resulted in an orchestra which has
    steadily and surely advanced to its present pre-eminent
    position under the leadership of Leopold Stokowski.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “The history of the Philadelphia Orchestra cannot be
    written in this brief space. It is a story of the
    pioneers who were inspired to found an orchestra; of
    devotion, faithfulness and financial aid on the part
    of the Officers and Board of Directors; of continuous
    work by the four Women’s Committees; of an ‘Unknown
    Donor,’ who is no longer ‘unknown’; of loyal support
    from interested citizens, and of a group of artists,
    whose music speaks for them and for their leader. In
    short, the orchestra, which now speaks for Philadelphia
    the world over, is the result of co-operation on the
    part of all these groups; a co-operation which has made
    Philadelphia one of the great musical centres of the
    world.”

[36] Programme book, November 19th and 20th, 1920.

_Public Ledger_, November 20th, 1920:

                “ORCHESTRA GIVES BIRTHDAY CONCERT

     “Programme same as that presented at First Performance
                        Twenty Years Ago

                     “Players Warmly Greeted
       “Silver Urn for Mr. Van Rensselaer After His Review
                         of Two Decades

    “The Philadelphia Orchestra gave a concert yesterday
    that was real music, all of it. There was nothing
    ‘modern’ in the programme, nothing that teased the ear
    with puzzle-problems or geometric exercises wrought
    ingeniously. The performance celebrated the Twentieth
    Anniversary of the first concert and the programme was
    the same as on that fundamental occasion.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “After the symphony came the celebratory features.
    Alexander Van Rensselaer made a graceful address in
    brief review of the twenty years. The finished product
    of the present, he held, was the outcome of united
    effort. The chief credit must go to the indefatigable
    women’s committees. The munificence of the until
    recently ‘unknown donor,’ Mr. Bok, assured us five
    years more of the inspiring leadership of Stokowski,
    and has established the endowment fund.

    “Dr. Stokowski declared that the music spoke for
    itself and that the orchestra was heartily glad when
    it gave pleasure to its hearers. Dr. Hart, in behalf
    of a committee, made an eloquent and feeling speech in
    deserved tribute to Mr. Van Rensselaer, and presented a
    silver urn of enormous dimensions, together with a set
    of resolutions.

    “The members of the committee standing with Dr. Hart
    were Miss Frances Wister, Miss Anne Thomson, Mr. Judson
    and Dr. Rich, and the actual presentation was made by
    Miss Thomson. The orchestra blew a fanfare and the
    audience stood and applauded.”

       *       *       *       *       *

_Public Ledger_, November 20th, 1920, Editorial:

           “TWENTY YEARS IN MUSIC

    “In signalizing its twentieth anniversary with a
    revival of the original programme directed by Fritz
    Scheel on November 16th, 1900, the Philadelphia
    Orchestra has enabled its friends to indulge in
    pleasurable reflections.

    “It is difficult, of course, to recall accurately,
    the artistry of any performance, musical or dramatic,
    after a lapse of two decades. But a highly sensitized
    memory is not needed in this instance. Between the most
    pioneering effort of the orchestra, which ventured
    upon only six concerts in its first season, and
    the authority and artistic opulence of the present
    organization, there is a disparity in which the whole
    community can take the profoundest pride.

    “Not only has the orchestra headed by Mr. Stokowski
    attained to a position of splendid leadership in
    the realm of music, but the esthetic standards of
    Philadelphia have admirably kept pace. Without
    affectation it may be said that the growth of musical
    culture in this city during the last score of years has
    been gratifyingly vigorous, unsurpassed here in any
    previous period of similar length.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Cultural appreciation, it is said, usually follows
    an era of fervent inspiration. Evidently it is an age
    of the former in which we are now dwelling, hence
    the abiding charm and appeal of a twenty-year-old
    programme. The new honors, well worth an anniversary
    observance, are for the interpreters.”

To those who had devoted years of effort to the orchestra, this
occasion was full of interest. Their thoughts flew back to memories
of Fritz Scheel and the early struggles; to the advent of Leopold
Stokowski and the advance of the orchestra to its present position; to
the changed attitude of the public. A procession of events seemed to
march down the years; the inauguration of a Pension Fund; the Mahler
Symphony and the Chorus; the Peoples’ Concerts; the University of
Pennsylvania Concerts; the effort for Popular and Sunday Concerts. Such
recollections made the life of the Philadelphia Orchestra seem full and
vigorous.

The twentieth season was especially fine musically. It marked the
inauguration of the Special Monday Evening Concerts, three in number,
which have gradually been increased to ten.

Other musical features of the year were Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony;
the playing in November, 1920, of “The Pilgrim Vision” by John Alden
Carpenter, commemorating the 300th anniversary of the landing of
the Mayflower: the three performances in March, 1921, of the Brahms
Requiem; and the presentation of Mahler’s Second Symphony, both with
the Chorus, trained by Mr. Stephen Townsend, of Boston.

It also marked the first appearance, as guest conductor, of the
celebrated leader, Willem Mengelberg, of Amsterdam.

The year was one of great satisfaction to all lovers of the
Philadelphia Orchestra. An organization founded on faith that it would
succeed artistically; and on faith that Philadelphia would eventually
cherish it to the extent of placing it on a permanent financial basis,
had justified the hopes of the founders in both these particulars. The
number of musicians had been augmented from eighty-five in 1900, to
ninety-six in 1920, and the audience had so increased that hundreds of
people were often turned away.

All persons therefore interested in the progress of music in the city
and especially the ones whose efforts had helped to bring about this
result rejoiced in the position now occupied by the orchestra.

In addition to delighting music lovers here and elsewhere, the
Philadelphia Orchestra was carrying the name of Philadelphia gloriously
around the world.




CHAPTER VI

MUSICAL NEIGHBORS


Occasionally philanthropic citizens express the wish that the
Philadelphia Orchestra was not conducted exclusively for a few idle
rich. Therefore, it is well to record some of the things that the
orchestra has done for the general public in this city.

The policy of the Association from the beginning has been to make the
orchestra the centre of Philadelphia’s musical life in an inclusive,
not an exclusive sense. Hence it has always been ready to reciprocate
any assistance rendered to it by giving its services free of charge
on numerous occasions. Often, of course, financial conditions had to
be considered first. Among the societies that have co-operated in
choral performances, without recompense, and, no doubt, at considerable
expense to themselves, are: the Eurydice Chorus, Fortnightly Club,
Jungermaennerchor Singing Society, Mendelssohn Club, Philadelphia
Choral Society. Outside of Philadelphia the Bach Choir of Baltimore,[37]
Schola Cantorum of New York, and Pittsburgh Chorus.

[37] See Appendix G.

On its part the orchestra has given a number of special performances
without remuneration, such as the concert for the Manuscript Music
Society in 1913, the concert in collaboration with the Mendelssohn Club
in honor of Dr. Wm. Wallace Gilchrist two years later; a performance
at Camp Dix and a concert for the benefit of the American Red Cross,
1918; a French War Relief Benefit the next year; the music at the
presentation of the Philadelphia Award for four years beginning in
1922, and the concert with the Mendelssohn Club to celebrate its
Fiftieth Anniversary in January, 1925. Special concerts were given for
the National Federation of Music Clubs in 1911, and for the National
Convention of Music Supervisors in 1920.

It must be remembered that such concerts undertaken in addition to the
regular engagements for the season have entailed special preparation
and have been an added burden to the busy conductor.

From the earliest days an effort was made to give music to the numbers
of people who enjoy lighter programmes. Popular concerts at low
prices were inaugurated by Mr. Scheel in 1903, at which time the name
“Popular” was such a misnomer that they had to be given in the form of
benefits on a fifty per cent basis of profit. Such concerts were given
at intervals after this for some years, and consecutively from 1909-10
to 1914-15 inclusive. In May, 1916, an effort was made to institute
“Pop” Concerts after the manner of the Boston Orchestra, at the close
of the regular season. The Academy parquet was floored over and light
refreshments were served at tables. The first season of eleven evenings
went off brilliantly, under the alternate leadership of Mr. Stokowski,
Dr. Rich and Mr. C. Stanley Mackey, and left a small surplus on hand.
Prices ranged from fifteen to fifty cents. The second season the
number was increased to eighteen, and for reasons not understood the
Association was left with a deficit, which caused the venture to be
abandoned.

An early enterprise of a philanthropic nature was the “People’s
Concerts” planned by the Executive Committee but placed in charge of
the Civic Club, with a committee composed of Mrs. Edward I. Keffer,
Chairman; Mrs. Spencer Ervin, Mrs. C. Howard Clark, Mrs. Frank
Rosengarten and Mrs. Walter Horstmann.

The first programme would have pleased the most fastidious of tastes:

                              Labor Lyceum Hall
                         Second and Cambria Streets
               Tuesday Evening, December 15th, at 8.15 o’clock
                           First of the Series of
                            THE PEOPLE’S CONCERTS
                                   by the
                           PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                           FRITZ SCHEEL, Conductor
                    Under the Auspices of the Civic Club

                                  PROGRAMME
       1. FELIX MENDELSSOHN-BARTHOLDY         Wedding March from
                                        “Midsummer Night’s Dream”
       2. HECTOR BERLIOZ                      Le Carnaval Romain
       3. JOSEPH GODEFROID                   Dance of the Sylphs
                    Solo for Harp, Alfred Kastner

       4. JOHANN STRAUSS                       Blue Danube Waltz
       5. JULES MASSENET                    Scènes Neapolitaines
       6. GIOACHINO ANTONIO ROSSINI      Overture “William Tell”
       7. HENRI VIEUXTEMPS                Fantaisie Appassionata
                Solo for Violin and Orchestra, Hugo Olk

       8. WEBER-BERLIOZ                  Invitation to the Dance
       9. ALBERT FRANZ DOPPLER                “Das Waldvoeglein”
         Solo for Flute and Horn Quartette, August H. Rodemann

       10. RICHARD WAGNER                 Overture “Tannhaeuser”
                           Admission 10 Cents

In the Annual Report of the Civic Club for 1904 this account is given:

    “The first ‘People’s Concert’ was held in Kensington
    at the Labor Lyceum Hall, Second and Cambria Streets,
    admission being 10 cents. It was largely through
    the co-operation of Mr. R. R. P. Bradford, of the
    Lighthouse Lyceum, his Committee and Miss Esther Kelly,
    that the concert proved to be such a great success. The
    hall was crowded and the people most enthusiastic; Mr.
    Scheel and his orchestra were greatly interested and
    gave a number of encores.

    “The receipts were $236.62 up to January 1st; expenses,
    $103.02. We hope to have a balance of almost $100 when
    all returns are made. This balance to be considered a
    fund for the People’s Concerts. The second concert will
    be given at Bethany Hall on January 11th, the third at
    Tuxedo Hall in March.”

There was no doubt about the success of these concerts from the point
of view of the enjoyment of the audiences. The hall was crowded almost
to the danger point, and the enthusiasm was unrestrained. The Women’s
Committees were much interested and kept in touch with Mrs. R. R.
Porter Bradford of the Lighthouse, Kensington, who knew the value of
such music in a section where the shutting down of textile mills for
a winter often made the price of a ticket unavailable. The Committees
used their persuasive powers with the Board of Directors to continue
these concerts at considerable expense, until a fight between two
labor unions made it impossible to rent the hall, the only one in
the neighborhood, and the concerts were no longer given. They were
the means, however, of procuring a number of guarantors, who were
interested in the orchestra from a philanthropic, instead of from a
musical point of view.

From the first, special rates were offered to music students through
the music schools of Philadelphia, for the attendance of the young
was especially desired. Tickets were also distributed free, but the
response was not encouraging.

Special prices were offered to boarding schools in and near
Philadelphia, but they too were not eager to patronize symphony
concerts.

In 1909, through the Women’s Committee, about 43,000 circulars about
the orchestra were sent out by the music schools and other schools with
their prospectuses, a favor much appreciated.

Special Concerts were given for the students at Weightman Hall,
University of Pennsylvania, from 1909-1922. These were conducted
under the auspices of a committee composed of representatives of the
student body, of the Faculty Tea Club (of which professors’ wives were
the members) and of the West Philadelphia Women’s Committee for the
Philadelphia Orchestra. Although the hall was unsuited to orchestral
performances, and the stage inadequate in size, these concerts were
very popular, and the orchestra was always treated in college style.
Press of engagements combined with the unsatisfactory physical
conditions there caused the abandonment of these.

Through the generosity of Mr. Cyrus H. K. Curtis two series of eight
“Public Ledger Educational Concerts” were given for public school
children in 1915-16 and 1916-17.

Public School Concerts have been given at the Academy of Music, with
all tickets at fifty cents, during the last two seasons.

Also for many years the orchestra played for the benefit of the Stetson
Hospital under a special business arrangement.

Free Sunday Concerts were inaugurated at the Metropolitan Opera House
in 1915-16, with a series of three, and continued during the next
season.

The Public School Concerts given in 1915-16 and led by Dr. Rich must
not be forgotten. They took place at the Normal School, Wm. Penn High
School, Philadelphia High School for Girls, Boys’ Central High School,
Germantown, West Philadelphia, Frankford and Southern High Schools.

The Young People’s Educational Concerts should be mentioned. Such a
series of five concerts was first given by Fritz Scheel in 1902-03, at
the Broad Street Theatre, with lectures by Wm. J. Henderson, Wm. F.
Apthorp, Louis C. Elson, Hugh A. Clarke and Henry E. Krehbiel. During
1903-04 and 1905-06 they were continued, and after a long intermission
came to life again in the Children’s Concerts, instituted in 1921.
[38]A special committee was organized in which many associations were
represented and the concerts were so successful that a second series
is now given in order to meet the demand. There is no more inspiring
sight than to watch the Academy filling up with eager-faced children
or than to hear their quick response to Mr. Stokowski’s remarks. The
first series was devoted to an explanation of the instruments and the
programmes are progressing educationally year by year. The principal
difficulty so far encountered is to prevent grown-up children from
attending.

[38] See Appendix L.

       COMPOSITIONS ON THE CHILDREN’S CONCERTS

    “I want to tell you the lovely time I had at the
    concert. I want to thank you for sending the tickets.
    I adored the beautiful light in the Academy of Music.
    The conductor’s name was Mr. Stokowski and he was a
    very nice man. I liked the part when the little boy
    only seven years old played the violin. He looked like
    Jackie Coogan. He watched the leader all the time he
    played. I wonder how long it took him to learn to play
    the violin so well.

    “Mr. Stokowski is a very pleasant man. He conducted
    very well. He told a story of a little goat boy who
    played on Sand Pipes. He asked the people to sing Auld
    Lang Syne.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “I thought the concert was fine. I think the little boy
    played a good piece of music when he played his violin.
    I would like to play a drum, because my brother plays
    a drum, and I could easily learn. He used to play in a
    band called the “Ardmore Band.” He was the best drummer
    they had. People could hear him far away.”

       *       *       *       *       *

    “I enjoyed the concert so much. The orchestra was the
    largest I have ever seen. It seemed as if there were at
    least a hundred men on the stage. Mr. Stokowski looked
    very gay in his medium blue suit. I liked to watch his hands.

    “He said anyone could learn to play in an orchestra if
    he wanted to, because it was up to the person himself.”

       *       *       *       *       *

This short account demonstrates that the Philadelphia Orchestra is a
neighbor of much value to the community in which it dwells.




CHAPTER VII

THE SUPPORT OF THE PUBLIC PRESS


Long before the project of a permanent orchestra for Philadelphia
received any degree of public support, the newspapers of this city
in a body used their influence in favor of such an institution. Some
one has spoken of newspaper life as a “career for patriots,” and
surely the editors of the daily papers deserve this title, if any
newspaper men do. No stone was left unturned to further the effort
for a first-class modern orchestra in this city. Paid-for space
announcing performances is one thing. Editorials by the column and
general information, besides the work of the music critic for each
paper are another. In the orchestra archives are scrapbooks filled
with editorials of immense value to the cause. For the newspaper is
a marvelous teacher of public taste and a molder of public opinion.
What would the task have been for such a small number of people, first
five, then eight, then twenty-four, to which were presently added
twenty-one women, if such support had not been prompt and constant?
The gallant list of newspapers, some of which no longer exist is, the
_Evening Bulletin_, the _Evening Ledger_, the _Evening Telegraph_, the
_Item_, _The Inquirer_, the _North American_, the _Press_, the _Public
Ledger_, the _Record_, the _Times_. Not only was support given to the
orchestra itself, but to the Women’s Committees in every undertaking.
For this publicity the Philadelphia Orchestra is in deep debt to the
Philadelphia papers.

Of the music critics it can be said that they are human in their likes
and dislikes, but have always been really interested and friendly.

One newspaper writer must be mentioned. Mrs. Cornelius Stevenson, as
“Peggy Shippen” used her clever pen to further the cause and especially
the work of the Women’s Committees; and was an honorary vice-president
from the beginning until her death. She was also one of the original
guarantors. She was not a music critic, but in her youth she had
possessed a fine contralto voice and she was a devoted music-lover.

So many articles and extracts have already been given that only one
more will be added in order to prove that Philadelphia newspapers and
many others have been warm friends of the Philadelphia Orchestra.

_Evening Telegraph_, March 18th, 1901, Editorial:

               “FOR A PERMANENT ORCHESTRA”

    “A constituency of nearly 3,000,000 people within sight
    of William Penn’s statue on the Public Buildings ought
    to be able to support all the institutions pertaining
    to a great modern metropolis. The newspapers,
    the hotels, the theatres, the great stores, the
    transportation facilities, and the institutions of
    learning and of science in Philadelphia will compare
    favorably with those of any other community of
    2,000,000 in the world; while the Park attractions,
    and the galleries and exhibitions of works of art are,
    in some important respects, far above the standard
    referred to. One factor of the metropolitan order of
    civilization has, however, been lacking. Up to a very
    recent period, Philadelphia has not kept pace with
    the modern procession in the public recognition of
    the value of music as a factor of civic life. While
    several American cities of half the size and quarter of
    the wealth have each maintained a permanent orchestra
    of the first class, Philadelphia has not had such an
    organization of any class. True, the Germania Orchestra
    made a brave struggle for existence, aided by the
    Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, and, for a time,
    gave promise of building up a permanent orchestral
    structure on a solid basis, but this endeavor was
    made largely at the cost of the musicians. While the
    Germanians and others who have devoted time and money
    to the service of the community deserve and should be
    given credit and honor for their labors, it yet remains
    true that to establish a permanent orchestra worthy of
    the city, the first requirement is a solid financial
    foundation to build on.

    “Such a foundation is the one thing we need to
    provide at this hour. We can today secure a permanent
    orchestra of the best type for our city by providing a
    permanent basis for its support. We are fortunate in
    having here at this time a musician who is at once a
    thorough artist and an efficient drill master—a rare
    combination of qualities that gave to the late Anton
    Seidl the highest place among orchestral leaders. It
    is not necessary to institute comparisons between Mr.
    Fritz Scheel and other conductors, but it is proper to
    say he has demonstrated the possession of these higher
    qualities that go to the making of a great leader. He
    has done wonders with the material at his command in
    this city, and that, too, under conditions unfavorable
    enough to discourage any less enthusiastic musician
    or less energetic worker. In view of what he has
    already accomplished in the comparatively short time
    he has been at work here, it is a safe and reasonable
    presumption that if given a guarantee of control for
    five years, with means enough available to warrant
    satisfactory contracts with competent musicians, Mr.
    Scheel would create for us a permanent orchestra second
    to none in this country. There is no question as to
    his ability to undertake this task; the only thing
    to be determined being whether we are wise enough
    and farseeing enough to strengthen his hands for its
    accomplishment.”




CHAPTER VIII

THE LISTENERS


The largest portion of this story has been devoted to the orchestra
itself, and the people who founded it, supported it and endowed it.
Now comes the turn of the party of the third part, the audience.
An orchestra may be wonderfully trained, superbly led, comfortably
supported, and yet miss the main point of existing. For without
listeners, even in the days of radio, an orchestra is incomplete.

In 1900 it was difficult to lure listeners into a concert hall, where
symphonic or severely classical music was to be played. Philadelphians
began by listening to symphonies in bits and in the late nineties it
was the custom for the Germania Orchestra to play one movement of a
symphony each week for four weeks, and play the entire work in the
fifth week. Theodore Thomas did not do this, but he could not get an
audience in 1876 or even in 1881.

It is an inspiring sight of a Friday afternoon or Saturday evening to
see the crowds bound for the Academy of Music. Equally inspiring, is
it to see the audience standing on the steps of the Academy and on
the street for two and three hours before admission can be had to the
Amphitheatre for fifty cents. True lovers of music these.

One of the methods employed to persuade people to take season seats was
the membership in the Auxiliary of the Women’s Committees. Another was
the lure of big soloists. Year by year, this musical organization was
obliged to attract by advertising the appearances of great artists.
But once the audience was procured, it stayed; and today soloists are
on the verge of becoming unpopular. Such is the influence of symphonic
music.

The right to interrupt the progress of a concert by demands for
repeated encores was one which the audience gave up with little grace.
In 1913 a paragraph appeared on the programme, stating that:

    “The management has decided in no case to permit
     more than one encore.”

And again:

    “As encores tend to disturb the unity of an orchestral
     programme the patrons of the Philadelphia Orchestra
     Concerts are respectfully informed that encore demands
     cannot be granted.”

The conductor had one or two bad experiences, which occupied some
minutes, but finally patience won the day and the audiences realized
that this pleasure, if it was a pleasure, was over forever at a
symphony concert.

Next came the hat question. It is not a new one, for in 1841 the
Musical Fund Society placed this notice in one of its programmes:

    “Ladies are particularly requested not to wear their
     bonnets in the concert room.”

This makes one realize that Philadelphia women were always devoted
to their hats. The war on hats was a merry one and began as early as
1906, at a time when hats were large. It is rumored that the fashion
at the moment required pinned on hair, so hats could not be removed.
This matter was taken up in the Women’s Committee, thought by some to
be like the complaint desk of a department store; a situation of which
they are proud, as it shows how the public turns to the women. Much
discussion arose and notices began to appear in the programmes:

    “For the greater convenience of all concerned, it is
    earnestly hoped that the women patrons of the Orchestra
    WILL REMOVE THEIR HATS during the performance. In many
    cities local ordinances compel, by legal means, the
    removal of head coverings that obstruct the view in
    places of amusement.”

               “MADAME HOMER AS A HEROINE
    “Louise Homer, the popular contralto of the
    Metropolitan Opera Company, who was the soloist at
    the Symphony Society’s concert in the New Theatre,”
    writes a New York critic, “proved herself a heroine.
    SHE TOOK OFF HER HAT! To herself and to every woman in
    the house, probably, the big creation, or confection,
    or whatever it is called, which she wore as she came
    upon the stage was a triumph in the art of millinery.
    Mere men knew only that it hid her lovely face. If the
    audience hadn’t been as well bred as it was musical,
    there would have been a demonstration when she pulled
    out the pins, removed the hat and placed it at the
    foot of the conductor’s stand. Instead there was only
    an audible sigh of delight. Is it too much to hope
    that Mme. Homer’s sister artists will hasten to follow
    her example, and that the hosts of her sex who attend
    concerts and recitals may be moved to accede to the
    request of the managers: ‘Ladies will please remove
    their hats’?”

The “hat question” would not down, but in Philadelphia the situation
was nothing to what it was in Boston, for the management was obliged to
put the following alarming announcement in the Programme Book:

    “His Honor, the Mayor, has notified the Management of
    Symphony Hall that, unless the law relating to the
    wearing of hats by ladies at public entertainments is
    obeyed at the Symphony rehearsals and concerts, he may
    be forced to revoke the license of Symphony Hall!”

                “THE HAT AT THE CONCERTS
       “AN EARNEST REQUEST OF OUR WOMEN PATRONS

    “A number of complaints have reached the Orchestra
    Association regarding the practice of women wearing
    their hats at the Orchestra Concerts, particularly
    at the Friday afternoon concerts, despite the notice
    printed each week in this program asking that for the
    comfort of others the hats shall be removed. This
    complaint has become so general that it now bids fair
    to result in a city ordinance, the same as in Boston
    and in Chicago, enforcing the removal of hats at all
    occasions of public amusements. This legal enforcement
    of what should be a matter of polite request ought not
    to be made necessary and the Orchestra Association
    earnestly asks of all its woman patrons that they will
    not permit this very simple matter to reach this acute
    stage. The Association would exceedingly regret to be
    compelled to carry out such an ordinance and it is
    within the power of each of our woman patrons to keep
    what after all is a matter of simple thoughtfulness
    within the bounds of politeness and consideration for
    others.”

Hats today are small, but all the listeners are not yet converted.

The next most disturbing element was, and is, the restlessness of the
audience.

There is a mistaken idea that coming late and leaving early is peculiar
to the modern era, and this day of haste. Far back in 1882 we know that
people left concerts early from this notice in a programme of that year:

                      “NOTICE
    “The patrons of the Germania Orchestra Concerts are
    respectfully requested to be in their seats, on the
    evenings of the concerts, by eight o’clock punctually.

    “Those persons who are unable to comply with this
    request, will kindly wait in the lobby until the close
    of the First Movement of the Symphony, when a pause
    will be made to enable them to reach their seats.”

Coming late is the habit of the American world at least, even when
taking trains. Being locked out does not remedy this habit, it only
evokes a few growls.

Again the management took up the subject through the programme:

                 “NOTES OF INTEREST

    “The hat question is not the only question that arises
    from time to time to prevent that serene enjoyment of
    concerts, which is the ideal estate of things hoped for
    by Management and concert-goers. Perhaps in the Elysian
    fields, choirs armed with angelic harps, are listened
    to without distractions furnished by late-comers and
    early-goers, or by people whose views on the numbers
    interpreted are as obstreperous as their hats, or the
    numberless physical annoyances that make for confusion
    and noise, that seem to be inevitable in concert
    auditoriums the country over. And this is apropos of
    the fact that a subscriber has written in to say that
    ‘The general confusion during the last number of the
    concerts on Friday afternoons is most annoying,’ and
    she continues, ‘I am wondering whether a request cannot
    be put in the programme to stop this nuisance, as has
    been done with regard to the wearing of hats. This
    is what one meets with; almost as soon as the last
    number begins, hats and coats are put on, veils are
    arranged, and during the playing of the finale people
    keep leaving, causing a general feeling of unquiet and
    unrestfulness. This seems to me very discourteous, and
    is most annoying to those who really want to enjoy the
    concert from start to finish. I know that sometimes it
    is necessary for a subscriber to leave early, but may I
    suggest that the persons who have to leave before the
    last number, vacate their seats before the Orchestra
    starts to play.’

    “All this seems reasonable enough, but it is a matter
    entirely in the hands of the concert-goers, who form
    their own ‘court of honor’ in these particulars.”

However, Philadelphia audiences have improved in concert manners since
the olden time. Then the audiences, although considered ill-behaved,
were much like European ones; they did throw things at the singers and
did not hesitate to express their opinions of the performance. But the
city has advanced, as can be seen by the following notice:

    “Pistole Reward—To whoever can discover the person who
    was so very rude as to throw Eggs from the Gallery upon
    the Stage, last Monday, by which the Cloathes of some
    Ladies and Gentlemen were spoiled and the performance
    in some measure interrupted!”[39]

[39] Sonneck: “Early Concert Life.”

Now we do not throw things, the performance is only “in some measure
interrupted” when we cough and sneeze during concerts and operas and
occasionally come in late. Frequent interruptions of a performance
by the screams and calls of displeased listeners, to say nothing of
constant conversation were the order of the early days of public
music. Not worse here than elsewhere, but annoying just the same. Now
a whisper is hardly ever audible at concerts, and a hiss is called
forth only by a modern composition too terrible to allow to pass
unnoticed. A hiss every now and again is not an unhealthy sign. It
shows that someone is listening; and there are a few coughs but always
behind the conductor’s back.

Early in the life of the orchestra the public began to write letters of
complaint to the management and to the newspapers. The management feels
that this is a sign of healthy interest and welcomes these comments. It
shows how strong the sense of possession of the orchestra is with its
patrons.

Encores have vanished like the missiles of the past. Hats and
restlessness are going out of fashion. The audiences of the
Philadelphia Orchestra are wonderful groups of people, some of whom
have held seats continuously since 1900. Their regular attendance has
encouraged the Board of Directors and inspired the conductor and the
musicians to artistic achievements. The party of the third part is
doing its share toward making the concerts a success.




CHAPTER IX

THE TWENTY-FIFTH ANNIVERSARY


Anniversaries are times for reminiscences and a general survey of
affairs.

The Corporation known as “The Philadelphia Orchestra Association” today
consists of four parts:

First, the Association:[40] comprising the subscribers to the Endowment
Funds of $25.00 or more, and the yearly subscribers to tickets for the
regular series of concerts; and a Board of Directors elected by them
(one-third annually), who in turn elect the officers;

    Second, the Philadelphia Orchestra;
    Third, the four Women’s Committees;
    Fourth, the Business Management.

[40] By-laws, 1920.

It is hardly necessary to mention the interdependence of this quartette
of activities, or to explain how many people have worked to procure an
orchestra for Philadelphia.

In 1900-1901 the Philadelphia Orchestra, composed of 85 musicians
gave six evening concerts. In 1925-26 this orchestra, composed of 106
musicians, will give performances as per the following schedule:

             [41]ACADEMY OF MUSIC, PHILADELPHIA
    Regular Series, 29 Friday afternoons, 29 Saturday evenings   58
    Special Series, Monday evenings                              10
    Children’s Concerts, 2 series                                 8
    Philadelphia Forum                                            3
    Philadelphia Award                                            1
    Out-of-town Concerts:
        New York City                                            10
        Washington                                                5
        Baltimore                                                 3
        Pittsburgh, Dayton, Chicago, Cleveland, Toledo,
            Detroit, Princeton, one each                          7
                                                                 ——
       TOTAL                                                    105

                RECORD OF PERFORMANCES
    Total number of concerts, twenty-five years                2017
    Number postponed                                              6
    Number cancelled (Ottawa, 1924)                               1

[41] For full list of performances, see Appendix E.

A more perfect fulfillment of obligations would be hard to find.

The regular series of symphony concerts in Philadelphia has been the
primary object and main concern of the Association. Other performances
have been included when the Philadelphia demand did not consume all the
time of the orchestra. Now a third series is being built up, consisting
of ten Monday evening concerts, at which the programmes are identical
with those of ten of the regular series. More and more this city is
absorbing its own orchestra.

During these twenty-five years much traveling has been done. The
first journey was to Reading in 1900. The next year concerts in five
Pennsylvania cities were added as well as in Trenton and Wilmington. In
1902-03 the first concerts in Baltimore and Washington were attempted
and the first New York appearance was made. Growing bolder with
advancing years appearances were made in new cities each year, of which
the following are the most important: Boston (1903-04); Baltimore and
Washington, five each (1906-07); Pittsburgh, one (1911-12), five pairs
(1916-17); New York City, five afternoon concerts (1918-19); Toronto,
three concerts (1919-20); New York City, ten concerts (1922-23).

The orchestra has traveled as far east as Portland, Maine; as far west
as Detroit and Ypsilanti, Michigan; as far south as Richmond, Virginia,
and as far north as Toronto, Canada. During the coming season Chicago
will be added to this list.

Traveling has been tinged with adventure. In 1908, when returning from
Wilmington, the special train carrying the orchestra was wrecked near
Chester. Mr. Pohlig and six musicians were injured, when the cars were
derailed and rolled down a steep embankment. Fortunately, there were no
serious injuries and all the instruments were unhurt.

Ten years later the orchestra reached Kalamazoo, Mich., with difficulty
during a severe blizzard, en route for Grand Rapids, where a concert
was to be played. The thermometer fell to 27° below zero in a sixty
mile gale. The concert was postponed but later given.

The last experience of winter weather was in Canada in 1924, when
the Ottawa concert was cancelled after the audience had waited in
perfect good humor for three hours, hoping that the train carrying the
orchestra could push through the snow.

In the past special trains were almost invariably used. Since railroad
transportation has more than doubled, and since the charge for a
special train has also been raised, the management wherever possible
has availed itself of regular trains, generally running as a second
section. Since the party now constitutes upwards of one hundred and
twelve people, five twelve-section drawing room cars and one baggage
car make up the equipment for night trips. Going to New York, two
coaches are attached to an early afternoon train, and a special train
home is provided after the performance.

       *       *       *       *       *

The labors of the officers and directors have been continuous. The
Executive Committee, chosen from the Board in the early days; a
sub-committee composed of Dr. Keffer and Mr. McCollin; the Committee
of Three, consisting of Mr. Norris, Mr. Wheeler, and the late Mr.
Charles A. Braun, who with the president, met daily from 1908 until
1920, shouldered most of the responsibility. Under the new By-Laws
the Administration Committee composed of Messrs. Edward W. Bok, James
Crosby Brown, Samuel S. Fels, Charles D. Hart, Effingham B. Morris,
William Jay Turner, Alexander Van Rensselaer, and Andrew Wheeler,
perform the arduous task of meeting every week regularly to dispose of
the business of the Association.

In the early days Mr. Henry Whelen, Jr., made it possible to carry on
the orchestra under financial difficulties, from 1900 until his death,
which, coming so soon after the loss of Fritz Scheel, was a double
blow. On May 22nd, 1907, this resolution was passed by the Board of
Directors:

    “The death of Mr. Henry Whelen, Jr., has deprived this
    Board of a most capable and efficient officer, and
    its members, of an esteemed and highly valued friend.
    To an artistic temperament, he added rare qualities
    of judgment and discretion inherent in a disciplined
    mind, and coupled with a sense of duty and habit of
    industry that continually and cheerfully placed his
    valuable services at the disposal of the community.
    The positions of member of the Board of Directors,
    of the Executive Committee, and of Treasurer of this
    Association, are but a few of the positions in which he
    stood in an unselfish relation to his native city, in
    an effort to discharge what he conceived to be his duty
    in the development of Music and Art in the community in
    which he lived.

    “It is also with an acute sense of personal loss that
    this minute is ordered in the sincere hope that it
    may beguile those nearest and dearest to him from
    something of the grief of so great a bereavement and
    also serve to perpetuate his memory in a community that
    has profited so much from his useful and unselfish
    citizenship.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Thomas McKean, for many years Vice-president, was one of the
officers who was always ready to assist in a financial crisis. Mr.
Richard Y. Cook and Mr. Theodore N. Ely were especially devoted members
of the Board, but all the membership should be included in this
category.

The social end, besides many others, has been taken care of by Mr. Van
Rensselaer, who has constantly given entertainments.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of the many friends outside of the officers and directors, Mr. Philip
H. Goepp has worked as hard as any man. From 1901-1902 until 1920-1921
inclusive he was annotator of the programme and well fitted for the
task, as he is a musician, composer, and author of the series on
“Symphonies and their Meaning,” authoritative works on this subject.
He gave his time and his knowledge to the Association, at first
without remuneration, so great was his enthusiasm over the continued
development of the orchestra. Many days and nights through the years
were devoted to the study of the works performed, and the Association
is greatly in his debt.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the period of his leadership Mr. Stokowski has had various
honors bestowed upon him. After the second performance of the Mahler
Symphony he was presented with a bronze wreath; on the completion of
ten years as conductor in 1922, by the Women’s Committees with a set
of twelve silver plates, and with a silver tankard by the Association;
the University of Pennsylvania conferred on him the Honorary degree of
Doctor of Music in 1920; and in 1922 he was the first recipient of the
Philadelphia Award of Ten Thousand Dollars. His appearances in Europe
in January 1923, when as guest conductor he led orchestras in France
and Italy were greeted with enthusiasm and with press notices of a
laudatory nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although it is a rented building, the Academy of Music is the only
dwelling place the orchestra has known, and the auditorium with its
architectural beauty and perfect acoustics is a marvelous place for
orchestral concerts. Having been built in 1857, its traditions link the
past with the present and cast a spell over the music.

The present stage setting, which replaces the gift of the West
Philadelphia Women’s Committee, is from the design of Mr. Huger
Elliott, and was executed as a labor of love by the students of the
Pennsylvania Museum and School of Industrial Art for the Association.

       *       *       *       *       *

A possession of the Association is the orchestral library that has
gradually been accumulated. Beginning with the purchase, for $600.00,
of the library of the Philadelphia Symphony Society and augmented in
1911 by Fritz Scheel’s collection, and by the constant addition of
new works, it is now suited to the needs of the orchestra and valued
as a great asset. It contains twelve hundred works with scores, and
orchestral parts for one hundred and ten men, besides four hundred and
thirty scores without orchestral parts.

       *       *       *       *       *

Advantage is often taken of modern musical inventions. For some years
much care has been given to the making of Victor Records, which are
popular the country over. There is now a list of forty-six, all
exceptionally good, and they have brought the orchestra many friends.
Radio transmitters are not used at performances. The Board of Directors
feels that it is unfair to patrons of the orchestra, who pay for
tickets and take the trouble to attend the concerts in person, to
broadcast the music throughout the country.

Mr. Stokowski recently secured the rights for the first presentation
of the new Hammond Pedal, invented by John Hays Hammond, Jr. The
first public performance on the piano with this attachment was at the
Philadelphia regular series of concerts, on October 30th and 31st,
1925, when Lester Donahue played the Rachmaninoff Second Concerto. The
invention will also be used in Washington, New York City and on the
Western tour.

       *       *       *       *       *

In looking back over the years, details come to mind. Much anxiety used
to be felt about Saturday nights, as bad weather meant a poor audience
and knocked the box office receipts. Now, the audience is anxious for
fear of uncomfortable delays on the steps during a storm, on account of
the crowd.

Another detail was the efforts that the women made long ago to brighten
up the appearance of the Saturday evening house, by asking their
friends in the boxes to wear gay clothes.

       *       *       *       *       *

The policy of the Philadelphia Orchestra Association has always been
to sell tickets at moderate prices. Tickets for the best seats for the
first regular series of six concerts sold for $8.00. Students could
buy tickets for the amphitheatre for $1.75 for fourteen rehearsals
and $2.00 for fourteen concerts. The price of tickets has increased
seventy per cent and operating expenses have increased five hundred per
cent in twenty-five years, but considering this, the tickets are still
moderate. A story is told by Mr. George T. Haley, of the Academy of
Music Ticket Office, loyal friend to the orchestra, of how as a young
assistant agent he was in charge of the window on the first day of the
first sale for the Philadelphia Orchestra. He opened promptly at 8.30
a. m.; the first sale was about ten and the next about four in the
afternoon. Now, his principal business in connection with the orchestra
is to placate the people who cannot get the seats they want or get any
seats at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Business Management of the Association has been since 1915 in the
hands of Mr. Arthur Judson, whose ability and that of the Assistant
Manager, Mr. Louis A. Mattson, is well known. Mr. Judson manages,
likewise, the Philharmonic Orchestra of New York and the Cincinnati
Orchestra. Mr. Mattson manages the summer concerts in Fairmount Park,
for which a number of Philadelphia Orchestra men are engaged. The ease
with which a large amount of business is conducted, and one in which
there is much detail, is due to the organizing talents of Mr. Judson
and to the devotion and long training of the office staff under him.
The Association is fortunate in having a manager of such rare business
acumen, whose talents have developed as necessity arose; until it is
safe to say that there is no more ably managed musical organization in
the country than this. To Mr. Mattson falls the task of distributing
the seats, no easy one in 1925, when there are almost none to dispose
of. No mention of the business end of this enterprise would be complete
without the names of Miss Ruth O’Neill, Miss Elizabeth M. Russell
and Miss Margaret E. Pringle, not to forget Mr. Stokowski’s private
secretary, Miss McGinty, who eases the thorny business path of an
artist.

       *       *       *       *       *

Speaking of business, the Endowment Funds of the Association were at
first in the hands of three trustees but now are in the care of a
Corporate Trustee, the Girard Trust Company.

But enough of details! Many forces have combined to make it possible to
maintain an orchestra.

Some years ago Peggy Shippen wrote:

    “This remarkable performance (Mahler Symphony),
    which attracted music connoisseurs from many cities,
    and which will remain a lasting credit to our town,
    was the result of a combination of forces patiently
    brought together by the will, power and genius of one
    man—Leopold Stokowski.

       *       *       *       *       *

    “Such triumphs of art scored in this city do more than
    all the advertising in the world to place Philadelphia
    in the lead of the great American centers. The Mayor
    has spoken of advertising this city; these things do
    this legitimately by adding to its opportunities. The
    sooner we realize that it is by honest work and the
    real thing well done that we can impose respect for our
    city and State, the better.

       *       *       *       *       *

    “It is in the last decade or so that those interested
    have realized the necessity for ‘coming together.’
    This policy seems to have been adopted since Alexander
    Van Rensselaer accepted the presidency of the Board
    of Directors. No one could be selected in this entire
    city better calculated to bring together the elements
    indispensable to the success of such an undertaking.
    Himself a musician, all his life identified with
    musical interests, he is one of the most widely popular
    men in this community.

       *       *       *       *       *

    “As the audiences grew and became critical, exacting
    a higher quality of music, Mr. Van Rensselaer and his
    board rose to the occasion and met the requirements of
    growth.

    “The Women’s Committee, besides developing the interest
    in the success of the orchestra, has helped with the
    Guarantee Fund, which, of course, is the pivot upon
    which turns the success of the undertaking. Without
    the backing of money, to pay for the best procurable
    talent, even the greatest genius is helpless to produce
    adequately a great work of art.

    “It was the combination of Mr. Van Rensselaer’s patient
    and broad policy, of the women’s inconspicuous but
    telling work of years upon the musical intelligence of
    the community, first under Mrs. A. J. Dallas Dixon’s
    direction and then under that of Miss Frances Wister,
    that provided the fertile ground upon which the genius
    of Mr. Stokowski brought out the almost superhuman
    result of last week.

    “The same success will attend similar methods in other
    fields. The theory of ‘splendid isolation’ does not
    apply to our epoch.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The Philippine Concerts which occurred on March 29th and April 5th,
1900; and which were the forerunners of the Philadelphia Orchestra,
were commemorated at the concerts of March 27th and 29th and April
3rd and 4th, 1925, by a notice in the programme and by the playing
of certain numbers played at those concerts. They marked the first
appearance of Fritz Scheel with an orchestra of professional musicians
in Philadelphia.

The Twenty-fifth Anniversary of the first concert on November 16th,
1900, is being celebrated at the concerts of November 13th and 14th,
1925, by simple ceremonies and a repetition of the first programme.
It is a long way from the total of seven concerts in 1900, to the one
hundred and five concerts arranged for this season. The road has been
discouraging and difficult, but the twenty-fifth anniversary is a cause
for rejoicing to all lovers of the Philadelphia Orchestra.

Little did the small group of men in 1900 dream that the orchestra they
founded would twenty-five years later be known throughout America and
Europe.

The “Road One Hundred and Fifty Years Long” has been worth traveling
to Philadelphians, to reach the present milestone in the symphonic
succession, so far the most important achievement in the city’s musical
history. If Baedeker were to write a “Guide to Music in America” he
would put three stars against the Philadelphia Orchestra.




CHAPTER X

THE POINT OF THE STORY


    “_Time Was unlocks the riddle of Time Is_.
         _That offers choice of glory or of gloom_:
    _The solver makes Time Shall Be surely his._”

The point of the story is the music that the Philadelphia Orchestra
makes. It would be a tragedy if after twenty-five years anyone could
ask “Why?” A tragedy for the officers and directors, for the Women’s
Committees, and for the reader and writer of this book. For the
musicians and for Leopold Stokowski it would be more than a tragedy,
the object of life would cease to exist.

Beginning in 1912 the musical record becomes more and more interesting.
The leader has poured out his talents for Philadelphia and the feast
has been lavish. Programme after programme of the works of the
great, interpreted by the brain of Leopold Stokowski have enthralled
his audiences. Only a few special selections and occasions can be
mentioned, but a perusal of the programmes for thirteen years shows
that the average of Philadelphia Orchestra concerts is far above the
usual average, for he is a master maker of programmes.

1912-13: Gustav Strube, “Puck”; Herman Sandby, Prelude to Act IV
“The Vikings of Helgenland”; Edward Elgar, Symphony No. 1; Guiseppe
Martucci, Symphony No. 1; Sigismund Noszkowski, “Die Steppen”; Richard
Strauss, “Liesbes Scene” from “Feursnot,” “Salome’s Tanz”; Henri
Rabaud, Symphony No. 2[42]; Ernest Schelling, “Légende Symphonic.”[43]

[42] First performance in America.

[43] First performance in America.

1913-14: Hans Erich Pfitzner, “Käthchen von Heilbronn,” overture;
Fernandez Arbos, “Guajiras,”[44] violin and orchestra; Florent Schmitt,
“Rapsodie Viennoise”[45]; Albert Roussel, Evocation No. 2 “La Ville
Rose”[46]; Henry Hadley, Symphony, “North, East, South and West”; Erich
Korngold, “Schauspiel” Overture; Otto Mueller, member Philadelphia
Orchestra, “Dramatic Overture”; Henry A. Lang[47], Symphony “Fantasies
of a Poet”; Beethoven, Ninth Symphony with Chorus.

[44] First performance in America.

[45] First performance in America.

[46] First performance in America.

[47] Philadelphian.

1914-15: Jan Sibelius, “Finlandia”; Bach, triple concerto, piano,
violin and flute; Paderewski, Symphony B minor[48], Special Concerts
for the Benefit of the Pension Fund; Mendelssohn, “Lobgesang Symphony”
with soloists and sixteen Choral Societies; Wagner Programme. Frederick
Stock, Symphony C minor; Feruccio Busoni, Indian Fantasy, piano and
orchestra;[49] Sandby, Suite from “The Woman and the Fiddler”; Mrs. H.
H. A. Beach, Symphony “Gaelic”; Georges Enesco, “Roumanian Rhapsody.”

1915-16: Gustav Strube, “Variations on an Original Theme”; Camille
Zeckwer[50], Symphonic Poem, “Sohrab and Rustum” (conducted by
composer); Enrique Granados, Intermezzo and Epilogue from Goyescas;
Gustav Mahler, Eighth Symphony for orchestra soli and chorus;[51]
Strauss “Alpensymphonie.”[52]

[48] First performance in America.

[49] First performance in America.

[50] Philadelphian.

[51] First performance in America.

[52] First performance in America.

1916-17: Frederick A. Stock: Violin Concerto, D minor; Arne Oldberg
“June” (conducted by composer); Gustav Mahler, “Das Lied von der
Erde,”[53] symphony for soli voices and orchestra; Max Bruch, Concerto
for two pianos written for Rose and Ottilie Sutro (first world
performance); Michel Dvorsky, “Chromaticon” piano and orchestra, Josef
Hofmann, pianist; Debussy, “The Blessed Damosel” after Rosetti for
soprano and Chorus of Women; Schelling, “Impressions,” variations
for piano and orchestra, composer at the piano; Liszt, Eine Faust
Symphonie, orchestra, tenor and bass soli and chorus; Bach, Matthäus
Passion, orchestra, soli, Philadelphia Orchestra Chorus, Chorus of
Girls from Philadelphia Normal School and Girls’ High School.

[53] First performance in America.

1917-18: American Programme, Edgar Stillman Kelley Symphony “New
England,” compositions by Philip H. Goepp, Arthur Foote; Skryabin,
“Poème de l’Extase”; Beethoven, Three Equali for four Trombones; Bach,
Concerto, three pianos and orchestra, Mme. Olga Samaroff, Bauer,
Gabrilowitsch; Sinding, Symphony; Ernest Chausson, “Poème” violin and
orchestra, Thaddeus Rich, violinist; Bloch Programme, concert conducted
by composer; Selim Palmgren concerto “The River,” piano and orchestra.

1918-19: MacDowell “Indian Suite” dirge in memory of fallen Americans;
Dvorsky, “The Haunted Castle”; Debussy “Sirènes,” orchestra and women’s
voices; Lorenziti, Suite for Viole d’Amour, Henri Casadesus, soloist;
Rachmaninoff, Air for a Choir of Solo Violins with orchestra; Programme
of four American composers, Frederic S. Converse, H. Clough-Leiter,
John Alden Carpenter, Cecil Forsyth; Leo Ornstein, piano soli, composer
at the piano; Chadwick, “Tam o’Shanter”; Ernest Bloch, Symphony No. 1;
Louis Garnier, “Vision” Poème for Orchestra.

1919-20: Beethoven, Choral Fantasy in C minor, piano, orchestra and
chorus, Mme. Samaroff, pianist; Malipiero, “Pause del Silenzio”;
Loeffler “A Pagan Poem” for Orchestra, with piano, English horn and
three trumpets obligato, Bauer pianist; Charles T. Griffes, four
compositions for orchestra; Rachmaninoff, Concerto No. 3, piano and
orchestra, composer at the piano; Symphony “The Bells”[54] (after Poe),
orchestra solo voices and Philadelphia Orchestra Chorus; Lorenziti,
Concerto for Viole d’Amour, double bass and orchestra, Thaddeus Rich
and Anton Torello, soloists; Weber, Concertino in F for bassoon and
orchestra, Richard Krueger, soloist; André Maquarre, two compositions
for orchestra; Mozart Opus 30, arranged as a Concerto for oboe and
small orchestra, Marcel Tabuteau, soloist; Beethoven, Ninth Symphony,
Philadelphia Orchestra Chorus, marking Ninety-sixth Anniversary of
first performance, 1824.

[54] First performance in America.

1910-21: Leo Sowerby “Comes Autumn Time”; J. Guy Ropartz, Symphony
No. 4; Cyril Scott, concerto piano and orchestra, composer at the
piano; John Alden Carpenter “A Pilgrim Vision” to mark Tercentenary of
Landing of the Mayflower; Beethoven, Ninth Symphony with Philadelphia
Orchestra Chorus; Brahms; double concerto violin and cello, Rich and
Penha, soloists; Brahms, “Requiem,” soprano and baritone soli, chorus
and orchestra; Gilchrist[55], Symphonic Poem, unveiling of Gilchrist
memorial; Mahler, Symphony No. 2, for orchestra, chorus and solo
soprano and contralto.

[55] Philadelphian.

1921-22: Sibelius, Symphony No. 5[56]; Alfredo Casello, “Pages of War”
for orchestra; Gregor Fitelberg, Polish Rhapsody[57]; Bloch, Suite
for viola and orchestra; Schoenberg, Five Orchestra Pieces; Vincent
d’Indy “Poème des Rivages,” d’Indy, guest conductor (first performed
on present tour); Bach Passacaglia, orchestrated by Leopold Stokowski
(first time); Strawinsky “Sacre du Printemps”[58]; Manuel de Falla,
excerpts from “El Amor Brujo”[59]; Otto Mueller, Carnival Overture
“Schlaraffiada.”

1922-23: Debussy “La Cour des Lys”; Ravel, “La Valse Choreographic,”
Poem for Orchestra; Strawinsky, “Feuerwerk”; Franck Centenary, Symphony
D minor. The orchestra was engaged by Dr. Richard Strauss for four New
York concerts of his own works exclusively. Dr. Strauss also conducted
one in Philadelphia.

1922-1923: Camille Zeckwer, “Jade Butterflies”; Strawinsky, “Trois
Poésies de la Lyrique Japonaise”; Enesco, Symphony E flat, Roumanian
Rhapsody, Enesco, guest conductor; Brahms, concerto for violin, Enesco,
violinist; January 26th and 27th, 1923, compositions by Milhaud,
Poulenc, Auric, Satie; Schelling, “A Victory Ball”; Pick-Mangiagali,
“Sortilegi,” Symphonic Poem, piano and orchestra; D. G. Mason, Prelude
and Fugue, piano and orchestra; Henry Eichheim, Oriental Impressions
for Orchestra; Schoenberg, “Kammersymphonie”.

1923-24: Strawinsky, “Chant du Rossignol”[60]; Bach concerto for
harpsichord; Händel, concerto for harpsichord, Wanda Landowska,
soloist; Strawinsky, “Symphonie d’Instruments à Vent”[61]; Josef
Hofmann, compositions for piano and orchestra, East and West,
Caliedescope, the Haunted Castle, “Chromaticon” (Dvorsky); Ottorino
Respighi, “Sinfonia Drammatica”; Deems Taylor, Suite “Through
the Looking Glass”; compositions by Magnard, Jean-Jules-Amable
Roger-Ducasse; Hand Krása; Strawinsky, “Renard,” burlesque for Chamber
Orchestra, two tenors, two basses; Beethoven, Ninth Symphony with
Toronto Choir.

[56] First performance in America.

[57] First performance in America.

[58] First performance in America.

[59] First performance in America.

[60] First performance in America.

[61] First performance in America.

1924-25: Nicholas Medtner, piano concerto, composer at piano; Edgar
Varese, “Hyperprisms”; Paul Hindemuth, Nusch-Nuschi Dances; Karl
Szymsanowski, violin concerto[62]; Kurt Atterberg, Symphony No. 2; Henry
Joslyn, War Dance from Suite, “Native Moments”; Strawinsky programme,
Strawinsky guest conductor; Prokokieff, Suite Scythe, “Ala and Lolli”;
Arthur Bliss, “Mêlée Fantasque”; Germaine Taillefer, Concerto[63] for
piano and orchestra; Isaac Albeniz, “Fête Dieu à Séville”; Edward
Burlingame Hill, Arthur Bliss, compositions for two pianos and
orchestra.

[62] First performance in America.

[63] First performance in America.

It must not be supposed from the above that the usual standard works
are not performed. The list is given to show the wide musical range to
which Philadelphians are treated. No mention has been made of the many
Wagner and Tschaikowsky programmes that have been presented. They have
occurred every year and are always a delight.

It is a pleasure to mention the principal players in the orchestra, who
are not generally known personally by the audience. It is a case of
“by their voices you shall know them,” and their voices enthrall the
listeners week by week. First comes Dr. Thaddeus Rich, most popular of
concertmasters and an assistant conductor of no mean attainments, who
is sometimes called to take the conductor’s place at the last minute,
where he acquits himself with honors. As we look farther there are:
David Dubinsky, first second violin; Samuel Lifschey, first viola;
Hanns Pick, violoncello; W. M. Kincaid, flute; Marcel Tabuteau, oboe;
Daniel Bonade, clarinet; Anton Horner, horn; Walter Guetter, bassoon;
Sol. Cohen, trumpet; Gardell Simons, Paul P. Lotz, C. E. Gerhard,
trombones; Philip A. Donatelli, tuba; Anton Torello, bass; Vincent
Fanelli, Jr., harp; and last but not least, Oscar Schwar, tympani.
These players all possess the requisites, which seem to be ability to
play and ability to obey, for the response of their wills to the will
of the leader is what makes success in an orchestra. One noticeable
feature about the musicians is their youth; this is patent to the eye,
and to the ear, from the virility of their performance.

To those who do not see farther than the Academy stage, it would be
useless to explain that the conductor’s activities are not confined to
stepping briskly onto the platform and leading concerts. People who
have given the matter thought must know that he is working all the
year round for the Philadelphia Orchestra. The rehearsals are very
exacting and the players are wonderfully prepared. Conducting a concert
means a physical, mental and emotional strain which is only understood
by those who have seen the conductor as he comes off the stage. Leading
without a score requires perfect concentration. Painstaking effort
and patience on the part of Mr. Stokowski bring their reward in the
finish of the performance, but it looks so easy! And therein is shown
his skill. Next there is the constant search for new works and the
mastering of them before rehearsals can begin. Much time is occupied
in hearing and selecting players, for no stone is left unturned to
find the best artists for each position. The mail is also a subject
of importance, as correspondence is kept up with individuals and
publishers and then there are letters of complaint or approval, all
to be answered. The conductor is a busy man, whose brain never stops
working, planning, devising for the orchestra.

Leopold Stokowski’s musical gifts are of a nature difficult to
describe. What thrills come to one at the remembrance of certain
moments, the first hearing of the Bach “Passacaglia,” the “Prelude
and Liebestod” from Tristan, the symphonies of Brahms, Schubert and
Tschaikowsky, Mahler’s Eighth, where the chorus “Alles Vergängliches
ist nur ein Gleichniss” soars aloft, Beethoven’s Seventh, and the Ninth
with the Mendelssohn Choir of Toronto. But why mention special moments?
The audiences have come to expect every concert to be a “special
moment.”

Philadelphia is to be congratulated that the orchestra bearing its name
is in the hands of Leopold Stokowski, master musician. It is constantly
advancing. When one peak on the climb is reached, the clouds roll away
and another comes into view. Let no man speak its doom by proclaiming
that the summit of Parnassus has been reached by the Philadelphia
Orchestra.

       *       *       *       *       *

The name of Alexander Van Rensselaer, Esq., appears on the first page
of this book. It is fitting that it should also appear on the last,
for the president’s activities encircle the orchestra. Many records of
his deeds appear in the annals of the Association, and many more are
engraved in the hearts of his fellow-workers and fellow-townsmen. He is
the only person, however, who knows what sacrifices his devotion has
entailed. For although a president may appear to enjoy more sunshine
than other individuals, he also bears the shock of all the storms. The
responsibility of such a post for twenty-five unbroken years is a heavy
burden for a man to bear. To say that he has borne it and continued to
hold the respect and affection of Philadelphians is the finest tribute
that could be paid him.

The story told in this book has been made possible by the president of
the Philadelphia Orchestra Association.

                         IN MEMORIAM
                       THEODORE THOMAS
            BORN OCTOBER 11, 1835; DIED JANUARY 4, 1905

    “The death of the pioneer of American music, and a veritable Titan
    of Conductors, Theodore Thomas, brings consternation to the world
    of music, as this great man stood for all that is pure and noble in
    his art. An event so calamitous, and peculiarly significant here in
    Philadelphia, where he was well known and beloved, devolves upon me
    the sad duty of giving an orchestral expression of our deep grief.
    While it is true that an all-wise Providence saw fit to remove
    from the field of action one who had probably reached the apogee
    of his power and influence, yet keen regret must of necessity be
    experienced, an emotion best expressed through the medium that
    the great Thomas made his own—the orchestra. Therefore, I deem it
    wise to change the programme for the Seventh Concert, selecting
    such numbers as, in a sense, may be regarded as a mortuary mass.
    In agreement with this idea, which I am sure my supporters
    will endorse, I have made the following changes, substituting
    such numbers that, were the lips now stilled in death able to
    articulate, they would, I trust, unreservedly approve.
                                                         FRITZ SCHEEL
                               Conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra.”

Philadelphia, January 6, 1905.

                           PROGRAMME
    1. RICHARD WAGNER
                   Siegfried’s Death from “Die Götterdämmerung”

    2. WOLFGANG AMADEUS MOZART               Symphony, G minor

               I. Allegro Molto 4/4
              II. Andante 6/8
             III. Menuetto: Allegro 3/4
              IV. Finale: Allegro Assai 4/4

    3. JULES DE SWERT   Concerto for Violoncello and Orchestra,
                                     No. 2, in C minor, Op. 38

                      Allegro moderato—Espressivo, 4/4
                              ALFRED SAAL

    4. RICHARD STRAUSS  Serenade, Opus 7, Andante, E flat major
             For 2 Flutes, 2 Oboes, 2 Clarinets, 4 Horns,
                    2 Bassoons, and Contra Bassoon

    5. LUDWIG VON BEETHOVEN   Overture, “Leonore No. 3,” Op. 72

                        PROGRAMME OF CEREMONIES
                         FRITZ SCHEEL MEMORIAL

                           Academy of Music
                       Wednesday, March Eleventh
                      Nineteen Hundred and Eight
                           at Three o’Clock

                              In Memoriam

                             FRITZ SCHEEL
              BORN LÜBECK, 1852; DIED PHILADELPHIA, 1907

    RICHARD WAGNER                          Vorspiel “Parsifal”

                                Address
                       MR. OWEN WISTER
    RICHARD STRAUSS              Tone Poem “Tod und Verklärung”

    BEETHOVEN                Funeral March from Eroica Symphony
                       DR. S. WEIR MITCHELL

    January 9-10, 1914

    BEETHOVEN     Slow Movement from Symphony No. 7, in A major
                       THEODORE N. ELY
    November 3-4, 1916

    BEETHOVEN                    Eroica Symphony Marcia Funèbre
                        HAROLD ELLIS YARNALL

    April 7-8, 1917

    MACDOWELL                         “Dirge” from Indian Suite
         Tribute to the memory of our soldiers and sailors who
                        have fallen in the war

    November 15-16, 1918

    BEETHOVEN                    Eroica Symphony Marche Funèbre
                        THEODORE ROOSEVELT
    January 17-18, 1919

       *       *       *       *       *

          “RESOLUTION PASSED AT MEETING OF BOARD OF
               DIRECTORS, NOVEMBER 26th, 1919

    “WHEREAS, the Directors of the Philadelphia
    Orchestra Association note with deep sorrow the death
    of Major Henry Lee Higginson,

    “And WHEREAS, they recognize that by his death
    the cause of good music throughout the country has
    sustained an irreparable loss,

    “And WHEREAS, they recognize their own deep
    debt of gratitude to him for his pioneer work in the
    said cause of music,

    “BE IT RESOLVED that they place on record
    their very real sense of this great loss and their
    feeling of sympathy in it not only with the members of
    his family, but with every officer and member of the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra Association.

    “It is further ordered that the Secretary of the
    Philadelphia Orchestra Association transmit a copy of
    this resolution to Mrs. Higginson and to the officers
    and members of the Boston Symphony Association.”

              “The Dirge from MacDowell’s ‘Indian Suite’
                            will be played

                               IN MEMORY
                                  of
             The Founder of the Boston Symphony Orchestra

                       MAJOR HENRY LEE HIGGINSON
                 November 18, 1834—November 14, 1919”

    November 28-29, 1919
    SCHUBERT                       Unfinished Symphony, Andante
                       GEORGE W. ELKINS

    December 5-6, 1919
    WAGNER        Funeral March from “The Twilight of the Gods”
                  MRS. ALEXANDER J. CASSATT

January 23-24, 1920

Resolution passed by the Women’s Committee, January 20th, 1920.

             MRS. ALEXANDER J. CASSATT

    “Mrs. Cassatt was associated with the Women’s Committee
    for the Philadelphia Orchestra, as an Honorary
    Vice-president, at the time of its organization in
    1904; in 1909 she was elected to the Board of Managers,
    and in 1914 became a Vice-president, which position
    she held until her death on January 9th, 1920. She was
    Chairman of the Nominating Committee for many years
    and conducted its affairs with discretion and ability.
    She was also Chairman of a Committee, which during the
    winter of 1912 devoted much time and thought to the
    revision of the By-laws.

    “Mrs. Cassatt gave her support to the cause of an
    orchestra for Philadelphia, however, before the
    Philadelphia Orchestra was organized as such, and
    before the Women’s Committee had a reason for existing.
    In the spring of 1900, she organized a committee
    of women which carried through the two so-called
    Philippine Concerts and gave Fritz Scheel his first
    opportunity to appear in Philadelphia as a conductor of
    an orchestra composed of professional musicians; as a
    direct result the Philadelphia Orchestra was organized
    in the fall of that year.

    “In spite of failing health and physical suffering,
    Mrs. Cassatt’s interest in the welfare of this
    Committee and the orchestra never flagged; her wise
    counsel was freely given, and her gracious presence was
    always an inspiration. She gave to this Committee the
    benefit of her wide knowledge of people and affairs,
    and for this we have a deep sense of gratitude.

    “Her last public appearance was at the Philadelphia
    Orchestra Endowment Fund Campaign Luncheon on November
    6th, 1919, on which occasion she presented the gift of
    one thousand dollars to the Endowment Fund from the
    Women’s Committee as a tribute to its President, Miss
    Frances A. Wister.

    “The influence of her loyalty will remain a rich
    heritage for the Women’s Committee for the Philadelphia
    Orchestra.

    “THEREFORE, BE IT
    “RESOLVED, That we, the members of the Women’s
    Committee for the Philadelphia Orchestra, hereby
    express our affection and respect for Mrs. Cassatt, and
    our grief and sense of irreparable loss at her death.

    “BE IT ALSO RESOLVED, That we record our
    appreciation of Mrs. Cassatt’s interest in the affairs
    of this Committee, of her work for the Philadelphia
    Orchestra, and of her distinguished qualities of
    leadership. We are profoundly touched by the fact
    that Mrs. Cassatt’s last public appearance was in our
    behalf, and are mindful of the privilege that has been
    ours in working with her for the cause of music in
    Philadelphia.

    “BE IT ALSO RESOLVED, That this resolution
    together with the preamble be spread upon the minutes
    and that copies be sent to Mrs. Cassatt’s family as an
    expression of our deep sympathy in their loss.

        _Committee on Resolutions_
            (Signed) FRANCES ANNE WISTER, _Chairman_
                     ADÈLE G. YARNALL
                     MRS. SIMON B. FLEISHER
                     SALLIE HOUSTON HENRY
                     ELIZABETH H. ARNETT”
    January 20th, 1920.

    WAGNER                      “Götterdämmerung” Funeral March
                       CHARLES A. BRAUN
    October 27-28, 1922.

    BEETHOVEN                     Symphony No. 7, Slow Movement
                      EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
    November 30, December 1, 1923.

    WAGNER                   Funeral March from Götterdämmerung
                        WOODROW WILSON
    February 8-9, 1924.

    CHOPIN                                        Funeral March
                MRS. ALEXANDER J. DALLAS DIXON
    October 16-17, 1925.

             MRS. ALEXANDER J. DALLAS DIXON
                “DIED SEPTEMBER 20, 1925

      “RESOLUTION PASSED BY THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                    ASSOCIATION

    “The officers and members of the Administration
    Committee of The Philadelphia Orchestra Association
    have learned with deep sorrow of the death of Mrs.
    Alexander J. Dallas Dixon, who had been a member of
    the Board of Directors of the Orchestra Association
    since its very beginning, as well as first President of
    the Women’s Committee for The Philadelphia Orchestra.
    Her charming personality, sweet disposition and wise
    judgment combined to make her endeared and respected by
    all her associates.

    “In her death we have lost a true and devoted friend
    of music and a lady with whom it was a pleasure to be
    associated.

         “THE WOMEN’S COMMITTEE FOR THE PHILADELPHIA
                         ORCHESTRA

            “MRS. ALEXANDER J. DALLAS DIXON

    “Mrs. Alexander J. Dallas Dixon, the first President of
    this committee, who died on September 20, 1925, was for
    several reasons especially dear to our members.

    “Captains of ships who take the helm for voyages over
    uncharted seas, or leaders of expeditions across
    unknown continents who bring such undertakings to
    successful ends, receive the honor of their comrades.
    How much more should we treasure the memory of a
    pioneer leader, whose enterprise was so skillfully
    planned that the work for a noble purpose has been able
    to continue during twenty-one years.

    “Long before Mrs. Dixon entered upon the difficult
    position of President of this committee, however, she
    was a force in the musical life of the city. As an
    amateur pianist and singer, and as a member of the
    Eurydice Chorus and of the Melody Club, she was a
    well-known and important figure among the devotees of
    this enchanting art.

    “Mrs. Dixon taught the committee many lessons, although
    some of us were unaware of this fact at the time,
    and probably she was herself. Behind a delightful
    simplicity of manner there lay courage, patience,
    ability, firmness of purpose in an unpopular cause and
    a shining soul. Therefore, personally and officially,
    Mrs. Dixon was the greatest ornament that the committee
    has possessed and the most beloved officer. It is
    especially distressing to us to lose her from our
    midst at a time when all friends of the Philadelphia
    Orchestra are rejoicing in the Twenty-fifth Anniversary
    of the first concert, which is to be celebrated in
    November. So devoted a member of the Board of Directors
    of The Philadelphia Orchestra Association will be much
    missed on that occasion.

    “It may be well said, ‘Her ways were ways of
    pleasantness and her paths were paths of peace,’ for,
    led by her, the Women’s Committee for The Philadelphia
    Orchestra has wended its steps along the same road. Our
    gratitude will endure while the committee continues to
    exist.

    “A committee composed of the officers has been
    appointed to present a resolution for action at this
    special meeting of the Women’s Committee for The
    Philadelphia Orchestra.

                       RESOLUTION
            “MRS. ALEXANDER J. DALLAS DIXON
        “First President of the Women’s Committee for
              The Philadelphia Orchestra—1904-1912

    “Mrs. Alexander J. Dallas Dixon was the first President
    of the Women’s Committee for The Philadelphia
    Orchestra, which was organized at her house on March
    11, 1904. Until 1912 she continued as its presiding
    officer and during these years she held the esteem
    and affection of the members of the committee and
    administered its affairs with wisdom, justice and a
    broad vision.

    “Therefore, be it Resolved:
    “That we, the officers and members of the Women’s
    Committee, desire to record our deep sense of loss
    in the death of a beloved former President and
    late Honorary Vice-President, and to express our
    appreciation of her fearless initiative, her unfailing
    good judgment, her gentle but firm character, her wise
    leadership.

    “Be it also Resolved:
    “That this resolution be spread upon the minutes and
    that a copy be sent to her husband.

                COMMITTEE
        “FRANCES ANNE WISTER, _President_
         ADÈLE G. YARNALL, _Vice-president_
         SALLIE HOUSTON HENRY, _Vice-president_
         HELEN WARREN ALLEN, _Treasurer_
         ELIZABETH H. ARNETT, _Corresponding Secretary_
         MARGARET S. WOOD, _Recording Secretary_”

    October 8, 1925.




APPENDIX




APPENDIX A


                    CHARTER
                      OF
    THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA ASSOCIATION

          (Adopted November 1, 1902)

The subscribers hereto, all of whom are citizens of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, have associated themselves together for the purpose
herein below set forth and being desirous of becoming incorporated
agreeably to the provisions of the Act of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, entitled, “An Act to provide for the
incorporation and regulation of certain corporations,” approved the
twenty-ninth day of April in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and seventy-four, and the supplements thereto, do hereby
declare, set forth and certify that the following are the purposes,
objects, articles and conditions of their said Association for and upon
which they desire to be incorporated.

ARTICLE 1.—The name of the corporation shall be The Philadelphia
Orchestra Association.

ARTICLE 2.—Its object is to encourage the performance of first-class
orchestral music in the City of Philadelphia and for that purpose to
establish and maintain The Philadelphia Orchestra.

ARTICLE 3.—The place in which the business of the said corporation is
to be transacted is the City of Philadelphia.

ARTICLE 4.—The said corporation is to exist perpetually.

ARTICLE 5.—The said corporation shall have no capital stock.

ARTICLE 6.—The number of Directors of the said corporation shall be
twenty-four, and the names and residences of those who are chosen for
the first year are as follows:

             Name                           Residence

    GEORGE BURNHAM, JR.                Philadelphia, Pa.
    A. J. CASSATT                      Philadelphia, Pa.
    JOHN H. CONVERSE                   Philadelphia, Pa.
    ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.                Philadelphia, Pa.
    WILLIAM L. ELKINS                        Elkins, Pa.
    MISS MARY K. GIBSON                Philadelphia, Pa.
    CLEMENT A. GRISCOM                 Philadelphia, Pa.
    MRS. ALFRED C. HARRISON            Philadelphia, Pa.
    JOHN H. INGHAM                     Philadelphia, Pa.
    OLIVER B. JUDSON                   Philadelphia, Pa.
    EDWARD I. KEFFER                   Philadelphia, Pa.
    C. HARTMAN KUHN                    Philadelphia, Pa.
    EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN                 Philadelphia, Pa.
    THOMAS MCKEAN                      Philadelphia, Pa.
    CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD                 Philadelphia, Pa.
    JAMES W. PAUL, JR.                 Philadelphia, Pa.
    MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN          Philadelphia, Pa.
    RICHARD ROSSMÄSSLER                Philadelphia, Pa.
    EDGAR SCOTT                        Philadelphia, Pa.
    SIMON A. STERN                     Philadelphia, Pa.
    MISS ANNE THOMSON                        Merion, Pa.
    ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER           Philadelphia, Pa.
    HENRY WHELEN, JR.                  Philadelphia, Pa.
    P. A. B. WIDENER                      Ashbourne, Pa.

_Witness_ the hands and seals of the subscribers this first day of
November, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and two
(1902):

    A. VAN RENSSELAER (L.S.)
    A. J. CASSATT (L.S.)
    GEO. F. BAER (L.S.)
    HENRY WHELEN, JR. (L.S.)
    JOHN H. CONVERSE (L.S.)
    C. HARTMAN KUHN (L.S.)
    GEO. BURNHAM, JR. (L.S.)
    EDWD. G. MCCOLLIN (L.S.)
    CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD (L.S.)
    JAS. W. PAUL, JR. (L.S.)
    JOHN H. INGHAM (L.S.)
    E. I. KEFFER (L.S.)

    State of Pennsylvania
    City and County of Philadelphia

    Before me, the Recorder of Deeds for the County of
    Philadelphia, on this twenty-first day of November A.
    D. 1902, personally appeared Henry Whelen, Jr., John H.
    Ingham and Edward I. Keffer, three of the subscribers
    to the foregoing certificate of incorporation and duly
    acknowledged the same to be their act and deed, and
    desired that the same might be recorded as such,

    _Witness_ my hand and official seal the day and
    year aforesaid.
         JOS. K. FLESCHER, Deputy Recorder of Deeds (L.S.)

                     DECREE
    In the Court of Common Pleas No. 4, of the County of
    Philadelphia of December Term 1902, N. 845.

    And now this fifth day of January, A. D. 1903, the
    within Charter and Certificate of Incorporation having
    been presented to me, a Law Judge of said County,
    accompanied by due proof of publication of the notice
    of this application as required by the Act of Assembly
    and rule of this Court in such case made and provided,
    I certify that I have examined and perused the said
    writing, and have found the same to be in proper form
    and within the purposes named in the first class
    specified in Section Second of the Act of General
    Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, entitled
    “An Act to provide for the Incorporation and Regulation
    of Certain Corporations,” approved April 29th, 1874,
    and the supplements thereto, and the same appearing
    to be lawful and not injurious to the community, I do
    hereby on motion of Edward G. McCollin and John G.
    Johnson, Esquires, on behalf of the petitioners, order
    and direct that the said Charter of The Philadelphia
    Orchestra Association, aforesaid be and is the same
    hereby approved, and that upon the recording of the
    same and of this order, the subscribers thereto and
    their associates shall be a corporation by the name
    of The Philadelphia Orchestra Association, for the
    purposes and upon the terms therein stated.
                                ROBERT N. WILLSON, Judge.

Filed in the office of the Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas
No. 4 as of December Term 1902 No. 845, on the Fourth day of December
A. D. 1902.

    C. B. ROBERTS, Deputy Prothonotary.

Recorded in the office for recording Deeds etc. in and for the County
of Philadelphia in Charter Book No. 28, page 53 etc.

_Witness_ my hand and seal of office this seventh day of January A. D.
1903.

    WM. S. VARE, Recorder of Deeds (L.S.).




APPENDIX B

    EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA ELECTED AT
                   THE ORPHEUS CLUB ROOMS, MAY, 1900
                                        HENRY WHELEN, JR.
                                        JOHN C. SIMS
                                        EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
                                        OSCAR A. KNIPE
                                        EDWARD I. KEFFER
                                        OLIVER BOYCE JUDSON
                                        JOHN H. INGHAM, Secretary.




APPENDIX C


     OFFICERS AND DIRECTORS OF THE PHILADELPHIA
                ORCHESTRA ASSOCIATION
                      1900-1925

                      1901-1902
                      OFFICERS
         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
         F. T. SULLY DARLEY, Vice-president
              JOHN H. INGHAM, Secretary
            HENRY WHELEN, JR., Treasurer

                      DIRECTORS
     A. J. CASSATT             C. HARTMAN KUHN
    JOHN H. CONVERSE           EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
    ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.        THOMAS MCKEAN, JR.
    F. T. SULLY DARLEY         CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
    WILLIAM L. ELKINS          JAMES W. PAUL, JR.
    MISS MARY K. GIBSON        MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN
    CLEMENT A. GRISCOM         EDGAR SCOTT
    MRS. ALFRED C. HARRISON    SIMON A. STERN
    JOHN H. INGHAM             MISS ANNE THOMSON
    OLIVER B. JUDSON           ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
    EDWARD I. KEFFER           HENRY WHELEN, JR.
    OSCAR A. KNIPE             P. A. B. WIDENER

                      1902-1903
                      OFFICERS
         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
         THOMAS MCKEAN, Vice-president
         JOHN H. INGHAM, Secretary
          HENRY WHELEN, JR., Treasurer

                      DIRECTORS
     GEORGE BURNHAM, JR.      EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
     A. J. CASSATT            THOMAS MCKEAN
     JOHN H. CONVERSE         CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
     ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.      JAMES W. PAUL, JR.
     WILLIAM L. ELKINS        MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN
     MISS MARY K. GIBSON      RICHARD ROSSMÄSSLER
     CLEMENT A. GRISCOM       EDGAR SCOTT
     MRS. ALFRED C. HARRISON  SIMON A. STERN
     JOHN H. INGHAM           MISS ANNE THOMSON
     OLIVER B. JUDSON         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
     EDWARD I. KEFFER         HENRY WHELEN, JR.
     C. HARTMAN KUHN          P. A. B. WIDENER

                      1903-1904
                      OFFICERS
         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
            THOMAS MCKEAN, Vice-president
              JOHN H. INGHAM, Secretary
            HENRY WHELEN, JR., Treasurer

                      DIRECTORS
      MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT THOMAS MCKEAN
      GEORGE BURNHAM, JR.    CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
      A. J. CASSATT          JAMES W. PAUL, JR.
      JOHN H. CONVERSE       MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN
      ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.    RICHARD ROSSMÄSSLER
      MISS MARY K. GIBSON    EDGAR SCOTT
      CLEMENT A. GRISCOM     SIMON A. STERN
      JOHN H. INGHAM         MISS ANNE THOMSON
      EDWARD I. KEFFER       ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
      C. HARTMAN KUHN        ANDREW WHEELER, JR.
      EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN     HENRY WHELEN, JR.
      OLIVER B. JUDSON       P. A. B. WIDENER

                      1904-1905
                      OFFICERS
         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
            THOMAS MCKEAN, Vice-president
              JOHN H. INGHAM, Secretary
            HENRY WHELEN, JR., Treasurer

                      DIRECTORS
       GEORGE BURNHAM, JR.  THOMAS MCKEAN
       JOHN H. CONVERSE     CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
       ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.  JAMES W. PAUL, JR.
       MISS MARY K. GIBSON  MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN
       CLEMENT A. GRISCOM   RICHARD ROSSMÄSSLER
       JOHN H. INGHAM       EDGAR SCOTT
       OLIVER B. JUDSON     MISS ANNE THOMSON
       EDWARD I. KEFFER     ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
       C. HARTMAN KUHN      ANDREW WHEELER, JR.
       EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN   HENRY WHELEN, JR.

                      1905-1906
                      OFFICERS
         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
         THOMAS MCKEAN, Vice-president
         ANDREW WHEELER, JR., Secretary
         HENRY WHELEN, JR., Treasurer

                      DIRECTORS
     MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
     GEORGE BURNHAM, JR.     THOMAS MCKEAN
     ALEXANDER J. CASSATT    CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
     JOHN H. CONVERSE        JAMES W. PAUL, JR.
     RICHARD Y. COOK         MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN
     ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.     EDGAR SCOTT
     MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON MISS ANNE THOMSON
     MISS MARY K. GIBSON     ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
     CLEMENT A. GRISCOM      ANDREW WHEELER, JR.
     JOHN H. INGHAM          HENRY WHELEN, JR.
     EDWARD I. KEFFER        P. A. B. WIDENER
     C. HARTMAN KUHN         MISS FRANCES A. WISTER

                      1906-1907
                      OFFICERS
         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
         THOMAS MCKEAN, Vice-president
         ANDREW WHEELER, JR., Secretary
         HENRY WHELEN, JR., Treasurer

                      DIRECTORS
     MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT   EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
     GEORGE BURNHAM, JR.      CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
     JOHN H. CONVERSE         JAMES W. PAUL, JR.
     RICHARD Y. COOK          MRS. F. H. ROSENGARTEN
     ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.      EDGAR SCOTT
     MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON  MISS ANNE THOMSON
     MISS MARY K. GIBSON      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
     CLEMENT A. GRISCOM       ANDREW WHEELER, JR.
     JOHN H. INGHAM           HENRY WHELEN, JR.
     EDWARD I. KEFFER         P. A. B. WIDENER
     C. HARTMAN KUHN          MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                    THOMAS MCKEAN

                      1907-1908
                      OFFICERS
         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
         THOMAS MCKEAN, Vice-president
         ANDREW WHEELER, JR., Secretary
         ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                      DIRECTORS
      MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  THOMAS MCKEAN
      GEORGE BURNHAM, JR.     ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD
      JOHN H. CONVERSE        CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
      RICHARD Y. COOK         JAMES W. PAUL, JR.
      ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.     MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN
      MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON EDGAR SCOTT
      MISS MARY K. GIBSON     E. T. STOTESBURY
      CLEMENT A. GRISCOM      MISS ANNE THOMSON
      JOHN H. INGHAM          ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
      EDWARD I. KEFFER        ANDREW WHEELER, JR.
      C. HARTMAN KUHN         P. A. B. WIDENER
      EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN      MISS FRANCES A. WISTER

                      1908-1909
                      OFFICERS
         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
         THOMAS MCKEAN, Vice-president
         ANDREW WHEELER, JR., Secretary
          ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                      DIRECTORS
      MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  THOMAS MCKEAN
      CHARLES A. BRAUN        ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD
      GEORGE BURNHAM, JR.     CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
      JOHN H. CONVERSE        G. HEIDE NORRIS
      RICHARD Y. COOK         MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN
      ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.     EDGAR SCOTT
      MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON E. T. STOTESBURY
      MISS MARY K. GIBSON     MISS ANNE THOMSON
      CLEMENT A. GRISCOM      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
      JOHN H. INGHAM          ANDREW WHEELER, JR.
      C. HARTMAN KUHN         MISS FRANCES A. WISTER

                      1909-1910
                      OFFICERS
         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
         THOMAS MCKEAN, Vice-president
         ANDREW WHEELER, JR., Secretary
          ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                      DIRECTORS
      MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  C. HARTMAN KUHN
      CHARLES A. BRAUN        THOMAS MCKEAN
      JAMES CROSBY BROWN      ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD
      GEORGE BURNHAM, JR.     CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
      JOHN H. CONVERSE        G. HEIDE NORRIS
      RICHARD Y. COOK         MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN
      ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.     EDGAR SCOTT
      MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON E. T. STOTESBURY
      THEODORE N. ELY         MISS ANNE THOMSON
      MISS MARY K. GIBSON     ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
      CLEMENT A. GRISCOM      ANDREW WHEELER, JR.
      JOHN H. INGHAM          MISS FRANCES A. WISTER

                      1910-1911
                      OFFICERS
         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
         THOMAS MCKEAN, Vice-president
         ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
         ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                      DIRECTORS
      MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT   THOMAS MCKEAN
      CHARLES A. BRAUN         ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD
      JAMES CROSBY BROWN       CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
      RICHARD Y. COOK          G. HEIDE NORRIS
      ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.      MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN
      MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON  EDGAR SCOTT
      THEODORE N. ELY          E. T. STOTESBURY
      MISS MARY K. GIBSON      MISS ANNE THOMSON
      CLEMENT A. GRISCOM       ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
      JOHN H. INGHAM           ANDREW WHEELER
      C. HARTMAN KUHN          MISS FRANCES A. WISTER

                      1911-1912
                      OFFICERS
         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
         THOMAS MCKEAN, Vice-president
         ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
         ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                      DIRECTORS
      MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD
      CHARLES A. BRAUN        CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
      JAMES CROSBY BROWN      G. HEIDE NORRIS
      RICHARD Y. COOK         MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN
      ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.     EDGAR SCOTT
      MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON E. T. STOTESBURY
      THEODORE N. ELY         MISS ANNE THOMSON
      MISS MARY K. GIBSON     ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
      CLEMENT A. GRISCOM      MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
      JOHN H. INGHAM          ANDREW WHEELER
      C. HARTMAN KUHN         J. R. BARTON WILLING
      THOMAS MCKEAN           MISS FRANCES A. WISTER

                      1912-1913
                      OFFICERS
         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
         THOMAS MCKEAN, Vice-president
         ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
         ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                      DIRECTORS
       MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT   ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD
       CHARLES A. BRAUN         CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
       JAMES CROSBY BROWN       G. HEIDE NORRIS
       RICHARD Y. COOK          MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN
       ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.      EDGAR SCOTT
       MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON  E. T. STOTESBURY
       THEODORE N. ELY          ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
       MISS MARY K. GIBSON      MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
       CLEMENT A. GRISCOM[64]    ANDREW WHEELER
       JOHN H. INGHAM           J. R. BARTON WILLING
       C. HARTMAN KUHN          MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                    THOMAS MCKEAN

[64] Died during the season and his place filled by Mrs. Harold E.
Yarnall.

                                   1913-1914
                                   OFFICERS
                      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
                      THOMAS MCKEAN, Vice-president
                      ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
                      ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                                   DIRECTORS
                   MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  C. HARTMAN KUHN
                   EDWARD W. BOK           THOMAS MCKEAN
                   CHARLES A. BRAUN        ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD
                   JOHN F. BRAUN           CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
                   JAMES CROSBY BROWN      G. HEIDE NORRIS
                   RICHARD Y. COOK         EDGAR SCOTT
                   ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.     E. T. STOTESBURY
                   CYRUS H. K. CURTIS      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                   MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
                   THEODORE N. ELY         ANDREW WHEELER
                   MISS MARY K. GIBSON     MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                   JOHN H. INGHAM          MRS. HAROLD E. YARNALL

                                   1914-1915
                                   OFFICERS
                      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
                      EDWARD W. BOK, Vice-president
                      ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
                      ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                                   DIRECTORS
                   MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  JOHN H. INGHAM
                   EDWARD W. BOK           C. HARTMAN KUHN
                   CHARLES A. BRAUN        THOMAS MCKEAN
                   JOHN F. BRAUN           ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD
                   JAMES CROSBY BROWN      G. HEIDE NORRIS
                   RICHARD Y. COOK         E. T. STOTESBURY
                   ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.     ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                   CYRUS H. K. CURTIS      MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
                   MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON ANDREW WHEELER
                   GEORGE W. ELKINS        MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                   THEODORE N. ELY         MRS. HAROLD E. YARNALL
                              MISS MARY K. GIBSON

                                   1915-1916
                                   OFFICERS
                      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
                      E. T. STOTESBURY, Vice-president
                      ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
                      ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                                   DIRECTORS
                   MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  HENRY MCKEAN INGERSOLL
                   EDWARD W. BOK           JOHN H. INGHAM
                   CHARLES A. BRAUN        C. HARTMAN KUHN
                   JOHN F. BRAUN           THOMAS MCKEAN
                   JAMES CROSBY BROWN      ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD
                   RICHARD Y. COOK         G. HEIDE NORRIS
                   ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.     E. T. STOTESBURY
                   CYRUS H. K. CURTIS      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                   MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
                   GEORGE W. ELKINS        ANDREW WHEELER
                   THEODORE N. ELY         MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                   SAMUEL S. FELS          MRS. HAROLD E. YARNALL
                              MISS MARY K. GIBSON

                                   1916-1917
                                   OFFICERS
                      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
                      E. T. STOTESBURY, Vice-president
                      ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
                      ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                                   DIRECTORS
                   MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  JOHN H. INGHAM
                   EDWARD W. BOK           C. HARTMAN KUHN
                   CHARLES A. BRAUN        ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD
                   JOHN F. BRAUN           G. HEIDE NORRIS
                   JAMES CROSBY BROWN      E. T. STOTESBURY
                   RICHARD Y. COOK         ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                   CYRUS H. K. CURTIS      MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
                   MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON ANDREW WHEELER
                   GEORGE W. ELKINS        JOSEPH E. WIDENER
                   SAMUEL S. FELS          MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                   MISS MARY K. GIBSON     CHARLTON YARNALL
                   CHARLES D. HART         MRS. HAROLD E. YARNALL
                            HENRY MCKEAN INGERSOLL

                                   1917-1918
                                   OFFICERS
                      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
                      E. T. STOTESBURY, Vice-president
                      ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
                      ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                                   DIRECTORS
                   MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT C. HARTMAN KUHN
                   EDWARD W. BOK          EFFINGHAM B. MORRIS
                   CHARLES A. BRAUN       ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD
                   JOHN F. BRAUN          G. HEIDE NORRIS
                   JAMES CROSBY BROWN     E. T. STOTESBURY
                   CYRUS H. K. CURTIS     ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                   GEORGE W. ELKINS       MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
                   SAMUEL S. FELS         ANDREW WHEELER
                   MISS MARY K. GIBSON    JOSEPH E. WIDENER
                   CHARLES D. HART        MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                   HENRY MCKEAN INGERSOLL CHARLTON YARNALL
                   JOHN H. INGHAM         MRS. HAROLD E. YARNALL

                                   1918-1919
                                   OFFICERS
                      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
                      E. T. STOTESBURY, Vice-president
                      ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
                      ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                                   DIRECTORS
                   MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  C. HARTMAN KUHN
                   EDWARD W. BOK           EFFINGHAM B. MORRIS
                   CHARLES A. BRAUN        G. HEIDE NORRIS
                   JOHN F. BRAUN           E. T. STOTESBURY
                   JAMES CROSBY BROWN      MISS ANNE THOMSON
                   CYRUS H. K. CURTIS      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                   MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
                   GEORGE W. ELKINS        ANDREW WHEELER
                   SAMUEL S. FELS          JOSEPH E. WIDENER
                   CHARLES D. HART         MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                   HENRY MCKEAN INGERSOLL  CHARLTON YARNALL
                   JOHN H. INGHAM          MRS. HAROLD E. YARNALL

                                   1919-1920
                                   OFFICERS
                      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
                      E. T. STOTESBURY, Vice-president[65]
                      ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
                      ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD, Treasurer

                                   DIRECTORS
                   MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  C. HARTMAN KUHN
                   EDWARD W. BOK           EFFINGHAM B. MORRIS
                   CHARLES A. BRAUN        G. HEIDE NORRIS
                   JOHN F. BRAUN           MISS ANNE THOMSON
                   JAMES CROSBY BROWN      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                   CYRUS H. K. CURTIS      MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
                   MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON ANDREW WHEELER
                   GEORGE W. ELKINS[66]     JOSEPH E. WIDENER
                   SAMUEL S. FELS          MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                   CHARLES D. HART         CHARLTON YARNALL
                   HENRY MCKEAN INGERSOLL  MRS. HAROLD E. YARNALL
                                JOHN H. INGHAM

[65] Resigned during the season.

[66] Died during the season and his place taken by William Jay Turner.

                                   1920-1921
                                   OFFICERS
                      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
                      WILLIAM JAY TURNER, Vice-president
                      ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
                      ROBERT K. CASSATT, Treasurer

                                   DIRECTORS
                   MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  C. HARTMAN KUHN
                   EDWARD W. BOK           EFFINGHAM B. MORRIS
                   CHARLES A. BRAUN        G. HEIDE NORRIS
                   JOHN F. BRAUN           ROBERT K. CASSATT
                   JAMES CROSBY BROWN      MISS ANNE THOMSON
                   CYRUS H. K. CURTIS      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                   MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
                   WILLIAM JAY TURNER      ANDREW WHEELER
                   SAMUEL S. FELS          JOSEPH E. WIDENER
                   CHARLES D. HART         MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                   HENRY MCKEAN INGERSOLL  CHARLTON YARNALL
                   JOHN H. INGHAM          MRS. HAROLD E. YARNALL

                                   1921-1922
                                   OFFICERS
                      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
                      WILLIAM JAY TURNER, Vice-president
                      ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
                      ROBERT K. CASSATT, Treasurer

                                   DIRECTORS
                   MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  C. HARTMAN KUHN
                   EDWARD W. BOK           EFFINGHAM B. MORRIS
                   CHARLES A. BRAUN        G. HEIDE NORRIS
                   JOHN F. BRAUN           ROBERT K. CASSATT
                   JAMES CROSBY BROWN      MISS ANNE THOMSON
                   CYRUS H. K. CURTIS      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                   MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
                   WILLIAM JAY TURNER      ANDREW WHEELER
                   SAMUEL S. FELS          JOSEPH E. WIDENER
                   CHARLES D. HART         MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                   HENRY MCKEAN INGERSOLL  CHARLTON YARNALL
                   JOHN H. INGHAM          MRS. HAROLD E. YARNALL

                        1922-1923, 1923-1924, 1924-1925
                                   OFFICERS
                      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER, President
                      WILLIAM JAY TURNER, Vice-president
                      ANDREW WHEELER, Jr., Secretary
                      ROBERT K. CASSATT, Treasurer

                                   DIRECTORS
                   MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT  C. HARTMAN KUHN
                   EDWARD W. BOK           EFFINGHAM B. MORRIS
                   EVAN RANDOLPH           G. HEIDE NORRIS
                   JOHN F. BRAUN           ROBERT K. CASSATT
                   JAMES CROSBY BROWN      MISS ANNE THOMSON
                   CYRUS H. K. CURTIS      ALEXANDER VAN RENSSELAER
                   MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
                   WILLIAM JAY TURNER      ANDREW WHEELER
                   SAMUEL S. FELS          JOSEPH E. WIDENER
                   CHARLES D. HART         MISS FRANCES A. WISTER
                   HENRY MCKEAN INGERSOLL  CHARLTON YARNALL
                   JOHN H. INGHAM          MRS. HAROLD E. YARNALL




APPENDIX D


    FIRST GUARANTORS OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                     1900-1901

    MR. HORACE ALLEN           MISS MARY K. GIBSON
    MISS HELEN AUDENRIED       MR. W. W. GILCHRIST
    MR. LEWIS AUDENRIED        MR. WM. GREW
    MRS. A. W. BAIRD           MISS MARY C. GRIFFITH
    MR. W. J. BAIRD            MRS. CLEMENT A. GRISCOM
    MR. J. W. BAYARD           MR. W. BENNETT GOUGH
    MRS. E. F. BEALE           MRS. R. EMOTT HARE
    MRS. LOUIS F. BENSON       MRS. J. CAMPBELL HARRIS
    MRS. ARTHUR BIDDLE         MR. AUSTIN S. HECKSCHER
    MRS. GEORGE TUCKER BISPHAM MESSRS. C. J. HEPPE & SON
    REV. CYRUS TOWNSEND BRADY  MR. F. D. HOWELL
    MR. JOHN F. BRAUN          MRS. WARREN INGERSOLL
    MISS FRANCES I. BROCK      MISS M. H. INGHAM
    DR. EDWARD BROOKS          MR. W. H. JOYCE
    MISS HARRIET BUCHANAN      MRS. O. A. JUDSON
    MRS. EDWARD S. BUCKLEY     MR. O. B. JUDSON
    DR. C. E. CADWALADER       DR. EDWARD I. KEFFER
    MISS F. E. CALDWELL        MR. PHILIP F. KELLY
    MRS. ALEXANDER J. CASSATT  MR. OSCAR A. KNIPE
    MRS. S. CASTNER, JR.       MR. C. HARTMAN KUHN
    MR. FRANK G. CAUFFMAN      MRS. BIGELOW LAWRENCE
    MISS KATE H. CHANDLER      MISS NINA LEA
    MRS. JAMES H. CHAPMAN      MR. J. BERTRAM LIPPINCOTT
    MR. CHARLES J. COHEN       MRS. E. LYNCH
    MR. JOHN H. CONVERSE       MR. EDW. G. MCCOLLIN
    MRS. ALEXANDER BROWN COXE  MRS. H. PRATT MCKEAN
    MRS. CHAS. E. COXE         MR. THOMAS MCKEAN
    MR. ECKLEY B. COXE, JR.    MR. FRANK MCLAUGHLIN
    MISS REBECCA COXE          MESSRS. HENRY MILLER & SONS
    MR. F. E. CRESSON          MR. JOSEPH M. MITCHESON
    MR. DAVID S. CRESSWELL     MR. CLEMENT BUCKLEY NEWBOLD
    MR. D. E. CROZIER          MRS. THOMAS H. NEWTON
    MR. H. B. CURRAN           MISS ETHEL PARRISH
    MR. CHAS. W. DANNEHAUER    MRS. JOSEPH PARRISH
    MR. FRANCIS T. S. DARLEY   MISS M. PARRISH
    MRS. SAMUEL G. DIXON       HON. CLEMENT B. PENROSE
    MR. GEORGE B. DREISLER     MRS. ELI KIRK PRICE
    MR. THEO. N. ELY           MR. MAX RIEBENACK
    MR. CHANCELLOR C. ENGLISH  MRS. E. C. ROBERTS
    MRS. SPENCER ERVIN         MR. W. S. ROBINSON
    MRS. WM. H. FARR           MISS FANNIE ROSENGARTEN
    MR. CHAS. H. FISCHER       MRS. FRANK H. ROSENGARTEN

    MR. J. G. ROSENGARTEN      MR. HENRY GORDON THUNDER
    MISS ELSÉ WEST RULON       MR. ALEX. VAN RENSSELAER
    MISS EMMA SCHUBERT         MRS. T. H. WARREN
    MR. EDGAR SCOTT            MR. HENRY WATERS
    MRS. THOMAS A. SCOTT       MR. L. R. WELSH
    MISS ELIZABETH SMITH       MR. ANDREW WHEELER, JR.
    MRS. EDWARD B. SMITH       MISS GERTRUDE WHEELER
    MISS E. K. SMITH, JR.      MR. C. S. WHELEN
    MR. S. DECATUR SMITH       MRS. C. S. WHELEN
    MRS. A. M. STARR           MR. HENRY WHELEN, JR.
    MR. SIMON A. STERN         MISS ABBIE WINNERY
    MESSRS. N. STETSON & CO.   MR. ELLIS D. WILLIAMS
    MRS. CORNELIUS STEVENSON   MR. CHAS. WILLING
    MR. W. R. STOBBE           MR. DAVID D. WOOD
    MISS M. D. TENBROOKE       DR. C. S. WURTS
    MR. J. B. THAYER, JR.      MRS. CHARLTON YARNALL
    MR. GEO. C. THOMAS         MR. RICHARD ZECKWER
    MR. HENRY J. THOURON       MR. HARRY D. ZIEGLER




APPENDIX E


        SUMMARY OF CONCERTS PLAYED BY THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
              SEASONS 1900-1901 TO 1924-1925, INCLUSIVE

        1—SEASON 1900-1901:
            Six Concerts                                             6
            Reading, Penna.                                          1
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                             7

        2—SEASON 1901-1902:
            Regular Series Concerts  14 }                           28
            Public Rehearsals        14 }
            Allentown, Harrisburg, Lancaster, Reading, York,
              Penna., Trenton, Wilmington, three (3) each           24
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            52

        3—SEASON 1902-1903:
            Regular Series Concerts  14 }                           28
            Public Rehearsals        14 }
            Beethoven Cycle                                          5
            Popular Concerts                                         5
            Young People’s Educational Series                        5
            Allentown, Harrisburg, Lancaster, Reading, York,
              Penna., Wilmington, three (3) each                    18
            Baltimore, Carlisle, Lebanon, Lock Haven, Scranton,
              Wilkes-Barre, Williamsport, Penna., New York City,
              Trenton, Washington, one (1) each                     10
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            71

        4—SEASON 1903-1904:
            Regular Series Concerts  14 }                           28
            Public Rehearsals        14 }
            Young People’s Educational Lecture Concerts              5
            People’s Concerts                                        5
            Special Concerts                                         2
            Popular Concert                                          1
            Special (Thibaud) Concert                                1
            Allentown, Harrisburg, Lancaster, Penna., Wilmington,
              three (3) each                                        12
            Boston                                                   2
            Reading, Lebanon, Penna., New York City, one (1) each    3
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            59

        5—SEASON 1904-1905:
            Regular Series Concerts  15 }                           30
            Public Rehearsals        15 }
            People’s Concerts                                        5
            Weingartner Concert, Special                             1
            Harrisburg, Washington, one (1) each                     2
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            38

        6—SEASON 1905-1906:
            Regular Series Concerts  18 }                           36
            Public Rehearsals        18 }
            Lecture Concerts                                         4
            Baltimore, Washington, Wilmington, three (3) each        9
            Lancaster, Reading, New York City, two (2) each          6
            Trenton, Easton, Brooklyn, one (1) each                  3
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            58

        7—SEASON 1906-1907:
            Regular Series Concerts  20 }                           40
            Public Rehearsals        20 }
            People’s Concert, Kensington                             1
            Baltimore                                                5
            Washington                                               5
            Wilmington                                               4
            Harrisburg                                               3
            Trenton                                                  2
            Easton, Reading, Penna., one (1) each                    2
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            62

        8—SEASON 1907-1908:
            Regular Series Concerts, 22 pairs                       44
            “In Memoriam” Concert, Fritz Scheel                      1
            Baltimore                                                5
            Washington                                               5
            Wilmington                                               4
            Lancaster                                                2
            New York City, Trenton, one (1) each                     2
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            63

        9—SEASON 1908-1909:
            Regular Series Concerts, 22 pairs                       44
            University of Pennsylvania                               2
            People’s Concerts, Kensington                            2
            Baltimore                                                5
            Washington                                               5
            Wilmington                                               4
            Lancaster                                                2
            New York City, Brooklyn, Princeton, one (1) each         3
                                                                    ——
                  TOTAL                                             67

        10—SEASON 1909-1910:
            Regular Series Concerts, 22 pairs                       44
            Popular Concerts                                        10
            University of Pennsylvania                               6
            People’s Concerts, Kensington                            3
            Stetson Concert                                          1
            Baltimore                                                5
            Washington                                               5
            Wilmington                                               4
            Princeton                                                2
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            80

        11—SEASON 1910-1911:
            Regular Series Concerts, 25 pairs                       50
            Popular Concerts                                        11
            National Federation of Music Clubs, Special              1
            People’s Concerts, Kensington                            3
            University of Pennsylvania                               2
            Stetson Concert                                          1
            Camden                                                   5
            Wilmington                                               4
            Norristown                                               2
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            79

        12—SEASON 1911-1912:
            Regular Series Concerts, 25 pairs                       50
            Two pairs of Concerts for the Guarantee Fund             4
            Popular Concerts                                         6
            People’s Concerts, Kensington                            4
            University of Pennsylvania Concerts                      2
            Germantown                                               1
            Stetson Concert                                          1
            Atlantic City                                            2
            Camden                                                   6
            Wilmington                                               4
            Akron, Cleveland, Easton, Norristown, Pittsburgh,
              Reading, Penna., one (1) each                          6
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            86

        13—SEASON 1912-1913:
            Regular Series Concerts, 25 pairs                       50
            Popular Concerts                                         6
            People’s Concerts, Kensington                            3
            Germantown                                               1
            Stetson Concert                                          1
            University of Pennsylvania                               2
            Manuscript Music Society                                 1
            Atlantic City                                            2
            Camden                                                   6
            Wilmington                                               4
            Akron, Cleveland, Toledo, Columbus; Detroit, Mich.;
              Pittsburgh, Reading, Penna.; Springfield, Mass.;
              Washington, one (1) each                               9
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            85

        14—SEASON 1913-1914:
            Regular Series Concerts, 25 pairs                       50
            Special Concert in Afternoon Series                      1
            Popular Concerts                                         6
            People’s Concerts, Kensington                            3
            University of Pennsylvania                               2
            Stetson Concert                                          1
            Atlantic City                                            4
            Princeton                                                2
            Washington                                               3
            Wilmington                                               4
            Oberlin, Akron, Cleveland,; Ann Arbor, Detroit,
              Boston, North Adams, Mass.; Meriden, Middlebury,
              Bridgeport, Waterbury, Norwich, Conn.; New York
              City, Pittsburgh, Easton, Reading, Scranton,
              one (1) each                                          17
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            93

        15—SEASON 1914-1915:
            Regular Series Concerts, 25 pairs                       50
            Special “Pension Fund” Concerts                          2
            Concert for Young People                                 1
            University of Pennsylvania                               2
            Richmond                                                 3
            Washington                                               3
            Wilmington                                               4
            Atlantic City                                            2
            Reading                                                  2
            Oberlin, Akron, Ann Arbor, Detroit, Baltimore,
              Buffalo, Cleveland, Erie, Indianapolis,
              New York City, Princeton, one (1) each                11
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            80

        16—SEASON 1915-1916:
            Regular Series Concerts, 25 pairs                       50
            Mahler’s Eighth Symphony, extra performances             7
            Public School (“Public Ledger”) Concerts                 8
            Free Sunday Afternoon Concerts                           3
            University of Pennsylvania                               3
            Stetson Concert                                          1
            Washington                                               5
            Wilmington                                               4
            Atlantic City                                            2
            Baltimore, Bryn Mawr, Buffalo, Oberlin, Cleveland,
              Columbus, Dayton, Detroit, Ypsilanti, Mich.;
              Jamestown, N. Y., New York City, Norristown, Easton,
              Lancaster, Lebanon, Reading, Penna., Princeton,
              one (1) each                                          17
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                           100

        17—SEASON 1916-1917:
            Regular Series Concerts, 25 pairs                       50
            Special performance of Bach St. Matthew Passion          1
            Public School (“Public Ledger”) Concerts                 8
            Free Sunday Afternoon Concerts                           3
            University of Pennsylvania Concerts                      3
            Stetson Concert                                          1
            Five pairs of Concerts in Pittsburgh                    10
            Baltimore                                                3
            Washington                                               5
            Wilmington                                               5
            Atlantic City                                            2
            Albany, Buffalo, Cleveland, Oberlin, Lima, Springfield,
              Columbus, Dayton, Detroit, Ypsilanti, Grand Rapids,
              Jamestown, N. Y.; New York City, Portland, Maine,
              Princeton, Lebanon, Reading, Penna.; Richmond,
              Va.; Wheeling, W. Va.; Williamstown, Manchester,
              Mass.; one (1) each                                   21
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                           112

        18—SEASON 1917-1918:
            Regular Series Concerts, 25 pairs                       50
            Reformation Concert, Special                             1
            Aeolian Concert, Special                                 1
            Red Cross Concert, Special                               1
            People’s Concert at Stetson Auditorium                   1
            Pittsburgh, 5 pairs                                     10
            Baltimore                                                5
            Washington                                               5
            Wilmington                                               5
            Oberlin                                                  2
            Cleveland                                                2
            Toronto, Canada                                          3
            Camp Dix, N. J.; Columbus, Dayton, Detroit, Grand
              Rapids, Kalamazoo, Ypsilanti, Mich.; Buffalo,
              Rochester, Ithaca, N. Y.; New York City, Princeton,
              one (1) each                                          12
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            98

        19—SEASON 1918-1919:
            Regular Series Concerts, 25 pairs                       50
            French War Relief Benefit                                1
            Roosevelt Memorial Concert                               1
            Wanamaker Concert                                        1
            Stetson Auditorium                                       1
            University of Pennsylvania                               2
            Pittsburgh, 5 pairs                                     10
            Washington                                               5
            Baltimore                                                5
            Wilmington                                               5
            New York City (Afternoon)                                5
            New York City, Vacation Association Benefit              1
            Cleveland                                                3
            Toronto                                                  3
            Oberlin                                                  2
            Wheeling, W. Va.; Pottsville, one (1) each               2
            House of Representatives, Harrisburg, Penna.             1
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                            98

        20—SEASON 1919-1920:
            Concerts, 25 pairs                                      50
            Endowment Fund Concerts (telephone subscribers)          2
            Wanamaker, Special                                       1
            Supervisors of Music, Special                            1
            Aeolian Concert, Special                                 1
            Stetson Auditorium                                       1
            University of Pennsylvania                               5
            New York City (Evening)                                  5
            Pittsburgh, 5 pairs                                     10
            Washington                                               5
            Baltimore                                                5
            Wilmington                                               5
            Toronto                                                  4
            Cleveland                                                3
            Harrisburg                                               2
            Buffalo, Ithaca, Columbus, Oberlin, Detroit,
              Pottsville, Princeton, one (1) each                    7
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                           107

        21—SEASON 1920-1921:
            Regular Series Concerts, 25 pairs                       50
            Monday Evening                                           3
            People’s Concert at Stetson Auditorium                   1
            University of Pennsylvania                               5
            New York City (Series)                                   8
            Froebel League, New York, Special                        1
            Washington                                               5
            Baltimore                                                5
            Wilmington                                               5
            Pittsburgh, 5 pairs                                     10
            Harrisburg                                               5
            Toronto                                                  4
            Princeton, Pottsville, one (1) each                      2
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                           104

        22—SEASON 1921-1922:
            Regular Series Concerts, 25 pairs                       50
            Monday Evening Concerts                                  3
            Children’s Concerts                                      3
            Strauss Concert                                          1
            Philadelphia Award                                       1
            Stetson Auditorium                                       1
            University of Pennsylvania                               5
            New York City (Series)                                  10
            Strauss, New York, Special                               4
            Washington                                               5
            Baltimore                                                5
            Pittsburgh, 5 pairs                                     10
            Harrisburg                                               5
            Toronto                                                  4
            Princeton, Pottsville, one (1) each                      2
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                           109

        23—SEASON 1922-1923:
            Regular Series Concerts, 26 pairs                       52
            Monday Evening Concerts                                  4
            Children’s Concerts, 3 pairs                             6
            Wanamaker Concert, Special                               1
            Stanley Theatre, Special                                 1
            “Forum” Concert                                          1
            (“Philadelphia Award”) Concert                           1
            Stetson Auditorium                                       1
            New York City                                           10
            Pittsburgh, 3 pairs                                      6
            Pittsburgh Children’s Concerts                           3
            Washington                                               5
            Baltimore                                                5
            Toronto                                                  4
            Harrisburg                                               3
            Princeton, Pottsville, one (1) each                      2
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                           105

        24—SEASON 1923-1924:
            Regular Series Concerts, 26 pairs                       52
            Monday Evening Concerts                                  6
            Children’s Concerts, 4 pairs                             8
            Philadelphia “Forum,” Lecture Concerts                   4
            Public School Children                                   3
            Teachers’ Convention, Special                            1
            Philadelphia Award                                       1
            Mendelssohn Choir of Toronto, Philadelphia               1
            New York City                                           10
            Mendelssohn Choir of Toronto, Special, in New York       2
            Washington                                               5
            Baltimore                                                5
            Toronto                                                  4
            Montreal, Princeton, one (1) each                        2
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                           104

        25—SEASON 1924-1925:
            Regular Series Concerts, 29 pairs                       58
            Monday Evening                                           8
            Children’s Concerts, 4 pairs                             8
            Public School Children                                   3
            Philadelphia “Forum”                                     3
            Philadelphia Award Concert, Special                      1
            New York City                                           10
            Washington                                               5
            Baltimore                                                5
            Toronto                                                  4
            Buffalo, Princeton, one (1) each                         2
                                                                    ——
                   TOTAL                                           107




APPENDIX F


                          CONDUCTORS
        PERSONNEL OF PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA 1900-1925
     PERSONNEL OF PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA CHORUS 1920-1921
                      MANAGERS 1900-1925
                      OFFICE STAFF 1925

                          CONDUCTORS
                  FRITZ SCHEEL        1900-1907
                  CARL POHLIG         1907-1912
                  LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI   1912

                          PERSONNEL
    S. ABAS                  Violin                           1901-02
    PHILIP ABBAS             Cello                            1916-17
    HARRY ALEINIKOFF         Violin                           1915-25
    PAUL ALEMANN             Clarinet                         1904-25
    LOUIS ANGELOTY           Violin                           1908-22
    P. ANTONELLI             Horn                             1920-23
    RUFUS M. AREY            Clarinet (Principal)             1923-24
    BERNARD ARGIEWICZ        Cello                            1917-19
                                                              1924-25
    WILLIAM L. ARKLESS       Violin                           1900-01
                             Viola                            1915-18
    J. ASCHKE                Piccolo                          1901-02
    ANTON ASENMACKER         Cello                            1917-19
    J. AYALA                 Trumpet                          1916-17
    F. V. BADOLLET           Flute                            1901-04
    HARRY J. BAKER           Battery                          1923-24
    IRVING J. BANCROFT       Violin                           1916-25
    PHILIP BANSBACH          Viola                            1919-22
    W. BARCHEWITZ            Violin                           1901-04
    CLEMENTE BARONE          Flute and Piccolo                1900-01
                            (Principal 1907-10)               1904-10
    RICHARD BARONE           Violin                           1923-24
    HERMAN BASSE             Trumpet (Principal 1904-05,      1904-05
                               1914-15)                       1914-17
    GUS BATTLES              Flute                            1906-09
    VICTOR BAY               Violin                           1922-23
    JACOB H. BECK            Trumpet                          1900-01
    WILLIAM J. BECK          Violin                           1906-09
    MIRKO BELINSKI           Cello                            1904-09
    J. F. BELLOIS            Violin                           1900-01
    JOEL BELOV               Violin                           1912-20
                                                              1923-24
    SAMUEL BELOV             Viola                            1908-20
    JOSEPH BENAVENTE         Cello                            1917-18
    AUGUST BENDER            Trumpet                          1901-03
    F. BENETER               Violin                           1901-02
    ISADORE BERV             Horn                             1923-25
    FREDERICK BETTONEY       Bassoon                          1917-20
    P. BIANCULLI             Violin                           1913-14
    HENRY BIELO              Bassoon                          1920-22
    JULIUS BIELO             Bass                             1920-22
    ANTONIN BLAHA            Violin                           1906-08
                                                              1909-12
    MAX BLEYER               Trumpet (Principal 1903-04)      1903-08
    MAX BLUMENFELD           Violin                           1904-06
    H. BOBELL                Violin                           1903-04
    GUSTAV BOEHM             Violin                           1900-01
    LOUIS BOEHSE             Bass                             1904-07
                                                              1908-25
    DANIEL BONADE            Clarinet                         1917-22
                                                              1924-25
    MILTON BORNSTEIN         Violin                           1921-25
    ROSARIO BOURDON          Cello                            1904-08
    DOMENICO BOVE            Violin                           1917-23
                                                              1924-25
    ISADOR BRANSKY           Viola                            1919-20
    HORACE BRITT             Cello (Principal)                1907-08
    ROGER BRITT              Violin                           1914-20
    JOSEPH BRODO             Violin                           1918-24
    LEOPOLD BROECKAERT       Flute                            1904-05
    H. I. BROWN              Violin                           1921-25
    J. H. BURKARTMAEIR       Violin                           1900-01
    NATHAN CAHAN             Bass                             1900-24
    P. CAHON                 Cello                            1901-02
    L. CAILLIET              Clarinet                         1916-25
    H. CAMPOWSKY             Violin                           1903-17
                                                              1920-23
    HERMAN CAROW             Violin                           1916-18
    HUGO CAROW               Viola                            1900-04
                                                              1908-21
    S. H. CAUFFMAN           Cello                            1901-02
                                                              1903-04
    HARRY CHAZIN             Violin                           1919-23
    S. CHEIFETZ              Viola                            1924-25
    JOSEF CHUDNOWSKY         Violin                           1913-24
    JOHN A. CIANCIARULO      Violin                           1900-01
                                                              1903-05
    GIUSEPPE CIMINO          Horn                             1918-19
    DAVID COHEN              Violin                           1918-25
    SOLOMON COHEN            Trumpet                          1918-25
    LUCIUS COLE              Violin                           1905-19
    FREDERICK W. COOK        Violin                           1906-24
    CARLTON COOLEY           Viola                            1919-20
    WILLIAM CONRAD           Bassoon                          1921-22
    S. CORTADELLA            Bass                             1923-24
    FRANCESCO CORTESE        Harp                             1900-01
    R. CRAS                  Horn                             1919-20
    HENRI CZAPLINSKI         Violin                           1924-25
    S. DABROWSKI             Violin                           1923-25
    BENJAMIN D’AMELIO        Violin                           1919-24
    J. DE BOER               Violin                           1901-02
    GEORGE DECHERT           Trombone                         1901-04
    GEORGE DE CLERCK         Viola                            1912-19
    VICTOR DE GOMEZ          Cello                            1916-19
    FRANK DELLI GATTI        Viola                            1920-21
                             Violin                           1921-23
    F. DEL NEGRO             Bassoon                          1922-25
    EUGENE DEVAUX            Oboe                             1910-11
    WILLIAM DIESTEL          Viola (Principal)                1908-15
    FRITZ DIETERICHS         Clarinet (Principal)             1901-12
    JOSEPH DI NATALE         Violin                           1917-18
    WILLIAM F. DODGE         Violin                           1906-07
    CARL DOELL               Violin (Concertmaster)           1900-01
    P. A. DONATELLI          Tuba                             1923-25
    FREDERICK DONATH         Viola and Celesta                1923-24
    PAUL DONATH              Violin                           1903-04
                                                              1907-17
    MAX DONNER               Violin                           1907-08
    JOHN D’ORIO              Horn                             1910-18
                                                              1921-25
    ALFRED DOUCET            Oboe (Principal)                 1902-13
    DAVID DUBINSKY           Violin                           1900-01
                             Viola                            1901-02
                             Violin (Principal 1912-25)       1908-25
    VLADIMIR DUBINSKY        Cello (Principal)                1906-07
    A. DUPUIS                Oboe                             1916-18
    W. B. EBANN              Cello (Principal)                1901-02
    SOL ECKSTEIN             Bass Clarinet                    1900-01
    OSCAR EILER              Cello                            1912-14
    BRUNO EINHORN            Cello                            1913-17
    BENJAMIN EISENBERG       Violin                           1918-19
    MAURICE EISENBERG        Cello                            1917-19
    HENRI ELKAN              Viola                            1920-25
    S. ELKIND                Bass                             1921-22
    OTTO ELST                Trombone (Principal)             1906-16
    RUDOLPH ENGEL            Viola and Trumpet                1904-25
    DAVID EPSTEIN            Viola                            1922-25
    LEONARD EPSTEIN          Viola                            1920-24
    MEYER B. EPSTEIN         Violin                           1923-24
    D. H. EZERMAN            Cello                            1901-02
    PASQUAL FABRIS           Violin                           1924-25
    RUDOLPH FAHSBENDER       Bass                             1920-23
    JULIUS FALK              Violin                           1900-03
    VINCENT FANELLI, JR.     Harp                             1913-25
    CARL FASSHAUER           Violin                           1912-18
    JOHN FASSHAUER           Bass                             1900-05
                                                              1907-21
    HENRY W. FEHLING         Violin (Principal)               1900-01
    HARRY FELDMAN            Violin                           1923-24
    W. FENSTEL               Cello                            1900-01
    EMILE FERIR              Viola (Principal)                1918-19
    ANTONIO FERRARA          Violin                           1916-20
                                                              1921-23
                                                              1924-25
    LUIGI FERRARA            Violin                           1917-18
                                                              1919-25
    PAUL FILLSACK            Violin and Clarinet              1901-24
    JOHN FISNAR              Bassoon                          1922-25
    JOHN A. FISCHER          Flute and Piccolo                1909-25
    R. FISCHER               Cello                            1902-03
    CLARENCE FOGG            Viola                            1900-02
                                                              1903-04
                                                              1906-08
    EMIL FLOGMANN            Cello                            1919-20
                                                              1921-25
    C. FRANKE                Violin                           1901-02
    GEORGE O. FREY           Tuba                             1921-23
                             Trombone and Euphonium           1923-24
    NATHAN FREY              Viola                            1921-24
    A. FRIESE                Battery                          1901-05
    MAX FROELICH             Cello                            1918-20
    JOHN FRUNCILLO           Viola                            1900-01
    PAUL FUCHS               Bassoon                          1902-08
    MARIO GARAFFONI          Bass                             1924-25
    EDGAR A. GASTEL          Violin                           1900-01
    ERWIN GASTEL             Cello                            1900-01
    FRED GEIB                Tuba                             1904-05
    EDWARD W. GEFFERT        Trombone                         1917-21
    VICTOR GEOFFRION         Bass                             1922-25
    C. E. GERHARD            Trombone                         1900-01
                                                              1904-09
                                                              1921-25
    A. GINSBURG              Violin                           1924-25
    ANGELO GIURATO           Violin                           1900-01
    HARRY GLANTZ             Trumpet                          1915-17
    BEAUMONT GLASS           Violin                           1910-17
    JOSEPH GLASSMAN          Bass                             1917-18
    ABRAM GOLDFUSS           Violin                           1918-21
    JEROME GOLDSTEIN         Violin                           1917-21
    A. GORODETZKY            Violin                           1920-25
    CHARLES GREBE            Cello                            1900-01
                                                              1903-04
                                                              1908-17
    FRED P. GREIMS           Cello                            1900-01
    H. GREIMS                Viola                            1901-02
    HERMAN GREVESMÜHL        Violin                           1902-03
    WILLIAM S. GREENBERG     Viola                            1923-25
    GEORGES GRISËZ           Clarinet (Principal)             1922-23
    JOHANN GROLLE            Violin                           1902-05
                                                              1907-11
    R. GROSSMAN              Cello                            1901-02
    HARRY F. GROVER          Viola                            1918-19
    WILLIAM GRUNER           Bassoon (Principal 1906-07)      1906-17
    WALTER GUETTER           Bassoon                          1922-25
    B. GUSIKOFF              Cello                            1920-25
    ISADORE GUSIKOFF         Cello                            1921-25
    WILLIAM H. GUSSEN        Violin                           1900-01
    WILLIAM H. GUYON         Flute and Piccolo                1907-09
    CARL HAFERBURG           Viola                            1901-02
                                                              1903-05
    L. M. HAFERBURG          Viola                            1902-03
    EMIL HAHL                Viola                            1902-19
    RAYMOND J. HALL          Cello                            1920-23
    ERICH HALTENORTH         Violin                           1901-02
                             Viola                            1904-24
    H. HALTENORTH            Violin                           1903-04
    CHARLES F. HAMER         Cello                            1919-20
    SIDNEY HAMER             Cello                            1918-22
    PAUL HANDKE              Trumpet (Principal 1902-03)      1901-03
    F. H. HARTMANN           Trombone                         1900-01
    H. HARTMAN               Bass                             1900-01
    A. HASE                  Bass                             1904-06
                                                              1920-25
    ALBERT HASE              Bass                             1901-04
    OTTO HAUBENREISSER       Violin                           1905-09
    GUSTAV HEIM              Trumpet (Principal)              1905-07
    A. HEINE                 Violin                           1903-04
    HERMAN HELLER            Violin                           1900-02
    JOHN HELLBERG            Bassoon                          1900-01
    P. HENKELMAN             Oboe and English Horn            1901-25
    OTTO HENNEBERG           Horn                             1905-25
    RUDOLPH HENNIG           Cello (Principal)                1900-01
    DAYTON M. HENRY          Violin                           1918-25
    A. HEYNEN                Bassoon                          1901-02
    HANS HIMMER              Cello                            1904-14
    H. J. HORNBERGER         Violin                           1900-04
    ANTON HORNER             Horn (Principal)                 1902-25
    JOSEPH HORNER            Horn                             1900-01
                                                              1902-25
    ERNEST HUBER             Bass                             1919-20
    A. HUSTER                Violin                           1901-02
    L. HUTINET               Trombone                         1916-17
    ROLAND HUXLEY            Violin                           1906-08
    JOHN G. INGLE            Violin                           1900-01
    WILLIAM JAEGER           Trumpet                          1900-01
    JOSEPH A. JAKOB          Horn                             1909-10
    SOL E. JARROW            Viola                            1905-06
    LEWIS C. JOCHER          Bass                             1900-01
                                                              1907-13
    CLARENCE JORDAN          Violin                           1924-25
    ERNEST KAEHLER           Violin                           1900-01
                                                              1907-13
    MAURICE KAPLAN           Viola                            1920-25
    ALFRED KASTNER           Harp                             1901-02
                                                              1903-04
    JOSEPH E. KEARNEY        Viola                            1903-04
    OSCAR KELLER             Clarinet                         1902-04
    GEOERGE WILLIAM KEYSER   Viola                            1908-19
    CARL KIHLMAN             Violin                           1903-19
    W. M. KINCAID            Flute (Principal)                1920-25
    HANS KINDLER             Cello (Principal 1916-20)        1914-20
    SAMUEL KLIACHKO          Cello                            1920-22
    KARL KLUPP               Horn                             1901-04
    CARL KNEISEL             Cello                            1908-17
                                                              1919-22
    F. H. KNORR              Bass                             1900-01
    HENRY KOCH               Horn                             1900-01
    A. KOEHLER               Trumpet                          1903-04
    H. KOENIG                Violin                           1903-04
    JAN KOERT                Violin                           1900-02
                             Viola (Principal)                1902-08
    BENJAMIN KOHON           Bassoon (Principal)              1912-15
    A. KORB                  Violin                           1901-06
    ELKAN KOSMAN             Violin (Concertmaster)           1901-02
    FABIEN KOUSSEVITZKY      Bass                             1923-25
    BORIS KOUTZEN            Violin                           1924-25
    HUGO KREISLER            Cello                            1906-07
    EMIL KRESSE              Violin, Tympani and Battery      1901-02
                                                              1904-25
    GEORGE KRESSE            Violin                           1901-03
                                                              1906-07
    CHRISTIAN KRIENS         Viola                            1902-04
    RICHARD KRUEGER          Bassoon (Principal)              1901-06
                                                              1907-08
                                                              1909-12
                                                              1915-22
    E. KRUGER                Violin                           1903-05
    OTTO KRUGER              Violin                           1905-17
    PAUL KRUMMEICH           Violin                           1903-07
    WILLIAM KRUSE, JR.       Bassoon                          1920-21
    ALEXIS KUDISCH           Violin                           1918-19
    JULIUS G. KUMME          Viola                            1900-01
    MAX LACHMUTH             Oboe and English Horn            1900-01
    JOSEPH LA MONACA         Flute                            1910-25
    F. M. LAPETINA           Viola                            1900-01
    FRANCIS J. LAPITINO      Harp                             1911-13
    EMILE LATISCH            Bass                             1910-17
    VINCENT LAZARRO, JR.     Bass                             1921-25
    H. C. LE BARBIER         Trumpet (Principal)              1909-14
    MORRIS LEIN              Trumpet                          1923-25
    J. W. F. LEMAN           Viola                            1908-18
    MILN LEMISCH             Viola                            1900-01
    ALFRED LENNARTZ          Cello                            1902-16
    B. F. LEVENTHAL          Viola                            1911-23
    HARRY LEVY               Violin                           1918-19
    ROBERT LINDEMANN         Clarinet (Principal)             1913-17
    A. LIPKIN                Violin                           1922-25
    GEORGE LIVOTI            Violin                           1923-24
    GUSTAVE A. LOEBEN        Viola and Celesta                1919-25
    ALFRED LORENZ            Violin                           1901-02
                                                              1903-17
                             Viola (Principal)                1917-18
                             Violin                           1918-25
    FRANZ LORENZ             Cello                            1909-17
    PAUL P. LOTZ             Trombone                         1900-01
                                                              1909-25
    H. LUCAS                 Viola                            1901-02
    ARTHUR LUCK              Bass                             1914-18
    C. STANLEY MACKEY        Tuba                             1900-04
                                                              1905-15
    ROBERT MÄDLER            Bass                             1902-07
    E. MAESTRE               Cello                            1922-24
    E. MALACH                Bass                             1918-19
    THEODORE MANSFELT        Cello                            1904-05
    ANDRÉ MAQUARRE           Flute (Principal)                1918-20
    DANIEL MAQUARRE          Flute (Principal)                1910-18
    ATTILLIO MARCHETTI       Oboe (Principal)                 1913-15
    JOHN MARQUARDT           Violin (Concertmaster)           1902-03
    MRS. JOHN MARQUARDT      Harp                             1902-03
    HERMAN MARTONNE          Violin                           1917-20
    GUSTAV MAYER             Battery                          1916-23
    HENRY MAYER, JR.         Battery                          1907-23
    ALBERT MEICHELT          Trumpet                          1902-04
    NICOLA MELATTI           Violin                           1922-24
    EMILIO MERIZ             Violin                           1917-18
    HERBERT G. MERTZ         Violin                           1919-20
    J. MESSIAS               Cello                            1901-02
    HARRY W. MEYER           Violin                           1904-15
    JOHN A. MEYER            Violin                           1900-01
    PAUL MEYER               Violin                           1914-21
    HENRY J. MICHAUX         Viola (Principal 1915-17)        1915-25
    CHARLES S. MILLER        Violin                           1918-19
    ROBERT MINSEL            Horn (Principal 1901-02)         1901-04
    OSKAR MODESS             Bassoon (Principal)              1900-01
    BERNHARD MOLLENHAUER     Violin                           1900-01
    JOHN W. MOLLOY           Violin                           1920-25
    ALBERT R. MORET          Violin                           1902-20
    FRANK S. MORTON          Violin                           1906-07
    HERMAN MUELLER           Viola and Bassoon                1910-17
                             Bassoon                          1917-25
    MATTHEW J. MUELLER       Violin                           1922-25
    OTTO MUELLER             Violin                           1907-14
                                                              1921-24
    C. H. MULLER             Bass                             1900-01
    G. MUNSCH                Clarinet                         1901-02
    CHARLTON LEWIS MURPHY    Violin                           1900-01
    EDWARD MURRAY            Viola                            1924-25
    LUDWIG NAST              Cello                            1902-04
    GENNARO M. NAVA          Viola                            1922-23
    F. A. NICOLETTA          Harp                             1923-25
    DAVID NOWINSKI           Violin                           1906-17
    BRAM OBERSTEIN           Cello                            1923-24
    W. OESTERREICH           Flute and Piccolo                1903-04
    MAX OLANOFF              Violin                           1918-19
    GUSTAV OLK               Viola                            1903-04
    HUGO OLK                 Violin (Principal)               1902-04
    SAMUEL OLLSTEIN          Violin                           1920-22
    GUSTAV PAEPKE            Violin                           1902-05
                                                              1922-23
    MATYAS PAULI             Bass                             1918-23
    L. PELLEGRINI            Violin                           1919-20
    MICHEL PENHA             Cello (Principal)                1920-25
    WILLIAM PFANNKUCHEN      Bassoon                          1906-07
    WALTER PFEIFFER          Violin 1910-19
    EARL PFOUTS              Violin (Principal part of        1911-18
                                        season 1911-12)
    PAUL PIESCHEL            Bassoon (Principal)              1908-09
    STEPHEN PILLISCHER       Violin                           1924-25
    PAUL PITKOWSKY           Violin                           1921-25
    PAUL PLANERT             Bass                             1901-05
    BENJAMIN PODEMSKI        Battery                          1923-25
    ALEXANDER POPOFF         Violin                           1923-25
    P. POPPERL               Violin                           1901-02
    M. POTTAG                Horn                             1901-02
    MILTON PRINZ             Cello                            1924-25
    KARL QUERENGAESSER       Bass                             1901-15
    PAUL RAHMIG              Bass (Principal 1901-14)         1901-17
                                                              1919-20
                                                              1924-25
    EDWARD RAHO              Oboe                             1913-25
    LEWIS RAHO               Oboe                             1918-24
    HOWARD F. RATTAY         Violin                           1905-06
    HAROLD W. REHRIG         Trumpet                          1923-25
    JOSEPH REITER            Horn (Principal)                 1900-01
    A. RENSCH                Oboe                             1901-02
    KALMAN REVE              Violin                           1923-24
    J. RHODES                Viola                            1901-02
    L. M. RICE               Viola                            1902-03
    THADDEUS RICH            Violin (Concertmaster)           1906-25
    ALBERT RIESE             Horn                             1904-09
                                                              1910-25
    HERMAN RIETZEL           Oboe                             1911-13
    ALBERT RITTER            Tympani                          1902-03
    A. RITZKE                Clarinet                         1900-01
    AUGUST H. RODEMANN       Flute (Principal)                1902-07
    C. H. RODENKIRCHEN       Trumpet (Principal 1907-09)      1907-09
                                                              1911-15
    EDMOND ROELOFSMA         Clarinet                         1902-20
    B. ROESCHMANN            Violin                           1900-01
                                                              1903-04
    JEAN ROGISTER            Viola                            1923-24
    SAM ROSEN                Viola                            1919-20
                                                              1921-25
    M. ROTH                  Violin                           1924-25
    E. ROZANEL               Trumpet                          1917-18
    R. RYKMANS               Bass                             1901-02
    ALFRED SAAL              Cello (Principal)                1904-06
    HERMAN SANDBY            Cello (Principal)                1902-04
                                                              1908-16
    ADOLPH SAUDER            Oboe                             1900-01
    HERBERT F. SAYLOR        Violin                           1904-05
    FRITZ SCHAEFER           Viola                            1904-05
    JULIUS SCHEEL            Violin (Principal)               1901-12
    PAUL SCHEELE             Viola                            1904-15
    REINHOLD SCHEWE          Violin                           1900-01
                                                              1907-16
    K. SCHINNER              Horn                             1901-02
    WILLIAM SCHLECHTWEG      Trombone                         1904-15
    HANS SCHLEGEL            Flute and Piccolo                1916-25
    ALEXANDER SCHMIDT        Violin                           1908-12
    EMIL SCHMIDT             Viola                            1900-01
    EMIL F. SCHMIDT          Violin                           1900-01
                                                              1903-04
                                                              1908-23
    GEORGE SCHMIDT           Viola                            1902-11
    HENRY SCHMIDT            Violin                           1920-25
    RICHARD SCHMIDT          Viola (Principal)                1900-01
    WILLIAM A. SCHMIDT       Cello                            1903-04
                                                              1911-12
                                                              1914-25
    CHARLES M. SCHMITZ       Cello                            1900-01
    PHILIPP SCHMITZ          Cello                            1903-13
                                                              1919-25
    CHARLES F. SCHOENTHAL    Flute (Principal 1900-01)        1900-01
                                                              1909-10
    GEROLD SCHON             Cello                            1918-20
    JOHN G. SCHON            Bassoon                          1916-20
    GEORGE SCHOTT            Cello                            1912-18
    FRED SCHRADER            Trombone (Principal)             1904-06
    B. SCHREIBMANN           Trumpet                          1921-23
    B. SCHUCH                Violin                           1901-02
    EDMUND SCHUËCKER         Harp                             1904-09
    JOSEPH SCHUËCKER         Harp                             1909-11
    MAX SCHULZ               Violin                           1902-05
    RICHARD SCHURIG          Bass (Principal)                 1900-02
    OSCAR SCHWAR             Tympani                          1903-25
    MICHEL SCIAPIRO          Violin                           1914-15
    MAX SELINSKI             Violin                           1907-14
    FRANK SELTZER            Trumpet                          1907-11
    ERNEST SERPENTINI        Oboe                             1924-25
    JULES J. SERPENTINI      Clarinet                         1920-25
    DAVID SHAIEVITCH         Flute                            1905-06
    J. BYRON SHANNON         Bass                             1920-24
    MARCUS SHERBOW           Violin                           1900-04
    JOSEPH SHERMAN           Violin                           1923-25
    S. SIANI                 Bass                             1924-25
    ADRIAN SIEGEL            Cello                            1922-25
    BERNARD SIEGERT          Cello                            1920-21
    ISRAEL SIEKIERKA         Violin                           1924-25
    HARRY SILBERMAN          Violin                           1917-18
    EMILE SIMON              Cello                            1907-14
    GARDELL SIMONS           Trombone                         1915-25
    JACOB SIMKIN             Violin                           1920-23
                                                              1924-25
    J. C. SMALL              Piccolo                          1900-01
    JOSEF SMIT               Cello                            1924-25
    ISADOR SOKOLOFF          Cello                            1914-18
    MAX SOTTNEK              Violin                           1909-13
    WILLY SPECKIN            Bass                             1903-04
                                                              1905-10
    ALFRED SPEIL             Violin                           1901-03
    S. SPOOR                 Violin                           1919-20
    GUSTAV STANGE            Trombone                         1902-04
    L. STARZINSKY            Viola                            1901-02
                                                              1903-10
    ROBERT STEIN             Cello                            1902-03
    BRUNO STEINKE            Cello                            1919-20
    BRUNO STEYER             Viola                            1924-25
    KARL STIEGELMAYER        Oboe                             1901-10
    WALTER H. STOBBE         Battery                          1900-01
    WILLIAM R. STOBBE        Tympani                          1900-01
    A. F. STOCKBRIDGE        Violin                           1906-07
    LEON STOLL               Viola                            1900-01
    WILLIAM STOLL, JR.       Violin                           1900-01
    ALFONS STORCH            Violin                           1904-06
    P. STRAHLENDORF          Violin and Bass Clarinet         1901-02
    K. STREUBER              Bass                             1901-02
    EDWARD A. STRINGER       Violin                           1900-01
    JACOB STROBLE            Violin                           1900-01
    JULIUS STURM             Cello                            1902-04
    MICHAEL SVEDROFSKY       Violin (Concertmaster)           1904-06
    MARCEL TABUTEAU          Oboe (Principal)                 1915-25
    EDUARD TAK               Violin                           1905-06
    MORRIS TARTAS            Viola                            1919-20
    ALEXANDER J. THIEDE      Violin                           1920-25
    ANDREW THOMAS            Tuba                             1915-21
    HANS TIEDGE              Violin and Battery               1902-17
    ANTON TORELLO            Bass (Principal)                 1914-25
    LUDWIG TREIN             Cello                            1900-02
                                                              1903-04
                                                              1907-11
    R. UNGER                 Cello                            1901-02
    G. UNGLADA               Violin                           1908-12
    EMIL URBASH              Flute and Piccolo                1902-03
    JAMES VALERIO            Battery                          1924-25
    F. W. VAN AMBURGH        Clarinet                         1912-13
    HEDDA VAN DEN BEEMT      Violin (Principal 1906-07)       1901-07
                                                              1911-20
                             Celesta                          1920-24
    AUGUST VAN LEUWEN        Flute                            1901-02
    ISRAEL S. VAN SCIVER     Battery                          1900-01
    ALBERT VAN STRATUM       Violin                           1905-06
    AMÉDÉE VERGNAUD          Viola                            1924-25
    ROMAIN VERNEY            Viola (Principal)                1920-25
    A. VILLANI               Bass                             1922-23
    ADOLPH VOGEL             Cello                            1921-25
    J. VOGEL                 Trombone                         1901-02
    HENRY F. VOLMER          Viola                            1900-01
    LOUIS VOLMER             Cello                            1900-01
    ERNST WAGNER             Trombone                         1901-04
    FREDERICK E. WAGNER      Trumpet (Principal 1900-01)      1900-01
                                                              1917-21
    JOSEF WALDMAN            Violin                           1912-16
    ROBERT WALTER            Violin                           1903-06
    HENRY WARNER             Violin                           1900-02
    EMIL WASCHEK             Viola                            1905-06
    FRANK S. WATSON          Cello                            1918-25
    NELSON J. WATSON         Bass                             1923-24
    HERMAN WEINBERG          Violin                           1919-25
    KARL WEINELT             Horn                             1904-05
    H. WEISSENBORN           Clarinet                         1900-01
    WILLIAM WELKER           Violin                           1900-01
    DANIEL R. WELLS          Viola                            1900-02
    WILLIAM M. WELLS         Cello                            1900-04
    M. F. WENNING            Violin and Bassoon               1901-03
    CHARLES R. WENZEL        Cello                            1904-06
    FLORENZ WERNER           Violin                           1901-03
    L. WERTHEIM              Viola (Principal)                1901-02
    CARL WHITAKER            Bass                             1900-01
    G. WICKING               Violin                           1902-03
    HEINRICH WIEMANN         Bass                             1924-25
    ERNEST S. WILLIAMS       Trumpet                          1917-23
    BENJAMIN H. WINTERSTEIN  Violin                           1916-18
    FLORIAN WITTMAN          Viola                            1922-23
    H. WITTMANN              Bass                             1900-01
    JOHN K. WITZEMANN        Violin                           1900-17
    M. WOLLENBERG            Bass                             1906-07
    JOHN WULF                Bass                             1907-19
    G. ZAPP                  Violin                           1901-02
    KARL W. ZEISE            Cello                            1922-24
    LEON ZEITZEW             Violin                           1920-21
    ALEXANDER ZENKER         Violin                           1916-25
    PAUL ZIEROLD             Cello                            1905-07
    L. ZIPORKIN              Bass                             1917-19
    ALBERT ZOELLNER          Horn                             1900-01

NOTE—This list includes only those men who completed a season’s work.

    PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA CHORUS[67]
             DECEMBER 1920

[67] NOTE—Figures following names denote year of admission.

                         _First Sopranos_
    MRS. G. W. ANDERSON ’19        MISS CLARA L. HOLDEN ’15
    MRS. ANNABEL I. BELL ’19       MISS H. G. HULLSTRUNG ’20
    MISS MILDRED S. BENNERS ’20    MRS. GERTRUDE M. JONES ’20
    MISS HELEN G. BLAKELY ’19      MRS. A. H. KOEHL ’20
    MRS. MILDRED S. CASCADEN ’19   MRS. H. C. KRESSLY ’19
    MISS BLANCHE E. CASCADEN ’19   MRS. MILTON KUTZ ’19
    MISS MILDRED CASTOR ’20        MISS ETTA C. LEVINE ’20
    MISS DIANA A. CAUFFMAN ’19     MISS HELEN B. LEWIS ’15
    MRS. M. CHRISTIE ’15           MRS. HOWARD MCMORRIS ’20
    MRS. P. BENSON COLLARD ’19     MISS IRMA F. MALDONADO ’20
    MISS GERTRUDE ELY ’15          MISS SOPHIA MALESON ’19
    MRS. H. B. EWING ’15           MISS GRACE E. MAHORTER ’20
    MRS. PEARL M. GILDAY ’20       MISS M. ELIZ. MORRISON ’19
    MRS. ROBERT C. GLENN ’19       MISS CLARA A. NAGEL ’19
    MISS WINFREY GLENN ’19         MISS ANNA L. NEIL ’15
    MRS. HAROLD GREENE ’20         MISS IDA H. OETTER ’16
    MISS NAOMI V. GROBE ’20        MISS DOROTHY E. PIERCE ’19
    MRS. HAROLD H. HAPPOLD ’20     MISS ELIZABETH POWERS ’20
    MISS AGNES M. HIGBEE ’16       MISS MARIAN M. RIDDLE '19

    MISS ETHEL K. RIDGE ’20        MRS. LILIAN S. TOUDY ’20
    MISS ALVA SERGEANT ’14         MISS VOLITA WELLS ’19
    MRS. ALBERT E. SEYMOUR ’20     MRS. M. N. WILLIAMSON ’20
    MRS. MABLE T. SHICK ’20        MISS FREEDA WOLLEY ’19
    MRS. PHILIP STERLING ’20       MISS JOSEPHINE E. ZWICK ’19
    MISS EMMA L. STRATTON ’19      MISS A. ELISE HARTMAN ’19
    MRS. M. L. SUTTON ’20          MISS MARGARET S. LEWIS ’15

                        _Second Sopranos_
    MRS. GILBERT P. ALBRECHT ’15   MISS JEAN P. MUMFORD ’19
    MISS FAYE ATKINSON ’19         MRS. R. S. B. PERRY ’19
    MISS CAROLINE AUSTIN ’20       MISS HELEN C. PHILIPS ’19
    MISS HELEN M. BATTEN ’14       MISS JOANNA L. POTTER ’14
    MISS AMELLA E. BEIN ’14        MISS EMMA M. REA ’19
    MISS MILDRED E. CASCADEN ’20   MISS ELSIE G. RODGERS ’15
    MRS. GRACE COLGAN ’20          MISS E. A. ROSSMÄSSLER ’15
    MISS MARION W. EISENHART ’20   MISS BERNICE RUSSELL ’19
    MISS THEO R. ELDREDGE ’19      MISS LOUISE P. SCHWARZ ’14
    MRS. RUTH F. ELIASSON ’19      MISS C. EVELYN SMITH ’15
    MISS MARY DALE HACKETT ’14     MISS MARGUERITE D. SMITH ’19
    MISS ELSIE M. HAUCK ’19        MISS PHOEBE HART SMITH ’19
    MISS MARIE L. HENRY ’20        MISS HELEN R. SNYDER ’19
    MISS GEORDIE P. JOLINE ’15     MISS MILAVA STANKOWITCH ’14
    MRS. ALBERT G. KLEEFELD ’15    MRS. JOHN B. THAYER, 3rd ’16
    MISS KATH. W. MCCOLLIN ’16     MRS. ANNA M. WILT ’19
    MISS EDITH M. MILLER ’20       MISS HELEN B. WINELAND ’15

                          _First Altos_
    MISS OLIVE I. BERRY ’14        MISS CLARA A. JEWELL ’19
    MISS ADA BESS ’20              MISS ELIZABETH K. JONES ’15
    MISS J. R. BONNIWELL ’19       MISS ELIZA KANNEGIESER ’15
    MISS JOYCE BOWERS ’19          MISS HELEN R. KERN ’19
    MISS HELEN I. CHAMBERS ’19     MISS MILDRED E. LOCKE ’15
    MISS FRANCES B. CODLING ’20    MISS MORTON J. MEYERS ’14
    MISS MAY COLDRAN ’20           MISS MARGARET MONTGOMERY ’19
    MISS ANNA E. ELLWANGER ’15     MISS SARIETA M. RENTON ’15
    MISS ADELE L. FOX ’16          MRS. E. M. REYNOLDS ’20
    MISS ANNE GEYER ’19            MISS CLARA L. RISTINE ’15
    MISS CREDA GLENN ’19           MRS. R. J. ROBINSON ’19
    MISS K. MARIE GOOD ’15         MISS CAROLINE L. ROTHMAN ’20
    MISS MARGARET GREAVES ’20      MISS PAULINE C. RUMPP ’15
    MISS FLORA E. GRUNING ’20      MRS. LEOPOLD SEYFFERT ’16
    MISS MARION W. GUSHEE ’20      MISS LYDIA P. WISE ’15
    MISS MARGUERITE E. INGRAM ’15  MISS OLIVE WOLF ’16
                   MRS. DAVID J. WRIGHT ’20

                          _Second Altos_
    MISS MARIE M. BARR ’14         MISS FLORENCE H. BURK ’19
    MRS. JOSEPH M. BECKETT ’19     MISS ADA V. CLOUDEN ’14
    MISS EDITH M. BOYD ’14         MISS ANNA COHN ’15

    MISS SUSIE J. DAILEY ’15       MRS. MAURICE MARKLEY ’16
    MISS F. EDNA DAVIS ’15         MISS ANNETTA R. MASLAND ’20
    MISS F. CAROLYN DEAVER ’19     MISS GEORGIA P. PALMER ’15
    MISS M. P. EUCHELBERGER ’19    MISS MARY M. PEARSON ’19
    MRS. CHARLES W. FOUST ’15      MRS. WILLIAM POLLOCK ’19
    MISS IRENE F. GOENNER ’16      MISS RAY RAWLINGS ’20
    MISS ALMA L. KELLMER ’20       MISS ETHEL H. STEWART ’14
    MISS ROBERTA LAIRD ’15         MISS HELEN A. STRAUGHN ’15
    MRS. JOHN H. MCCRACKEN ’14     MISS ALMA M. TEGGE ’19
    MRS. IDA A. MCGIRR ’20         MISS JANE WHITEHEAD ’19
    MRS. HARRY A. MACKEY ’15       MISS E. MAY WILLIAMSON ’14

                          _First Tenors_
    MR. GILBERT P. ALBRECHT ’14    MR. J. MITCHELL HOOPER ’19
    MR. A. W. ALLEN ’20            MR. CHAS. A. HUNSBERGER ’14
    MR. DONALD G. BAIRD ’20        MR. WILLIAM JAMISON ’15
    MR. HENRY W. CLAVIER, JR. ’15  MR. ADOLPH MEHNEN ’15
    MR. ALAN C. CUNNINGHAM ’15     MR. SAMUEL ALBERT NOOK ’20
    MR. ROBERT DEWAR ’20           MR. GEORGE D. PHILLIPS ’20
    MR. CHARLES E. FREW ’15        MR. BENJAMIN W. PRICE ’15
    MR. JOSEPHUS J. FROST ’15      MR. HAROLD C. RAWLEY ’14
    MR. ALFRED H. GONZALES ’15     MR. ALBERT E. SEYMOUR ’14
    MR. ARTHUR G. GRAHAM, JR. ’19  MR. GEO. H. STANIFORTH ’15
    MR. HENRY K. HOLLINGER ’20     MR. ELMER E. TRAUB ’15
                   MR. J. HENRY WARREN ’19

                         _Second Tenors_
    MR. JOHN E. ABNETT, JR. ’19    MR. WM. LLOYD HARDING ’19
    MR. ADOLF BALOD ’20            MR. EUGENE MULLER ’16
    MR. JOS. K. BARTHOLOMEW ’15    MR. THOMAS NELSON, JR. ’20
    MR. EDWIN S. BARTLETT ’14      MR. ADAM H. PATTERSON ’19
    DR. CHARLES A. BEHNEY ’20      MR. WILLIAM POLLOCK ’15
    MR. JOHN W. CULP ’20           MR. J. R. SATTERTHWAITE ’19
    MR. EDW. W. DIETSCH ’20        MR. REESE R. SMITH ’20
    MR. C. SEYMOUR EVANS ’15       MR. ALEXANDER STEWART ’20
    MR. L. J. FINNAN, JR. ’16      MR. ALLAN F. TITUS ’20
    MR. WM. D. HAMILL ’15          MR. GEORGE R. TYSON ’19

                          _First Bassos_
    MR. H. CARL ALBRECHT ’14       MR. GEORGE S. GENGENBACH ’19
    MR. CHARLES A. BJORKLUND ’19   MR. ROBERT C. GLENN ’15
    MR. GEORGE P. BOGGS ’20        MR. JAS. B. GREENWOOD ’20
    MR. RAYMOND T. BOHN ’20        MR. J. COURTLAND HAMER ’15
    MR. ALBERT W. BRAEUNINGER ’15  MR. RAYMOND E. HESS ’20
    MR. JOHN A. BROOK ’20          MR. W. CHESTER HILL ’20
    MR. HENRY T. DENBY ’20         MR. EDWARD E. HIPSCHER ’20
    MR. BERTRAM F. EVERIT ’15      MR. ALVAH H. KOEHL ’20
    MR. WM. H. FAVILLE ’19         MR. FREDERICK LANDSTREET ’15
    MR. R. H. FLEMING ’14          MR. EUGENE MAES ’19

    MR. WILLIAM MILLHAM ’15        MR. RICHARD M. SUTTON ’19
    MR. HUGH R. PARRISH ’19        MR. ARTHUR SYNNESTVEDT ’15
    MR. FRANCIS H. ROCKETT ’20     MR. FRANK B. TITUS ’20
    MR. WM. J. SEARLE, JR. ’20     MR. EDWARD L. WALLACE ’20
    MR. HOWARD F. STORY ’20        MR. BERNARD G. WISE, JR. ’20
                  MR. WILLIAM ZIMMERMANN ’19

                         _Second Bassos_
    MR. JAS. H. W. ALTHOUSE ’15    DR. EUGENE K. KRAUSE ’16
    DR. JOHN H. ARNETT ’20         MR. WM. MCGOWAN, JR. ’20
    MR. HARRY BROESE ’15           MR. RAY MILLER ’20
    MR. CLINTON M. CHRISTINE ’15   MR. CARL F. RUMPP ’19
    MR. A. P. CHUTE ’14            MR. OLIVER F. SAYLOR ’19
    MR. STEPHEN T. CONWAY ’20      MR. DENNIS SOSNOWSKI ’19
    MR. W. R. CRAWFORD ’20         MR. MILTON B. STALLMAN ’16
    DR. F. H. EATON ’20            MR. HUBERT SYNNESTVEDT ’16
    MR. C. L. FARRADAY ’15         MR. GEO. B. WHIDDEN ’14
    MR. FRANK A. HARTRANFT ’14     MR. FRANK J. WILLIAMS ’20
    MR. WILLIAM C. HESS ’20        MR. FRANK D. WITHERBEE ’19
    MR. HARRY K. KIRK ’16          MR. J. C. WRENSHALL, JR. ’19

NOTE—Figures following names denote year of admission.

    MANAGERS OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                 1900-1925
     OLIVER BOYCE JUDSON, 1901-02
     GEORGE P. ECKELS, 1902-03
     JOHN MAHNKEN, 1903-04, 1904-05
     ERNEST J. LANIGAN, 1905-06
     CHARLES AUGUSTUS DAVIS, 1906-07 to 1909-10
     HARVEY M. WATTS, 1911-12, 1912-13
     RALPH EDMUNDS, 1913-14, 1914-15
     ARTHUR JUDSON, 1915-16
     HORACE CHURCHMAN, 1910-11, Controller

          OFFICE STAFF
              1925
       ARTHUR JUDSON, 1915
       LOUIS A. MATTSON, 1907
       ELIZABETH M. RUSSELL, 1917
       MARGARET E. PRINGLE, 1916
       MARY A. MCGINTY, 1917
       RUTH M. O’NEILL, 1910




APPENDIX G


            ASSISTANT CONDUCTORS
              GUEST CONDUCTORS
    ORGANIZATIONS THAT HAVE APPEARED WITH
           THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
       SOLOISTS WHO HAVE APPEARED WITH THE
             PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA

            ASSISTANT CONDUCTORS

A. H. RODEMANN, 1907: Philadelphia, February 15-16, conducted regular
concerts during Scheel’s illness.

THADDEUS RICH, 1914: Assistant Conductor, Kensington, Philadelphia,
April 8; November 5-6, 1915, entire programme with exception
Schoenberg’s Kammersymphonie; November 9, 1915, Stetson concert;
Norristown, January 11, 1916; Philadelphia regular concerts, January
28-29, 1916; Philadelphia Girls’ High School, January 31, 1916;
Lancaster, Pa., February 1, 1916; Easton, Pa., February 17, 1916;
Reading, Pa., February 22, 1916; University of Pennsylvania, February
24, 1916; Boys’ Central High School, March 7, 1916; Germantown High
School, March 30, 1916; Frankford High School, April 13, 1916; Stetson
Concert, January 9, 1917; Atlantic City, N. J., January 22, 1917;
Reading, Pa., February 20, 1917; University of Pennsylvania, February
21, 1917; Stetson Concert, November 7, 1917; Pittsburgh, Pa., February
11, 1918; Oberlin, Ohio, February 13, 1918; Philadelphia, December 28,
1918; Toronto, February 22, 1919; Philadelphia, March 21-22, 28-29,
April 12-15-16, 1919; Stetson, March 25, 1919; Wilmington, March
24, 1919; Stetson, November 15, 1921; University of Pennsylvania,
January 18, 1922; Philadelphia regular concerts, January 20-21,
1922; University of Pennsylvania, February 8, 1922; University of
Pennsylvania, March 1, 1922; University of Pennsylvania, March 22,
1922; Pittsburgh, November 10, 1922, January 13, 1923, and March 23,
1913, conducted Children’s concerts; Stetson, November 14, 1922;
Harrisburg, March 22, 1923; Pittsburgh, March 23, 1923; Philadelphia
regular concerts, January 19-20, 1923; Philadelphia regular concerts,
January 11-12, 1924; Princeton, March 18, 1924; Philadelphia regular
concerts, January 23-24, 1925; Princeton, March 2, 1925.

    GUEST CONDUCTORS

ERNEST BLOCH, 1918: Philadelphia, January 25-26, conducted programme of
his own works.

LEANDRO CAMPANARI, 1907: Philadelphia, February 22-23, March 1-2;
Harrisburg, February 19; Trenton, February 21; Reading, February 25;
Washington, February 26; Baltimore, February 27, during Scheel’s
illness.

ALFREDO CASELLA, 1921: Philadelphia, October 28-29, conducted his own
“Pages of War.”

ALPHONSE CATHERINE, 1919: Philadelphia, January 31-February 1,
conducted entire programme.

FRANK GUERNSEY CAUFFMAN, 1909: Philadelphia, March 5-6, conducted his
own “Legende.”

GEORGE W. CHADWICK, 1911: Philadelphia, March 29, conducted his own
Suite Symphonique at National Federation of Musical Clubs Concert.

VINCENT D’INDY, 1922: Philadelphia, January 6-7; Princeton, January 9;
Washington, January 10; Baltimore, January 11; Harrisburg, January 12;
Pittsburgh, January 13-14, conducted entire programme.

GEORGES ENESCO, 1923: New York, January 2; Philadelphia, January 5-6;
Washington, January 9; Baltimore, January 10; Harrisburg, January 11;
Pittsburgh, January 12-13; Pottsville, January 17, conducted entire
programme.

OSSIP GABRILOWITSCH, 1920: Philadelphia, April 3-5, conducted entire
programme.

PHILIP H. GOEPP, 1909: Philadelphia, March 5-6, conducted his own
Academic March; February 1, 1911, conducted his own Wedding March;
April 2, 1913, conducted his own Wedding March, one number by Wm.
Gerstley and one by H. Pfitzner—all Philadelphia.

SAMUEL GARDNER, 1919: Philadelphia, October 24-25, conducted his own
“New Russia.”

HENRY HADLEY, 1910: Philadelphia, November 25-26, conducted his own
“Culprit Fay”; New York, March 9, 1920, conducted his own overture,
“Othello.”

VICTOR HERBERT, 1912: Philadelphia, February 16-17, conducted the
prelude to Act III of his own “Natoma.”

HENRY ALBERT LANG, 1911: Philadelphia, March 1, conducted his own
Fantastic Dances (Popular Concert); Philadelphia, April 2, 1913,
conducted his “Fantasies of a Poet” (Manuscript Music Society Concert).

WASSILI LEPS, 1908: Philadelphia, February 21-22, conducted entire
Programme on account Pohlig’s injuries from railroad accident; also
Philadelphia, March 13-14, 1908, and March 5-6, 1909, conducted his own
“In the Garden of the Gods”; Philadelphia, February 15, 1911 (Popular
Concert), conducted Clarence Bawden’s “Ballade” for Piano; Wilmington,
February 5, 1912, conducted entire Wagner programme; Philadelphia,
April 2, 1913 (Manuscript Music Society Concert), conducted his own
aria for soprano and orchestra, “Nirvana.”

WILLEM MENGELBERG, 1921: Philadelphia, March 18-19, conducted entire
programme.

DARIUS MILHAUD, 1923: Philadelphia, January 26-27, conducted entire
programme.

OTTO MUELLER, 1913: Philadelphia, April 2, conducted his own Symphonic
poem “Atlantis,” at Manuscript Music Society Concert.

HORATIO PARKER, 1911: Philadelphia, March 29, conducted his own aria
“Crépuscule,” at National Federation of Musical Clubs Concert.

SERGEI RACHMANINOFF, 1909: Philadelphia, November 26-27, conducted his
own Symphony in E minor and Moussorgsky’s fantasy, “Une nuit sur le
mont chauve”; also played group piano soli.

HERMAN SANDBY, 1915: Philadelphia, February 19-20, conducted his own
orchestral suite, “The Woman and the Fiddler.”

CYRIL SCOTT, 1920: Philadelphia, November 5-6, conducted his own “Two
Passacaglias for Orchestra.”

FREDERICK STOCK, 1924: Philadelphia, January 18-19-21; Washington,
January 22; Baltimore, January 23, conducted entire programme.

RICHARD STRAUSS, 1904: Philadelphia, March 4-5; Boston, March 7-8;
conducted “Tod und Verklärung,” “Till Eulenspiegel,” also a group of
his own songs; Philadelphia, November 30, 1921; New York, October
31, 1921; November 15, 1921, December 13, 1921, December 27, 1921;
Philadelphia, December 23-24, 1921, conducted entire programme.

IGOR STRAWINSKY, 1925: Philadelphia, January 30-31, conducted entire
programme of own works.

GUSTAV STRUBE, 1915: Philadelphia, December 31-January 1, 1916,
conducted his own “Variations on an Original Theme.”

HEDDA VAN DEN BEEMT, 1913: Philadelphia, Manuscript Music Society
Concert, April 2, conducted his own “Introduction and Scene” for
orchestra, “Aucassin et Nicolette”; Philadelphia, April 3-4, 1914,
conducted same composition.

WILLEM VAN HOOGSTRATEN, 1925: Philadelphia, January 16-17-19;
Washington, January 20; Baltimore, January 21, conducted entire
programme.

LOUIS VON GAERTNER, 1910: Philadelphia, December 22-23, conducted his
own Tone Poem, “Macbeth.”

FELIX WEINGARTNER, 1905: Philadelphia, February 16, conducted entire
programme—special concert.

CAMILLE ZECKWER, 1916: Philadelphia, February 4-5, conducted his own
“Sohrab and Rustum.”

              ORGANIZATIONS WHICH HAVE APPEARED WITH
                    THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
    BACH CHOIR OF BALTIMORE (1907), Baltimore.
    EURYDICE CHORUS OF PHILADELPHIA (1908, 1912).
    FORTNIGHTLY CLUB OF PHILADELPHIA (1908, 1916).
    BEN GREET PLAYERS (1909).
    JUNGER MAENNERCHOR SINGING SOCIETY OF PHILADELPHIA (1914).
    MENDELSSOHN CHOIR OF TORONTO (1914), Philadelphia.
    MENDELSSOHN CLUB OF PHILADELPHIA (1903, 1904, 1907, 1911, 1913,
       1914, 1916, 1919).
    PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA CHORUS (1916, 1917, 1919, 1920, 1921).
    PITTSBURGH CHORUS, trained by Charles Heinroth (1921), Pittsburgh.
    SCHOLA CANTORUM OF NEW YORK (1919), New York.
    Organizations participating in the Lobgesang Symphony:

    CANTAVES CHORUS, EURYDICE CHORUS, FELLOWSHIP CLUB, FORTNIGHTLY
    CLUB, GERMANTOWN CHORAL SOCIETY, HAYDN CLUB, JUNGER MAENNERCHOR,
    LYRIC CLUB, MATINEE MUSICAL CLUB, MENDELSSOHN CLUB,
    ORPHEUS CLUB, PHILADELPHIA CHORAL SOCIETY, STRAWBRIDGE AND
    CLOTHIER CHORAL SOCIETY, TREBLE CLEF CLUB, VOCAL ART SOCIETY,
    WANAMAKER CHORAL SOCIETY.

    Outside organizations participating in the performance of Bach’s
    “St. Matthew Passion”:

    GIRLS’ NORMAL SCHOOL and GIRLS’ HIGH SCHOOL CHORUSES.

    SOLOISTS WHO HAVE APPEARED WITH THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                                 1900-1925

      PHILIP ABBAS          Cellist             1917
      MABELLE ADDISON       Contralto           1914, 1915
      FRANCES ALDA          Soprano             1914
      PERLEY DUNN ALDRICH   Baritone            1910
      MERLE ALCOCK          Contralto           1921
      PAUL ALEMANN          Bass Clarinet       1923
      ETHEL ALTEMUS         Pianist             1907, 1911, 1916
      PAUL ALTHOUSE         Tenor               1916
      HORACE ALWYNE         Pianist             1924
      PASQUALE AMATO        Baritone            1910
      RUFUS M. AREY         Clarinetist         1924
      ROBERT ARMBRUSTER     Pianist             1912, 1916
      PEPITO ARRIOLA        Pianist             1910
      ADÈLE AUS DER OHE     Pianist             1903
      CECILE AYRES          Pianist             1914
      WILHELM BACHAUS       Pianist             1912, 1914, 1923
      DELLA BAKER           Soprano             1920
      INEZ BARBOUR          Soprano             1916, 1921
      JOHN BARCLAY          Baritone            1921, 1922, 1924
      LOUISE BARNOLT        Contralto           1911
      MARY BARRETT          Soprano             1915, 1918, 1919
      VERA BARSTOW          Violinist           1916
      GEORGIA RICHARDSON
             BASKERVILLE    Pianist             1915
      HAROLD BAUER          Pianist             1902, 1908, 1914,
                                                1916, 1917, 1918,
                                                1919, 1920, 1922
      EDNA HARWOOD BAUGHER  Soprano             1912
      CLARENCE BAWDEN       Pianist             1910, 1911
      DAN BEDDOE            Tenor               1915
      WASSILY BESEKIRSKY    Violinist           1915, 1916
      LOUIS BAILLY          Viola               1921
      DAVID BISPHAM         Baritone            1903, 1904, 1911, 1921
      LILLIAN BLAUVELT      Soprano             1900, 1903, 1904
      FANNIE BLOOMFIELD ZEISLER Pianist         1902, 1903, 1904, 1907,
                                                1908, 1915, 1916
      EDITH WELLS BLY       Pianist             1910, 1916
      GIUSEPPE BOGHETTI     Tenor               1915
      EDWARD BONHOTE        Baritone            1910
      ELIZABETH BONNER      Contralto           1919, 1923
      LEONARD BORWICK       Pianist             1914
      ROSARIO BOURDON       Cellist             1907
      DOMENICO BOVE         Violinist           1916
      SOPHIE BRASLAU        Contralto           1915
      JOHN F. BRAUN         Tenor               1902, 1908, 1911,
                                                1914, 1915
      ROBERT BRAUN          Pianist             1915
      ELIZABETH PRITCHARD BREY Soprano          1922
      BERTHA BRINKER        Soprano             1912
      HORACE BRITT          Cellist             1907, 1908
      VIOLA BRODBECK        Soprano             1913, 1915
      EDDY BROWN            Violinist           1918, 1920
      HELEN BUCHANAN        Soprano             1914, 1915, 1919
      RICHARD BUHLIG        Pianist             1907, 1908
      MRS. JOSEPH BUNTING   Soprano             1904
      ALOYS BURGSTALLER     Tenor               1903
      TOM BURKE             Tenor               1922
      RICHARD BURMEISTER    Pianist             1902
      FERRUCCIO BUSONI      Pianist             1911, 1915
      MME. CHARLES CAHIER   Contralto           1922
      GIUSEPPE CAMPANARI    Baritone            1905, 1908
      TERESA CARREÑO        Pianist             1901, 1908, 1909,
                                                1913, 1914
      PABLO CASALS          Cellist             1915, 1918, 1920
      ANNA CASE             Soprano             1911, 1917
      MARIE CASLOVA         Violinist           1916
      ALFREDO CASELLA       Pianist             1921, 1923
      CECILE CHAMINADE      Pianist             1908
      KITTY CHEATHAM        Interpreter of
                              Children’s Songs  1913, 1914
      WALTER CLAPPERTON     Basso               1922
      JULIA CLAUSSEN        Mezzo-Soprano       1918
      ACHILLE COCOZZA       Violinist           1910
      DAVID COHEN           Violinist           1917
      SOL COHEN             Trumpet             1923, 1925
      FRANK M. CONLY        Basso               1911
      HORATIO CONNELL       Bass-Baritone       1911, 1914, 1917
      LUTHER CONRADI        Pianist             1908
      EMILIA CONTI          Soprano             1914
      ELSA LYONS COOK       Soprano             1915, 1917, 1919
      CARLTON COOLEY        Violinist           1921
                     Winner of Stokowski Medal
      ALBERT CORNFELD       Violinist           1915
      ALFRED CORTOT         Pianist             1918, 1920, 1922,
                                                1925
      CHARLES M. COURBOIN   Organist            1922
      MARCELLA CRAFT        Soprano             1916
      JULIA CULP LIEDER     Singer              1914, 1916
      CLAUDE CUNNINGHAM     Baritone            1906
      ROYAL DADMUN          Baritone            1920, 1921
      EUGENE D’ALBERT       Pianist             1905
      MARGUERITE D’ALVAREZ  Contralto           1922
      MURRAY DAVEY          Basso               1912
      REBECCA DAVIDSON      Pianist             1917
      ELEANORE DE CISNEROS  Mezzo-Soprano       1908
      EMILIO DE GOGORZA     Baritone            1907, 1915, 1916
      JOSE DELAQUERRIERE    Tenor               1924
      F. DEL NEGRO          Bassoon             1923, 1924
      MARY HISSEM DE MOSS   Soprano             1908
      VLADIMIR DE PACHMANN  Pianist             1904, 1907, 1911
      SUSANNA DERCUM        Contralto           1915, 1916
      EMMY DESTINN          Soprano             1915
      MINA DOLORES          Soprano             1923
      P. DONATELLI          Tuba                1923
      ALFRED DOUCET         Oboe                1910
      NICHOLAS DOUTY        Tenor               1905, 1907, 1914,
                                                1918
      VLADIMIR DUBINSKY     Cellist             1907
      MARCEL DUPRE          Organist            1922
      CLAIRE DUX            Soprano             1922
      W. B. EBANN           Cellist             1902
      MISCHA ELMAN          Violinist           1909, 1912, 1913,
                                                1914, 1915, 1916,
                                                1917
      MYRTLE ELVYN          Pianist             1914
      GEORGES ENESCO        Violinist           1923, 1924
      EDWIN EVANS           Baritone            1915, 1919
      MILDRED FAAS          Soprano             1914, 1915, 1919
      JULES FALK            Violinist           1910
      VINCENT FANELLI, JR.  Harpist             1914, 1923
      FRANK L. FARRELL      Pianist             1914
      GERALDINE FARRAR      Soprano             1919
      MAUDE FAY             Soprano             1916
      IDETTE FEINMAN        Pianist             1917, 1922
      MRS. LOGAN FELAND     Soprano             1913
      EMILE FERIR           Viola               1918
      ALICE FIDLER          Contralto           1918, 1919, 1920
      ADELAIDE FISCHER      Soprano             1916
      JOHN A. FISCHER       Flutist             1922, 1923, 1925
      CARL FLESCH           Violinist           1914, 1923, 1925
      FELIX FOX             Pianist             1903
      MARY WOODFIELD FOX    Pianist             1911
      CORNELIUS FRANKE      Violinist           1902
      OLIVE FREMSTAD        Soprano             1917, 1918
      CARL FRIEDBERG        Pianist             1917
      BLANCHE FRIEDMANN     Soprano             1911
      MME. POVLA FRIJSH     Soprano             1918, 1919
      RUDOLF FRIML          Pianist             1905
      CLARENCE FUHRMAN      Pianist             1905
      OSSIP GABRILOWITSCH   Pianist             1900, 1902, 1907,
                                                1915, 1916, 1917,
                                                1918, 1919, 1920,
                                                1923
      JOHANNA GADSKI        Soprano             1905, 1906, 1907,
                                                1908, 1915
      RUDOLPH GANZ          Pianist             1913, 1920
      SAMUEL GARDNER        Violinist           1919
      MABEL GARRISON        Soprano             1916, 1917, 1924
      EDITH L. GASTEL       Soprano             1912
      LUCY GATES            Soprano             1916
      EVA GAUTHIER          Mezzo-Soprano       1922
      ELENA GERHARDT        Soprano and         1913, 1915, 1916,
                              Lieder Singer     1917, 1921, 1922
      JEAN GERARDY          Cellist             1901, 1905, 1922
      JEANNE GERVILLE-RÉACHE Contralto          1912, 1913
      DINH GILLY            Baritone            1913
      FRANK GITTELSON       Violinist           1914, 1916
      THELMA GIVEN          Violinist           1920
      ALMA GLÜCK            Soprano             1910, 1911, 1914,
                                                1915, 1916
      LEOPOLD GODOWSKY      Pianist             1912, 1916
      DOROTHY GOLDSMITH     Pianist             1912, 1917
      EFFIE LELAND GOLZ     Violinist           1915
      KATHARINE GOODSON     Pianist             1908, 1909, 1913,
                                                1914, 1920
      PERCY GRAINGER        Pianist             1916
      MRS. WILLIAM HOUSTON GREENE Soprano       1911, 1913
      CHARLES GREGOROWITSCH Violinist           1901
      HERMANN GREVESMÜHL    Violinist           1903
      DAVID GRIFFIN         Baritone            1915
      BONARIOS GRIMSON      Violinist           1913
      GEORGES GRISËZ        Clarinet            1923
      MAUD GROVE            Contralto           1910
      WALTER GUETTER        Bassoon             1923, 1925
      HENRY GURNEY          Tenor               1915
      ARTHUR HACKETT        Tenor               1920, 1923
      EMILY STOKES HAGAR    Soprano             1915
      MARGUERITE HALL       Contralto           1904
      MARIE HALL            Violinist           1905
      MARK HAMBOURG         Pianist             1902, 1907
      RACHEL HAMILTON       Soprano             1917
      VAHRAH HANBURY        Soprano             1920
      ELSIE STEWART HAND    Pianist             1903
      HAROLD HANSEN         Tenor               1924
      THEODORE HARRISON     Baritone            1914, 1915
      ARTHUR HARTMANN       Violinist           1906
      SUE HARVARD           Soprano             1913
      HUGO HEERMANN         Violinist           1905
      JASCHA HEIFETZ        Violinist           1918
      ALEXANDER HEINEMANN   Baritone and
                              Lieder Singer     1912
      ANTON HEKKING         Cellist             1907
      OTTO HENNEBERG        Horn                1923
      RUDOLPH HENNIG        Cellist             1901
      MYRA HESS             Pianist             1922
      FLORENCE HINKLE       Soprano             1910, 1911, 1912,
                                                1913, 1914, 1915,
                                                1916, 1917, 1920,
                                                1921, 1922
      ALLEN C. HINCKLEY     Basso               1909
      JOSEF HOFMANN         Pianist             1901, 1902, 1904,
                                                1907, 1913, 1915,
                                                1917, 1918, 1919,
                                                1922, 1923, 1924
      LOUISE HOMER          Contralto           1905, 1908, 1913, 1914
      HORACE R. HOOD        Baritone            1913
      ANTON HORNER          Horn                1923
      JOSEPH HORNER         Horn                1923
      HENRY HOTZ            Basso               1918
      MAE HOTZ              Soprano             1917, 1919
      BRONISLAW HUBERMAN    Violinist           1922, 1923
      CAROLINE HUDSON-ALEXANDER Soprano         1914
      ESTELLE HUGHES        Soprano             1919, 1920
                   Winner of Stokowski Medal
      ELSA ALVES HUNTER     Soprano             1920
      ERNEST HUTCHESON      Pianist             1906, 1908, 1910,
                                                1915, 1921
      MARIA IVOGUN          Soprano             1922
      SASCHA JACOBINOFF     Violinist           1917, 1918
      RAFAEL JOSEFFY        Pianist             1904
      CLARA YOCUM JOYCE     Contralto           1913
      FRANCESKA KASPAR-LAWSON Soprano           1908, 1909,
                                                1911, 1912
      ALBERT KASTNER        Harpist             1901
      EMILY STUART KELLOGG  Contralto           1907
      GRACE KERNS           Soprano             1913
      MARGARET KEYES        Contralto           1911, 1914,
                                                1916, 1917
      W. M. KINCAID         Flutist             1922, 1923,
                                                1924, 1925
      HANS KINDLER          Cellist             1915, 1916, 1917,
                                                1918, 1919, 1921,
                                                1922, 1923, 1924,
                                                1925
      KARL KLEIN            Violinist           1907
      CHARLES E. KNAUSS     Pianist             1905, 1906, 1907,
                                                1911, 1913
      PAUL KOCHANSKI        Violinist           1921, 1923, 1924
      TILLY KOENEN          Contralto and
                              Lieder Singer     1910, 1916
      AUGUSTA KOHNLE        Contralto           1913
      BENJAMIN KOHON        Bassoon             1914
      NINA KOSHETZ          Soprano             1922, 1923, 1924
      ELKAN KOSMAN          Violinist           1901, 1902
      FRITZ KREISLER        Violinist           1901, 1902, 1905,
                                                1907, 1908, 1910,
                                                1913, 1915, 1917,
                                                1920, 1921
      RICHARD KRUEGER       Bassoon             1920
      JOSEPH LA MONACA      Flutist             1925
      FREDERIC LAMOND       Pianist             1924
      WANDA LANDOWSKA       Pianist and
                              Harpsichordist    1923, 1924
      EDWARD LANE           Pianist             1922
                   Winner of Stokowski Medal
      MARIE STONE LANGSTON  Mezzo-Soprano       1911, 1913, 1914
      EDWARD LANKOW         Baritone            1920
      FRANCIS LAPITINO      Harpist             1911, 1912
      EARLE LAROS           Pianist             1914, 1916
      FLORENCE LARRABEE     Pianist             1915
      HULDA LASHANSKA       Soprano             1921, 1924
      ROBERTA LEE           Soprano             1919
      MAURITS LEEFSON       Pianist             1907
      ALFRED LENNARTZ       Cellist and
                              Organist          1915
      WASSILI LEPS          Pianist             1908, 1910, 1911, 1912
      EMILIE FRICKE LESHER  Pianist             1922
      MISCHA LEVITZKI       Pianist             1921
      JOSEF LHEVINNE        Pianist             1907, 1909
      JOSEF AND ROSINA LHEVINNE Pianists        1922
      JAMES LIEBLING        Cellist             1914
      ALBERT LINDQUEST      Tenor               1917
      HUBERT LINSCOTT       Basso               1924
      S. H. LIPSCHUETZ      Basso               1912, 1913
      CARLO LITEN DRAMATIC  Reader              1918
      ALFRED LORENZ         Violinist           1904
      WALDEMAR LUTSCHG      Pianist             1905
      MADELEINE MCGUIGAN    Violinist           1915, 1916, 1917
      J. CAMPBELL MCINNES   Baritone            1920
      MARGARET MCMULLIN     Soprano             1919
      GUY MAIER             Pianist (with
                               Lee Pattison)    1924, 1925
      ANDRÉ MAQUARRE        Flutist             1919, 1920, 1921
      DANIEL MAQUARRE       Flutist             1911, 1912, 1913,
                                                1914, 1915, 1916,
                                                1918
      MARVINE MAAZEL        Pianist             1920
      EDWARD MACDOWELL      Pianist             1901
      WILL C. MACFARLANE    Organist            1917
      C. STANLEY MACKEY     Tuba                1914
      FRANCIS MACMILLEN     Violinist           1911
      HELEN MACNAMEE-BENTZ  Soprano             1911, 1913, 1914,
                                                1915
      CHARLOTTE MACONDA     Soprano             1903
      JOHN MARQUARDT        Violinist           1903
      MRS. JOHN MARQUARDT   Harpist             1903
      HELENA MARSH          Contralto           1923
      HENRI MARTEAU         Violinist           1906
      FREDERIC MARTIN       Basso               1907
      GURNEY MATTOX         Violinist           1915
      MARGARET MATZENAUER   Contralto           1917, 1918, 1919,
                                                1920, 1921
      GEORGE MEADER         Tenor               1921
      NICHOLAS MEDTNER      Pianist             1924
      ELSA MEISKEY          Soprano             1917
      KATHRYN MEISLE        Contralto           1918
      YOLANDA MERÖ          Pianist             1911, 1913, 1916,
                                                1921, 1924
      CAROLINE MIHR-HARDY   Soprano             1904, 1905
      GWILYN MILES          Baritone            1901
      LETITIA RADCLIFFE MILLER Pianist          1916
      SELDEN MILLER         Pianist and
                               Organist         1905, 1906
      MARGARET ASHMEAD MITCHELL Soprano         1915
      BENNO MOISEIWITSCH    Pianist             1919, 1923
      GRISHA MONASEVITCH    Violinist           1924
                      Winner of Stokowski Medal
      RUTH MONTAGUE          Mezzo-Soprano      1923
                      Winner of Stokowski Medal
      EDWARD MUMMA MORRIS   Pianist             1914, 1915
      LAMBERT MURPHY        Tenor               1916, 1917, 1920
      MARGUERITE NAMARA-TOYE  Soprano           1912
      HAROLD NASON          Pianist             1907
      AGNES THOMSON NEELY   Soprano             1906
      OTTO NEITZEL          Pianist             1906, 1907
      ANNA NEWHOFF          Pianist             1920
      FRANK A. NICOLETTA    Harpist             1923
      MITJA NIKISCH         Pianist             1924
      ELSIE NORTH           Soprano             1911
      GUIOMAR NOVAES        Pianist             1917, 1921
      MARGARETE OBER        Soprano             1915
      HUGO OLK              Violinist           1902, 1903
      SIGRID ONEGIN         Contralto           1922
      LEO ORNSTEIN          Pianist             1919, 1921, 1925
      ANNA OTTEN            Violinist           1902
      IGNACE JAN PADEREWSKI Pianist             1914
      WILLIAM H. PAGDIN     Tenor               1908
      KATHLEEN PARLOW       Violinist           1911, 1916, 1921
      LEE PATTISON          Pianist
                              (with Guy Maier)  1924, 1925
      FREDERICK PATTON      Basso               1920
      MICHEL PENHA          Cellist             1920, 1921, 1922,
                                                1923, 1924
      LOUIS PERSINGER       Violinist           1912
      ALEXANDER PETSCHNIKOFF Violinist          1906, 1908
      MAY PETERSON          Soprano             1916, 1921
      FERNAND POLLAIN       Violoncellist       1918
      MILDRED POTTER        Contralto           1915
      JOHN POWELL           Pianist             1917, 1923
      MAUD POWELL           Violinist           1914, 1916
      MICHAEL PRESS         Violinist           1924
      RAOUL PUGNO           Pianist             1903, 1906
      ROBERT QUAIT          Tenor               1920
      AGNES CLUNE QUINLAN   Pianist             1910
      SERGEI RACHMANINOFF   Pianist             1909, 1919,
                                                1920, 1921
      PAUL RAHMIG           Double Bass         1914
      HAROLD RANDOLPH       Pianist             1906, 1909, 1910,
                                                         1913, 1915
      ALFRED REISENAUER     Pianist             1905
      GERTRUDE RENNYSON     Soprano             1911, 1914
      THADDEUS RICH         Violinist           1906, 1907, 1908,
                                                1909, 1910, 1911,
                                                1912, 1913, 1914,
                                                1915, 1916, 1917,
                                                1918, 1919, 1920,
                                                1921, 1922, 1923,
                                                1924, 1925
      ALBERT RIESE          Horn                1923
      MRS. ALBERT M. RIHL   Soprano             1904
      EMMA ROBERTS          Mezzo-Soprano       1915, 1920
      CHRISTIAN RODENKIRCHEN Trumpet            1914
      MAX ROSEN             Violinist           1918
      MORIZ ROSENTHAL       Pianist             1906, 1907
      ARTHUR RUBINSTEIN     Pianist             1906, 1922
      CORNELIUS RÜBNER      Pianist             1908, 1910
      ZIPPORAH ROSENBERG    Soprano             1912, 1913
      ELSA RUEGGER          Violoncellist       1903, 1906
      ELLA RUMSEY           Contralto           1920
      ALFRED SAAL           Violoncellist       1905, 1906
      CAMILLE SAINT-SAENS   Pianist             1906
      CARLOS SALZEDO        Harpist             1918, 1919
      CARLOS SALZEDO        Pianist             1924
      OLGA SAMAROFF         Pianist             1905, 1906, 1907,
                                                1909, 1914, 1915,
                                                1916, 1917, 1918,
                                                1919, 1920, 1921,
                                                1922, 1925
      HERMAN SANDBY         Violoncellist       1902, 1904, 1908,
                                                1909, 1910, 1911,
                                                1912, 1913, 1914,
                                                1915, 1916
      EMIL SAUER            Pianist             1908
      EMILE SAURET          Violinist           1905
      ERNEST SCHELLING      Pianist             1905, 1913, 1915,
                                                1917, 1922
      HANS SCHLEGEL         Flutist             1925
      EMIL F. SCHMIDT       Violinist           1920
      E. ROBERT SCHMITZ     Pianist             1920
      ALEXANDER SCHMULLER   Violinist           1921, 1922
      ARTUR SCHNABEL        Pianist             1923
      ALWIN SCHROEDER       Violoncellist       1905, 1908, 1909
      EDMUND SCHUËCKER      Harpist             1909
      MAX SCHULTZ           Violinist           1904
      ERNESTINE SCHUMANN-HEINK Contralto        1902, 1904, 1906,
                                                1907, 1911, 1912,
                                                1914, 1916
      OSCAR SCHWAR          Tympanist           1923
      CYRIL SCOTT           Pianist             1920
      HENRI SCOTT           Basso               1915
      OSCAR SEAGLE          Baritone            1915
      VIVIENNE SEGAL        Soprano             1915
      MRS. F. A. SEIBERLING Contralto           1913
      TOSCHA SEIDEL         Violinist           1918, 1919
      JOHANNES SEMBACH      Tenor               1915, 1916, 1917
      MARCELLA SEMBRICH     Soprano             1902, 1913
      ARRIGO SERATO         Violinist           1921
      JULES J. SERPENTINI   Clarinet            1923
      IRMA SEYDEL           Violinist           1913
      ARTHUR SHATTUCK       Pianist             1918
      OSCAR SHUMSKY         Violinist           1924
      ALEXANDER SILOTI      Pianist             1922, 1923
      BRUCE SIMONDS         Pianist             1922
      GARDELL SIMONS        Trombone            1924
      MARGARET SITTIG       Violinist           1921
      JEAN SKROBISCH        Tenor               1915
      MRS. FARRINGTON SMITH Soprano             1916
      DAVID SOKOLOVE        Pianist             1924
      ALBERT SPALDING       Violinist           1915, 1916
      AUGUST SPANUTH        Pianist             1903
      JANET SPENCER         Contralto           1908
      THEODORE SPIERING     Violinist           1917
      MAUD SPROULE          Contralto           1902
      HELEN STANLEY         Soprano             1921
      EVELYN STARR          Violinist           1915
      GERTRUDE MAY STEIN    Soprano             1902
      FRIBDA STENDER        Soprano             1906
      S. TUDOR STRANG       Organist            1910, 1911
      G. RUSSELL STRAUSS    Baritone            1909
      PAULINE STRAUSS-DE AHNA Soprano           1904
      HENRY SUCH            Violinist           1912
      ROSE AND OTTILIE SUTRO Pianists           1916
      MICHAEL SVEDROFSKY    Violinist           1905, 1906
      NOAH H. SWAYNE, 2D    Basso               1911
      MARGUERITE SYLVA      Soprano             1911
      MARCEL TABUTEAU       Oboe                1915, 1917, 1920,
                                                1921, 1923, 1924
      PASQUALE TALLARICO    Pianist             1911, 1913
      EMIL TELMANYI         Violinist           1921
      MAGGIE TEYTE          Soprano             1919, 1920
      JACQUES THIBAUD       Violinist           1903, 1904, 1917,
                                                1918, 1919, 1920,
                                                1921, 1922
      DOROTHEA THULLEN      Soprano             1913
      HENRY GORDON THUNDER  Organist            1916
      WILLIAM SYLVANO THUNDER  Organ and        1915, 1916, 1917,
                                 Harmonium      1920, 1921
      ANTON TORELLO         Double Bass         1914, 1917, 1920,
                                                1921
      RUTH TOWNSEND         Mezzo-Soprano       1915
      EVALYN TYSON          Pianist             1919
      ALINE VAN BARENTZEN   Pianist             1916, 1917
      MARCIA VAN DRESSER    Soprano             1918, 1919
      ELLISON VAN HOOSE     Baritone            1903, 1912
      HENRI VARILLAT        Baritone            1912
      FERENC VECSEY         Violinist           1921
      ROMAIN VERNEY         Viola               1921, 1922, 1923
      PAUL VOLKMANN         Tenor               1904, 1908
      CONSTANTIN VON STERNBERG Pianist          1903, 1905, 1910,
                                                1916
      JULIAN WALKER         Basso               1904
      HELEN WARE            Violinist           1913, 1914
      ALMA WEISSHAAR        Soprano             1912
      HUNTER WELSH          Pianist             1914
      FLORENZ WERNER        Violinist           1902
      REINALD WERRENRATH    Baritone            1916, 1917,
                                                1920, 1921
      CLARENCE WHITEHILL    Baritone            1911, 1916
      CHARLOTTE DEMUTH WILLIAMS Violinist       1921
      ERNEST WILLIAMS       Trumpet             1921
      EVAN WILLIAMS         Tenor               1913
      ARTHUR HOWELL WILSON  Pianist             1910, 1911
      FLORA WILSON          Soprano             1910
      ROSALIE WIRTHLIN      Contralto           1917
      HERBERT WITHERSPOON   Basso               1915, 1917
      JOHN K. WITZEMANN     Violinist           1902, 1903, 1904,
                                                1906, 1910, 1913,
                                                1915, 1916
      LUDWIG WÜLLNER        Reader and
                              Liedersinger      1908, 1910
      EUGENE YSAYE          Violinist           1904, 1913
      CAMILLE ZECKWER       Pianist             1904, 1913, 1914
      MARIE ZECKWER-HOLT    Soprano             1907, 1908, 1910,
                                                1917
      EFREM ZIMBALIST       Violinist           1912, 1914, 1916,
                                                1918, 1919, 1921
      MARIE KUNKEL-ZIMMERMAN Soprano            1902, 1905, 1906,
                                                1907
      AUGUSTA ZUCKERMANN    Pianist             1902




APPENDIX H


         SOME OF THE PRINCIPAL PLAYERS IN THE VARIOUS
           SECTIONS OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                             1900-1925

          THADDEUS RICH, _Assistant Conductor
                       and Concertmaster_

    Dr. Thaddeus Rich, who has been the concertmaster of
    the Philadelphia Orchestra since 1906, was born in
    Indianapolis. He began to play the violin in 1893, and
    when he was twelve years old showed such remarkable
    talent that he was sent to Leipsig, where he entered
    the Leipsig Conservatory, graduating with honors at the
    age of fifteen. In 1901 he accepted a position as first
    violinist with the famous Gewandhaus Orchestra under
    Arthur Nikisch, and two years later he went to Berlin
    as concertmaster of the Charlottenburg Opera. Here
    he studied violin with Joachim and composition with
    Pfitzner. In 1905 he returned to America, and Fritz
    Scheel, who was then conductor of the orchestra, heard
    him play and immediately engaged him as concertmaster.
    At his performances in Philadelphia he has played
    nearly every modern and classic concerto of value in
    violin literature.

                     HANS KINDLER,
               _First Violoncellist—1916-20_

    Hans Kindler was born in Rotterdam, Holland, and was
    educated in the High School and University of
    that city. When he was nine years old he began to
    play the ’cello, and later he attended the Rotterdam
    Conservatory, where he studied under Mossel, Jean
    Gerardy, and Casals. He was for two years solo cellist
    with the Deutsches Opernhaus, Berlin-Charlottenburg,
    and during his residence in Berlin he taught the
    ’cello at the Scharwenka Conservatory. Mr. Kindler
    has appeared with the principal orchestras in Berlin,
    Amsterdam, Birmingham, and Hanover, under such famous
    conductors as Mengelberg, Kunwald, Schönberg, Landon
    Ronald, etc. He has also played in joint recitals with
    Julia Culp, Xaver Scharwenka, and Ferruccio Busoni, who
    dedicated to him a transcription of a Chromatic Fantasy
    by Bach. He has also played for the Queen of Holland
    and for the Prince and Princess of Wied in Berlin.

    DAVID DUBINSKY: _First second Violinist_,
    was born in Odessa, Russia, educated in Philadelphia.
    Began his musical education at the age of eleven.
    Studied the violin under Schradieck and Sauret.
    Original member of Philadelphia Orchestra. Four seasons
    in Pittsburg Orchestra under Emil Paur, serving as
    principal second violin. Played in Cincinnati Orchestra
    in May Festivals of 1906 and 1914 Boston Festival
    Orchestra. _Engaged for Philadelphia in 1908._

    ROMAIN JOSEPH VERNEY: _First Viola_,
    was born in Paris, France, graduated with honors
    from the Paris Conservatory, where he studied under
    Theophile Laforge, at the age of eighteen. Was one
    of the principals at the Opera Comique and played in
    the Concerts Colonne. Came to this country in 1906 to
    be first viola with the New York Symphony Orchestra,
    where he remained for five years, and from there went
    to the Chicago Grand Opera Company. _Engaged for
    Philadelphia Orchestra 1920._

    WILLIAM MORRIS KINCAID: _First Flute_,
    was born in Minneapolis, educated at Punahan, Honolulu,
    also Columbia University. While living in Hawaiian
    Islands began to study the piano at the age of seven,
    flute at the age of eight, and after moving to the
    United States, the organ. He studied the flute at
    Institute of Musical Art with George Barrère, from
    which he graduated in the regular and artist course.
    He played with New York Symphony Orchestra for five
    years. Soloist at concerts in and around New York and
    on tour with New York Symphony and New York Chamber
    Music Society. _Engaged for Philadelphia Orchestra in
    1921._

    MARCEL TABUTEAU: _First Oboe_, was born
    at Compiègne (Oise), France. He began his musical
    studies at the age of six, with his brother-in-law, a
    well-known violinist. At the age of thirteen he became
    a pupil at Paris Conservatory under Georges Hillet,
    the famous master of the French Oboe School, where
    he studied five years. In 1904 was awarded the first
    prize at Paris Conservatory. His teacher advised him
    to come to this country and recommended him to Walter
    Damrosch, with whom he played for several seasons, and
    in 1908 was engaged by Toscanini at the Metropolitan
    Opera House. _Engaged for Philadelphia Orchestra in
    1915._

    ANTON HORNER: _First Horn_, was born in
    Gossengrun, Bohemia. He began to play the violin at
    the age of eight under his father’s instruction, who
    was a professional musician; began to learn the horn
    at thirteen, entered Leipsig Conservatory at fourteen
    where he studied for over three years, violin under
    Hans Becker, and horn under Frederick Gumbert. Three
    years with Pittsburgh Orchestra. (Also plays violin.)
    _Engaged for Philadelphia Orchestra in 1902._

    RICHARD KRÜGER: _First Bassoon_, was born
    in Berlin, Germany. Received private instruction in
    violin and piano from the age of twelve to fourteen;
    then four years at the Parlow Conservatory of Music,
    Berlin, being a pupil of Otto Schoenberg in the study
    of the bassoon. Played with Symphony Orchestra at
    Aix-la-Chapelle and Cologne, and under the direction
    of Richard Strauss, Felix Weingartner, Felix Mottl and
    Fritz Steinbach, also with Theodore Thomas Orchestra in
    Chicago. (Also plays piano and violin.) _Engaged for
    Philadelphia Orchestra 1901._

    ANTONIO TORELLO: _First Double Bass_, was
    born at San Sadurni de Noya, Province of Barcelona,
    Spain. Received his musical education at the Municipal
    School of Music at Barcelona. Began to play bass at
    the age of ten, played in an orchestra and at fourteen
    was playing solos. Played in the following orchestras:
    Associación? Musical de Barcelona, Boston Opera Orchestra,
    Boston Festival Orchestra, has been heard as soloist in
    Spain, Portugal and Madeira Island, and in the United
    States during the Boston Festival Orchestra tour in
    1911, all through the New England States, Pittsburgh,
    Denver, Cleveland, etc. Came to America in 1909.
    _Engaged for Philadelphia Orchestra in 1914._

    DANIEL BONADE: _First Clarinet_, was born
    in Geneva, Switzerland. Studied the clarinet under
    M. Lefèbre (solo clarinet at Paris Opera) in 1904,
    and won first prize at Paris Conservatory in 1913.
    Played in Paris in Sechiari Symphony Orchestra and in
    Monteux Symphonic Orchestra (Paris). _Engaged for
    Philadelphia Orchestra in 1917._

    SOLOMON COHEN: _First Trumpet_, was born
    in New York City. Began studying trumpet in 1912 under
    Mr. Schlossberg of the New York Philharmonic; then
    studied harmony under Hedda van dem Beemt. _Engaged
    for Philadelphia Orchestra 1918._

    J. WALTER GUETTER: _First Bassoon_,
    was born in Philadelphia. Studied violin from nine
    to fourteen years of age; at fourteen began study
    of bassoon and piano. From 1910 to 1914 studied at
    Klindworth Scharwenka Conservatory of Music, Berlin,
    under Adolf Guetter, principal bassoonist of former
    Royal Opera. With Chicago Symphony Orchestra from
    1915-22. Appeared as soloist with local Orchestra at
    St. Marknerkirchen, Saxony, in 1914; in Chamber Music
    Concerts in Chicago and Philadelphia; with Philadelphia
    Orchestra at Children’s Concerts in 1923. _Engaged
    for Philadelphia Orchestra in 1922._

    MICHEL PENHA: _First Cellist_, 1920-1925,
    was born in Amsterdam, Holland. He began his general
    musical education at Amsterdam Conservatory, and
    studied under Professors Mossel, Hugo Becker and Joseph
    Salmen. Toured as soloist in Europe, Indies, South
    America and United States. _Engaged for Philadelphia
    Orchestra in 1920._

    WILLIAM OSCAR SCHWAR: _Tympanist_,
    was born in Bautzen, Saxony, Germany. Began to play
    the violin at the age of ten. Studied tympani under
    Mr. Heinemann, first tympani player at the Royal
    Opera and teacher at Royal Conservatory at Dresden,
    Germany. Was a member of the Royal Opera at St.
    Petersburg, and has played in all the leading cities
    of Germany and European countries under the following
    musical directors and in the cities here cited:
    Felix Mottl, Karlsruhe; Treckler, Dresden; Sauer,
    Coblentz, Frischen, Hanover. Shortly after joining
    the Philadelphia Orchestra he made a sensation by
    his wonderful playing in the overture “Romeo and
    Juliet” by Tschaikowsky. When he had finished, the
    entire orchestra applauded him with great enthusiasm,
    an action which is seldom accorded a member of an
    orchestra in rehearsal by his colleagues. (Also plays
    snare drum, bells and xylophone.) _Engaged for
    Philadelphia Orchestra in 1903._

    GARDELL SIMONS: _Trombone_, was born at
    Allegan, Michigan. He began the study of the trombone
    at the age of nine and a few years later commenced a
    systematic course of study in Chicago. Since it was
    difficult at that time to get instruction of a high
    order from Trombonists he relied mostly upon singers
    and instrumentalists of repute for his instruction in
    breathing, phrasing, articulation and expression, and
    at length became one of the originators of the Modern
    School of trombone playing; also studied harmony and
    composition to some extent. Played first trombone with
    Philharmonic Orchestra, New York City, Arens “People’s
    Symphony,” Volpe Symphony and others. Wide experience
    as soloist with concert bands and concert companies,
    etc., and plays mostly his own compositions or violin
    music adapted by himself to the trombone. _Engaged
    for Philadelphia Orchestra 1915._

    DANIEL MAQUARRE: _First Flute_,
    1910-1918, was born in Brussels. When five years old he
    began the study of music in Paris, and in 1893, entered
    the National Conservatory of Paris to study flute and
    harmony; in 1896 he won the first prize for the flute.
    Toured in the United States as soloist with Mme. Emma
    Nevada in 1901, and was for two years soloist with
    Longy Club, of Boston. In 1902 became member of the
    Boston Symphony Orchestra, where he remained for seven
    seasons; also one season with New York Philharmonic.
    Organized the D. Maquarre Ensemble of Instruments
    in fall of 1913 in Philadelphia. _Engaged for
    Philadelphia Orchestra 1910._

    ANDRÉ MAQUARRE: _First Flute_, 1918-1910,
    was born in Brussels. Began his musical studies at the
    age of eight at the Paris Conservatory, with Solfeggio
    and Piano under Martini, also studied Harmony with
    Landon, Flute with Henry Altes and Composition with
    Massenet. Played in several orchestras in Paris,
    also Opera. Joined the Boston Symphony Orchestra in
    1898 as solo flute, and from 1906-1917 was conductor
    of the Boston Symphony Orchestra during the period
    of the “Pop” Concerts season at Symphony Hall. Wide
    soloist experience in Symphony orchestras, chamber
    music organizations, also obligato with singers, such
    as Melba, Gilibert and others. Founded the Maquarre
    Sextet in Boston in 1901. Composed three operas and
    a number of orchestral pieces in Symphonic form, an
    overture played by the Boston Symphony Orchestra; and
    chamber music for wind choir and songs. _Engaged for
    Philadelphia Orchestra 1918._

    PETER HENKELMAN, _First English Horn and
    Oboe_, was born in Heusden, Holland. Attended
    school in Holland, and at the age of seven began to
    study the violin. A few years later he began the study
    of the piano, and at the age of thirteen entered the
    Royal Conservatory at The Hague, where he started to
    study the oboe and English horn, as well as continuing
    his studies of the violin, piano and theory. He has
    played with the City Symphony Orchestra at Haarlem and
    Utrecht, the Winderstein Orchestra of Leipzig, the
    Symphony Orchestra of Budapest, the City Orchestra
    of Heidelberg, as well as with the Concertgebouw of
    Amsterdam. _Engaged for the Philadelphia Orchestra
    1901._




APPENDIX I


    PARTIAL LIST OF “FIRST PERFORMANCES” IN AMERICA
    AURIC—Nocturne (January 26-27, 1923)
    BLISS—Mêlée Fantasque (February 27-28, 1925)
    BRAUNFELS—Fantastic Variations (October 14-15, 1921)
    CARPENTER—“A Pilgrim Vision” (November 26-27, 1920)
    CONVERSE—“The Mystic Trumpeter” (March 3-4, 1905)
    DE FALLA—Excerpts from “El Amor Brujo” (April 15-17, 1922)
    D’INDY—Symphony No. 2, in B flat (December 30-31, 1904)
    D’INDY—“Wallenstein” (December 19-20, 1902)
    DVORAK—Heldenlied (December 27-28, 1901)
    FITELBERG—Polish Rhapsody (November 4-5, 1921)
    GLAZOUNOW—Scènes de Ballet (February 24-25, 1905)
    GRANADOS—Intermezzo and Epiloque from “Goyescas”
        (March 10-11, 1916)
    HAUSEGGER—Symphonic Poem, “Wieland der Schmied”
        (October 17-18, 1913)
    MAHLER—Symphony No. 8 (March 2, 1916)
    MAHLER—Das Lied von der Erde (December 16, 1916)
    DANIEL GREGORY MASON—Symphony No. 1, in C minor
        (February 18-19, 1916)
    PURCELL—Trumpet Prelude (December 26-27, 1924)
    RABAUD—Symphony No. 2, in E minor (October 24-25, 1913)
    RACHMANINOFF—Symphony No. 3, “The Bells”
       (February 6-7, 1920)
    RIMSKY-KORSAKOW—Excerpts from “Kitesch” (Solitude and
        The Battle), (October 26-27, 1923)
    SCHELLING—A Victory Ball (February 23-24, 1923)
    SKRYABIN—Symphony No. 3, “Le Divin Poème”
        (November 19-10, 1915)
    SIBELIUS—Symphony No. 5, in E flat (October 21-22, 1921)
    RICHARD STRAUSS—Alpensymphonie (April 28-29, 1916)
    STRAWINSKY—Le Chant du Rossignol (October 19-20, 1923)
    STRAWINSKY—Symphonies d’Instruments à Vent, à la mémoire
        de Claude Achille Debussy (November 23-24, 1923)
    STRAWINSKY—Sacre du Printemps (March 3-4, 1922)

                          CONCERTOS

    MAX BRUCH—Concerto for two Pianos and Orchestra
       (December 29-30, 1916) First World Performance.
    MEDTNER—Concerto in C minor for Piano and Orchestra
       (October 31-November 1, 1924)
    ORNSTEIN—Second Concerto for Piano and Orchestra
       (February 13-14, 1925)
    SZYMANOWSKI—Concerto for Violin and Orchestra
       (November 28-29, 1924)
    TAILLEFERRE—Concerto for Piano and Orchestra
       (March 20-21, 1925)

           Performances of the Ninth Symphony of Beethoven:

    March 26, 1903; January 1-2, 1904; February 7-8, 1907; February
    27, 1907 (Baltimore); March 13-14, 1914; May 7-8, 1920; December
    3-4, 1920; April 8, 1921 (Pittsburgh); February 21, 1924 (Toronto);
    March 4, 1924 (New York); March 6, 1924 (Philadelphia with Mendelssohn
    Choir of Toronto)




APPENDIX J


       PROGRAMMES OF SIX CONCERTS OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                        FIRST SEASON 1900-1901

                        PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                      MR. FRITZ SCHEEL, Conductor

                             FIRST CONCERT
               Friday, November 16, 1900, at 8.15 P. M.

                               PROGRAMME
    CARL GOLDMARK                 Overture, “In Spring,” Op. 36
    LUDWIG VAN BEETHOVEN        Symphony No. 5, C minor, Op. 67
               I. Allegro con brio         2-4
              II. Andante con moto         3-8
             III. Allegro                  3-4
              IV. Allegro                  4-4
                      Intermission of ten minutes

    PETER ILITSCH TSCHAIKOWSKY  Concerto for Pianoforte, No. 1,
                                          B flat minor, Op. 23

               I. Allegro, non troppo e molto maestoso      3-4
              II. Andantino simplice                        6-8
             III. Allegro con fuoco                         3-4
    KARL MARIA VON WEBER      “Invitation to the Dance,” Op. 65
                  Orchestration by Felix Weingartner
    RICHARD WAGNER            Entry of the Gods into “Walhalla”
               MR. OSSIP GABRILOWITSCH, Soloist

                            SECOND CONCERT
               Friday, December 14, 1900, at 8.15 P. M.

                          PROGRAMME
    LUDWIG VAN BEETHOVEN                Overture Leonore, No. 3
    JOHANNES BRAHMS             Symphony No. 2, D major, Op. 73
               I. Allegro non troppo
              II. Adagio non troppo
             III. Allegretto grazioso (Quasi Andantino)
              IV. Allegro con spirito
    AMBROISE THOMAS                        “Mad Scene” (Hamlet)
                      Intermission of ten minutes

    PETER I. TSCHAIKOWSKY          Serenade for Strings, Op. 48
              Andantino non troppo—Allegro Moderato
              Moderato, Tempo di Valse—Larghetto
              Elegiaco—Andante, Allegro con spirito

    Songs
             “Spring Has Come” (Hiawatha), Tyler
             “Skylark,” Händel
             “An April Birthday,” Ronalds

    BEDRICH SMETANA                         “Vltava” (Moldau)
                  From Symphonic Poem “My Fatherland”
                  MME. LILLIAN BLAUVELT, Soloist
                  SELDEN MILLER, Accompanist

                             THIRD CONCERT
                Friday, January 18, 1901, at 8.15 P. M.

                          PROGRAMME

    RICHARD WAGNER                            A Faust Overture
    LUDWIG VAN BEETHOVEN                Symphony No. 4, Op. 60
               I. Adagio—Allegro Vivace
              II. Adagio
             III. Allegro Vivace
              IV. Allegro ma non troppo
                             Intermission

    H. VIEUXTEMPS                       Concerto No. 2, Op. 19
               I. Allegro
              II. Andante
             III. Rondo—Allegro

    ENGELBERT HUMPERDINCK                     Moorish Rhapsody
               I. Tarifa (Sunset Elegy)
              II. Tanger (A Night in a Moorish Cafe)
             III. Tetuan (A Ride in the Desert)
                 MR. FRITZ KREISLER, Soloist

                            FOURTH CONCERT
                 Friday, February 8, 1901, at 8 P. M.

                          PROGRAMME

    WILLIAM W. GILCHRIST                         Symphony in C
               I. Introduction, Vivace Impetuoso. Allegro Molto
              II. Adagio, Andante Moderato
             III. Scherzo, Vivace
              IV. Finale, Molto Allegro

    EDWARD MACDOWELL                  Concerto for Piano No. 2
               I. Larghetto. Poco più Mosso e con Passione
              II. Presto Giocoso
             III. Largo. Molto Allegro

    CARL MARIA VON WEBER                     Overture “Oberon”
    EDWARD GRIEG             Berceuse for Strings, from Op. 68
    HEINRICH HOFFMANN            Elves and Giants, from Op. 22
    ANTON DVORAK                   Slavonic Dances III and VII
                  EDWARD MACDOWELL, Soloist

                             FIFTH CONCERT
                Wednesday, March 6, 1901, at 8.15 P. M.

                          PROGRAMME

    CARL GOLDMARK                 Overture “Sakuntala,” Op. 13
    AUGUST LINDNER           Concerto for Violoncello, E minor
               a. Serenade—Andante
               b. Tarantelle—Allegro Vivace

    PETER TSCHAIKOWSKY           Symphony “Pathétique,” Op. 74
               I. Adagio—Allegro non troppo
              II. Allegro con Gracio
             III. Allegro Molto Vivace
              IV. Finale—Adagio Lamentoso
    FRANZ LISZT                                   Les Préludes
                 MR. RUDOLPH HENNIG, Soloist

                             SIXTH CONCERT
                 Friday, April 19, 1901, at 8.15 P. M.

                          PROGRAMME

    JOACHIM RAFF                           Symphony “Im Walde”
               I. Allegro
              II. Largo—Allegro Assai
              III. Allegro

    EDUARD GRIEG                  Concerto for Piano in A flat
               I. Allegro Moderato
              II. Adagio
             III. Allegro Moderato

    PETER TSCHAIKOWSKY  Overture—Fantasie, “Romeo and Juliet”
                 MME. TERESA CARREÑO, Soloist




APPENDIX K


    THE WOMEN’S COMMITTEES FOR THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                               1924-1925

                         (Formed March, 1904)
    MISS FRANCES A. WISTER, President
    MRS. HAROLD ELLIS YARNALL, Vice-president
    MRS. CHARLES W. HENRY, Vice-president
    MRS. CHARLES R. WOOD, Recording Secretary
    MRS. WILLIAM W. ARNETT, Corresponding Secretary
    MRS. ALFRED REGINALD ALLEN, Treasurer
    MISS FRANCES A. WISTER, General Secretary for the
        Endowment Fund

                   HONORARY VICE-PRESIDENTS
    MRS. ALEXANDER W. BIDDLE    MRS. ARTHUR E. NEWBOLD
    MRS. JOHN CADWALADER        MRS. MORRIS PFAELZER
    MRS. A. J. DALLAS DIXON     MISS ANNE THOMSON
    MRS. GEORGE W. C. DREXEL    MRS. WM. AUSTIN SLAUGHTER
    MISS MARY K. GIBSON         MRS. EDWARD T. STOTESBURY
    MRS. AUSTIN S. HECKSCHER    MRS. CHARLEMAGNE TOWER
    MRS. CHARLES E. INGERSOLL   MRS. ALEX. VAN RENSSELAER
    MRS. C. HARTMAN KUHN        MRS. J. WILLIAM WHITE
    MRS. JAMES MCCREA           MRS. CHARLTON YARNALL
    MRS. THOMAS MCKEAN

                          DIRECTORS
    MRS. THOMAS G. ASHTON       MISS NINA LEA
    MRS. RUSSELL DUANE          MRS. JOSEPH LEIDY
    MISS GERTRUDE ELY           MRS. THOMAS ROBINS
    MRS. SIMON B. FLEISHER      MRS. JOHN B. THAYER, 3D
    MRS. JOSEPH M. GAZZAM       MRS. SYDNEY THAYER
    MRS. FRANK T. GRISWOLD      MRS. JOHN B. TOWNSEND
    MRS. HENRY S. JEANES        MRS. GEORGE F. TYLER

                          EX-OFFICIO
        Germantown—COUNTESS OF SANTA EULALIA
        West Philadelphia—MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY
        Delaware County—MRS. MATTHEW H. CRYER

        GERMANTOWN AND CHESTNUT HILL WOMEN’S COMMITTEE
                         (Formed March, 1905)
    COUNTESS OF SANTA EULALIA, President
    MRS. CHARLES E. MORGAN, First Vice-president
    MRS. HENRY W. RAYMOND, Second Vice-president
    MRS. WILLIAM JAY TURNER, Third Vice-president
    MISS ROSSMÄSSLER, Recording Secretary
    MRS. W. BEAUMONT WHITNEY, Corresponding Secretary
    MRS. RICHARD ROSSMÄSSLER, Treasurer
    MISS FRANCES A. WISTER, General Secretary for the
        Endowment Fund

                          DIRECTORS
    MRS. FRANKLIN BAKER, JR.    MRS. THERON I. CRANE
    MRS. WM. L. BARCLAY         MRS. NORTON DOWNS, JR.
    MRS. GEORGE C. BOWKER       MRS. WM. W. FRAZIER, 3D
    MRS. WM. P. M. BRAUN        MRS. FREDERIC GARDINER
    MRS. HENRY W. BUTTERWORTH   MRS. GEORGE HORACE LORIMER
    MRS. CHARLES S. CHESTON     MRS. JOSEPH A. LOUCHHEIM
    MRS. J. HAMILTON CHESTON    MRS. WM. PRICE NEWHALL
    MRS. EDW. W. CLARK, 3D      MRS. EDWARD A. SCHUMANN
    MRS. MORRIS LLEWELLYN COOKE

             WEST PHILADELPHIA WOMEN’S COMMITTEE
                         (Formed April, 1905)

                           OFFICERS
    MRS. L. HOWARD WEATHERLY, President
    MRS. C. LINCOLN FURBUSH, First Vice-president
    MRS. WILLIAM S. NEWCOMET, Second Vice-president
    MRS. ALFRED H. PEIFFER, Recording Secretary
    MRS. CHARLES L. MITCHELL, Corresponding Secretary
    MRS. SAMUEL S. FELS, Treasurer
    MISS FRANCES A. WISTER, General Secretary for the
        Endowment Fund

                             DIRECTORS
    MRS. PERLEY DUNN ALDRICH   MRS. JOHN S. W. HOLTON
    MISS MARGUERITE BEMENT     MRS. WYLLIS K. INGERSOLL
    MRS. HAROLD BOERICKE       MISS AMELIA JUSTI
    MRS. JOHN J. BOERICKE      MRS. JOHN M. KENNEDY, JR.
    MRS. EDWARD W. BOK         MRS. H. MCKNIGHT MOORE
    MRS. JOHN F. BRAUN         MRS. EDWARD L. PERKINS
    MISS MARY BURNHAM          MRS. FRANK READ, JR.
    MRS. CHARLES CARVER        MRS. HAROLD E. ROBERTS
    MRS. LEWIS R. DICK         MRS. A. M. STARR
    MRS. F. W. FERGUSON        MRS. WILLIAM A. SULLIVAN
    MRS. G. W. B. FLETCHER     MRS. W. MOSELEY SWAIN
    MRS. COLLIN FOULKROD       MRS. ARTHUR WILSON
    MRS. JAMES WOODS FRY       MRS. CAMILLE ZECKWER
    MRS. HERBERT T. HERR

              DELAWARE COUNTY WOMEN’S COMMITTEE
                     (Formed May, 1911)
                      BOARD OF MANAGERS

                           OFFICERS
       MRS. MATTHEW H. CRYER, President
       MRS. SAMUEL S. BURGIN, First Vice-president
       MRS. J. S. C. HARVEY, Second Vice-president
       MRS. HARRY H. BATTLES, Third Vice-president
       MRS. HENRY VOLKMAR GUMMERE, Secretary
       MISS BEULAH C. GARRETSON, Treasurer

                          DIRECTORS
    MRS. FRANK AYDELOTTE      MRS. S. LEONARD KENT, JR.
    MRS. J. CLAUDE BEDFORD    MRS. GIBSON MCILVAINE
    MRS. WILLIAM H. BIESTER   MRS. ROBERT L. MCLEAN
    MRS. SAMUEL DYER CLYDE    MRS. JOHN A. MILLER
    MRS. MORTON P. DICKESON   MRS. T. HALDEAN MOORE
    MRS. WILLIAM EASBY        MRS. CHARLES MUSSER
    MRS. ALBERT FOX           MRS. GEORGE BISPHAM PAGE
    MRS. HAROLD C. GODDARD    MRS. A. A. PARKER
    MRS. EDWARD F. HITCHCOCK  MISS EDITH PETERS
    MRS. BENJAMIN R. HOFFMAN  MRS. RICHARD PETERS, JR.
    MRS. EDWARD K. INNES      MRS. J. FREDERICK PETRY
    MRS. ROBERT F. IRWIN      MRS. J. LORD RIGBY
    MRS. WILLIS D. JAMESON    MRS. JOHN DAVID SHATTUCK
    MRS. E. R. KELLER         MRS. CHANNING WAY
    MRS. N. B. KELLY          MRS. HENRY M. WIRZ


COMMITTEES OUT-OF-TOWN

              THE DELAWARE COMMITTEE (1907-1508)
                       (Wilmington)
                           for
                  THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                      Formed May, 1905
        MRS. LEWIS C. VANDEGRIFT, President
        MRS. JOSEPH SWIFT, Vice-president
        MRS. WILLIAM BETTS, Secretary
        MISS ANNIE T. FLINN, Treasurer
        MRS. OTHO NOWLAND, Chairman Guarantee Fund
        MRS. ELLWOOD C. JACKSON, Chairman Auxiliary Committee
        MRS. A. H. BERLIN, Chairman Press Committee

    MRS. JOHN BANCROFT       MRS. ALFRED R. JONES
    MRS. JOHN B. BIRD        MRS. A. E. KRUSE
    MISS MARTHA BRADFIELD    MISS KURTZ
    MRS. DANIEL M. BATES     MISS LORE
    MRS. T. LESLIE CARPENTER MRS. D. J. REINHARDT
    MRS. ALLAN J. COLBY      MRS. J. E. SMITH
    MRS. W. F. CURTIS        MRS. HARRY J. STOECKLE
    MRS. WILLIAM K. DU PONT  MRS. CALVIN SWAYNE
    MRS. HARLAN GAUSE        MRS. WILLIAM F. SELLERS
    MRS CHARLES E. GRIFFITH  MRS. HENRY B. THOMPSON
    MRS. NORMAN HUXLEY       MRS. JAMES P. WINCHESTER

              THE WASHINGTON COMMITTEE (1907-1908)
                               for
                   THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                        Formed May, 1906

                MISS AILEEN BELL, Acting Chairman

    (The names of a large Committee and a list of Patronesses
                        are unavailable.)

                THE BALTIMORE COMMITTEE (1907-1908)
                  FOR THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                           Formed May, 1906

       LAWRASON RIGGS, ESQ., President
       HIS EMINENCE CARDINAL GIBBONS
       HIS EXCELLENCY GOVERNOR EDWIN WARFIELD
       RIGHT REVEREND BISHOP WILLIAM PARET, D.D.
                                     Vice-presidents

    HON. CHARLES J. BONAPARTE  MRS. BERNARD N. BAKER
    BERNARD N. BAKER, ESQ.     MRS. CHARLES J. BONAPARTE
    FRANK FRICK, ESQ.          MRS. DAVID L. BARTLETT
    J. SWAN FRICK, ESQ.        MRS. WILLIAM ELLICOTT
    GAUN M. HUTTON, ESQ.       MRS. T. HARRISON GARRETT
    DR. HENRY BARTON JACOBS    MRS. JOHN GILL
    SIGNOR PIETRO MINETTI      MRS. GAUN M. HUTTON
    PHILIP OGDEN, ESQ.         MRS. HENRY BARTON JACOBS
    WILSON PATTERSON, ESQ.     MRS. HOWARD MUNNIKHUYSEN
    DR. THOMAS L. SHEARER      MRS. WILLIAM PARET
    R. MANSON SMITH, ESQ.      MRS. WILSON PATTERSON
    JOHN MARSHALL THOMAS, ESQ. MRS. NELSON PERIN
    EDWIN L. TURNBULL, ESQ.    MRS. R. MANSON SMITH
    JERE H. WHEELWRIGHT, ESQ.  MRS. JAMES MADISON THOMPSON
    J. B. NOEL WYATT, ESQ.     MRS. EDWIN WARFIELD
                                        MRS. JERE WHEELWRIGHT
                    MISS SHEARER, Chairman


       HONORARY MANAGERS      ACTIVE MANAGERS

    MRS. W. S. BELDING        MISS BLOODGOOD
    MRS. JOHN S. BERRY        MISS BESSIE CAMPBELL CLARK
    MISS OCTAVIA BATES        MRS. ISAAC DIXON
    MRS. FREDERICK M. COLSTON MRS. J. HAMSLEY JOHNSON
    MRS. J. S. ELLARD         MRS. ERNEST KNABE
    MRS. CHARLES M. FRANKLIN  MISS LURMAN
    MRS. RICHARD GRIFFITH     MRS. EDWARD H. MCKEON
    MRS. PAUL HAUPT           MRS. S. C. ROWLAND
    MRS. DAVID HUTZLER        MRS. SIGMUND SONNEBORN
    MRS. GRIER HERSH          MRS. OSCAR A. TURNER
    MRS. CHARLES KEIDEL       MRS. CLARENCE WATSON
    MRS. C. MANIGAULT MORRIS  MRS. ROBERT W. WOOD
    MISS MARY L. PARKER       MRS. GEORGE L. ZELL
    MRS. FREDERICK B. STIEFF  FREDERICK M. COLSTON, ESQ.
    MRS. WILLIAM S. THAYER    CHARLES E. DOHME, ESQ.
    MRS. SIDNEY TURNER        FREDERICK H. GOTTLIEB, ESQ.
    REV. F. WARD DENYS        DR. JOHN HEMMETER
    MILES FARROW, ESQ.        REV. OLIVER HUCKEL
    DR. CHARLES M. FRANKLIN   ERNEST JENKINS, ESQ.
    EDWIN FRANK, ESQ.         ROBERT OLIVER LEHR, ESQ.
    MAURICE GREGG, ESQ.       THEODORE MARBURG, ESQ.
    DR. B. MERRILL HOPKINSON  REV. JOHN TIMOTHY STONE
    EDWIN SCHENCK, ESQ.
    CHARLES WEBER, JR., ESQ.

      THE WOMEN’S COMMITTEE FOR THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
    invites you to be present at a meeting in the interest of
                   THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                        to be held at the
                          ARUNDELL CLUB
              1000 North Charles Street, Baltimore,
                               on
         Thursday afternoon, December fourteenth (1905)
                   at half after three o’clock

                     Under the patronage of

               MRS. JOSIAH LAW BLACKWELL
               MRS. ALEXANDER BROWN
               MRS. GEORGE DALLAS DIXON
               MRS. S. NAUDAIN DUER
               MRS. WILLIAM M. ELLICOTT
               MRS. GEORGE T. GIBSON
               MRS. DANIEL C. GILMAN
               MRS. JOHN P. POE
               MRS. HAROLD RANDOLPH
               MISS MARY BUTLER SHEARER
               MRS. W. PLUNKETT STEWART
               MRS. JESSE TYSON
               MRS. GEORGE L. ZELL

                            Music by
             MRS. THOMAS S. KIRKBRIDE, JR., Pianist
                               and
                   MR. JOHN WITZEMANN, Violinist
               and MR. ALFRED SAAL, Violoncellist
              Members of the Philadelphia Orchestra




APPENDIX L


                  ANNOUNCEMENT OF CHILDREN’S CONCERTS
                THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA ASSOCIATION
                             Founded 1900
                       Maintaining and Operating
                      THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                             104 Musicians
                     LEOPOLD STOKOWSKI, Conductor

                         Special Announcement
                 Children’s Concerts Season 1921-1922
                     Wednesday Afternoons at Four

                          December 14th, 1921
                          February 1st, 1922
                            March 8th, 1922

                           Academy of Music

                     In Answer to a Long-Felt Need

          The Philadelphia Orchestra Association announces a
                  Series of Three Children’s Concerts
             for the coming season under the auspices of:

          THE MATINEE MUSICAL CLUB   THE CITIZEN’S COMMITTEE

    Mrs. Frederick W. Abbott,            Mrs. Frederick Rosengarten,
                     Chairman                              Chairman

    Mrs. Edwin B. Garrigues              Mrs. Robert Von Moschzisker
    Mrs. Helen Pulaski Innes             Mrs. John Hampton Barnes

    The Board of Education
    Dr. Edwin C. Broome, Superintendent of Schools, Philadelphia
    Dr. Enoch W. Pearson, Director of Music in the Public Schools
    Dr. Hollis Dann, Director of Music, State Dept. of Education
    The Women’s Committee for the Philadelphia Orchestra
    The Germantown & Chestnut Hill Women’s Committee for The
      Philadelphia Orchestra
    The West Philadelphia Women’s Committee for The Philadelphia
      Orchestra
    The Media, Chester & West Chester Women’s Committee for
      The Philadelphia Orchestra
    The Civic Club of Philadelphia
    The New Century Club
    The Philomusian Club
    The Pennsylvania Federation of Music Clubs
    The Philadelphia Association of Settlements

    These Concerts will be conducted by Mr. Stokowski,
    who has arranged a series of programmes lasting one
    hour, during which short talks will be given about the
    instruments, as well as about the selections played.

    The Concerts are for Children, and no adult will be
    admitted unless accompanied by one or more children.

                   COMMITTEE ON CHILDREN’S CONCERTS

                   MISS FRANCES A. WISTER, Chairman
               MR. EDWARD W. BOK       DR. CHARLES D. HART

           SCHEDULE OF PRICES                 Series of
                (No Tax)                        Three
                                               Concerts
    Parquet and Balcony Boxes, seating six       $18.00
    Parquet and Balcony Boxes, seating four       12.00
    Parquet, Parquet Circle and Balcony Seats      2.25
    Family Circle                                  1.50
    Amphitheatre                                    .75




APPENDIX M


    PHILADELPHIA PERMANENT ORCHESTRA
               PROSPECTUS
              March 3, 1899

The musical life of this city has reached a stage in its development
that must make it apparent to all who are interested in the advancement
of matters of art and education that if we are to continue the progress
of the past few years and take our place as a city of any musical
importance, the next and most necessary step is the founding of a
Permanent Philadelphia Orchestra. Such an undertaking is one that
requires serious consideration, and the co-operation not only of our
music-loving public but of all citizens who are interested in our civic
progress.

In order to establish an orchestra such as would be a distinct credit
to the city, it is necessary to have a paid-up fund of not less than
$250,000.

The following Committee, before issuing this circular, have given the
matter great consideration, carefully looked into various organizations
in other cities, and feel confident that if they meet with liberal
response Philadelphia will have in a few years an orchestra second to
none in America. When Boston, Chicago, Cincinnati, Buffalo, Pittsburgh,
and other cities, not nearly so large or so wealthy, have established
permanent orchestras, it is surely time that we should interest
ourselves and unite in aiding to form an organization in keeping with
our size and importance. This will not be possible with less than the
sum before mentioned, which they trust you will aid them in securing
upon the following terms and conditions:

1. Subscribers shall not be bound by their subscriptions unless the sum
of $200,000 shall have been subscribed.

2. The fund shall be used only for the purpose of establishing and
maintaining a permanent Philadelphia Orchestra, and it shall be applied
for that purpose by the following Trustees:

    C. WILLIAM BERGNER          C. HARTMAN KUHN
    JOHN H. CONVERSE            SIMON A. STERN
    SAMUEL A. CROZER            JAMES F. SULLIVAN
    GEORGE W. CHILDS DREXEL     THOMAS B. WANAMAKER
    CHARLES C. HARRISON

or their successors. The discretion of such Trustees shall be absolute
as regards the administration of the fund, and they shall have power to
fill any vacancy occurring in their number, they having agreed to abide
by the conditions herein stated.

The Trustees shall invest $200,000 of the fund, using only the interest
thereof and the additional $50,000 shall be used for current expenses
of the first few years, when the expenses will be heavier and the
deficit greater.

3. The orchestra shall be composed, first, of the best musicians
resident in Philadelphia; then, of the best musicians obtainable either
in this country or abroad. In order to insure the success of the
enterprise, it is absolutely necessary that the highest standard be
maintained, that the reputation of the orchestra can be established in
other cities beside our own, for it is not possible for an orchestra to
become self-supporting that cannot command engagements outside the city
to which it belongs.

4. The Board of Trustees, when it considers that the completion of the
fund is assured, shall select the leader upon the careful and unbiased
consideration of the merits and records of all candidates submitted to
it. Such candidates, however, to be only men of the highest reputation
either in Europe or America, and the leader one whose name will add to
the prestige of the orchestra both here and in other cities.

5. The selection and placing of the musicians shall be made by the
leader, subject to conditions in paragraph three.

6. As the subscribers contribute to the fund solely for the benevolent
purpose of advancing the cause of music in Philadelphia and release all
control over said fund, they shall not be considered as partners with
each other, or with the Trustees in the conduct or management of said
orchestra.

7. The Board of Trustees shall never exceed nine in number.

8. Subscribers to the permanent fund shall have choice of seats in
advance of the general public for all Symphony Concerts.

The Committee earnestly requests all who are interested and who will
aid them by subscribing to the Fund, to kindly give the matter their
prompt attention, and send in any subscription or communication as soon
as possible, for if the Orchestra is to be established by next season,
it is necessary to push matters without delay.

            COMMITTEE
    Philadelphia Permanent Orchestra[68]

[68] The officers were: Chairman, Mrs. W. H. H. Robinson; Treasurer,
Mrs. Edward I. Keffer; Secretary, Miss Edith Lee Hutchinson.

MISS BALCH MISS MARY MOSS MRS. WILLIAM BURNHAM MRS. CLEMENT B. NEWBOLD
MRS. LOUIS F. BENSON MRS. CHARLES PLATT, JR. MISS BRIGHT MRS. JOHN
WILLIAMS PATTEN MRS. GEORGE W. C. DREXEL MISS ETHEL PARRISH MRS.
CHANCELLOR C. ENGLISH MRS. W. H. H. ROBINSON MRS. SIMON B. FLEISHER
MRS. CORNELIUS STEVENSON MISS M. K. GIBSON MRS. C. MORTON SMITH MRS.
ALFRED C. HARRISON MISS SUSAN STEVENSON MRS. JOHN HARRISON MRS. MONROE
SMITH MRS. EDWARD IUNGERICH KEFFER MRS. JOHN THOMPSON SPENCER MRS.
JOSEPH LEIDY, JR. MRS. WILLIAM PENN TROTH MRS. WILLIAM L. MCLEAN MISS
FRANCES WISTER MISS ADA ELIZABETH MILES MRS. CHARLES S. WHELEN.

MISS EDITH LEE HUTCHINSON, Secretary, 1936 Wallace Street

ENDORSERS

    Mr. and Mrs. W. W. Arnett           Miss Margaret Harvey
    Mr. Francis R. Abbott               Mr. Ellis Clarke Hammann
    Mr. and Mrs. Samuel T. Bodine       Mr. Alfred Curtin Hirsh
    Mr. Richard S. Brock                Mr. Max Heinrich
    Mr. James M. Beck                   Mr. Samuel B. Huey
    Mrs. William Bucknell               Mr. James Hay
    Mr. and Mrs. James M. Bennett       Mr. H. H. Hallowell
    Mr. Henry C. Blair                  Mr. John H. Ingham
    Mr. David Bispham                   Mrs. Charles E. Ingersoll
    Miss Emma M. Boyles                 Mr. Henry McKean Ingersoll
    Dr. Edward Brooks                   Miss Hilda Justice
    Blasius & Sons                      Mr. J. George Klemm
    Mr. Charles A. Braun                Dr. Edward Iungerich Keffer
    Mrs. M. M. Baltz                    Mr. and Mrs. J. L. Ketterlinus
    Mr. Samuel Castner, Jr.             Mr. and Mrs. George B. Kester
    Mr. Richard Y. Cook                 Miss Florence Keen
    Mrs. Edward H. Coates               Mr. Edward Knapp
    Mrs. J. Gardner Cassatt             Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Lea
    Mrs. Edward Coles                   Mr. August B. Loeb
    Mrs. William T. Carter              Mr. Algernon Sidney Logan
    Mr. Harrison K. Caner               Mr. and Mrs. Thomas McKean
    Mr. and Mrs. W. W. Curtin           Mrs. Henry Pratt McKean
    Miss Mary M. Cohen                  Mr. Edward Garrett McCollin
    Mr. and Mrs. J. deW. Cookman        Mr. James C. Miller
    Dr. Hugh A. Clarke                  Mr. Selden Miller
    Mr. Gilbert Raynolds Combs          Miss Alice Lewis Murphy
    Mr. and Mrs. Frederick S. Dickson   Miss Agnes Morrison
    Mr. F. T. Sully Darley              Mr. and Mrs. Harrison S. Morris
    Mr. Frederick Douredoure            Mr. Charles T. Murphy
    Mr. and Mrs. Stephen P. Darlington  Mr. Frederick R. Meigs
    Mr. Nicholas Douty                  Mrs. Markoe
    Mr. William L. Elkins               Miss Helen L. Murphy
    Mr. Carl Edelheim                   Mrs. J. P. Mumford
    Mr. Chancellor C. English           Miss Mary Wanamaker Miller
    Mr. Henry Erben                     Miss Adelaide Madeira
    Mrs. Charles Este                   Mr. Edmond Morris
    Mrs. George Harrison Fisher         Mr. G. Heide Norris
    Mr. and Mrs. Caleb Fox              Mr. Charles E. Pugh
    Mr. and Mrs. George C. Fletcher     Miss Marie Virginia Peck
    Mr. Charles N. Fahnestock           Mr. Charles R. Peck
    Mr. Charles Fearon                  Mrs. Frank Pleasanton
    Miss Elizabeth Wilson Fisher        Mrs. John Worrell Pepper
    Mr. and Mrs. W. W. Gibbs            Mr. Frederick Peakes
    Mr. and Mrs. Wm. B. Gough           Mr. Enoch Pearson
    Mrs. J. Ernest Goodman              Mr. Joseph Rosengarten
    Mr. W. W. Gilchrist                 Mrs. Frank H. Rosengarten
    Mrs. Charles W. Henry               Dr. J. M. Reeves
    Mr. and Mrs. Byerly Hart            Mr. and Mrs. Richard Rossmaessler
    Mr. Edward I. H. Howell             Mrs. Harry B. Rosengarten

    Dr. Henry C. Register               Mrs. Eliza D. Turner
    Miss Elsé West Rulon                Mr. S. S. Thompson
    Mrs. Thomas A. Scott                Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Tenbrook
    Mr. Justus C. Strawbridge           Mr. Louis C. Whitney
    Mr. N. A. Stout                     Mr. and Mrs. Owen Wister
    Mr. Monroe Smith                    Dr. George Woodward
    Mr. and Mrs. John Hasletine Shinn   Mr. Massah M. Warner
    Mr. A. M. Sheppard                  Mr. Clarence Wolf
    Mr. Calvin Mason Smith              Miss Woolman
    N. Stetson & Co.                    Mr. Albert B. Weimer
    Mr. Constantin von Sternberg        Mrs. Wm. Rotch Wister
    Mr. Frank Thomson                   Mr. Andrew Wheeler, Jr.
    Mr. George C. Thomas                Mr. E. Burgess Warren
    Mrs. Charles Newbold Thorpe         Mr. P. A. B. Widener
    Miss Kate Tilge                     Mr. Richard Zeckwer

     The following members of the Board of the Musical Fund Society:

    MR. WM. F. BIDDLE          MR. GEO. P. KIMBALL
    MR. O. C. BOSBYSHELL       DR. ALFRED C. LAMBDIN
    MR. JOHN H. CARR           MR. EDW. G. MCCOLLIN
    MR. H. G. CLAY             MR. R. P. ROBINS
    DR. RICHARD J. DUNGLISON   MR. CHARLES M. SCHMITZ
    MR. JAS. W. HAZLEHURST     MR. CHARLES P. TURNER
    MR. WM. H. HOLLIS          MR. C. WETHERILL

              MANUSCRIPT SOCIETY OF PHILADELPHIA
                  W. W. GILCHRIST, President

             THE SYMPHONY SOCIETY OF PHILADELPHIA
                 DR. E. I. KEFFER, President

       *       *       *       *       *

A Philadelphia newspaper 1899:

            “HOW TO GET AN ORCHESTRA”

    “It need not be difficult in Philadelphia to form
    as fine an orchestra as anybody is willing and able
    to pay for. A permanent orchestra is a very costly
    institution. It involves the permanent employment
    of anywhere from fifty to a hundred good musicians,
    at salaries sufficient to secure their constant and
    exclusive services as orchestra players throughout the
    active portion of the year. A simple calculation will
    show that the expense of this mounts quickly by tens of
    thousands.

    “Even in a great city, with a very large public
    interested in orchestral music, it is scarcely
    possible to meet this expense by the receipts from
    local concerts. There is a limit to the number of
    concerts that can be prepared or that can find hearers
    in one place, so that a large fixed orchestra can
    hardly earn its living—unless in some great place
    of popular resort, like the Crystal Palace at London
    or the Trocadero at Paris. Boston, an exceptionally
    self-reliant metropolis, provides two full audiences a
    week for the symphony concerts in Music Hall for
    twenty-four weeks in the year, but it is known that
    this does not meet the expense of the orchestra.
    Experience furnishes no evidence of any such hunger
    for orchestral music among the general public of
    Philadelphia as would justify a reliance on its
    financial support for an orchestra of the class of
    that which private generosity has maintained at Boston
    and that has established a standard with which, as a
    business enterprise, it would be necessary to compete.

    “Clearly, therefore, such an enterprise, if undertaken
    here, must be undertaken either in a missionary spirit
    by those who regard music as an elevating influence
    in the community, or for their own gratification, by
    those who wish for greater musical opportunities for
    themselves. In either case, or both, the promoters
    must expect to pay the piper. And this being the case,
    we should say that those who pay have an entire right
    to choose their piper—to organize their orchestra in
    their own way and put it in charge of whom they please.

    “The discussion that has been going on recently upon
    this subject has run wide of the mark. It is not a
    question of the best way to organize an orchestra, but
    simply whether there is anybody ready to put up the
    money to have an orchestra at all. If there is not,
    the whole discussion is futile; if there is, we cannot
    see that the details concern anybody else. The rest of
    us can pay for our tickets and find fault, or we can
    let it alone, as we have done with so many excellent
    orchestra concerts, past and present. Something beside
    the purely musical appeal is required to attract
    an audience, very few of whom can know the actual
    difference between one band and another, except in size
    and in some of the more meretricious technical effects,
    and if this can be supplied by personal, social or
    fashionable interest and influence, there is that much
    gained.

    “It is an old rule in Philadelphia, that when anybody
    undertakes to do anything, everybody else proposes a
    different way. This has always prevented the natural
    development of a local orchestra, and always will do so
    as long as the matter is open to public contention. The
    first essential to the establishment of a high-class
    orchestra is capital. If that is provided, the rest can
    be obtained, and those who provide it have the right
    to determine how to spend it, and the right also to
    command appreciation an support. Without this we can
    dispute till the cows come home with no more result
    than at any other time in the past forty years, during
    which time everybody has been agreed that Philadelphia
    should have such an orchestra, but no two agreed as to
    who should conduct it, or how it should be maintained.”

_Public Leger_, March 4, 1899:

              “A PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA”

    “The movement which has long been on foot to establish
    a permanent symphony orchestra in this city, one
    which should from its inception challenge favorable
    comparison with any other orchestra in the United
    States, and one in which all who take an interest
    in music might feel a justifiable pride, has now
    taken such definite shape that its accomplishment is
    practically assured.

    “A perusal of the prospectus of the Philadelphia
    Permanent Orchestra which was issued yesterday by the
    committee who have piloted the undertaking into its
    present haven, an which will be found published in
    full on another page, shows that a paid-up fund of
    $250,000 is necessary for the work in hand. All who are
    interested in the civic progress of the city, an those
    in particular who are interested in music, are invited
    to contribute to the fund.

    “The details of the scheme speak for themselves, but
    the pith of the understanding is that $200,000 of the
    fund shall be permanently invested and the interest
    used for the advancement of the orchestra, while the
    $50,000 cash balance is to be devoted to the current
    expenses of the first few years. Preference is to
    be given to musicians resident in Philadelphia, and
    the Board of Trustees is to select the leader from
    conductors of acknowledged reputation at home or abroad.

    “That such an institution will be of great and
    permanent value to the city, there can be no possible
    doubt. A symphony orchestra of the calibre proposed
    is as essential to the musical taste of the rising
    generation as a well endowed public library is to their
    literary education. Without an acknowledged standard
    to judge by, musical taste and musical judgment
    become chaotic, and degenerate by feeding without
    discrimination on what is inferior.

    “That such an organization will draw full houses, those
    who have seen the Academy packed to the ceiling at
    every concert given by the Boston Symphony Orchestra
    will not doubt, an the fact that Philadelphia has
    enabled a grand opera company of the first magnitude
    to give an extended season here with a large margin of
    profit for the past two years, is another demonstration
    of the existence of a large musical public. It must be
    admitted that the musical public of Philadelphia is
    peculiar in some respects; it has a rooted antipathy to
    mediocrity and an invincible dislike of being managed
    from New York. But the public know what they want. They
    have long wanted an orchestra—a real orchestra—of
    their own. Various obstacles have cropped up from time
    to time in the way, but the last one—the war with
    Spain—no longer exists; the way has been cleared and
    the time is ripe for the accomplishment of its desire.

    “The names of the committee who will direct the affairs
    of the orchestra are substantial guarantees of an able,
    impartial and business-like administration of its
    affairs, and the names of those who have endorsed it
    financially, a list that will be double and trebled in
    a few days, are certain indications that the orchestra
    will shortly be an accomplished fact.”




APPENDIX N


                    LITERATURE OF EARLY DAYS
      FIRST CIRCULAR ANNOUNCING THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
         MAILED IN SEPTEMBER, 1900, TO ABOUT 4000 PEOPLE

                   THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                          85 Performers
                   MR. FRITZ SCHEEL, Conductor

    A series of six Symphony Concerts will be given at the
    Academy of Music during the season of 1900-1901, on the
    following dates: Friday evening, November 16; Friday
    evening, December 14; Friday evening, January 18;
    Friday evening, February 8; Wednesday evening, March 6;
    Friday evening, April 19.

    Soloists of the first rank will assist at the concerts,
    and names will be announced as soon as pending
    engagements have been made.

    The prices of season tickets, with reserve seats to the
    six concerts, are: Boxes with six seats $75; boxes with
    four seats $50; other seats $8, $6 and $4; proscenium
    boxes on application.

    Sale of seats to holders of Patronesses’ Cards will
    begin at Miss Harris’s office, No. 1115 Chestnut
    Street, on Wednesday morning, October 10, at 9 o’clock.

    The series announced above is the outgrowth of two
    Symphony Concerts given last winter for the benefit
    of sufferers by the Philippine War. The committee in
    charge was the auxiliary to the committee of ladies who
    supervised the Philippine concerts, and it is intended
    that the management of the series of the coming season
    shall be generally the same. To cover expenses of the
    concerts a guarantee fund has been subscribed, the
    amount of which is sufficient to meet the requirements
    of the present undertaking; but it is hoped that our
    people will give the concerts such liberal support as
    to prevent a deficit at the end of the season.

       *       *       *       *       *

    The Philippine concerts proved the availability of
    many of our resident musicians for work of the highest
    grade, and the committee has undertaken the task of
    organizing this series of concerts because it believes
    that with a sufficient number of rehearsals, under
    capable direction, our home players will be able to
    render great orchestral compositions efficiently and
    acceptably.

    Mr. Scheel will insist upon frequent and thorough
    rehearsals of the music; and no labor nor expense will
    be spared to make the work of preparation complete and
    the musical results wholly satisfactory.

    The committee feels, however, that without a widely
    spread interest among the people of Philadelphia, its
    chief object would not be realized. That object is
    largely to promote the musical culture of the city, and
    to improve its status as a center of musical effort.

    Therefore, an appeal is made to every Philadelphian
    who understands what this undertaking may mean to the
    city’s future musical life for active interest and
    co-operation.

    Most useful help can be given to the movement by
    making its object known to friends and acquaintances;
    all personal effort will be an effective aid to the
    committee’s work.

    Whether or not the receipts equal the expenses of the
    concerts, it is the hope of the committee that this
    movement for music in Philadelphia will receive hearty
    encouragement and support from every one who has a
    pride in the city’s artistic life.

                Committee:
                          HENRY WHELEN, JR.
                          JOHN C. SIMS
                          EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
                          OSCAR A. KNIPE
                          DR. EDWARD I. KEFFER
                          OLIVER BOYCE JUDSON
                          JOHN H. INGHAM, Secretary,
                                508 Chestnut Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

     CIRCULAR LETTER MAILED TO PATRONESSES WHO HAD NOT
         PURCHASED TICKETS ABOUT TEN DAYS BEFORE SALE
                TO PUBLIC, OCTOBER, 1900:

                  THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
                         85 Performers
             MR. FRITZ SCHEEL, Conductor

    The Management of the Philadelphia Orchestra wishes
    to inform those interested in the concerts that the
    sale of season tickets has progressed most favorably.
    Of the forty-nine boxes forty-one have been sold, and
    about thirteen hundred seats have been taken. There
    now remain unsold but 140 seats in the Parquet, 103
    in the Parquet Circle and 76 in the Balcony. Prompt
    application at Heppe’s Piano Rooms, 1115 Chestnut
    Street, will be necessary to secure choice places.
    Should these seats be disposed of, there will, of
    course, be no sale of reserved seats for single concerts.

    Such widespread support is the best proof that the
    public of Philadelphia has undoubted faith, not only in
    the musical ability of Mr. Scheel and his men, but also
    in the value of this effort to advance the cause of
    orchestral music in our community. The attitude of the
    musical profession toward the project is clearly set
    forth in the enclose circular.

                      Committee:
                                HENRY WHELEN, JR.
                                JOHN C. SIMS
                                EDWARD G. MCCOLLIN
                                OSCAR A. KNIPE
                                DR. EDWARD I. KEFFER
                                OLIVER BOYCE JUDSON
                                JOHN H. INGHAM.

          CIRCULAR ISSUE ABOUT OCTOBER 15, 1900,
         FOR PRESS AND FOR SOLICITING PATRONESSES, TO
            BE ENCLOSED WITH OTHER LITERATURE:

                 THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA
            MR. FRITZ SCHEEL, Conductor

    Believing that the public would be glad to hear what
    the Musical Profession in Philadelphia thinks of this
    undertaking, the committee in charge has written to a
    few of the leading musicians, asking for their views.
    Extracts from their replies are given below.

    The intelligent and keen critical standpoint from which
    their life’s training enables them to judge, gives
    weight to their words, and the complete unanimity of
    opinion which they express is noteworthy.

       *       *       *       *       *

From Mr. Thomas a’Becket, President, Pennsylvania State Music Teachers’
Association:

    “Without a doubt the best man who has taken up
    residence in Philadelphia during the past forty years.
    This opinion is shared by the older of our orchestral
    musicians; also by men who have recently played under
    his conducting. It has been fully demonstrated, first,
    that Mr. Scheel has wonderful ability in handling
    musicians—amateur as well as professional—and drawing
    from them their best work; second, that there is in
    Philadelphia—which I have maintained for twenty-five
    years—the nucleus for a good orchestra. The great need
    has been the proper man to bring together conflicting
    elements. (The movement) has, indeed, my heartiest
    support.”

       *       *       *       *       *

From Dr. Hugh A. Clarke, Professor of Music, University of Pennsylvania:

“I believe Mr. Scheel to be a leader of first-rate ability in every
respect. His work during the past winter gives ample evidence of his
high standing as a musician and a conductor. The movement for the
establishment of an orchestra in Philadelphia has my most cordial
support, as I am convinced that it has now taken the right shape and is
in the hands of the right people.”

       *       *       *       *       *

From Mr. W. W. Gilchrist, Principal of the Central Conservatory of
Music, Leader of the Mendelssohn Club, Leader of the Harrisburg
Oratorio Society, etc.:

    “Those in whose judgment I have confidence speak very
    highly of him. The movement has my cordial support.”

       *       *       *       *       *

From Dr. Alfred C. Lambdin, Musical Editor, of “The Philadelphia Times.”

    “To the broad musical knowledge, the imaginative
    perception, the technical accomplishment that makes
    up the interpretive artist of high rank, he seems to
    add those peculiar personal qualities, the power of
    expressing his musical ideas through the medium of
    others, that differentiate the real ‘conductor.’ The
    value of such a man in any musical community is
    measured only by his opportunity. The great value of
    Mr. Scheel’s work this winter has been in the fresh
    and full artistic authority, which he has brought to
    bear upon our disorganized musical forces here. The two
    concerts at the Academy abundantly demonstrated what
    can be done under such leadership and how it can be
    done. The movement, therefore, to continue that work,
    and develop it on the lines already laid down, commands
    my most cordial support.”

       *       *       *       *       *

From Mr. D. D. Wood, Organist of St. Stephen’s Church, Instructor at
Philadelphia Musical Academy, Teacher of Harmony, Counterpoint, etc.:

    “Mr. Scheel is possessed of all those rare
    qualifications which go to make up a great leader.

    “He is most excellent musician of large and varied
    experience, an earnest and conscientious worker, a man
    of great personal magnetism, and thoroughly capable of
    making the very best of the means at his disposal. As a
    conductor he deserves a place in the very first rank.

    “The work accomplished by Mr. Scheel during the past
    winter has been eminently successful, and deserves the
    cordial recognition of all true lovers of musical art,
    and of all who are interested in the progress of that
    art in our city.

    “I am in hearty sympathy with the movement set forth in
    your circular.”

[Illustration]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWENTY-FIVE YEARS OF THE PHILADELPHIA ORCHESTRA, 1900-1925 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


