The Project Gutenberg eBook of The seven books of Paulus Ægineta, volume 3 (of 3)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The seven books of Paulus Ægineta, volume 3 (of 3)
        translated from the Greek: with a commentary embracing a complete view of the knowledge possessed by the Greeks, Romans, and Arabians on all subjects connected with medicine and surgery

Author: Aegineta Paulus

Translator: Francis Adams

Release date: April 13, 2023 [eBook #70533]

Language: English

Original publication: United Kingdom: Printed for the Sydenham Society, 1844

Credits: Tim Lindell, Turgut Dincer and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVEN BOOKS OF PAULUS ÆGINETA, VOLUME 3 (OF 3) ***






                                   THE
                             SYDENHAM SOCIETY

                                INSTITUTED
                                MDCCCXLIII

                         [Illustration: SYDENHAM]

                                  LONDON
                               MDCCCXLVII.




                                   THE
                               SEVEN BOOKS
                                    OF
                             PAULUS ÆGINETA.

                        TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK.

                                   WITH
                               A COMMENTARY
                EMBRACING A COMPLETE VIEW OF THE KNOWLEDGE
                             POSSESSED BY THE
                       GREEKS, ROMANS, AND ARABIANS
                                    ON
            ALL SUBJECTS CONNECTED WITH MEDICINE AND SURGERY.

                            BY FRANCIS ADAMS.

                            IN THREE VOLUMES.
                                VOL. III.

                                  LONDON
                     PRINTED FOR THE SYDENHAM SOCIETY
                               MDCCCXLVII.

                       PRINTED BY C. AND J. ADLARD,
                            BARTHOLOMEW CLOSE.




ADVERTISEMENT TO THE THIRD VOLUME.


I think it necessary to say a few words in explanation of the reason why
the reader will find in the Commentary contained in this, my concluding
volume, some deviation from the plan upon which the Commentaries in the
two preceding volumes were executed.

In the Advertisement to the First Volume it is stated that, by the advice
of the Council of the Sydenham Society, I had restricted the history
which I gave of professional opinions on the various subjects treated
of in the course of my work to what is properly called the period of
ancient literature, and to this rule it will accordingly be observed
that I have generally adhered, except in a few instances, where a
departure from it seemed to be demanded for the sake of illustration, or
for some other special object. But in dealing with the subject-matter
of the present volume, namely, the Materia Medica and Pharmacy of the
ancients, it became apparent to me from the first that a different
plan of proceeding was indispensable, otherwise the usefulness of the
whole work to the ordinary reader would be very much impaired. It is
well known how frequently the nomenclature of the sciences connected
with these subjects has changed, and what differences of opinion have
prevailed with regard to many of the substances used in the practice of
medicine by the ancients. In order, therefore, to render the information
contained in this and the preceding volumes of ready access for practical
purposes, it appeared to me necessary to bring down the annotations to
modern times, so that one might see at once what is the exact import of
the ancient terms of art, and what the medicinal substances mentioned
in the course of the work actually were, according to the nomenclature
of the present age. Accordingly it will be found that the Commentary in
this volume abounds in references to modern authorities, and contains a
variety of materials collected, not only from the earlier herbalists and
commentators on Dioscorides, Theophrastus, and other ancient authors,
but likewise from recent writers on Botany, Mineralogy, and the Materia
Medica, in illustration of the various articles which are treated of
in this work. And I have much satisfaction in having it in my power to
state that the plan now described has the authority and sanction of the
Council, who gave it their entire approval. To Dr. Pereira I owe my
grateful acknowledgment for much valuable advice and assistance received
from him on this part of my work; but at the same time it is fair to him
to state I have no right to make him in anywise responsible for opinions
herein advanced which may turn out to be erroneous.

And now, having brought my laborious undertaking to a conclusion, I
would embrace the present opportunity of returning my most sincere
expression of thanks to the Council for the honour which they conferred
upon me in selecting my work for publication, and for the very
flattering terms in which they speak of the first volume in the Annual
Report of their proceedings for 1845. I trust that whatever degree of
merit they discovered in _it_ will be found not to be wanting in the
succeeding parts, and that, taken together, the three volumes will be
acknowledged to constitute a more copious repertory of ancient opinions
on professional subjects than is to be found elsewhere. If such be the
judgment which the intelligent members of the Sydenham Society shall
generally pronounce on my work, I shall certainly never regret the time
and exertions which I have bestowed upon it.

                       τοιόν δ’ ἀπέβη τόδε πρᾶγμα,

                                                                     F. A.

BANCHORY, _June 21st, 1847_.




CONTENTS OF THE THIRD VOLUME.


                              SEVENTH BOOK.

  SECT.                                                               PAGE

    1. On the Temperaments of Substances as indicated by their Tastes    1

    2. On the Order and Degrees of the Temperaments                      2

       On the powers of simple medicines                                 6

    3. On the Powers of Simples individually                            17

       Appendix to the Third Section—On the Substances introduced
         into the Materia Medica by the Arabians                       424

    4. On Simple Purgative Medicines                                   480

       On those things which evacuate bile                             481

       Medicines which evacuate black bile                             483

       Medicines which evacuate phlegm                                  ib.

       Medicines which evacuate water                                  484

       On cholagogues                                                  489

       On melanogogues                                                 491

       On phlegmagogues                                                492

       On hydragogues                                                   ib.

    5. On Compound Purgatives                                          493

    6. On the Management of those who take Purgative Medicines; and
         what is to be done to those who are not purged by a proper
         dose of Purgatives                                            497

    7. On the Treatment of Hypercatharsis                              499

    8. On the Antidotes called Hieræ                                   500

    9. On Liniments to be applied to the Anus, and purgative
         Applications to the Navel                                     502

   10. On Emetics                                                      503

       Modes of administering hellebore                                504

   11. On the different kinds of Antidotes                             510

   12. On Trochisks, or Troches                                        528

   13. On Dry Applications and Abstergents (Smegmata)                  536

   14. On Liniments to the Mouth and Throat                            541

   15. On Delicious and Officinal Potions                              544

   16. On Collyria and Agglutinative Applications                      548

   17. On Plasters, and those things which are added to the boiling
         of them, from the Works of Antyllus, and on the proportion
         of wax to oil                                                 558

   18. On Emollient Plasters and Epithemes                             576

   19. On Restorative Ointments (Acopa), Liniments, Calefacient
         Plasters (Dropaces), and Sinapisms                            581

   20. On Different Preparations of Oil and Ointments                  589

   21. On Œnantharia                                                   598

   22. On Perfumes and Cyphi                                           599

   23. On the Preparations of Masucha, which some call Masuaphium      601

   24. On Pessaries, from the Works of Antyllus                         ib.

   25. On Medicines which may be substituted for one another, from
         the Works of Galen                                            604

   26. On Weights and Measures                                         609

   GENERAL INDEX                                                       629




PAULUS ÆGINETA.




BOOK SEVENTH.


In this book, being the seventh and last of the whole work, we are to
treat of the properties of all Medicines, both Simple and Compound, and
more especially of those mentioned in the six preceding books.


SECT. I.—ON THE TEMPERAMENTS OF SUBSTANCES AS INDICATED BY THEIR TASTES.

It is not safe to judge from the smell with regard to the temperament
of sensible objects; for inodorous substances consist indeed of thick
particles, but it is not clear whether they are of a hot or cold
nature; and odorous substances, to a certain extent, consist of fine
particles and are hot; but the degree of the tenuity of their parts, or
of their hotness, is not indicated, because of the inequality of their
substance. And still more impracticable is it to judge of them from their
colours, for of every colour are found hot, cold, drying, and moistening
substances. But in tasting, all parts of the bodies subjected to it come
in contact with the tongue and excite the sense, so that thereby one may
judge clearly of their powers in their temperaments. Astringents, then,
contract, obstruct, condense, dispel, and incrassate; and, in addition
to all these properties, they are of a cold and desiccative nature. That
which is acid, cuts, divides, attenuates, removes obstructions, and
cleanses without heating; but that which is acrid, resembles the acid in
being attenuant and purging, but differs from it in this, that the acid
is cold, and the acrid hot; and, further, in this, that the acid repels,
but the acrid attracts, discusses, breaks down, and is escharotic. In
like manner, that which is bitter cleanses the pores, is detergent and
attenuant, and cuts the thick humours without sensible heat. What is
watery is cold, incrassate, condenses, contracts, obstructs, mortifies,
and stupefies. But that which is salt contracts, braces, preserves as
a pickle, dries, without decided heat or cold. What is sweet relaxes,
concocts, softens, and rarefies: but what is oily humectates, softens,
and relaxes.


SECT. II.—ON THE ORDER AND DEGREES OF THE TEMPERAMENTS.

A moderate medicine which is of the same temperament as that to which it
is applied, so as neither to dry, moisten, cool, nor heat, must not be
called either dry, moist, cold, or hot; but whatever is drier, moister,
hotter, or colder, is so called from its prevailing power. It will be
sufficient for every useful purpose to make four ranks according to
the prevailing temperament, calling that substance hot, according to
the first rank, when it heats, indeed, but not manifestly, requiring
reflection to demonstrate its existence: and in like manner with regard
to cold, dry, and moist, when the prevailing temperament requires
demonstration, and has no strong nor manifest virtue. Such things as
are manifestly possessed of drying, moistening, heating or cooling
properties, may be said to be of the second rank. Such things as have
these properties to a strong, but not an extreme degree, may be said to
be of the third rank. But such things as are naturally so hot as to form
eschars and burn, are of the fourth. In like manner such things as are
so cold as to occasion the death of a part are also of the fourth. But
nothing is of so drying a nature as to be of the fourth rank, without
burning, for that which dries in a great degree burns also; such are
misy, chalcitis, and quicklime. But a substance may be of the third rank
of desiccants without being caustic, such as all those things which
are strongly astringent, of which kind are the unripe juice of grapes,
sumach, and alum.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The following is a list of the ancient authorities on the
Materia Medica and Pharmacy: Hippocrates (pluries); Dioscorides (de
Materia Medica); Celsus (v); Scribonius Largus (pluries); Marcellus
Empiricus; Pliny (H. N. pluries); Rei Rusticæ Scriptores; Apuleius (de
Herbis); Antonius Musa (de Herba Betonica); Macer Floridus; Galenus (de
Simpl.; de Comp. Med. sec. loc.; de Comp. Med. sec. gen.); Aëtius (i and
ii); Oribasius (Med. Collect. xi et seq.); Sextus Platonicus (de Med.
ex animal.); Zosimus Panopolita (de Zythorum confectione); Actuarius
(Meth. Med.); Myrepsus (pluries); Psellus (de Lapidibus); Rhases (Contin.
liber ult.; ad Mansor. iii); Avicenna (ii, et alibi); Serapion (de
Simpl.; de Antidot.); Mesue (de Simpl.); Haly Abbas (Pract. ii and x);
Averrhoes (Collig. v); Albengnefit (Libellus de Simpl. med. virt.); Geber
(Chemia); Servitor (de Præpar. Med. i. e. xxviii Albucasis); Baitharis
Præfatio ap. Casiri Biblioth. Arab. Hisp. p. 276; Ebn Baithar (Uebersetz
von Sontheimer); Rei Rusticæ Scriptores Arabici ap. Casiri B. A. H.;
Alchindus (Libellus de Med. compos. grad.)

Hippocrates, although he appears to have been familiarly acquainted with
the properties of most of the vegetable substances of the Old World,
still employed in the practice of medicine, has left no regular treatise
on the Materia Medica and pharmacy of his time. Theophrastus has treated
more fully and ingeniously of botany and vegetable physiology than any
other Greek writer; but except in two or three instances he scarcely
alludes to the medicinal powers of the articles which he describes.
In short, Dioscorides is the first and great authority on the Materia
Medica,—his contributions to which can never be too highly appreciated;
for, as Alston justly remarks, the science in ancient times remained
ever after in nearly the same state as he left it. The genius of Galen,
it is true, shed a considerable degree of lustre over the subject by his
philosophical theory regarding the general actions of medicines; but
his descriptions of particular substances, and even his detail of their
properties, are mostly borrowed from Dioscorides. The Greek authors,
subsequent to his time, can scarcely be said to have added one single
article to the list of medicinal substances described by him. Aëtius,
however, although he can advance no great claim to originality, has
given, as we shall see presently, a remarkably lucid exposition of the
Galenical principles of therapeutics. Of Pliny’s great work, so replete
with the most rare and curious information on almost every department of
ancient literature, we feel reluctant to speak otherwise than in terms
of unqualified eulogy, and yet candour obliges us to admit that on all
medical subjects this writer is but a very indifferent authority. For,
being evidently possessed of no practical acquaintance with professional
matters, he appears to have been wholly incapable of discriminating real
from pretended facts in medicine, and has accordingly jumbled important
and useless matter together in many instances with very little judgment,
nor can his opinions be much relied upon except when he copies closely
from Dioscorides. The same objection cannot be made to his countryman
Celsus; but the plan of his work being limited, the account which
he gives of these matters is confined to a classification of simple
substances, and a few formulæ for the formation of the more important
pharmaceutical compounds. The Arabians added camphor, senna, musk, nux
vomica, myrobalans, tamarinds, and a good many other articles to the
Materia Medica; but, upon the whole, they transmitted the science to us
in much the same shape as regards arrangement and general principles
as they received it from their Grecian masters. At the same time it is
impossible to take even a cursory view of the great work of Ebn Baithar,
now fortunately rendered accessible to many European scholars by Dr.
Sontheimer’s translation of it into German, without being struck with
the amazing industry, enterprise, and talent displayed by that wonderful
people in this department of medical science. In this collection,
more than 1400 medicinal and dietetical articles are described, many
of them no doubt in nearly the same terms as they had been noticed by
Dioscorides and Galen, but of original matter relative to substances
then for the first time introduced into the practice of medicine, there
is no lack; and it is only to be regretted that a proper key to these
stores is still a desideratum which it is to be feared will not soon be
supplied. Ebn Baithar’s list of medicinal substances, however, is far
more copious than those of the other Arabians, who in general follow
closely in the footsteps of the Greek authorities, and seldom supply
anything very original of their own. For example, the Materia Medica
of Rhases contains only 765 articles, and that of Avicenna only 747,
which it is to be remarked, is a smaller number than is contained in
the work of Dioscorides, wherein Alston states that he counted above 90
minerals, 700 plants, and 168 animal substances, making 958 in all. This
is nearly triple the number of simples contained in the Materia Medica
of the Edinburgh Dispensatory at the present day, which amount only to
341 articles; so that if this branch of medical science has received any
material improvement in modern times, it must arise principally from
our superior accuracy in estimating the virtues of the substances now
in use, or in making more ingenious compositions of their elementary
ingredients. At all events, it is quite clear that the Greek, Roman, and
Arabian physicians were amply provided with medicines of every possible
character, and there is no reason to suppose that they were in anywise
behind us in the skilful management of them. It has been affirmed,
indeed, in some late publications which we have seen, that the ancients
had never classified the articles in the Materia Medica according to the
nature of their actions; but this we need scarcely assure the reader is
a very erroneous account of the matter: and in proof of this we could
have wished, if our limits had permitted us, to have introduced here some
of the classified lists of medicinal substances as given by the ancient
authorities, and more especially those of Aëtius and Serapion.

    Verum hæc ipse equidem, spatiis inclusus iniquis
    Prætereo, atque aliis post me memoranda relinquo.

We have mentioned above that Aëtius’s account of the general principles
of the Materia Medica is particularly excellent, and we have now to add,
that as it is sufficiently explicit to convey a distinct idea of the
Galenical system, and is contained within moderate limits when compared
with the full and lengthy exposition of it given by Galen himself, we
shall give that of Aëtius entire, and confine our annotations almost
solely to it in the present instance:—


“_On the Powers of Simple Medicines._

“There are differences in the particular actions of medicines, arising
from each of them being to a certain degree hot, or cold, or dry, or
humid, or consisting of subtile or of gross particles, but the degree
in which each of them is possessed of the above-mentioned properties
cannot be truly and accurately determined. We have endeavoured, however,
to define them in such a manner as will be sufficient for all practical
purposes, laying it down that there is one class of medicines possessed
of a similar temperament to our bodies, when they have received a certain
principle of change and aliation from the heat in them, and that there is
another which is of a hotter temperament than we. Of this temperament I
have thought it right to make four orders, the first being imperceptible
to the senses, and only to be inferred from reflection; the second being
perceptible to the senses; the third strongly heating but not burning;
and the fourth, or last, caustic. In like manner of frigorific or cooling
things, the first order requires reflection to demonstrate its coldness:
the second consists of such things as are perceptibly cold; the third
is perceptibly cold, but does not occasion mortification; the fourth
produces mortification. So it is in like manner with humectating and
desiccant articles. Let such an order of degrees be laid down to render
clearer the course of instruction, rose oil or the rose itself being
placed in the first order of cooling things; the juice of roses in the
second, and in the third and fourth those things which are extremely
cold, such as cicuta, meconium, mandragora, and hyoscyamus. In regard
to hot things, dill and fenugreek belong to the first order; those
which are next to them, to the second; and so of the third and fourth,
until we come to the caustic. In like manner, respecting moistening and
desiccant medicines, beginning with those of a moderate degree, we may
arrange them until we come to their extremes. Such knowledge is of no
small importance for the purpose of medical instruction. One ought also
to exercise the sense of taste, and remember the peculiar qualities of
juices; as, for example, that such a substance when applied to the tongue
dries strongly, contracts, and roughens it to a considerable depth, such
as unripe wild pears, cornels, and the like; every such thing that is
intensely austere is called sour. Such things, as when applied to the
tongue, do not constringe and contract it like astringents, but, on the
contrary, appear to be detergent and cleansing, are called salt. Such
things as are more detergent and also rougher in a painful degree, are
called bitter. Those things which are biting and corrosive with a strong
heat, are called acrid; and such as are biting without heat, are called
acid, and these have the power of causing a fermentation when poured upon
earth. Of those which lubricate, fill, remove asperities, and, as it
were, erosions of the tongue, such as do so with sensible delight, are
called sweet; but such as do this without sensible delight, are called
fat. If, then, you wish to form a judgment of acrimony, you may learn
to do so from garlic, onions, and the like, which are to be frequently
tasted and long masticated, in order that the sensation thereby imparted
may be fixed in the memory. But if you wish to acquire the perception
of astringency, you may do so from galls, sumach, and the like; if of
bitterness, from natron and bile; and if of sweetness, from rob and
honey. Further, if you would wish to judge of such things as are devoid
of all qualities, or of an intermediate quality as to taste, take water,
and having tasted it, retain the perception in your memory; but see
that it be the purest water, and that it contain none of the aforesaid
qualities; neither sweetness, acidity, acrimony, nor bitterness; and,
in addition, that it be neither very hot nor very cold. Proceeding from
this, you may the more readily perceive the obscure taste of certain
juices which I call moderately sweet, but which others call watery; such
as the juice of green reeds and of grass, of wheat and of barley, and
of moderately sweet things, as resembling what I have described to be
of all other things the most devoid of qualities, I mean water, which
is in an intermediate state between heat and cold, or inclines a little
to cold. If being endowed with such a taste, it have not a liquid but a
dry consistence, it must necessarily be terrene and desiccative without
pungency. These things are called emplastic, such as starch, and most of
the thoroughly-washed metals, as pompholyx, ceruse, calamine, Cimolian
earth, Samian earth, and the like. Some are not only terrene, but also
watery in their nature; and some contain no little air in them: such
are viscid and therefore emplastic. There are two kind of emplastic
medicines, the one very terrene and dry, and the other altogether viscid,
being composed of water, earth, and, for the most part, of air, such
as sweet oil. The white of an egg is similar to oil, but more terrene.
The cheesy part of milk is emplastic, and so also the fat of swine. The
fat and suet of a bull and a buck-goat are acrid, and more terrene than
that of swine. That of a goose or a cock is hotter and drier than that
of swine; but of subtile parts, and by no means terrene. The fats then,
if they have no acrimony, are emplastic, or obstruent of the pores, more
especially if of a drier and more terrene nature, such as well-washed
wax. Emplastic medicines then are of such a nature. But astringents
are terrene, and with regard to the composition of their particles are
thick; but in their qualities they are cold. Acids in composition are
attenuating, but cold, like astringents. The terrene particles contained
in the juices, which, when melted, contract and dry the humidity of the
sentient parts of the tongue, if particularly rough, are called sour; but
if less so, austere; and we properly call the temperament of such juices
cold. But since they are unequally desiccative—for in this consists
their asperity—they are likewise terrene; for every watery substance
permeates the body evenly, and when removed it easily coalesces; but
what is terrene when removed does not readily coalesce again. And the
peculiarity of the sensation, if you will recollect the impression, will
testify to the same effect; for the passage of acid juices, in the organs
of sensation, appears quick; but that of sour, slow; and acids exert
their actions more on the deep-seated parts, whereas sour substances act
more superficially. When you wish to ascertain the action of a truly sour
substance, if that which is made trial of appear at the same time sour
and pungent, I would recommend you to lay that species aside, and to have
recourse to something which is sour without being pungent, and neither
acid, sweet, nor bitter, but as much as possible having no one quality
or power mixed up with its astringency; for it is useless and foolish to
make trial of such a medicine, as it cannot be ascertained whether it
be by its astringency, or by any of the qualities mixed with it, or by
a combination of both, that the substance which is made trial of exerts
its action. Therefore, chalcitis, misy, copperas, the flakes of copper,
sori, and, in addition to them, the armeniacum pictorium (Armenian
pigment), mercury, and other astringent substances which are also at
the same time pungent, act by both their properties upon the bodies to
which they are applied; but we are not thereby informed whether they burn
by their astringency or by their acrimony; for such substances, when
taken into the body, being composed of gross particles, and rather hot
in their powers, having become ignited in the course of time, according
to the change which they undergo in the body of the animal, ulcerate
and burn the parts about the stomach like heated stones or irons; and
owing to their weight they are incapable of being distributed over the
body. It is better, therefore, after much observation, to look out for
something that is purely astringent, and when you have found such a
substance, make haste to try it in the manner you have formerly heard
described; such as having tasted the flowers of the wild pomegranate,
galls, or the flowers of the cultivated pomegranate, hypocistis, acacia,
sumach, or the like, if the substance appear intensely sour, and it is
manifest that it contains no other quality, you must prove the action
of astringency from it. A sour substance then is terrene and cold, and
its quality may necessarily be removed in three ways; either by being
heated, or moistened, or by undergoing both these changes at the same
time. If only heated, it will neither become more humid nor softer; but
becoming harder it will have acquired sweetness, as is the case with
acorns and chesnuts, as they are called. But if only moistened, and if
the humidity is of a thick nature and watery, it becomes austere; for
the astringent part being dissolved renders the juice austere, it being
the property of a watery fluid to obtund the powers of every juice. If a
subtile and airy fluid be superadded, it will become acid, for coldness
being attenuating will render the former quality acid. When moistened and
heated at the same time, if with a watery humidity, it will occasion a
change to sweetness; but if with an airy, to fatness; for the fruits of
such trees as appear sweet to us when ripened, are, when newly formed,
sour and dry in their consistence, each according to the nature of the
tree which produced it; but in process of time, they become more humid or
juicy; and some get acidity superadded to their sourness, which latter
quality when they have laid aside they become again sweet as they arrive
at maturity. Some do not acquire sweetness at all while upon the trees,
but after a time, when separated from them. Some without the intermediate
acidity pass from sourness to sweetness, as the fruit of the olive. All
things are concocted by heat, which is of a twofold nature, the one
proper and innate, and the other supplied from without by the sun. But,
since being sour at first, they become sweet when ripe, their sweetness
is occasioned by heat; but their acidity and sourness by cold. And it has
already become obvious that as fruits being sour at first, in process
of time become, some sweet, some acid, some austere, and some remain
sour, that great variety will arise from a mixture of these qualities.
Wherefore, the fruit of the ilex, the cornel, and other such things, are
sour to the last, because they remain cold and dry as at the beginning,
being only increased in size, but acquiring no other internal change.
The fruits of the myrtle, the wild pear, and the oak are sweet and sour
at the same time; but the fruit of Aminæan vines, wine, and such like
things, are only austere. The fruit of the palm tree, and of wines, the
Surrentine, and such as have sweetness joined to astringency, are at the
same time austere and sweet. The Theræan wine, the Scybelitic, boiled
must called rob, and other such like things, are only sweet. The fruit
and juice of the olive in particular, but also of all other such things
from which oil is formed, are fatty. And as a sour juice in process of
time, becoming at first sweeter, and afterward turning more acrid and
bitter, ends in becoming wholly bitter; so in like manner, a cold juice
becomes at first more acid, and if wholly congealed it turns entirely
acid; and such fruits as at gathering are filled with much humidity,
and such as otherwise acquire much water, readily become acid from very
slight causes. For if the unripe grape is acid, but the ripe sweet, and
if all fruits are ripened by the solar heat, it is obvious that what
is more imperfect and colder is acid; whereas, what is more perfect
and hotter is sweet. When wine, therefore, from refrigeration becomes
acid, it is clear that it returns again to the same juice from which
it was formed, I mean that of the unripe grape. But vinegar differs
thus far in power from the juice of the unripe grape, that the vinegar
has acquired a certain degree of acrimony from the putrefactive heat
(”fermentation?“); but the juice of the unripe grape has no acquired
heat, and therefore none of the acrimony of vinegar; wherefore, vinegar
is more attenuating than the juice of the unripe grape, as the sensation
bears testimony to the truth of what has been said; but the acrimony of
the vinegar is not sufficient to overcome the coldness arising from its
acidity; it serves, however, to make it more penetrating; for inasmuch
as heat is more penetrating than cold, so does the acrimony of vinegar
the more readily pass the pores of sensible bodies, and thus acrimony
takes the lead, but coldness follows at no great interval. And it is this
mixed and almost indescribable sensation which prevents us from calling
vinegar simply cold; for we perceive in it a certain fiery acrimony.
But the coldness, from the accompanying acidity, straightway obtunds
and extinguishes the acrimony, and therefore there is a much greater
sensation from the coldness than from the heat; for some persons by
drinking oxycrate in the summer season are sensibly cooled, and remain
free from thirst. But since thirst arises from two distinct causes,
either from a deficiency of moisture or an excess of heat, that arising
from dryness is not cured, but that occasioned by heat is removed by it;
for vinegar by itself does not moisten, but is decidedly refrigerant.
Thirst, therefore, arising from a hot intemperament, or from a hot and
dry one, is not to be cured by drinking vinegar; but when humidity and
heat meet together, the proper cure of such a kind of thirst is vinegar;
but otherwise in the case of those who are thirsty in ardent fevers and
all other hot diseases, and in those during summer and hot weather,
their state is a compound of heat and dryness, so that the proper
cure for it is a composition of vinegar and water; for the vinegar is
decidedly refrigerant, and by its tenuity readily diffusible, and the
water, in addition to its property of cooling, is the most moistening
of all substances, for nothing is more moistening than water. But as an
external application for heat of the hypochondrium, the juice of unripe
grapes is preferable to vinegar, because it has no violent and offensive
coldness, nor any pungent heat mixed with it; for in such affections
persons require to be soothed without violence by an application which
will not induce externally any pungent acrimony. The juice of the unripe
grape, then, is not only acid but sour; for, as mentioned before, almost
all the fruits of trees are at first sour to the taste; and not only
are acids cold, but so also are sour and austere things. And if any one
will taste quinces, myrtles, or medlars, he will perceive clearly that
there is one sensation from acids, and another from sour and austere
things; for sour things seem to propel inwards the part which they
touch, everywhere equally squeezing, constricting, and contracting, as
it were; but the austere seem to penetrate deeply, and to induce a rough
and unequable sensation, so that by drying they expel the humidity of
the parts of sensation. Thus, between sour and austere juices, there is
a certain peculiar difference of sensation not easily to be described,
but which everybody must understand from what has been said. Every sour
substance, then, when free from all other qualities, I have upon trial
always found to be cold; but every sweet substance is hot, and does not
greatly exceed the heat in us; and as we are delighted, more especially
if we are cold, with the touch of warm water, until it expand the parts
congealed by the cold, and as it heats us, and does not dissolve nor
break the continuity of the parts, it is very pleasant and useful; so all
sweet food is hot, and yet it is not possessed of such a degree of heat
as to be unpleasant, but remains within the limits of those things which
expand, soften, and are demulcent: for all nutritive food is allied to,
and agrees with, the whole substance of the bodies which it nourishes; it
requires, therefore, to be moderately hot, so as to agree with the bodies
which are nourished; and hence one kind of food and medicine does not
agree with all men; for according to his peculiar substance and affection
is every one delighted and benefited. And such being the nature of things
those kinds of food which are less sweet are less hot, and their heat is
proportionate to their sweetness; but these things, when they get to an
immoderate degree of heat, are no longer sweet, but appear bitter, such
as honey which is old and much boiled, and so also with all other sweet
things; for such things as without boiling or preparation are allied to
the temperaments of the bodies which they nourish, appear already sweet;
but all such as are not allied appear unsavoury until prepared, for
those which are hot require to be corrected by cold, and those which are
sufficiently cold by the mixture of calefacient food and by heat. In
like manner such things as are terrene and drier than proper, are to be
corrected by humidity; and those things which are humid and watery, by
drying; that which is sweet therefore, in addition to being more or less
hot, is necessarily more or less humid. But when this bitterness arises
from being over-roasted, as in lime and ashes, it is necessarily rendered
dry and hot. For this reason every bitter thing is of such a nature as
to prove detergent, and is calculated to break down and to cut viscid
and thick humours, and such are ashes and natron; but that bitter sap
is dry and terrene, may be collected from the circumstance, that bitter
things are of all others the least prone to putrefaction, and do not
engender worms nor other animals such as are usually formed in roots,
herbs, and fruits when they become putrid; for we see that such animals
and putrefactions take place in humid bodies. Those things which are
intensely bitter (I call those things such which have no other manifest
quality) are uneatable, not only by men, but by almost all animals,
because every living creature is more or less humid, and bitter things
are dry in like manner as ashes and cinders. As, therefore, that which is
truly sweet is nutritive, and that which is purely bitter innutritive,
so those things which are intermediate are nutritive indeed, but less
so than the sweet. The salt juice is allied to the bitter, for both are
terrene and hot; but they differ from one another perceptibly in this,
that the bitter is more attenuated and wrought by the heat and dryness;
and thus, too, of salts, such as are hard, denser, and more terrene (as
are almost all the fossils), are less calefacient and attenuating; but
such as are brittle and porous are at the same time more attenuating and
hotter; and some of them are bitterish, being intermediate between the
hard salts and aphronitrum; and if you will warm any saltish thing to a
great degree it will straightway become bitter. Thus, the water of the
Lake Asphaltitis, which they call the Dead Sea, being contained within
a hollow and hot place, and overheated by the sun, becomes bitter, and
for this reason it becomes more bitter in summer than in winter. And if
you will draw some of it, and put it into a hollow vessel in a place
exposed to the sun during the summer season it will straightway become
more bitter than it generally is. For no animals appear to be found in
such water, neither plants; and although the rivers which fall into it
contain many large fishes, more especially the river near Jericho called
Jordan, none of the fishes pass the mouth of the river, and if you will
catch some and throw them into the Lake, you will see that they die
immediately, and hence it is called the Dead Lake or Sea. Thus, that
which is intensely bitter is inimical to all plants and animals, and is
of a parched and dry nature, becoming like soot from roasting. Having,
therefore, settled the powers of bitter juices, and said that they are
cutting, detergent, attenuant, and decidedly hot, to such a degree only
as not to burn, we shall next proceed to the acrid; and first we may say
of them that they are truly hot, then corrosive, caustic, escharotic, and
of a dissolvent nature, when applied externally to the skin; but when
taken internally, those which, in their whole substance are adverse to
certain animals, are all septic and destructive to them, as the cantharis
and buprestis are to men. But such as are distinguished only by excess
of their heating powers, if thicker and terrene, as arsenic, sandarach,
and the like, we call ulcerative of the internal parts; but if they
consist of subtile parts, such as the common seeds, carrot, anise, and
the like, they are diuretic, diaphoretic, and, in a word, cutting and
discutient; and some are also useful in expectorations from the chest
and menstrual discharges. But acrid juices would seem to differ from
bitter, not only in possessing strong heat, but also in this, that all
bitter things are not only hot but of a dry temperament like ashes,
while in such acrid substances as are not bitter, there is often much
humidity mixed, and therefore we use no few acrid things as articles
of food. But since enough has been said respecting all the juices,
it still remains to treat of the vapours. Most of the vapours, then,
affect us similarly to the juices; for all acids, and likewise vinegar
itself, move the senses of smell and taste in like manner; and acrid
things, as garlic, onions, and the like, are pungent and offensive to
the smell, no less than to the taste; so that, without tasting certain
things, such as dung, we are confident that we know its quality, and
therefore at once we abstain from them, because we repose confidence in
the sense of smell. And of fragrant things, such as have become putrid
and offend the smell, we straightway throw away, and do not attempt to
taste; and in short, with regard to almost all things, the smell and
taste are found to agree; and we refer each of them to two classes,
calling the most of those substances which have smell, odorous, and
fetid, and considering the odorous analogous to sweet things, and the
fetid to such as are not sweet to the tongue, it would appear that from
bodies which have no smell there is but little emitted, or at least that
it is disproportionate to their bulk, as is the case with salt and sour
things in particular; for the substance of sour things is of a dense
and cold nature, so that it is natural that what is emitted from them
should be small in quantity, thick, and terrene in its parts, so as not
to reach the brain in respiration. Hence it is not safe to judge of
their temperament from the smell as it is from the taste: for we know
that things which are inodorous consist of thick particles, but it is
not apparent how they are as to heat and cold; and that fragrant things
consist of subtile particles, and are hot in their nature; but it is not
shown by the smell but by the taste what is the degree of their tenuity
and heat. The inequality of their substance is the cause why fragrant
things give no certain indication of temperament; and therefore it is
not safe to judge of all the qualities of the rose from its smell; but
in taste all the parts of the bodies which are tasted fall equably upon
the tongue, and each excites a sensation agreeably to its nature, namely,
the sour part in it which is terrene consists of thick particles and is
cold; the bitter, which consists of subtile parts and is hot; and third,
the watery, which is necessarily cold. It is not safe then, as has been
said, to form a judgment of all the powers of simple substances from the
smell; but it is still more impracticable to estimate simple medicines
from their colours; for hot, cold, dry, and humid substances are found
of every colour. And yet from the colour of every kind of seeds, roots,
or juices it is possible to derive a certain indication of their
temperament. For example, onions, squills, and wine, the whiter they are,
are the less hot; but such as are of a yellowish and intermediate colour
are hotter. And wheat, vetches, and kidney-beans, and chick-peas, the
root of iris, that of kingspear, and many others, are similarly affected.
In each genus, for the most part, such things as are gold coloured,
red, and of a bright yellow, are hotter than the white, so that if any
conjecture can be formed therefrom of the powers of medicines, it is so
far well. It is best then, as has been often said and demonstrated, to
determine the powers of each by exact experiment, for by this you cannot
be deceived; but before ascertaining their powers by experiment, the
taste will give many indications, in which it will be assisted in a small
degree by the smell.” (_Præfatio in Aëtium._)

For a fuller account of the subject, the reader is referred to the first
five books of Galen’s work ‘On the Powers of Simples;’ to the first
tractate of the Second Book of Avicenna; and to the introductory part of
Serapion’s work ‘On Simples.’ A useful abstract of the ancient opinions
is given in the small tract of Albengnefit. The nature of the tastes
is ingeniously discussed in the ‘Timæus’ of Plato, and by Theophrastus
(de Causis Plantarum, vi.) Alkhendi’s theory of the action of compound
medicines appears to be ingenious; but it is complex and difficult to
explain, being founded upon the principles of geometrical properties
and musical harmony. The ‘Chemia’ of Geber contains a very interesting
abstract of the knowledge possessed by the ancients regarding the
recondite nature of substances, that is to say, on alchemy, but supplies
little or no information on the Materia Medica or Pharmacy.

Before concluding our present commentary, it may be proper to remark, as
tending to show the importance of the Galenical theory of the action of
medicines in the literature of medicine, that not only was it generally
adopted by most of the Greek and Arabian authorities subsequent to
Galen, but it prevails in the works of all our old herbalists, as, for
example, Gerarde, Parkinson, Culpeper, and of the other writers on the
Materia Medica, down to the days of Quincy. We may also take the present
opportunity to state that in the works of the ancient authorities, we
have detected a few traces of the singular doctrine of signatures, as it
has been called, but that with the exception of Geber, who can scarcely
be held to be a medical writer, we have found no allusion to alchemy
_or_ astral influence, as having anything to do with the operation of
medicines. The first ancient writer who notices alchemy, we believe, is
Firmicus (iii.) Though the Arabians were much given to this superstitious
conceit, it would appear from what we have mentioned that their medical
authorities had kept their minds free from the contamination of it.


SECT. III.—ON THE POWERS OF SIMPLES INDIVIDUALLY.

COMMENTARY. The part of our task upon which we are now entering is
at once so arduous and important, that we cannot but feel diffident
of our abilities to execute it properly. We may venture, however, to
assure the reader that we have spared no pains as far as lay in our
power to unravel the intricacies with which this department of ancient
science is involved, and that, with this intention, upon every article
we have carefully compared the descriptions of the ancient authors,
and have likewise availed ourselves of the learned labours of modern
commentators on Theophrastus, Pliny, and Dioscorides. We may mention
that those we have generally reposed most confidence in are Matthiolus,
Dodonæus, Harduin, Stackhouse, Schneider, Sprengel, and Sibthorp. It
will also be seen that we have paid a good deal of attention to the
works of our English herbalists, the study of whose works we consider
highly important, as reflecting much light on the ancient literature
of this subject. We have further culled freely from a variety of other
sources. As our limits prevent us from entering into the discussion of
controverted points, we are under the necessity of merely giving the
result of our own investigations in each case. Those who wish to see the
commentator’s opinions more fully on these matters are referred to the
Appendix to Dunbar’s ‘Greek Lexicon,’ which was written exclusively by
him.


Ἀβρότονον,

Abrotonum, _Southernwood_, warms and dries in the third degree, being
of a discutient and cutting nature, for it is possessed of a very small
degree of sourness, and if rubbed with oil over the whole body, it cures
periodical rigors. But it is prejudicial to the stomach; and the burnt
being more desiccative than the unburnt, cures alopecia, along with some
of the finer oils.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides and most of the subsequent authorities, with
the exception of Paulus, describe two species, the mas. and the femina.
The one without doubt is the _Artemisia Abrotanum_; the other probably
the _Santolina Chamæcyparissus_. The use of southernwood is as ancient
as Hippocrates, but Galen is the ancient author who has treated of its
faculties most elaborately. He recommends it strongly both externally in
fomentations, and internally as an anthelminthic. For the latter purpose
it is praised by the natural historian Ælian (H. A. ix, 33), and by
most of the medical authorities on the Materia Medica, both ancient and
modern. As an application in ophthalmy, along with the pulp of a roasted
quince, it is highly spoken of by Galen and the others. Galen says, that
friction with the oil of southernwood is useful in intermittents, and
this character of it is confirmed by all the authorities down to recent
times. Avicenna joins Dioscorides in praising it as an emmenagogue, and
says, that it produces abortion. (ii, 266.) Aëtius is fuller than the
others on the virtues of the lixivial ashes of southernwood, recommending
them particularly in diseases of the anus and in alopecia. Celsus ranks
it among the cleansing medicines (v, 5.) Pliny makes mention of a vinous
tincture (xiv, 19.) See also Dioscorides (v, 49.) Macer Floridus, a
comparatively modern authority, joins the more ancient authorities in
commending it as an antidote to narcotic poisons. He also says, that a
vinous tincture of it is useful in sea-sickness. Serapion, after quoting
freely from Dioscorides and Galen, under this head adds, upon “an unknown
authority,” that, when boiled with oil and rubbed over the stomach,
it cures coldness of the same. (De Simpl. 317.) In the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia (Athens, 1837), the two species of wormwood are described by
the names of _Artemisia Abrotonum_ and _Artemisia contra_. See further
Pereira (M. M. 1356.)


Ἀγάλλοχον,

Agallochum, is an Indian wood resembling the thyia, of an aromatic
nature. When chewed it contributes to the fragrance of the mouth. It is
also a perfume. Its root, when drunk to the amount of a drachm weight,
cures waterbrash and loss of tone in the stomach, and agrees with
hepatic, dysenteric, and pleuritic complaints.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is probably the lignum aloes or _Aloexylon Agallochum_,
Lour., although there has been considerable difference of opinion on this
point. See Gerarde’s ‘Herbal’ and the commentators on Dioscorides and
Mesue. Our author’s description of it is taken from Dioscorides (i, 21.)
The Arabian authorities and Simeon Seth describe several varieties of it;
the most excellent of which is said to be the Indian. At all times it has
been much used in India as a perfume. See in particular Avicenna, who
gives an elaborate dissertation on the different kinds of agallochum or
xylaloe, found in India, and the modes of preparing it (ii, 2, 733.) See
also Serapion (De Simpl. 197); Ebn Baithar (ii, 224); and Rhases (Cont.
l. ult. i, 27.) It does not occur in the Hippocratic treatises, nor in
the works of Celsus. Although not retained in our Dispensatory, it is
still kept in the shops of the apothecaries, and has the reputation of
being cordial and alexiterial. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p. 91.)


Ἀγαρικὸν,

Agaricum, _Agaric_, is a root or an excrescence from the trunk of a tree,
of a porous consistence, and composed of aerial and terrene particles.
It is of a discutient nature, cuts thick humours, and clears away
obstructions, of the viscera particularly.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears to have been the same as the _Boletus igniarius_
(_touchwood_ or _spunk_), which is still retained in our modern
Dispensatories. It is a fungous excrescence which grows on the trunk of
the oak, larch, cherry, and plum. Dioscorides and most of the ancient
authorities speak highly of it as a styptic. Dioscorides also commends
it in stomach complaints, but Aëtius maintains that it is prejudicial to
the stomach. Galen calls it cathartic, and speaks highly of its virtues
in the cure of jaundice and other hepatic affections. (De Simpl. v.)
For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2); Serapion (De Simpl. 78); Rhases
(Contin. l. ult. i, 28.) They recommend it in jaundice, like Galen,
and in complaints of the lungs, melancholy, protracted fevers, and in
other cases. It is now seldom used, being found to act harshly both as
an emetic and a cathartic. We have treated of the poisonous agarici in
another place (v, 64.) The _Boletus Laricis_ occurs in the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia. (Athens, 1837.)


Ἀγήρατον,

Ageratum, _Maudlin_, is possessed of discutient and slightly
anti-inflammatory powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our modern herbalists are generally agreed that this is our
maudlin, that is to say, the _Achillea Ageratum_, and the commentators
on Mesue hold that it is his eupatorium. From Dioscorides down to modern
times it has been commended as a diuretic medicine and an emollient
of the uterus. Dioscorides, however, seems to say that it is heating,
whereas Galen represents it as mildly anti-inflammatory. Perhaps there
is some error in the text of the former. (iv, 59.) We do not find it in
the works of Hippocrates, nor in those of Celsus, nor have we found it
treated of by any of the Arabians, except Ebn Baithar, who merely gives
extracts from Dioscorides and Galen (ii, 57.)


Ἄγνος ἢ λύγος,

Vitex, the _Chaste-tree_, heats and dries in the third rank. It consists
of fine particles and dispels flatulence, whence it is believed to
contribute to chastity, not only when eaten and drunk, but also when
strewed under one. Its seed also, when drunk, acts as a deobstruent
of the liver and spleen. When toasted it is less flatulent and more
distributable.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The anaphrodisiacal powers of the _Vitex Agnus Castus_, or
chaste-tree, are noticed by most of the medical authorities, and by
Ælian (H. A. ix, 36.) But modern authorities question its claims to this
character. Until lately, however, it held a place in our Pharmacopœia.
Our author abridges Dioscorides (1, 134), and Galen (De Simpl.) For the
Arabians, see particularly Avicenna (ii, 2, 43), and Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. 31.) It occurs in the works of Hippocrates.


Ἄγρωστις,

Gramen, _Grass_, that of Parnassus is particularly useful; it is
desiccative, moderately cooling, consists of fine particles, and is
somewhat sour; it, therefore, is an agglutinant of bloody wounds, and its
decoction is lithontriptic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides treats separately of the agrostis, which
probably is our couch-grass, or _Triticum repens_, and of the agrostis
in Parnasso, which has been very doubtfully referred to the _Parnassia
palustris_. (iv, 30.) Our author would appear to have confounded these
two articles together, and to have applied to the latter the characters
which Dioscorides gives to the other. The modern herbalists agree
with the ancients in commending the couch-grass as being diuretic and
lithontriptic. None of the commentators or herbalists have given a
satisfactory account of the esculent grass of Galen. The Arabians treat
of the grasses very confusedly. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 704);
Rhases (Contin. l. ult. iii, 50); Serapion (c. 119.) In the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia the _Triticum repens_ stands for the ἀ. (p. 72.) Apuleius
says “Græci agrostem Latini gramen appellant.”


Ἄνχουσαι,

Anchusæ, _Alkanet_; there are four varieties, all of which are not
possessed of the same powers. For that which is called onoclea has a root
which is astringent and somewhat bitter; whence it is useful in splenitic
and nephritic cases. It is a suitable remedy for erysipelas when applied
with polenta. The leaves are less cooling and desiccative than the root,
and, therefore, they are also drunk for diarrhœa. The lycapsos being more
astringent, agrees in like manner with erysipelas. The onochilos (or
alcibiadios) being possessed of stronger medicinal properties than these,
is beneficial for the bites of vipers, when applied as a cataplasm, as an
amulet, and when eaten. The fourth variety being smaller than the others,
has scarcely got a name: but being more bitter than the alcibiadios, it
is applicable in cases of the broad lumbricus when taken in a draught to
the extent of an acetabulum.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The first species is either the _Anchusa tinctoria L._,
or the _Lithospermum tinctorium_; the lycapsos, the _Echium italicum
L._; the alcibiadios, the _Echium diffusum_, and the fourth species the
_Lithospermum fruticosum_. There is considerable difficulty, however, in
determining the alkanets of the ancients. Our author, in his account of
them, follows Galen, who, in his turn, copies from Dioscorides. Avicenna,
Rhases, and Haly Abbas borrow all they say of them from Dioscorides
and Galen. The only one of these substances that is retained in our
modern Pharmacopœias is the _Anchusa tinctoria_, and it is used only
for colouring. The medicinal virtues of the _Lithospermum_, or of any
species of _Echium_, are scarcely recognized. Indeed, as the Anchusa
tinctoria is retained in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia, and as it is
there stated to be a common plant in Greece, we need have no hesitation
in admitting it to be the common anchusa of the ancients.


Ἄδάρκη,

Adarce is a sort of froth of salt water, collecting about rubbish and
weeds. It is very acrid, and heating almost to burning when applied
externally with other things; for it cannot be taken internally.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The description of this substance given by Dioscorides,
Galen, and the other authorities is substantially the same as our
author’s, from which all we can gather is that it was a saline concretion
formed about reeds and herbs in salt lakes. But even Matthiolus confesses
that he never could satisfy himself that he had found the substance in
question, and no modern authority on the Materia Medica has treated of
it. Dioscorides compares it to the _alcyonium_, from which we think it
probable that the adarce may have been applied to some species of this
zoophyte. See Alcyonium. Dioscorides recommends it for the cure of lepra
and sciatica (v, 136.) The Arabians borrow from him under this head.
See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 17); Serapion (c. 378.) It is not
mentioned by Celsus.


Ἄδίαντον,

Adiantum, _Maiden-hair_, is desiccative, attenuant, and moderately
discutient; and with regard to heat and cold, it holds an intermediate
place. It, therefore, cures alopecia, discusses swellings, proves
lithontriptic when taken in a draught, dries up expectorations from the
lungs, and stops defluxions of the belly.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Theophrastus says that it derives its name from its property
of not being wet in rain. He adds, that it promotes the growth of the
hair. (H. P. vii, 13.) Nicander says the same of it. (Ther. 846.)
According to Apuleius, it is the same as the callitrichon, polytrichon,
and asplenon. There can be no doubt that it is the _A. Capillus Veneris
L._ Dioscorides describes another species by the name of τριχόμανες,
which Sprengel and Schneider agree in referring it to the _Asplenium
Trichomanes L._ Stackhouse agrees with them respecting both these
species. The syrup of capillaire, which still holds its place in the
shops as a favorite domestic medicine, is prepared from the _Adiantum_.


Αΐζωον,

Sempervivum, _Wall-pepper_ (or _House-leek_?), of which there are two
varieties. It cools in the third degree, is moderately desiccative and
astringent, and is applicable for erysipelas, herpes, and inflammations
from a defluxion.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author, copying from Galen and Aëtius, describes two
species which seem to be the _Sempervivum arboreum_ and _Sedum rupestre_.
Dr. Lindley, however, refers the latter to _S. ochroleucum_. Dioscorides
has a third species, which may be referred to the _Sedum stellatum_.
The greater house-leek is praised by Dioscorides as an application for
headache, for the bites of venomous spiders, diarrhœa, and dysentery; as
an anthelminthic when drunk with wine; for stopping the fluor of women
in a pessary, and as an application to the eyes in ophthalmy (iv, 88,
89.) Macer Floridus commends it in menorrhagia. He calls it _acidula_.
Serapion, Avicenna, Rhases, and Haly Abbas merely copy from the Greeks.
Even Ebn Baithar has nothing original under this head. These plants,
although not retained in our Dispensatory, are still allowed to possess
medicinal properties. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 345.) It is still retained
in some of the foreign Dispensatories, and is held to be refrigerant and
astringent.


Ἀετώνυχον,

Ætonychon will be treated of under the head of _Stones_.


Ἀθηρά,

Pulticula, _Pap_, is a kind of puls fit for being supped, which is
prepared from ground spelt or from any corn, and agrees with children. It
answers also for cataplasms.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides gives the same account of it. It is the _Puls
fritilla_ of Pliny. Matthiolus says it is called _bouillie_ in French, i.
e. _pap_. Hesychius speaks of its being prepared from wheat, and Pliny
from rice.


Ἀιγίλωψ,

Ægilops, _Cockle_, is possessed of discutient powers, whence it cures
indurated inflammations and ægilops (fistula lachrymalis.)

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There is great difficulty in determining the grasses of
the ancients. This may be seen by consulting the ‘Herbal’ of Gerarde
on this subject. The present article was probably the _Ægilops ovata_.
Dioscorides gives nearly the same account of it as our author, who copies
Galen. He further mentions that the juice of it, mixed up with flour and
dried, was laid up for use (iv, 136.) The Arabians borrow closely from
Dioscorides. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 211), and Serapion (c.
25.)


Ἄιγειρος,

Populus nigra, _the Black Poplar_; it is heating in the first degree,
moderately desiccative, and consists of fine particles. Its leaves, when
applied with vinegar, remove gouty pains; but the resin of it being
hotter than the leaves, is mixed with restorative ointments and emollient
plasters. But its fruit, when drunk with vinegar, is beneficial to
epileptics.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt that it is the _Populus nigra_. Our
author and all the other authorities, both Greek and Arabian, copy
closely from Dioscorides (i, 110.) We will have occasion to treat of its
gum or resin afterwards. See Karabe. Celsus does not mention the black
poplar. The αἴγειρος κρητικὴ of Hippocrates was no doubt a variety of
_Populus nigra_. For the Arabians, consult in particular Avicenna (ii, 2,
333, 340, 364); Serapion (c. 266); and Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 165.)


Ἀιδοῖον,

Testiculus, _the testicle_ of a stag, when dried and triturated with wine
and drunk, is a remedy to those who have been bitten by vipers. It is
also mixed with compound medicines.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sextus Platonicus in like manner recommends the privy parts
of a stag as an antidote for poisons. All copy from Dioscorides (ii, 46.)


Ἀιθάλη and λίγνυς will be treated under Λ.


Ἀιθιοπίς,

Salvia Æthiopis, _Ethiopian Sage_, has leaves like the petty-mullein; and
the decoction of its root, when drunk, relieves ischiatic and pleuritic
diseases, hæmoptysis, and asperity of the trachea, when taken with honey.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It may be set down as being the _Salvia Æthiopis_, to which
our English herbalist Gerarde gives the English name of mullein of
Æthiopia. Neither Galen nor Aëtius has treated of it. Our author has
borrowed from Dioscorides (iv, 193.) We do not find it in the Materia
Medica of the Arabians, with the exception of Ebn Baithar, who merely
gives an extract from Dioscorides under this head.


Ἃιμα,

Sanguis, _Blood_; no kind of it is of a cold nature, but that of swine
is liquid and less hot, being very like the human in temperament. That
of common pigeons, the wood pigeons, and the turtle, being of a moderate
temperament, if injected hot, removes extravasated blood about the eyes
from a blow; and when poured upon the dura mater, in cases of trephining,
it is anti-inflammatory. That of the owl, when drunk with wine or water,
relieves dyspnœa. The blood of bats, it is said, is a preservative to the
breasts of virgins, and, if rubbed in, it keeps the hair from growing;
and in like manner also that of frogs, and the blood of the chamæleon
and the dog-tick. But Galen, having made trial of all these remedies,
says that they disappointed him. But that of goats, owing to its dryness,
if drunk with milk, is beneficial in cases of dropsy, and breaks down
stones in the kidneys. That of domestic fowls stops hemorrhages of the
membranes of the brain, and that of lambs cures epilepsies. The recently
coagulated blood of kids, if drunk with an equal quantity of vinegar, to
the amount of half a hemina, cures vomiting of blood from the chest. The
blood of bears, of wild goats, of buck goats, and of bulls, is said to
ripen apostemes. That of the land crocodile produces acuteness of vision.
The blood of stallions is mixed with septic medicines. The antidote from
bloods is given for deadly poisons, and contains the blood of the duck,
of the stag, and of the goose.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author abridges this article from Galen. See also in
particular Serapion (De Simpl. ex Animalibus.)


Ἄιρα,

Lolium, _Darnel_, is heating and drying, almost in the third degree,
being equal in power to the iris.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This, which is the _Zizanien_ of the Arabians, may be set
down as the _Lolium temulentum_. Dioscorides gives the fullest account of
its medicinal faculties; he recommends it along with radishes and salt as
an application to gangrenous and spreading sores, and with sulphur and
vinegar for lichen and lepra; when boiled with pigeon’s dung and linseed
in wine for discussing strumous and indolent tumours; for ischiatic
disease boiled with mulse and applied as a cataplasm; and used in a
fumigation with myrrh, saffron, and frankincense, he says it promotes
conception (ii, 122.) Aëtius says, it is more acrid but less attenuant
than iris. We have not been able to find it noticed in the works of
Hippocrates nor in those of Celsus. The Arabians merely copy Dioscorides
and Galen. See Serapion (c. 70); and Avicenna (ii, 2, 658.) Our old
English herbalists repeat the ancient characters of this plant.


Ἀκαλλίς

is the fruit of a shrub growing in Egypt, the decoction of which is an
ingredient in the Collyria, for promoting acuteness of vision.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Galen and Aëtius have not treated of this article. Our author
copies from Dioscorides, who, under the name of ἀκακαλὶς, describes it
as an Egyptian plant, resembling the myrica (i, 118.) We may therefore
conjecture, with considerable probability, that it is merely some species
or variety of the tamarix. It does not appear that it is treated of by
the Arabians, nor have we found it in the works of Hippocrates or Celsus.


Ἀκακία,

Acacia is of the third order of desiccants, and of the first of cooling
medicines; but if washed, of the second. It is sour and terrene.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes the acacia as being a thorny tree or
shrub, not erect, having a white flower and fruit like lupine, inclosed
in pods, from which is expressed the juice that is afterwards dried in
the shade (i, 133.) It was much disputed among the older commentators on
Dioscorides whether or not this description applies to the _Acacia vera_;
but since the time of Prosper Alpinus, it has been generally decided in
the affirmative by all scholars, with the exception of Dierbach, who
contends in favour of the _A. Senegal_, without any good reason, as
far as we can see. This gum was used medicinally by the authors of the
Hippocratic collection, who prescribe it as an astringent in hemorrhages,
for which purpose it is also recommended by Celsus (v. 1.) Serapion and
the others merely copy from Dioscorides and Galen. See in particular
Avicenna (ii, 2, 3.)


Ἀκαλύφη,

Urtica, _the Nettle_; the fruit and leaves are composed of fine
particles, and are desiccative without pungency; they dispel and cleanse
swellings, loosen the bowels, are moderately flatulent, and therefore
incite to venery.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This article is either the _Urtica dioica_, or the
_pilulifera_; or both species were comprehended under it. In the modern
Greek Pharmacopœia, the _pilulifera_ stands first (p. 164.) Galen, like
our author, calls it aphrodisiacal. Macer Floridus recommends it strongly
as being calefacient and stimulant. Both Dioscorides and Galen agree
in commending it as an expectorant when the chest is loaded with thick
humours. The Arabians treat of it at considerable length. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 714); Serapion (c. 150); Rhases (Cont. l. ult.; 152.)


Ἄκανθος,

Acanthus, _Bears-breech_ (called also Melamphyllon and Pæderos), has
discutient and desiccative powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the plant which our English herbalists describe by the
name of Bears-breech, now called the _Acanthus mollis_ by botanists.
Dioscorides recommends it as being diuretic, and astringent of the
bowels (iii, 17.) Our author follows Galen. Whether “gummi acanthinum”
of Celsus (v, 2) belong to this place, or not rather to the acacia, as
Milligan suggests, we cannot determine for certain. Modern authorities
have confirmed the characters which the ancients ascribed to it. (See
Rutty, M. M. p. 70); Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p. 45.)


Ακάνθιον,

Acanthium, is composed of fine particles, and has heating powers,
therefore it is a remedy for convulsions.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Gerarde and our other herbalists delineate and describe
this plant under the name of the cotton-thistle, meaning either the
_Onopordon acanthium_ or _O. Illyricum_, cotton-thistle. Dioscorides
affirms that it is of service to persons affected with tetanus, and upon
his authority all the others, both ancient and modern, ascribe virtues to
it in this case. The reader may be amused by comparing what Gerarde and
Culpeper have written of it with the ancient descriptions of Dioscorides
and Pliny. The cotton-thistle was long used as a potherb. See Beckmann
(History of Inventions, under ARTICHOKE); and Loudon (Encycl. of Garden,
p. 736.)


Ἄκανθα λευκή,

Spina alba, _the White-thorn_. Its root is desiccative and moderately
astringent, therefore it relieves stomachic complaints, hæmoptysis,
and toothache; but its seed, consisting of fine particles, and being
of a hot nature, when drunk relieves convulsions. Acantha Ægyptia, or
Arabica, _the Egyptian or Arabic thorn_, is possessed of very astringent
and desiccative powers. Whence it restrains a flow of blood and other
discharges.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Respecting the two thistles here described, we may refer
the former, with Sibthorp, to the _Cirsium Acarna_, and the latter,
or Arabian, to the _Onopordon acanthium_. All the authorities follow
Dioscorides in giving its characters. (iii, 12.) See Avicenna (ii, 2,
671-3); Serapion (c. 130); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. i, 670.)


Ἄκινος,

Acinus; it resembles basil, and is moderately astringent, therefore it
restrains alvine and uterine discharges, when taken in a draught; and
when applied as a cataplasm, is of use for erysipelas and phygethlon.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our old herbalists describe it under the name of wild basil,
meaning perhaps the _Ocimum pilosum_, and there seems little reason to
question their authority in this instance. Neither Galen nor Serapion
has described it. Indeed we are not aware that any of the Arabians has
described it except Ebn Baithar (ii, 254); neither have we found it in
the Hippocratic collection, nor in the works of Celsus.


Ακόνιτον or Παρδαλιαγχὲς,

Aconitum, _Wolfsbane_, is possessed of septic and deleterious properties;
it is, therefore, not to be taken internally, but externally it may be
applied to flesh requiring erosion. The lycoctonon, being possessed of
the same properties as the former, is particularly fatal to wolves, as
the other is to panthers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The two species of aconite described by Dioscorides (iv,
77), and the other authorities, are generally supposed to be the
_Doronicum Pardalianches_ and the _Aconitum Napellus_. In the modern
Greek Pharmacopœia, the _Neomontanum_ is substituted for the former of
these. The κάμμαρον of Hippocrates would seem to be the latter. It has
been already treated of among the poisonous substances in the Fifth Book
(§ 45.) It was used only as an anodyne, and principally in complaints
of the eyes. Avicenna in treating of the aconites, borrows closely from
Dioscorides (ii, 2, 361, 676.) He says of the lycoctonon, that it is not
administered either internally or externally. Rhases says of the aconite,
that it was used to relieve pains of the eyes. (Cont. l. ult. i, 20.)


Ἄκορον,

Acorum, _Sweet Flag_, heats and dries in the third degree. We use its
root for a diuretic, and for scirrhus of the spleen. It also attenuates a
thickened cornea.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears indisputably to be the _Acorus pseudacorus_,
as even Gerarde the old herbalist has clearly stated, and not the
_Acorus verus_, as Dr. Hill and others have maintained. All the ancient
authorities ascribe much the same virtues to it as our author. See
particularly Dioscorides (i, 2); Avicenna (ii, 2, 45); Rhases (Cont.
l. ult. 21); Serapion (c. 269.) In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia it is
identified with the κάλαμος ἁρωματικός (p. 32.)


Ἀκρίδες,

Locustæ, _Grasshoppers_, in fumigations relieve dysuria, especially of
women. The wingless grasshopper, when drunk in wine, relieves the bite of
scorpions.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is quite certain that the Ἀκρὶς of the Greeks, and
the _Locusta_ of the Romans was a species of locust or grasshopper.
See Harduin (ad Plin. H. N. xi, 35.) Without doubt, then, it was the
_Gryllus migratorius L._ The wingless locusta mentioned by our author is
the insect in its larvous state. Our author copies from, and abridges,
Dioscorides (ii, 56); and Avicenna does the same (ii, 2, 388.) Celsus
treats of the locusta only as an article of food (ii, 28.) In this way,
as is well known, the locusts were much used by the ancients. They are
not noticed, however, either as an article of food or of medicine in the
modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Ἄκτη μεγάλη,

Sambucus, _the Elder-tree_, and Χαμαιάκτη, Sambucus humilis _vel_ Ebulus,
_Dwarf-elder_, are possessed of desiccative, moderately discutient and
agglutinative powers. When eaten or drunk they occasion a discharge of
water from the bowels.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The two species of elder, namely, the _Sambucus nigra_ and
_Ebulus_, are much commended by the ancients for the cure of dropsy.
As Dioscorides states, the elder is hydragogue, but disagrees with the
stomach. He further recommends a hip-bath made of water in which elder
has been boiled, for obstructions and hardness of the uterus (iv, 161.)
Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of it in general terms like
Paulus. The Arabians in treating of it generally borrow from Dioscorides
and Galen. See particularly Serapion (c. 284.) It appears to be the
_acte_ of Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 23); and is the _aktha_ of Ebn
Baithar, according to his German translator, Dr. Sontheimer, in which
opinion we fully agree with him. The Sambucus of Avicenna (ii, 2, 611)
is not the elder, but the jasmine. We have not been able to detect the
other in his Book on the Mat. Med., but can scarcely suppose that he has
entirely overlooked it.


Ἅλες,

Sales, _Salts_, have desiccant and astringent powers. Wherefore they
consume whatever humours are in the body, and also contract by their
astringency. Whence they form pickles, and preserve substances from
putrefaction. Roasted salts are more discutient.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. For an account of the factitious salts of the ancients, see
in particular Pliny (H. N. xxxi, 39.) Sprengel remarks that the ἅλος
ἄχνη, or _spuma maris_, is merely the skum or down of salt, which sticks
to rocks in such situations as salt is usually formed in. The ἅλος
ἂνθος, or _flos salis_, he adds, is a very different substance, being a
native, impure carbonate of soda; containing also magnesia, lime, and
some terrene admixture, to which it owes its colour. When deprived of
its carbonic acid it becomes caustic, and was then called ἄφρος νίτρου
by the ancients (v. ἀφρόνιτρον.) The _sal ammoniac_ of the Greeks was
a native fossil salt, and considerably different from ours. Geoffroy
seems to agree with Salmasius, that it was the _sal gem_. Dr. Hill also
maintains that it was only a peculiar form of the sal gem. See also
Jameson’s ‘Mineral.’ (iii, 15.) In fact, from Dioscorides’ description of
the ammoniac salt, nobody can avoid seeing that it was merely a variety
of the common fossil salt. He treats of the medicinal faculties of the
salts at so great length that we dare not venture to copy his account of
them. It is literally translated by Pliny (xxxi, 45.) He recommends them
internally by the mouth and in clysters, and externally in fomentations,
baths, and fumigations. Serapion quotes the whole of Dioscorides’ chapter
on Salts without supplying much additional information of his own. He
describes minutely the process of roasting salts in an earthen vessel,
and covering them up with coals, and thus applying heat to them. The
_sal ammoniac_ he describes, from Arabian authorities, as being a white
red salt, extracted from hard clear stones, and being saltish, with much
pungency (c. 409.) We never could altogether satisfy ourselves whether or
not this be the same as the sal ammoniac of the Greeks. Rhases (Cont.
l. ult. 600) and Avicenna (ii, 2, 608) are brief and indistinct in
describing the sal ammoniac, but probably refer to the true sal ammoniac.
Ebn Baithar minutely describes several kinds of it. Pliny also has a
description of a factitious salt, which it would appear could be nothing
else than our sal ammoniac. (N. H. xxxvi, 45.) Still, however, we need
have no hesitation in setting down the ammoniac salt of the Greek medical
authors as being a variety of the sal gem. This is the conclusion which
Beckmann arrives at regarding it: he holds, however, that Geber and
Avicenna were certainly acquainted with our ammoniac salt. (History of
Inventions.)


Ἀλθάια ἢ Ἐβίσκος,

Althæa or Ebiscus, _Marsh-mallows_, is a species of wild mallows. It is
discutient, relaxant, anti-inflammatory, soothing, and ripens tumours
(phymata). But the root and seed have all the other properties in a
more intense degree, and are also detergent of alphos. The seed is
lithontriptic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This must either be the _Lavatera arborea_ or _Althæa
officinalis_. Dioscorides is much fuller than our author in enumerating
its properties, but upon the whole they agree very well as to its
general character. Besides the cases in which our author recommends
it, Dioscorides speaks highly of the decoction of it when drunk with
wine in dysuria, the grievous pains of calculus, dysentery, and other
acute affections. He also advises the mouth to be rinsed with it in
cases of toothache (iii, 153.) It would be useless to go over the other
authorities, who supply no new views. Even our modern herbalists all
agree in repeating the praises of the marsh-mallow as delivered by
Dioscorides. For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 72); Serapion (c.
76); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 26); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) This genus
of the _Malvaceæ_ does not seem to be noticed either by Hippocrates or
Celsus. The _Althæa officinalis_ occurs in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia,
published at Athens in 1837.


Ἅλιμον,

Halimon consists of heterogeneous particles, being saltish and
sub-astringent. But the greater part of it is of a hot temperament, with
an undigested sap. It therefore promotes the formation of milk and semen.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author abridges the characters of this substance, which
probably is the _Atriplex Halimus_, from Galen or Dioscorides (i, 126.)
It is the sea-purslane of our English herbalists. For the Arabians, see
particularly Avicenna (ii, 2, 470.)


Ἁλκάια,

Alcæa, _Vervain-mallow_, is a species of wild mallows. When drunk
with wine it removes dysenteries and gnawing pains of the belly, more
particularly its root.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. All the authorities agree in giving this article, which
evidently is the _Malva Alcæa_, Vervain-mallow, the general characters of
the mallow. See particularly Dioscorides (iii, 154.) It does not occur
in the works either of Hippocrates or Celsus, nor, as far as we know, in
those of the Arabians.


Ἁλκυονία,

Alcyonia; they are detergent and discutient of all matters, being
possessed of an acrid quality; but the kind called milesium (it is
vermiform and purple) is the best: wherefore, when burnt, it cures
alopecia, and cleanses lichen and alphos. That which has a smooth surface
is most acrid, proving not only detergent, but likewise excoriating; but
that which resembles unwashed wool is the weakest of all.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. For an account of the alcyonia, see Aristot. (Hist. Anim. ix,
15); Pliny (N. H. x, 47, and xxxii, 27.) According to Sprengel, the A.
consisted of the bones of fishes which the kingfishers had swallowed and
vomited up. The term, however, was also applied to a kind of zoophytes,
five species of which are described by Dioscorides and Pliny. The 1st
species is the _Alcyonium cotoneum_, Pall.; the 2d, the _A. papillosum_;
the 3d, the _A. palmatum_; the 4th, the _Spongia stuposa_, Ellis, or
_Spongia panicea_, Pall.; and the 5th, the _A. aurantium_, Pall. (Mat.
Med. v, 135.) Geoffroy says that the alcyonia “are of a substance much
like gum tragacanth, and when mixed in broth of warm milk they swell and
make a rich soup.” The zoophytes called alcyonia are a kind of spongy
substances, containing a sort of living jelly in their interior. Our
author abridges Dioscorides’ account of the _alcyonia_, as likewise
do Avicenna (ii, 2, 605) and Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 1, 677.) Celsus
prescribes it several times as a corrosive, caustic, and cleansing
medicine. (v, 6, 7, 18.) We believe it does not occur in the Hippocratic
treatises.


Ἅλμη,

Muria, _Brine_; that which is unmixed with other matter has properties
like salts, only weaker from the mixture with water. But the brine of
pickled fish and of pickled olives is possessed of very detergent powers,
and therefore is injected in ischiatic and dysenteric complaints.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Regarding the nature of this article, there can be no doubt.
Galen recommends the brine from pickled fish as a wash for putrid ulcers
both of the mouth and rectum. Dioscorides, in addition, recommends it for
such cases as sea-water is useful in, when poured upon the part. (v, 126.)


Ἀλόη,

Aloe, _Aloes_, is heating in the first degree, and desiccative in the
third. It is stomachic, detergent, discutient, and eccoprotic. When
washed it is less detergent, but more stomachic; it is anti-inflammatory,
and promotes the cicatrization of ulcers, especially those about the anus
and pudendum.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides is the first author who gives a distinct account
of this important article. He describes two varieties of the juice
(gum-resin), namely, the arenaceous and the hepatic. He says that it
closes up the mouths of veins in hemorrhoids; but, according to Avicenna
and Mesue, it produces the contrary effect. Hence, says Mesue, it is
hurtful in hemorrhoids and affections of the fundament. (De Simpl.
i.) Galen properly remarks that it is at the same time stomachic and
eccoprotic. Didymus mentions the hepatic aloe (Geopon. vi, 6), as do
several of the medical authorities. It is marked by Dr. Pereira as
being the _Aloe hepatica vera_ and _Aloe indica_ (Ph. Ed.), being the
liver-coloured socotorine aloe. That is to say, the hepatic is merely a
variety of the socotorine aloe. See also Dr. Royle (M. M. 598.) Isidorus
says of aloes: “In India et Arabia gignitur, arbor odoris suavissimi
et summi.” (Orig.) Averrhoes says it is an excellent purgative which
evacuates the stomach and liver. He commends it as an application to
apostemes. (Collig. v, 42.) Aloe was used in stimulant applications to
ill-conditioned sores. See Aëtius. Avicenna forbids us to administer
it during the prevalence of severe cold. (ii, 2, 64.) It was used in
eye-washes (Cels. vi), as it is by the native doctors in India to this
day. (Ainslie’s Mat. Ind. i, 10.) The aloe is not found in the Materia
Medica of Hippocrates.


Ἁλὸς ἄνθος,

Flos salis, _the Flower of Salt_, is a humid medicine, consisting of
more subtile particles than burnt salts, and is moderately acrid and
discutient.


Ἁλὸς ἄχνη,

Spuma maris; this is a frothy efflorescence of salts, but consists of
more subtile particles than salts, and discusses more, but contracts less.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. (Ἁλὸς ἄνθος and Ἁλὸς ἄχνη, see Ἃλες.)


Ἀλσίνη, or μυὸς ὂυς,

Alsine, or Auricula muris, _Chickweed_, has powers like the pellitory of
the wall, namely, cold and diluent. Wherefore it is applicable to hot
inflammations.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This has been generally set down as the _Stellaria media_,
but doubtfully. Dioscorides describes it as a _Myosotis_. (ii, 214.) See
also Pliny (H. N. xxvii, 8), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 18.)

Our old herbalists give a confused account of the chickweed. In fact,
this is one of the articles in the Materia Medica of the ancients which
we must set down as _lost_, from our inability to determine what it
was. It seems to have been looked upon by the Arabians as an important
article. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 18); Rhases (Contin. l. ult. i, 99.) Like
our author, they copy closely from Dioscorides. We have not detected it
in the works either of Hippocrates or Celsus. It does not occur in the
modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Ἄλυπον,

Alypon; the seed of it purges black bile downwards when taken in the same
quantity as dodder of thyme, with salts and vinegar; but it occasions
slight ulceration of the intestines.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Many of the older commentators supposed this to be the
plant which produces turbit, but we shall have occasion to discuss this
question when treating of the additions to the Materia Medica made by the
Arabians. What this article really was is very uncertain. Pliny and all
the medical authorities mention its purgative powers. See in particular
Dioscorides (iv, 177), from whom our author evidently copies.


Ἄλυσσον,

Alysson, _Madwort_, is so called because it is of use to those who have
been bitten by mad dogs. Being possessed of discutient, detergent, and
desiccative powers, it removes obstructions of the kidneys, and cleanses
ephelis.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It was supposed by the earlier herbalists and commentators
that the A. of Galen is a different substance from that of Dioscorides.
The former (which is also our author’s) is a species of horehound, to
which the herbalists give the distinctive name of Galen’s madwort. It
is the _Marrubium Alyssum_. That of Dioscorides has been conjectured to
have been some species of _Veronica_, but, in fact, there is no certainty
on this point, and we must own our inability to perceive the difference
between it and the A. of Galen. Dioscorides recommends his plant in
ephelis and hydrophobia, (iii, 95.) See also Avicenna (ii, 2, 26.)


Ἀλώπηξ,

Vulpes, _the Fox_; the whole animal, if boiled alive or dead, renders the
oil discutient, when it attracts the deep-seated fluids to the surface.
Wherefore, when arthritic patients are put into a hip-bath of this oil
for a considerable time it removes the complaint entirely, if at its
commencement, and moderates it if protracted.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Galen and Serapion give nearly the same account of the
medicinal properties of the _Canis vulpes_ as our author.


Ἀμάρακος,

Amaracus, _Marjoram_; it is calefacient in the third degree, and
desiccative in the second.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That it was some species of marjoram appears quite certain
from the ancient descriptions of it; but, otherwise, it cannot be
satisfactorily determined. Most probably, it was the same as the
sampsuchus, namely, the _Origanum Marjorana_. Dioscorides strongly
recommends the ointment as an emmenagogue, and for various other
purposes. (i, 78.) For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 466); Serapion
(c. 286); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 439.)


Ἀμάραντον,

Amarantum, _Amaranth_, is attenuant and incisive, and therefore when
taken with wine it promotes the menstrual discharge, and dissolves
coagulated blood when taken with wine and honey. It dries up all
defluxions, and is bad for the stomach.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The old herbalists describe a plant under the English name
of Flower-gentle, which they represent to be this article, but it
cannot be satisfactorily determined. Our author borrows from Galen and
Aëtius his account of its medicinal properties, which certainly appears
rather contradictory. How a plant, which they represent as being of a
drying nature, should at the same time act as an emmenagogue, does not
well appear. Our English herbalist Gerarde sagaciously remarks that it
has probably got the character of stopping bleeding solely from its
ears being red, as if, forsooth, all red things must act in this way;
although, as he adds, Galen had laid it down as a rule (Simpl. 2, 4) that
no inference with regard to the virtues of substances can be drawn from
their colours. But see under _helicrysus_, which Dioscorides holds to be
the same plant.


Ἀμβροσία,

Ambrosia; when applied as a cataplasm it has astringent and repellent
powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Ambrosia, as Pliny remarks (H. N. xxvii, 11), is a vague name
which has been applied to various plants. Our old herbalists describe a
plant under the English name of Oak of Cappadocia, which they represent
as the A. of Dioscorides. He gives it the same medicinal character as our
author (iii.) Galen and Aëtius do the same. It probably is the _Ambrosia
maritima_, a plant not yet wholly unknown to the shops. See Gray (Suppl.
to Pharmacop. p. 70.) We have not found it described by any of the
Arabians except Ebn Baithar (i, 80.)


Ἄμμι,

Ammi, _Bishop’s Weed_, is of the third order of calefacients and
desiccants, being composed of subtile particles, discutient and diuretic;
but the seed of it is particularly useful.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The _Ammi copticum_, or Bishop’s weed, has long held a
place in the Materia Medica, and yet it is now scarcely recognized.
See Dioscorides (iii, 63); Galen (De Simpl. v); Avicenna (ii, 2, 60);
Serapion (c. 297.) It is now ranked as one of the four lesser hot seeds,
and is held to be attenuant, aperient, and carminative. In a word, all
the authorities, ancient and modern, agree in giving it the characters
bestowed upon it by Dioscorides and Galen.


Ἀμΐαντον,

Lapis Amiantus, is formed in Cyprus, being like stone-alum, and is so
called because when put into the fire it is not burnt. Some use it in
desiccative depilatories.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This is generally confounded with the _Alumen plumosum_,
with which it is compared by Dioscorides, but it is in fact a different
substance, being a variety of asbestus. Dioscorides does not mention any
medicinal properties of which it is possessed, but states that garments
were made out of it, which resisted the force of fire. (M. M. v, 155.)
See also Pliny (H. N. xix, 4.)


Ἄμμος,

Arena, _Sand_; that on the sea-shore is sufficiently desiccative.
Wherefore when heated by the sun it dries up all humid bodies which have
been buried in it; and when roasted it forms a dry fomentation instead of
millet or salts.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. _The Sand of the Sea-shore._ We have often had occasion,
in the course of this work, to mention the use of heated sand as a dry
fomentation.


Ἀμμωνιακὸν θυμίαμα,

Ammoniacum thymiama, _Ammoniac Perfume_, is a juice of intense emollient
powers, so as to dissolve scirrhous tumours and tofi.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes the ammoniac as being the juice of a
Ferula growing near Cyrene, and mentions afterwards that an inferior
kind is also obtained from a tree of the reed tribe in Lybia, near
Ammon. The reed which produces the better kind is now called the _Ferula
tingitana_. Whether the inferior kind be the commercial ammoniacum of
the present day, which is procured from the _Dorema ammoniacum_, does
not appear certain. Dr. Hill holds that the ancients were acquainted
with the two kinds which we have. In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia it is
questioned whether it is the product of the _Heracleum gummiferum_, or
_Ferula orientalis_. The _thymiama_, or _suffimentum_, was the finest
kind of ammoniac, and was so called from being used in religious rites.
Dioscorides recommends ammoniac for many medicinal purposes, both
internally and externally; as for loosening the bowels when taken in a
draught; for asthma and other affections of the chest when given as a
linctus with honey; for indurations of the spleen and liver when applied
in the form of a cataplasm; and for nebulæ of the cornea. (iii, 88.)
Galen gives nearly the same characters of it. Serapion quotes Dioscorides
and Galen, and adds a few other particulars of not much importance from
Arabian authorities, such as that it is diuretic and emmenagogue, and
expels humours from the body. (c. 268.) Rhases, Avicenna, Ebn Baithar,
and Haly Abbas supply no additional information of any interest under
this head. Averrhoes commends it as a medicine which softens and
dissolves hard tumours. (Collig. v, 42.)


Ἀμόργη,

Amurca, _the Lees of Oil_, is of the second order of intensely
calefacient, and desiccative medicines. By these means it cures ulcers in
dry bodies, but increases and exasperates those in others.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The _amurca_, as Dioscorides states, is the sediment of
strained oil. Celsus mentions it often as a strong external application,
in which form it is greatly commended by Dioscorides in various
affections. He says it is an article in collyria and plasters. He also
speaks of its being used as an injection into the rectum, the urethra,
and the vagina, in diseases of these parts.


Ἀμπελόπρασον,

Ampeloprasum, _Vine-leek_, being a species of wild leek, is most acrid
and hot according to the last degree: hence it proves deleterious. It is
incisive, deobstruent, and hurtful to the stomach.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The _Allium Ampeloprasum_ L. is recommended by Dioscorides as
being more powerfully calefacient and emmenagogue than the leek (_Allium
Porrum_); and when given in food, beneficial to persons stung by venomous
animals. Our author follows Galen.


Ἄμπελος ἀγρία,

Vitis sylvestris, _the Wild Vine_; its grapes and tops are possessed
of detergent powers, but have also some astringency. The powers of the
_cultivated vine_ are like those of the wild, but weaker. The shoots
of the _white vine_ (called also bryonia and psilothrum) are eaten as
stomachics, and prove diuretic. The root is detergent, attenuant, and
moderately hot. Wherefore it melts down the spleen when drunk or applied
externally as a cataplasm with figs; and it cures itch and leprosy. The
black vine, also called bryony, is like the aforementioned, only weaker.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The wild vine is evidently the _Tamus communis_; the white
the _Bryonia dioica_; and the black the _Bryonia alba_. Gerarde, our old
herbalist, says that the reason why the bryony and the wild vine are
confounded together, is that Pliny could not sufficiently expound them
(xxiii, 1), and made them all one, in which error are all the Arabians.
Dioscorides treats of them at considerable length, and more especially of
the white, which he commends in the strongest terms, as an application
to malignant and ill-conditioned sores. (iv, 180.) He and Oribasius take
notice of its purgative powers. Our modern herbalists and older writers
on the Materia Medica, all treat of the bryonies in the same terms as the
ancient authorities. See _Bryonia_.


Ἀμὐγδαλα,

Amygdalæ, _Almonds_; the bitter are possessed of powers which are
attenuant and deobstruent of deep-seated viscid and thick humours, and
detergent of those lodged in the skin. The wood has the same powers. The
sweet are moderately hot.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Respecting this article there can be no difference of
opinion. Plutarch and many of the ancient authorities take notice of
the powers of almonds in resisting intoxication. Dioscorides states
that a cataplasm formed from almonds, with vinegar or rose oil, and
applied to the forehead or temples relieves headache. Taken internally,
he says, they are laxative, soporific, and diuretic. (i, 186.) Serapion
gives nearly the same account of them. (c. 82.) Dioscorides greatly
commends almond oil as a demulcent in various complaints, such as
pains, inflammation, and displacement of the uterus, also in headache
and earache, in nephritic, calculous, and other diseases. (i, 38.)
Avicenna gives it the same character, and otherwise enlarges very fully
in recapitulating the virtues of almonds. As an article of food, he
says, bitter almonds are stomachic, and sweet almonds are fattening.
He recommends them as an application to herpes and other diseases of
the skin. Bitter almonds he speaks highly of in obstructions of the
kidneys. Altogether the account which he gives of this article is most
interesting. (ii, 257.) See also Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 45); Averrhoes
(Collig. v, 42.) The latter recommends them as powerful deobstruents of
the liver.


Ἄμυλον,

Amylum, _Starch_, is formed from clean wheat moistened with water during
the heat of the dog-days, which water is to be poured off five times in
the day. When it becomes very soft, it is to be strained and the water
poured off, and the bran separated; and it is to be dried quickly in the
sun before it become sour. Its powers are moderately cooling, desiccant,
and emollient of acrid humours.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of the mode of preparing starch is
mostly taken from Dioscorides (ii, 123.) Pliny describes the process
in nearly the same terms. He says, it may be prepared from wheat or
spelt. (H. N. xxviii, 17.) He calls it astringent, and recommends it
in hæmoptysis. Serapion also recommends it in this complaint. (c. 29.)
Celsus ranks it among the “res boni succi.” (ii, 20.) It is mentioned
by Hippocrates, who recommends it as an application to the mouth of the
womb. (De Mulieb. ii.)


Ἄμωμον,

Amomum; its powers are like those of the sweet-flag; but the former is
the drier, and the latter more digestive.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. For the general literature of this subject, we would beg
to refer to what we have said in the Appendix to the Greek Lexicon.
Notwithstanding all the illustration which it has received, it must be
admitted that now we have no practical acquaintance with the article in
question, unless we agree with Dr. Pereira in setting it down as the
_Amomum Cardamomum_. This opinion, however, which had been previously
stated by Feæus (Flor. Virg. xvi, 199), is controverted by the learned
Sprengel. (ad Dioscor. i, 14.) But still if the cardamom be not exactly
the amomum of the ancients, there can be no doubt that these two
substances must have been very similar to one another. Dioscorides treats
more fully of this article than Galen, Aëtius, Oribasius, or our author,
describing it as being calefacient, astringent, desiccative, soporific,
and anodyne when applied in a plaster to the forehead, and stating that
it ripens and discusses boils and meliceris, proves useful to persons
stung by scorpions, in a cataplasm with basil; relieves gouty persons,
soothes inflammations of the eyes, and those in the bowels, with raisins;
that it is useful in female complaints, in the form of a hip-bath, and
that the decoction of it is fitting in cases of nephritis, hepatitis,
and gout. (i, 14.) Serapion quotes the descriptions of it given by
Dioscorides and Galen, and adds, upon the authority of Humaim, the son
of Isaac, that it is possessed of inebriating and soporific powers. (c.
279.) Avicenna’s account of it is made up from Dioscorides, Galen, and
Serapion (ii, 251.) Haly Abbas recommends the decoction of it (_hamama_)
in diseases of the liver and kidneys. Celsus includes both the amomum
and cardamomum (which, by the way, seems decidedly to prove that they
were not _exactly_ the same thing) among the ingredients of an emollient
plaster (_malagma_) which he describes, and which he recommends as an
excellent application to abscesses, and various schirrous tumours.
(v, 18, 7.) It does not occur, we believe, in the Materia Medica of
Hippocrates; at least we have failed to detect it while writing this
article.


Ἀναγαλλὶς,

Anagallis, _Pimpernel_; both kinds are of sufficiently detergent powers,
having some hottish and attractive properties, so that they extract
thorns; and the juice of it purges by the nose.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. These two well-known plants, namely, the _Anagallis arvensis_
and _cærulea_, are included in all the ancient lists of medicinal herbs,
and were only of late excluded from our British Pharmacopœias. All
the authorities, ancient and modern, give them the same characters as
Dioscorides, to whom our author is principally indebted. (ii, 209.) He
says they are useful in diseases of the kidneys and liver. (l. c.) The
anagallis does not occur in the works of Celsus. For the Arabians, see
Serapion (c. 155); Avicenna (ii, 2, 32.) They all copy from Dioscorides
and Galen. Even Ebn Baithar supplies nothing of much consequence. (i, 90.)


Ἀνάγυρος,

Anagyrus, _Stinking-bean Trefoil_; is a strong-scented and acrid shrub
of hot and discutient powers, but the seed consists of more subtile
particles, and is emetic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides and Pliny recommend the _Anagyris fœtida_ for
promoting the pains of labour, and the expulsion of the placenta after
delivery. It is curious to remark that our old herbalists ascribe the
same virtues to it. It was therefore to our forefathers in the profession
what the ergot of rye is to the present generation; being, according to
Galen, an acrid, diaphoretic, and heating substance, its action must, in
many respects, have resembled the ergot. With the exception of Oribasius,
who merely copies Dioscorides, we are not aware of any ancient writer
that treats of it, with the exception of Ebn Baithar, and he also merely
copies the descriptions of it given by Dioscorides and Galen. Though
excluded from our Dispensatory, this article is not wholly unknown to the
shops. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharm. 93.)


Ἀνδράχνη,

Portulaca, _Purslain_, is cooling in the third degree, but humectates
in the second; and by these powers it relieves heat of the stomach when
applied to the abdomen, and dispels defluxions. By its viscidity it
smooths the teeth when set on edge by acids; and by its astringency it
relieves dysentery and hemorrhages.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Aëtius, like our author, describes the purslane (_Portulaca
oleracea_) as a cooling and sub-astringent herb. Both he and our author
copy from Galen, who writes earnestly in commendation of this plant,
which retained its place in our English Dispensatories down to a late
date. Dioscorides likewise writes fully on its virtues, recommending it
as a cooling and astringent medicine, externally, in pains of the head,
inflammations of the eyes &c., and internally, for inflammations of the
bowels, intestinal worms, hæmoptysis, hemorrhoids, and various other
cases. (ii, 150.) Celsus also calls it an astringent and cooling herb.
(ii.) For the Arabians, see Serapion (c. 349); Avicenna (ii, 2, 534);
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 563); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) They treat of
it in nearly the same terms as the Greeks.


Ἀνδρόσαιμον,

Androsæmum, _Tutsan_, or _Park-leaves_, (or St. John’s wort?); there are
two varieties of it, the one of which is called ascyrron and ascyrroides,
being a species of hypericon, but the other is named dionysias. Their
fruit is purgative, but their leaves more desiccant.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our Tutsan or Park-leaves has been generally set down as this
plant, but Sibthorp, who viewed the plants of classic lands on the spot,
inclines to the _Hypericum ciliatum_. The truth of the matter we believe
to be that as the _Hypericum_ is a numerous genus, and the species have
a close resemblance to one another, they were often confounded together
by the older authorities. Both Culpeper the herbalist and Rutty have
expressed their wonder that so important an article as the _androsæmum_
should have been lost sight of in recent times. Pliny, and all the
medical authorities, recommend it strongly as an application to burns
and ulcers, and ascribe cholagogue powers to it when administered
internally. See Dioscorides (iii, 163); Galen (De Simpl. v); Aëtius (i);
Oribasius (Med. Coll. xiii); Ebn Baithar (ii, 579); Rhases (Cont. l. ult.
i, 59.) The last two merely give extracts from Dioscorides and Galen.


Ἀνδρόσακες,

Androsaces, is a bitter and acrid herb, discutient and desiccative. It
and its fruit, when drunk, are diuretic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This is a Syrian plant, which, although both Matthiolus and
Gerarde pretend to give figures of it, has never been satisfactorily
determined. Serapion and Avicenna have completely omitted treating of it,
and Rhases merely says of the _androsafes_, by which he probably meant
the _androsaces_, that it is decidedly heating with moderate astringency.
(Cont. l. ult.) Our author seems to copy from Dioscorides (iii, 140.)


Ἀνεμώνη,

Anemone, _Wind-flower_; all the varieties of it have powers which are
acrid, detergent, epispastic, and open the mouths of vessels: whence they
increase phlegm, remove leprosy when applied, and attract milk.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The wind-flowers, so celebrated in ancient poetry, being a
numerous genus, there has been some difficulty in determining exactly
the species described by Dioscorides. He mentions two, the cultivated
and the wild, and divides each into two varieties, according to the
difference of colour in their flowers. The former may be set down as
the _A. coronaria_, and the other as the _A. nemorosa_. The latter only
is indigenous in this country, but the other is commonly cultivated
in gardens. He recommends them principally as external applications,
as for foul ulcers, in collyria for inflammation of the eyes, and in
pessaries to promote menstruation. (ii, 207.) Galen and the succeeding
authorities follow him. The anemone is not to be found in Celsus. For the
Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 655); Serapion (c. 72); Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. iii, 48); Ebn Baithar (ii, 100.) They do little more than copy from
Dioscorides. The _A. pratensis_ occurs in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia
(132.)


Ἄνηθον,

Anethum, _Dill_; it warms in the second degree intensely, and dries in
nearly the same degree. When boiled in oil it is diaphoretic, anodyne,
and soporific; and concocts crude swellings. But when burnt it becomes
of the third order of heating and drying medicines, and is useful when
sprinkled upon foul ulcers. But the green is more humid, and less hot and
digestive.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author condenses and abridges the account of the dill
(_Anethum graveolens_) given by Galen. Dioscorides, in his usual
empirical style, recommends it for various purposes, such as promoting
the flow of milk, stopping slight vomiting, opening the bowels,
increasing the urine, proving useful to hysterical women in a hip-bath,
and so forth. (iii, 60.) The Arabians as usual copy from both. See
Avicenna. (ii, 2, 69.)


Ἄνθυλλις,

Anthyllis; there are two varieties, both of which are desiccant
applications to ulcers; but that resembling the ground-pine consists of
more subtile particles, so as to be beneficial in epileptic cases. It is
also more detergent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The former species, which Dioscorides describes and
recommends for the cure of wounds, we would willingly refer to the
_Anthyllis vulneraria_, but the predominance of authority is against it,
and in favour of the _Cressa cretica_. The other is probably the _Ajuga
Iva_. Avicenna joins Dioscorides in commending it as a vulnerary herb
(ii, 2, 744), for which virtue the anthyllis was long celebrated, as its
scientific name implies.


Ἄνησον,

Anisum, _Anise_; the seed is particularly acrid, eating, and drying in
the third degree. Hence it is diuretic and dispels flatus.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Serapion and Avicenna, like the Greek authorities, call the
_Pimpinella anisum_ diuretic and emmenagogue. It is now reckoned the
first of the four hot seeds, the other three being carui, cumin, and
fennel.


Ἀντίρρινον or Ἀνάρρινον,

Antirrinon, or Anarrinon, _Snapdragon_, has properties resembling those
of the bubonium, but weaker, whence you may learn its properties.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Galen writes of this article, _Antirrinum Orontium_, or
Calfsnout, as being of no use in medicine. (De Simpl. v.) Dioscorides,
also, mentions it only as an amulet and external application. (iv, 131.)
It is scarcely noticed by the other authorities. According to Pliny, it
is emmenagogue. Serapion has omitted it.


Ἄνωνις or Ὤνωνις,

Anonis, or Ononis, _Rest-harrow_, has heating powers, especially in its
root. Its juice, when drunk with wine, promotes the secretion of urine,
is lithontriptic, breaks eschars, and soothes pains of the teeth.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author abridges his account of the _Ononis antiquorum_
from Galen. All in fact borrow from Dioscorides, who further mentions of
it, that it was sometimes used as a pickle. (iii, 18.) It would appear
to be the _Onobes_ of Rhases (Cont. i, 520), who gives the characters of
it from Galen. Serapion and Avicenna have omitted it. Modern authorities
enumerate it among the five aperient roots. It is only of late years that
it has been expelled from our Pharmacopœias. Even yet it is not wholly
unknown to our apothecaries. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p. 94.) Two
species of the _Anonis_, the _antiquorum_ and _spinosa_, occur in the
modern Greek Pharmacopœia (p. 119.)


Ἀπαρίνη,

Lappa, _Cleavers_ (which some call philanthropon, others omphalocarpon),
is moderately detergent and desiccative; it also consists of subtile
particles.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. All the herbalists and best commentators agree that it is
the _Galium aparine_. (See Gerarde, Sprengel, and others.) According to
Dioscorides a decoction of its leaves is useful to persons bitten by
phalangia and vipers, when drunk with wine; an injection of the same
into the ears cures earache; and when mixed up with axunge it discusses
scrofulous tumours. Galen and the subsequent authorities seem to
attach less importance to it. (iii, 94.) We cannot find it in Serapion,
Rhases, Avicenna, nor Haly Abbas; but it is treated of by all our older
herbalists, and has found a place in many modern pharmacopœias. It is not
contained, however, in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Ἄπιον,

Pyrum, _the Pear_, is unequal as to temperament, consisting partly
of terrene and partly of watery matter. When eaten, therefore, it is
stomachic, and quenches thirst. When applied as a cataplasm it dries and
cools moderately.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author copies the characters of the _Pyrus communis_ from
Galen and Aëtius. We have treated of it as an article of food in the
First Book. Both Dioscorides and Pliny make mention of perry. Dioscorides
says, that pears prove prejudicial to hungry persons when eaten. (i, 167.)


Ἀπόκυνον or Κυνοκράμβη,

Brassica canina, _Dog’s-bane_; it is also called cynomoron, because
it proves quickly fatal to dogs. But it is also deleterious to men,
being very fetid and hot, without being desiccant. Hence, when applied
externally as a cataplasm it is discutient.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author borrows his account of this article very closely
from Galen. It is clearly a poison rather than a medicine. In fact, it is
classed by Schulze among the ancient poisons. (Toxicol. veterum.) Orfila
also treats of it among the acrid poisons (p. 82, Eng. ed.) It seems
doubtful whether it be the _Periploca Græca_, as we formerly stated it to
be (II, 242); the _Cynanchus erectus_, as Sprengel supposes; or one of
the species of _Apocynum_. Having no practical acquaintance with these
herbs, we cannot pretend to give any decided opinion on the subject.


Ἀπόχυμα,

Apochyma, is the old pitch scraped from ships. It is solvent, desiccant,
and discutient of tumours.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides calls it also Ζωπίσσα. It consists, as he
explains, of the wax and pitch of ships which had been macerated in salt
water. Pliny says of it, “Zopissam eradi navibus diximus cera marino sale
maceratâ. Optima hæc a tirocinio navium. Additur autem in malagmata ad
discutiendas collectiones.” (H. N. xxiv, 26.)


Ἀράχνη,

_Aranea_, _the Spider_, when softened into a plaster, and applied to the
forehead and temples, is said by Dioscorides to remove the periodical
attacks of tertians. Its web, when applied, stops hemorrhage, and
preserves superficial sores from inflammation.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes two species, which probably are the
_Aranea retiaria_, and the _Aranea domestica_. Serapion gives the
same account of their medicinal properties. They appear to have been
principally used externally, as an anti-inflammatory application.


Ἀργεμώνη,

Argemone, _Prickly Poppy_, is possessed of detergent and discutient
powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Of the two species described by Dioscorides, the former,
which is the _Papaver argemone_, is recommended by him in nebulæ
and albugo of the eye, and its leaves as a soothing cataplasm for
inflammations. The other, which may be the _Geum urbanum_, or avens,
he also recommends principally as an external application in sores and
affections of the eyes; but adds of it, that when drunk with wine it
is useful in the case of persons stung by venomous animals. (ii, 208.)
Galen and the succeeding authorities treat of it more cursorily; and the
Arabians would seem not to treat of it at all, with the exception of Ebn
Baithar, who merely gives translations of what Dioscorides and Galen had
written of it. (i, 28.)


Ἀρίσαρον,

Arisarum, _Friar’s Cowl_, is smaller than the wakerobin, but much more
acrid; and has a root of the size of an olive.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our herbalists give the name of Friar’s Cowl to this plant,
which even they admit to be possessed of insignificant powers. It is the
aris of Pliny. (H. N. xxiv, 16.) Its botanical name is _Arum arisaron_.
Dioscorides calls it an acrid medicine, and recommends it solely in
collyria. (ii, 198.) The Arabians appear to have confounded it with the
arum, under the name of Luf. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 132); and Ebn Baithar
(ii, 449.)


Ἀριστολοχία,

Aristolochia, _Birthwort_; all kinds of it are hot, consist of subtile
particles, and are detergent, bitter and subacrid; and are most useful
remedies. The round consists of more subtile particles, and is every
way more drastic. The clematitis is fragrant but weaker. The long is,
in other respects, intermediate between these, but no less hot than the
round.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Three species of the Birthwort, the _Aristolochia longa_,
_rotunda_, and _clematis_, have been described by the authorities from
Dioscorides downwards. The first two still retain their places in
our Pharmacopœias, but are seldom used. Dioscorides recommends them,
especially as uterine medicines, for promoting menstruation, the lochial
discharge, and the expulsion of the fœtus. He also says it is useful in
affections of the chest, the spleen, and in other diseases. (iii, 4, 5.)
The toxicologists from Nicander downwards recommend the birthwort as
an antidote to poisons. See also Theophr. (H. P. ix, 15); and Apuleius
(De Herbis.) Mesue describes it as being phlegmagogue, cholagogue, and
emmenagogue. He also recommends it in a fumigation along with arsenic
for asthma. (De Simpl. ii, 27.) Avicenna treats of it at great length,
recommending it strongly as an uterine and alexipharmic medicine. (ii,
2, 49.) See also Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 77); Averrhoes (Collig. v,
42); Serapion (c. 171); Ebn Baithar, _pluries_. Pliny describes a fourth
species under the name of Pistolochia. Modern authorities confirm the
birthwort’s character as to its being powerfully emmenagogue. See Quincy,
Lewis, Pereira, and the other writers on the Materia Medica.


Ἄρκευθος,

Juniperus, _the Juniper_, heats and dries in the third degree. The fruit
is equally calefacient, but desiccant only in the first degree.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes two species of it, the major and the
minor, which probably are to be referred to the _Juniperus macrocarpa_,
Sibth., and the _J. oxycedrus_. He calls them acrid, diuretic, and
calefacient, and further recommends them in diseases of the chest, in the
hysterical convulsion, and as being alexipharmic. (i, 103.) The other
authorities, both Greek and Arabian, copy closely under this head from
him. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 359); and Ebn Baithar (ii, 189.)
The vernix is a resinous gum, which is procured from the juniper; it is
called _Sandarax_ by the Arabians, and is to be carefully distinguished
from the sandaracha or sulphuret of arsenic. They recommend it in
hæmoptysis. See Serapion, Rhases, and Avicenna. Of the juniper, see
further under Κέδρος, and appendix under Sandaracha.


Ἄρκιον,

Arcium (called also Prosopites); its leaves are like those of the
colocynth, but larger and harder. It is discutient and desiccant, and has
some stypticity. Wherefore, its leaves cure old sores.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The ancient descriptions of this plant seem to point to the
burdock, which, however, owing to a confusion of names, has been called
the _Arctium lappa_. Dioscorides recommends it internally in diseases
of the chest, and externally as a cataplasm to old ulcers. (iv, 105.)
This is the same as the second arctium of Galen, who recommends it in
the same cases as Dioscorides. Apuleius, like Dioscorides, says it is
useful in cases of strangury. Our old herbalists treat of the virtues of
the burdock in the same terms as the Greek and Roman authorities. The
Arabians, as far as we can discover, do not treat either of the arcion or
the arction, with the exception of Ebn Baithar, who merely gives extracts
from Dioscorides and Galen, and seems puzzled to distinguish the two
plants from one another. (i, 25.) In the modern Greek Dispensatory both
the _Arctium bardana_ and the _A. lappa_ are set down as corresponding to
the ἄρκειον.


Ἄρκτιον,

Arctium, _Lappa_, is like the verbascum; its roots are tender, white, and
sweet: it consists of subtile particles, and is possessed of desiccant
and moderately detergent powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This, which is treated of under the same name by Dioscorides
(iii, 104), and is the former arctium of Galen, is probably the
_Verbascum sanguineum_. The description of it given by Galen, at all
events, points to some species of the mullein. Both the authorities we
have mentioned recommend it as an application to burns and chilblains.


Ἀρμενιακὸν,

Armeniacum, has detergent properties with a little acrimony, and a
small degree of astringency. It is therefore mixed up with ophthalmic
medicines, and promotes the growth of the hairs of the eyelids.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We shall not enter into the discussion of disputed points
respecting this article, further than to state our own opinion, that in
all probability it was a native ore of carbonate of copper; but which of
the species or sub-species described by modern mineralists the armenium
was, we cannot venture to decide. See Cleavland’s Mineralogy (p. 570,
&c.) Dioscorides, who treats of it under the name of armenium, (v, 105),
compares it to chrysocolla, which it is well ascertained is that species
of native carbonate of copper now described under the names of copper
green and mountain green. He merely recommends it as a cosmetic when
applied to the eyelashes. Serapion confounds this substance with the
Lapis armeniacus, (c. 404); but Avicenna accurately distinguishes between
them. (ii, 2, 56, 415.)


Ἀρνάβω,

Arnabo, is one of the aromatics. Hence it is mostly mixed up with
ointments, being possessed of hot and dry powers in the third degree,
like cassia and carpesium. Hence Posidonius says, that it may be used
instead of cinnamon when it is not at hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This article, which is treated of only by Aëtius (xvi, 113),
besides our author, has never been accurately determined. It has been
supposed to be the zerumbeth, of which we will have occasion to treat
more fully in another place. See the Appendix.


Ἀρνόχλωσσον,

Plantago, _Plantain_, both cools and dries in the second degree, being
composed of a watery and a terrene substance, and having a little
astringency; therefore it agrees with malignant ulcers, defluxions, and
mortifications; by the symmetry of its temperament it stops hemorrhages,
and agrees with most of them. For it is desiccant without being
stimulant, and cooling without being narcotic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The greater plantain of Dioscorides was probably the
_Plantago major_, which, in all ages down to the present times, has
been so celebrated as a vulnerary herb. Our author’s account of its
virtues is taken either from Dioscorides or Galen, for, in the present
instance, there is scarcely a shade of difference in opinion between
these two authorities. The lesser plantain of Dioscorides is either the
_lanceolata_ or _maritima_, probably the former. (ii, 152.) See Macer
Floridus. Avicenna and Serapion copy word for word from Dioscorides and
Galen. None of the plantains are mentioned by Hippocrates. Celsus places
the “plantago” in the list of substances which are both astringent and
cooling. (ii, 33.) None of the species of plantago here described occur
in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Ἄρον,

Arum, _Wakerobin_, is of the first order in heating and drying, being
formed of a terrene substance that is hot and detergent. Its roots are
hotter. But the dracunculus is stronger.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have all along assumed, with our older herbalists, that
this is the wakerobin or cuckow-pent, namely, the _Arum maculatum_
L. Pliny and Mesue are the only ancient authors who have noticed its
purgative powers. Our author’s account of its faculties is much the same
as that given by Dioscorides, Galen, and Oribasius, and its ancient
character has been amply confirmed by modern authority. The Arabians
treat of it fully, but rather confusedly, under the name of _Luf_. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 432); Serapion (c. 43); Ebn Baithar (ii, 246.) Even at
the present day it is not wholly excluded from the Materia Medica. See
Pereira (M. M. p. 811.) We have treated of its congener, the dragon herb,
as an article of food, in another place. See Book I, 114.


Ἀρσενίκον,

_Arsenic_, is possessed of caustic powers. It is used also for
depilatories, but if the application be allowed to remain long it
affects the skin itself. When burnt its particles become attenuated.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no hesitation in deciding that this is the
yellow sulphuret of arsenic, commonly called orpiment, the latter
term being a corruption of auripigmentum, the Latin name of it. See
Celsus (v, 5.) The ancients used this mineral very freely as an
external application, and internally by the mouth, in clysters, and
in fumigations. Avicenna recommends arsenic with the gum of pine, in
the form of a pill, for asthma. He also speaks highly of a potion
containing arsenic and honeyed water. He particularly commends arsenic
as an application to herpes esthiomenos of the nose. (ii, 2, 48.) Cælius
Aurelianus recommends an injection containing arsenic for ascarides.
(Tard. Pass. iv, 7). It was freely used in injections for the cure of
chronic dysentery. (See Book iii.) Serapion speaks favorably of it in
complaints of the eyes. (§ 381.) Servitor says, that sublimed arsenic is
a septic and pungent medicine, which removes the fungous flesh of ulcers,
and is a depilatory. He describes minutely the process of subliming and
whitening it. Avicenna likewise makes mention of white arsenic. Geber
also treats of sublimed arsenic, by which it is clear he meant the
factitious oxide with which we are now familiar. (iii, 29.)


Ἀρτεμισία,

Artemisia, _Mugwort_; both varieties are heating in the second degree,
and desiccant in the first. They are composed of subtile particles, so
that they break down stones in the kidneys, and suit with fumigations of
the womb.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The three species of the artemisia described by Dioscorides
are probably the _arborescens_, _spicata_, and _campestris_. He
recommends the artemisia strongly as an emmenagogue, when given
internally, in the form of a hip-bath, and as an injection into the
vagina. He also makes it to be lithontriptic. (iii, 107, 118.) The same
characters are given it by Galen and by Avicenna, whose _berengfef_ it
appears to be. (c. 83.) Aëtius and most of the authorities describe only
the first two species of the artemisia. Serapion and Avicenna describe
under this head an oriental species, which, it is probable, was the
_Artemisia Judaica_. Honain (ap. Avicennam), also describes the _A.
Indica_. The famous _Moxa_ is prepared from the lanugo or downy substance
which adheres to the under surface of the leaf of the artemisia. See
Barrow’s ‘Travels in China,’ Woodville, Miller, and Pereira. That the
artemisia long retained the character which Dioscorides gave it, of
possessing powerful virtues as an emmenagogue and a lithontriptic, is
evident from what is said of it in the work of Macer Floridus. Except as
furnishing the moxa, (and it is now believed to be got from a particular
species, the _A. moxa_) the species of artemisia here treated of are now
wholly discarded from the practice of medicine.


Ἅρτος,

Panis, _Bread_; in a cataplasm it is more discutient than can be
accounted for from the properties of wheat, owing to its containing salt
and leaven. For the leaven is attractive of the deep-seated humours.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have given some account of the kinds of bread used by
the ancients in the 78th sect. of the First Book. Oribasius gives an
excellent description of the mode of preparing the bread poultice and
its uses. He directs us to dissolve the bread in water until it acquires
the consistence of gruel, and then, having added oil or butter to it,
to boil it to the proper consistence. He adds, that it is the best of
all applications with which he was acquainted for promoting suppuration.
His account of the different kinds of cataplasms is most ample and
interesting. (Med. Collect.)


Ἄσαρον,

Asarum, _Asarabacca_, has the same powers as the sweet flag, but more
intense.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This plant, which is certainly the _Asarum Europæum_, or
common Asarabacca, is said by Dioscorides to be diuretic, heating, and
emetic, answering well with dropsical cases and chronic sciatica and
promoting menstruation; its roots drunk with mulse to the amount of
six drachms, he says, purge like white hellebore. (i, 9.) Galen seems
to have overlooked the importance of this article, for he is nearly as
brief as our author in treating of it; and Aëtius and Oribasius follow
him. Serapion, Rhases, and Avicenna recommend it in the same cases
as Dioscorides, and also in obstructions of the liver and spleen, and
as a stimulant ingredient in collyria. Modern authorities confirm the
character of this medicinal article given it by Dioscorides. See Lewis
(Mat. Med. i, 178); Rutty (Mat. Med. 43); Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p.
38.) Although not excluded from our Dispensatories, less attention is now
bestowed on the asarabacca than it would seem to deserve. See Royle (M.
M. p. 548.) Ipecacuanha has nearly superseded it as an emetic in this
country. The asarum is still retained in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia
(p. 22.)


Ἀσβόλη,

Fuligo, _the Soot_ which painters use. It is taken from glassworks, and
is possessed of discutient and acrid powers, so as to burn and occasion
putrefaction. It cures burns, with rose-cerate.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides and some of the other authorities mention the
_Fuligo_, or _soot_ of glassworks, in nearly the same terms as Paulus.


Ἀσκαλαβώτης,

Stellio, _the Swift_; this animal is useless for all other purposes, but
they say that it is a good application to persons bitten by a scorpion.
It is mixed also with venereal excitants.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of this reptile in the Fifth Book. It is the
spotted lizard, _Lacerta stellio_ L. Its aphrodisiacal faculty is alluded
to by our author in another place. (B. III, 58.)


Ἀσκληπιάς,

Asclepias, _Swallow-wort_, being hot and dry as to its powers, and
consisting of subtile particles, agrees well with tormina when drunk with
wine, and in the form of a cataplasm it is a good application to the
bites of venomous animals, and malignant ulcers in the uterus and breasts.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There appears little reason to doubt that it is the
_Asclepias vincetoxicum_, or Swallow-wort. Our author borrows its
medicinal characters from Dioscorides. (iii, 96.) Galen candidly admits,
that he had no experience of it as a medicine. Pliny, like Dioscorides
and our author, recommends it for the cure of tormina and the bites of
serpents. (H. N. xxvii, 18.) Until lately it held a place in our modern
Dispensatories, with the characters given it by the ancients. See Quincy
(p. 59); Rutty (Mat. Med. p. 44); Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p. 57.)


Ἄσκυρρον is treated of under Androsæmon.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have stated under ἀνδρόσαιμον the difficulty there is in
distinguishing the different species of _Hypericum_ described by the
ancients. We cannot pretend to decide whether the present article be the
_androsæmum_ or the _perforatum_. Dioscorides recommends the ascyrron
as an emmenagogue, in sciatica, and as an application to burns. (iii,
163.) The Arabians treat of it only as being identical either with the
hypericum or the androsæmum. See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 59); Avicenna
(ii, 2. 354.)


Ἀσπάλαθος,

Aspalathus, _Rose-wood_, is composed of heterogeneous ingredients, having
acrid and astringent powers, and hence it is desiccant. On this account
it is useful for mortifications and defluxions.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We must not enter into the discussion regarding this article;
suffice to say, that we have now arrived at the conclusion that it was
either the _Lignum rhodium_, or a substance so near to it in qualities,
that the latter came to be substituted for it. We need scarcely say, that
there is great difference of opinion among the botanical authorities what
tree or shrub it is which produces the _Lignum rhodium_. Upon the whole
the predominence of evidence is in favour of some species of _Cytisus_.
Dioscorides recommends the aspalathus when boiled in wine as a gargle in
aphthæ, as an injection in spreading and impure ulcers of the genital
organs (_chancres?_), in dysuria, flatulence, and other complaints. (i,
19.) Now it will be observed that the distilled oil of _Lignum rhodium_
has been recommended in similar cases by modern authorities. See Moses
Charras (Royal Pharmacopœia, Chemical, iii, 1, 24.) The Arabians give the
aspalathus the same characters as the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 206);
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 251.) The aspalathus of Celsus (v, 24) was, no
doubt, the same as that of Dioscorides. It is probably the μέλαινα ῥίζα
of Hippocrates.


Ἀσπάραγος,

Asparagus, _the Rock Asparagus_, or _Myacanthinus_, is detergent, but
of a middle temperament as to heat and cold; it is deobstruent of the
kidneys and liver, especially its roots and seed. It also cures toothache.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See Book I, 75. The medicinal asparagus of the ancients
would appear to have been different from our garden asparagus, from the
description of its root given by Dioscorides (ii, 151), and yet there
seems to have been very little difference between them in properties,
since both are used for the same culinary and medicinal purposes;
the ancient, we suppose, must have been the _A. acutifolius_. From
Dioscorides down to the present time, the asparagus has been celebrated
as being possessed of deobstruent and diuretic powers, and hence it has
been given in jaundice, nephritis, and many other diseases of a like
kind. Celsus recommends it as a pickle in affections of the spleen. (iv,
9.) It occurs in the Hippocratic collection, and is fully treated of by
the Arabians. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 603); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 667.)
Symeon Seth, after repeating from Galen that the asparagus acts upon the
kidneys and imparts its odour to it, remarks that this need not surprise
us, since, by holding a certain herb of a red colour in the hands, the
urine is reddened. What herb he alludes to cannot be exactly ascertained.
(V. Not. Bogdani.) At all events it is clear from this that the ancients
believed in absorption by the cuticle. The Arabians held that it is
antiseptic. Casiri (Bibl. Hist. Arab. 337.) The wild asparagus was called
_Corruda_ (Cato de R. R.)


Ἀσπλήνιον,

Asplenium, _Spleenwort_, or _Ceterach_, has the properties of a substance
which consists of subtile particles, but is not hot. It therefore breaks
down stones and dissolves indurated spleens.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The spleenwort, or _Asplenium ceterach_, held a place in the
Materia Medica from the earliest times down to a very recent period.
Dioscorides commends it in diseases of the spleen (whence it derives its
name), in strangury, jaundice, and calculus. Galen briefly assigns it the
same character, which is repeated by Aëtius and Oribasius, as well as by
our author, and also by Avicenna (630.) We cannot find it mentioned by
Serapion or Rhases. It held a place in our Dispensatory in the time of
Lewis. (Materia Medica A.D. 1791.)


Ἀσταφὶς,

Uva passa, _the Raisin_; the cultivated is possessed of digestive,
astringent, and slightly discutient powers; the wild is possessed of
strongly acrid, so as to be strongly phlegmagogue and detergent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides treats much more fully of the medicinal powers
of raisins than Galen and our author, recommending them in affections
of the windpipe, chest, kidneys, and bladder; for dysentery when eaten
with their stones by themselves, or when fried along with millet flour,
barley-meal, and eggs; in masticatories with pepper; in inflammation
of the testicles, when applied in a cataplasm with the flour of beans
and cumin; for epinyctis, carbuncle, fevers, putrid and gangrenous
sores about the joints, without their stones, when pounded with rue;
for gout in a cataplasm with opoponax, and for the removal of loose
nails. (v, 4.) Avicenna and Rhases briefly quote Dioscorides, and supply
nothing additional. They hold, like the Greeks, that in particular cases
raisins prove injurious to the urinary organs. Symeon Seth mentions that
the Egyptians prepared a very sweet wine from raisins and honey. (De
Alimentis.)


Ἀστὴρ Ἀττικὸς,

Aster atticus, _Starwort_, is also called bubonium, because it is
believed to cure buboes, not only when applied for this purpose but
even when appended as a periapt. It is possessed of mixed powers, being
discutient and cooling.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of the starwort, _Aster amyllus_,
is taken from Galen, who in his turn copies from Dioscorides. In the
common editions of Dioscorides there is a passage under this head (which
although quoted by Serapion (§ 96), is scarcely considered genuine by
Sprengel, seeing it is not alluded to by Galen or Pliny), in which the
_Aster atticus_ is recommended for ardour of the stomach, inflammations
of the eyes, buboes, and quinsies. The Arabians in treating of the _Aster
atticus_ copy from Dioscorides. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 357);
Serapion (De Simpl. 96); Rhases (Contin. l. ult. i, 95.) It is not found
in the works of Celsus. It held a place in our modern Dispensatory down
to a late date. See Quincy (116.)


Ἀστράγαλος,

Astragalus, _Wild Liquorice_, is a small shrub, having astringent
roots, and is desiccative in no contemptible degree. It promotes
the cicatrization of old ulcers, and when drunk with wine stops the
discharges of the bowels. It is mostly produced in Phæneum of Arcadia.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That the astragalus belongs to the vetch tribe can admit
of no doubt, but the particular genus and species have never been
determined. All the authorities, both ancient and modern, recommend it as
an astringent both externally and internally. We cannot find it in the
works either of Hippocrates or Celsus. Our author manifestly borrows from
Dioscorides. (iv, 62.) The Arabians do not appear to treat of it.


Ἄσφαλτος,

Bitumen; it is desiccant and calefacient in the second degree: it is
therefore agglutinative of fresh wounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The asphaltus, or _Bitumen judaicum_, held a place in the
Materia Medica from the days of Hippocrates down to a very recent period.
It got the name of Jew’s pitch, from its having been principally procured
from Judæa, where it is found floating on the surface of the Dead Sea,
or Lacus Asphaltites. Some commentators have been puzzled by Dioscorides
representing the colour of the finest asphaltus as purplish, but it is
to be borne in mind that the ancients applied this term not to a scarlet
red but to any rich dark-blue colour, such as that of the sea. All
the authorities, ancient and modern, represent it as being emollient,
discutient, and emmenagogue. Serapion gives a very interesting account
of it. (§ 177.) See also Avicenna (ii, 2, 114); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
88); also Celsus (v, 6.)


Ἀσφόδελος,

Asphodelus, _Kingspear_; its root is possessed of detergent and
discutient powers. When burnt its ashes become more calefacient,
desiccative, and attenuate. It therefore cures alopecia.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. All the ancient authorities, including Hippocrates and
Celsus, treat of the _Aspodelus ramosus_, or Kingspear, and in general
are agreed in recommending it internally as being emmenagogue and
diuretic, and externally as an application to alopecia or _porrigo
decalvans_. The author who treats of it most elaborately is Dioscorides,
who recommends it for the purposes we have mentioned, and as an
alexipharmic, as a cure for toothache, and many other cases. (ii, 199.)
Our author follows Galen. For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 273);
Serapion (c. 221); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 26.) They all copy from
Dioscorides and Galen. It was sometimes used as a culinary herb. See
Vol. I, p. 118. Our old herbalists repeat its ancient characters as a
medicine. See Gerard (i, 70.) It has been discarded from the Pharmacopœia
for some time past.


Ἀτρακτυλὶς,

Atractylis, _Wild Cnicus_, or _Distaff-thistle_; it is of the thorny
tribe, being possessed of desiccative and moderately heating powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. In another place (Vol. I, p. 113) we have treated of the
atractylis as a culinary herb, agreeing with Sprengel in referring it
to the _Carlina lanata_. The commentators on Dioscorides, however, are
greatly at variance with regard to it; most of the old herbalists agree
with Belon and Fuchsius in holding it to be the _Carduus benedictus_, or
blessed thistle. See Gerard’s Herbal (ii, 489.) We cannot help remarking,
however, that the virtues of the _Carduus benedictus_ as given by Quincy
(English Dispensatory, i, 2) by no means agree with those assigned to
the atractylis by Dioscorides; he holds it to be alexipharmical. (iii,
97.) Our author copies from Galen. The Arabians supply no additional
information. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 159.)


Ἀτράφαξις,

Atriplex, _Orache_, moistens in the second degree and cools in the
first. It therefore opens the belly. Its fruit is possessed of detergent
powers, whence it is useful in jaundice and obstructions of the liver.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of the orach (_Atriplex Hortensis_) as a
culinary herb in Book I, § 74. It is still used as an article of food
on the Continent. Our author copies from Dioscorides (ii, 145), whose
account of it is amplified and explained by Galen. (De Simpl. v.) It
is briefly treated of in like terms by Avicenna (ii, 2, 174); Serapion
(c. 146); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 97.) Rhases, after quoting what
Dioscorides and Paulus say of it, adds on his own authority that he had
known the seed of it prove powerfully emetic and laxative.


Ἀφάκη,

Aphace, _Wild Vetch_, is possessed of astringent powers like the lentil;
but when eaten it is more difficult to digest than the lentil, and is
more strongly desiccative, with a moderate degree of heating properties.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This is clearly a species of _Vicia_, but whether the
_bithynica_, _lutea_, or _hybrida_ cannot be satisfactorily determined.
It is treated of by our older herbalists, who agree with the ancients in
assigning to it astringent powers. The Arabian authorities would appear
to have overlooked it. Our author is indebted to Dioscorides (ii, 177)
and Galen (De Simpl. v.)


Αφρόνιτρον,

Aphronitrum is possessed of discutient and detergent powers, so as not
only to cleanse those parts which are foul, but also to cure pruritus.
But when drunk it is bad for the stomach.


Ἀφρὸς νίτρου,

Spuma nitri; it has powers like those of natron, but its substance is
more attenuate, and therefore it is smooth like flour.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. As Dr. Coray’s account of the _Nitrum_, _Aphronitrum_, and
_Spuma nitri_ of the ancients is of high authority, we are induced to
give it in his own language literally translated. “The nitrum of the
ancients was not that substance which modern chemists call by the name
(nitre or nitrate of potass), being a composition of nitric acid and
a vegetable alkali, but that which is called natron, being a native
combination of carbonic acid and an alkali (natron or native carbonate
of soda.) And they called the harder and more stony lumps nitrum or
litrum, and the more spongy and softer aphronitrum or aphrolitrum; and
spuma nitri or litri, the superficial efflorescence of the nitrum and
floury part, which was easily scraped off.” (Ad Xenoc. et Galen. de
Al. ex Aquat.)—From this account it appears that the firmer and harder
lumps of the native carbonate of soda were called nitrum; the softer
and more spongy pieces aphronitrum, and those kinds which had a bright
florid appearance externally and readily crumbled down into a powder, the
spuma nitri. Dioscorides gives a more lengthy account of its medicinal
properties than either Galen or our author, not only recommending it
externally as a stimulant and discutient application to various cutaneous
diseases and the bites of mad dogs, but also internally as an antidote
to poisonous mushrooms, buprestis, bull’s blood, &c. (v, 129.) Serapion
has a very interesting chapter on nitrum and aphronitrum, but it is in a
great measure made up from Dioscorides and Galen (c. 411.) For a further
account of the ancient nitrum, see under _Litrum_ in this section. We may
just mention in this place that the aphronitrum would appear to have been
merely _Afrum nitrum_, that is to say, a variety of the nitrum or natron
found in Africa.


Ἀχρὰς,

Pyrum silvestre, _the Wild Pear_; its properties are like those of the
common pear, but more intense. It therefore agglutinates large wounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides mentions that it is a species of wild pear. He
recommends it as an antidote to mushrooms. (i, 168.) Serapion and Mesue
give it the same character.


Ἀψίνθιον,

Absinthium, _Wormwood_; it is heating in the first degree, but drying in
the third, being possessed at the same time of astringent, bitter, and
acrid qualities. It therefore evacuates bilious humours in the stomach
by the bowels and by urine. But in collections of phlegm it is of no
service, owing to its astringency. The juice of it is much hotter than
the herb itself.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides also describes two other species, the one being
clearly the _Artemisia maritima_, and the other not the santonica,
although it bears that name, but rather the _palmata_, according to
the best modern commentators. Dioscorides recommends the true wormwood
(_Artemisia abrotanum_) in a great many cases, both externally and
internally; as being diuretic and preventing surfeit when taken
beforehand, relieving flatulence of the stomach and bowels; proving
emmenagogue in a potion or pessary, removing the feeling of suffocation
induced by mushrooms, when drunk with vinegar, and when with wine
counteracting the poisonous effects of ixia and hemlock, the bites of
the shrew mouse and sea dragon; its vapour removing toothache, and
a cataplasm the intense pains of ophthalmy; as suiting in dropsical
affections and diseases of the spleen, and in many other cases. He
mentions a wine of wormwood made by the people about Propontis and
Thrace, which they used for the aforesaid purposes in the absence of
fever. (iii, 23.) Pliny enumerates fully the many medicinal properties
which were ascribed to it. (H. N. xxvii, 28.) Galen says that it is
less attenuant but as desiccative as southernwood. Apuleius calls it
anthelminthic. The Arabians recommend it with the same intention. Casiri
(Bibl. H. A. 336.) All the authorities hold that it is cholagogue.
See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 2), who is very full in describing
the medicinal properties of wormwood, recommending it in infusion, in
decoction, in the form of syrup, and in wine. See also Serapion (c.
14); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 9.) The last
of these, after giving the opinions of Dioscorides, Galen, Ruffus,
Pythagoras, and Oribasius, quotes Musy (Mesue?) as saying of it that it
is stomachic, a whetter of the appetite, useful in jaundice, quinsy,
inflammation of the eye and ear, hardness of the liver, spleen, and womb,
and in dropsy. One of Serapion’s Arabian authorities commends it as a
deobstruent, and in cases of jaundice. It occurs in the list of medicinal
substances used both by Hippocrates and Celsus. The latter recommends it
as being both stomachic and diuretic. Although its use as a febrifuge has
been superseded by a more popular medicine of the same class, we need
scarcely remark that it still holds a place in our Dispensatories. The
modern Greek Pharmacopœia contains the two species which are described by
the names of _Artemisia Absinthium_ and _Artemisia contra_. The latter is
the santonicum, its name being an abbreviation of _contra vermes_. See
Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 705.)


Βάλανος Μυρεψικὴ,

Glans unguentaria, _Nut Ben_; its inner and, as it were, fleshy parts
have detergent and incisive powers along with astringency: and therefore
when drunk with honeyed water, to the amount of a drachm weight, it
occasions vomiting and loosens the lower belly. But when taken with
oxycrate it is of use for obstructions of the viscera. It proves
detergent in affections of the skin when rubbed in with vinegar. Its bark
is very astringent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no dispute that this is the ben nut, the term
ben being derived from the Arabians. The tree from which it is procured
is said to be the _Hyperanthera moringa_ Vahl. See Ainslie (Mat. Med.
i, 197.) It is further called _Myrobalanum_, but the coincidence of
name must not lead the reader to identify it with the myrobalans of
the Arabians, of which we shall have occasion to give some account in
another place. Pliny gives an interesting account of it, representing
the Arabian as being the best oil in quality, and the Troglodytic or
Ethiopian, as the worst. (H. N. xii, 47.) Being principally used in
unguents, it has often got the name of glans unguentaria. Dioscorides
writes fully of its medicinal properties, recommending it in particular
inwardly, as an emetic and purgative, and externally, as an application
to various cutaneous diseases, such as psora and leprosy (iv, 157.)
Celsus recommends it in several places as an ingredient in emollient
ointments, more especially for indurations of the spleen (iv, 9; v, 18,
4.) The Arabians, especially Avicenna and Serapion, treat of it at great
length, but in nearly the same terms as Dioscorides and Galen. Of late
years nut ben has been excluded from our Dispensatories; but our older
authorities in modern times confirm the characters of it given above from
Dioscorides, that is to say, that it acts both as an emetic and a purge,
but in the latter capacity slowly and with pain. See Hill (Mat. Med. 4,
94); Rutty (Mat. Med. p. 52.)


Βάκχαρις,

Baccharis, _Spikenard_, is a fragrant herb, like cinnamon, used for
garlands. It is acrid; and its root when boiled is deobstruent, diuretic,
and emmenagogue. But its leaves being astringent are beneficial in fluxes.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Regarding this much disputed article, the predominance
of authority, as we think, is in favour of its being some species of
_Conyza_. Old Gerard gives it the English names of ploughman’s spikenard
and cinnamon-root, and repeats the characters of it given by the ancient
authorities. It has been long since expelled from our Dispensatories.
Galen, in his Commentary on the Glossa Hippocratica, mentions that the
name is applied both to a herb and a Lydian ointment. It does not occur
in the works of Celsus nor in those of the Arabians. Our author draws
his characters of it from Dioscorides, who recommends it, among other
purposes, as being emmenagogue and promoting parturition (iii, 44.)


Βαλάυστιον,

Balaustium, _the Flower of the Wild Pomegranate_; it is powerfully
astringent, having also desiccant and cold powers. It heals superficial
sores, and stops defluxions.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. _Balaustine_, or the _Flower of the double Wild Pomegranate_,
is an astringent medicine much used by the ancient physicians.
Dioscorides recommends it principally as an anthelminthic to kill the
broad ascaris, by which he meant the tænia. (See ii, 147.) Galen writes
very elaborately on this article, contending that it is a good example
of a plant possessed of an astringent quality, and stating that it
was in general use with this intention externally in intertrigo and
other ulcers, and internally in cases of hæmoptysis, dysentery, and in
all defluxions from the stomach or womb. The Arabians give a similar
account of it, and further recommend balaustine as a whetter of the
appetite, and a restorative from the ill effects of intoxication, and a
medicine calculated to stop vomiting. See in particular Serapion (129),
and Avicenna (ii, 2, 109.) Although modern authority is not wanting
to confirm what the ancients have stated regarding the efficacy of
balaustine as an astringent in diarrhœa, dysentery, and menorrhagia, it
has been excluded of late years from our British Dispensatories. Our
continental brethren still make use of it. The modern Greek Pharmacopœia
does not retain the leaves.


Βάλσαμον,

Balsamum, _Balsam-tree_; that part of it which is like its wood is
desiccant and heating in the second degree. It is also composed of
subtile particles, but the juice of it is much more so. Its fruit is
possessed of similar powers, but its particles are less subtile.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This clearly is the _Balsamum Gileadense_, or Balm of
Gilead, being procured, as Dr. Pereira states, from the _Balsamo-dendron
Gileadense_, a middling-sized tree growing in Arabia. He says, it is
rarely or never employed by Europeans; but is adapted to the same cases
as the terebinthinates. The Asiatics use it for its odoriferous as well
as its medicinal properties. Dioscorides certainly writes strongly in
its favour, recommending it as a detergent application to sores and
complaints of the eyes, and internally as an emmenagogue and diuretic,
and as an antidote to poisons and venomous animals. Galen treats of it
much more reservedly (i, 18.) The balsam occurs in Celsus’s list of
articles which concoct and promote suppuration (v, 3.) The Arabians fully
coincide with the character of it given by Dioscorides. See in particular
Serapion (c. 160); Avicenna (ii, 2, 81.) Though this article has almost
ceased to be employed in the practice of the scientific physician, it was
the instrument by which one of the most successful pieces of empiricism
was perpetrated in the beginning of this century. We allude to Dr.
Solomon’s celebrated Balm of Gilead.


Βαλωτὴ,

Balote, by some called _Black Horehound_; it is possessed of acrid and
detergent powers; therefore, when applied with salts, it relieves the
bite of mad dogs.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There appears little reason to doubt that this is the
_Ballote nigra_, or stinking horehound of our herbalists. Our author’s
account of it is abridged from Dioscorides. It is not treated of by
Galen, Aëtius, nor Oribasius, neither is it found in Celsus. Avicenna
and Ebn Baithar we believe are the only Arabians who notice it, and they
copy from Dioscorides (ii, 2, 553, and i, 166.)


Βάτος,

Rubus, _the Bramble_; its shrubby part is moderately astringent and
desiccant, and therefore agglutinates wounds and stops defluxions. The
root, in addition to its astringency, is attenuate in no small degree. It
therefore breaks down renal calculi. Its ripe fruit is hotter, and has a
moderate astringency. It is therefore edible; but the unripe is sour and
powerfully desiccant, more especially if dried. In like manner also the
flower.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The first species of bramble described by Dioscorides is
probably that well-known one the _Rubus fruticosus_, the other is the
_Rubus Idæus_, or raspberry bush. The Β. Ἰδᾶιος of Dioscorides was
supposed by Ruellius and others to be the _Fragaria_ or _Strawberry_,
but with this supposition we cannot agree. Strawberries are not noticed
by any Greek writer, but are first mentioned by Ovid (Met. i, 104); and
then by Pliny (H. N. xxv, 62.) The μόρον βατῶδες, of which mention is
occasionally made by our author, was the fruit of the bramble, being so
called, according to Eustathius, from its resemblance to mulberries.
(Ad Iliad. xiii, 121.) Our author abridges Galen, who is at great
pains in defining the powers of the batos, which he makes out to be
moderately astringent and desiccative; and hence he pronounces it to
be useful in dysentery, fluxes of the bowels, atony, hæmoptysis, and
in calculus as a lithrontriptic. Dioscorides indulges in a still more
lengthened exposition of its virtues, recommending the decoction of it
as an astringent in looseness of the bowels, and in fluor albus, as an
antidote to the sting of the serpent Prester; its leaves when chewed, to
strengthen the gums and cure the aphthæ of children, and externally, for
the cure of herpes, achor, procidentia oculi, and many other diseases
(iii, 36.) It is briefly alluded to by Celsus in treating of lientery
(iv, 16.) The Arabians, as usual, copy from Dioscorides and Galen. See
Serapion (De Simpl. 124); Avicenna (ii, 2, 572.) The rubi held their
place and ancient characters in our Dispensatories down to a late date.
See Quincy (p. 94.) Even yet several of the rubi are still kept in the
shops for medicinal purposes. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p. 89.)


Βατράχιον,

Ranunculus, _Crowsfoot_, consists of four varieties, all of which are
possessed of powerfully heating and desiccant powers, and also of
acrid and caustic, so as to occasion ulceration with pain; but when
moderately used, it proves only detergent of the skin. The dried root is
a sternutatory.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. According to Sprengel, the first species is the _Ranunculus
Asiaticus_; the second, the _R. lanuginosus_; the third, the _R.
muricatus_; and the fourth, the _R. aquatilis_. Galen recommends it
as a powerful escharotic, and our author evidently copies from him.
Dioscorides gives a similar account of the ranunculi, recommending
them for the removal of leprous nails, psora, stigmata, and other
tumours, as a fomentation to chilblains, and as an application to remove
toothache. The Arabians treat of the ranunculi in the same terms as the
Greeks, copying their medicinal characters from Dioscorides and Galen.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 368), and Ebn Baithar (ii, 343.) Neither of them
gives anything original of his own, nor from any Arabian authority. The
ranunculi, we need scarcely mention, have now been discarded by the
regular practitioner; but yet several of them are still kept in the
shops, and have the reputation of being excellent vesicants. Gray (Suppl.
to Pharmacop. p. 122.) In like manner old Culpeper affirms that the
crowsfoot is an effectual and a much safer blister than cantharides (p.
59.) The modern Greek Pharmacopœia does not contain it.


Βάτραχοι,

Ranæ, _Frogs_; they are eaten when made into a soup for the bites of
venomous animals; when burnt, their ashes become very desiccant; and stop
hemorrhages, and cure alopecia, along with liquid pitch.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides, Galen, and Serapion recommend them in the cases
mentioned by our author. The species with which they must have been most
familiar is the green frog. We have stated in another place that the
Greeks and Romans did not use the frog as an article of food. (Vol. I,
166.)


Βδέλλιον,

Bdellium; both the Scythian and Arabian are possessed of powers which
prove emollient of indurated tumours, more especially the recent. The
Arabian is also diuretic, lithontriptic, and digestive.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides, as Dr. Ainslie remarks (Mat. Ind. i, 30), has
sufficiently well described this article; and yet he adds afterwards,
it is a lamentable fact that the actual tree from which bdellium is
got has not hitherto been clearly ascertained by botanists. He rejects
the conjecture of Sprengel, although supported by the high authority
of Kæmpfer and Rumphius that it is procured from the _Borassus
flabelliformis_, and also that of Matthiolus, who maintained that it is
procured from the _dwarf palm_, or _Chamœrops humilis_. Upon the whole,
the opinion of Virey, founded on the authority of Forskael, that it is
got from some species of _Amyris_, seems to be the most probable. Dr.
Pereira gives the following account of this article: “The term _Bdellium_
is applied to two gummy resinous substances. One of these is Indian
bdellium, or false myrrh, the bdellium of Scripture, which is obtained
from _Amyris (Balsamodendron?) Commiphora_. See further Royle (Hindoos
Med. p. 90.) The other kind is called _African Bdellium_, and is obtained
from the _Heudolotia Africana_.” (Mat. Med. 1634.) On the _Bdellium_,
see further what we have said in the Appendix to Dunbar’s Greek Lexicon.
The ancients would appear to have been well acquainted with both these
kinds of bdellium; at all events they were acquainted with the Indian,
for Dioscorides has described it. He represents the bdellium to be
calefacient, emollient, and dissolvent, and recommends it for dissolving
hard tumours, for promoting menstruation in pessaries, and fumigations,
and as an emetic, diuretic, and expectorant (i, 80.) The Arabians were
evidently still more familiar with the bdellium than their Grecian
masters; but have supplied little or no additional information respecting
it. See in particular Serapion (De Simpl. 117), and Avicenna (ii, 2,
112.) Celsus recommends it frequently as an ingredient in external
applications. As far as we have been able to discover, it does not occur
in the works of Hippocrates.


Βεττονικὴ,

Bettonica, _Bettony_, is a herb having slender branches like those of
the pennyroyal, but still more slender, and is possessed of scarcely any
quality to the taste. It grows mostly in rocky situations, and is used
for the composition of nephritic medicines. There is among the Romans
another herb called bettonica, to which Dioscorides gives the name of
cestrum; but others name it psychotrophon, because it delights in cold
situations, having no resemblance to the aforementioned, except its
medicinal powers. In addition to its action as a diuretic, it is useful
for many other purposes; for its root in particular, when drunk with
hydromel, occasions vomiting, and the leaves open the bowels.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dr. Alston says, “There is a Libellus (De Betonica)
attributed commonly to Augustus’s physician, Antonius Musa, by some
to L. Apuleius, of which there are said to be very ancient MSS.” We
have seen the work mentioned by Alston. It is published _Tiguri_,
A.D. 1537, with notes by Humelbergius. It is a small work, occupying
scarcely four leaves in octavo. The author commences with a dedication
to Augustus, in which he informs the emperor that the betony is useful
for forty-seven complaints, which he proceeds to enumerate, after giving
a short description of the herb. He says of it, “Cestron vocatur, etiam
psychotrophon, siquidem frigidis reperitur in locis, radicibus tenuibus,
thyrso tenui ultra cubitum quadrangulo, foliis quercui similibus, boni
odoris, semine in summitate thyrsi spicato, modo thymbræ.” The following
are some of the cases in which he recommends it: For fractures of the
head, as an external application; for pains of the eyes in a fomentation;
for pains in the teeth, boiled in old wine or vinegar; for consumption
and difficulty of breathing; for complaints of the liver, spleen, and
kidneys; as a purgative when given to the amount of four drachms in eight
cyathi of hydromel; for calculus; for dropsy; to prevent intoxication;
as an antidote to poisons and the bites of venomous reptiles and mad
dogs; for gout, &c. Many different opinions, as stated by Sprengel,
have been entertained respecting this herb. Perhaps, as he suggests, it
may have been the _Rumex Hydrolapathum_ or _Aquaticus_. The κεστρεὺς
of Dioscorides he thinks is the _B. alopecurus_. But for the general
literature of this subject, we must refer to our discussion on it in
the Appendix to Dunbar’s Greek Lexicon. The betony held a place in the
Materia Medica down to a very late period. Both Dioscorides and Pliny
recommend it in hæmoptysis and purulent affections of the chest, and
it enters as an ingredient into several of Myrepsus’s antidotes for
dysentery and cæliac affection. Celsus mentions it only in one place,
where he says of it, that it is an useful application to the stings of
venomous snakes (v, 27, 10.) For the Arabians, see in particular Serapion
(322), and Averrhoes (Coll. v, 42.) Our old herbalists and other modern
authorities who treat of betony, praise it as a vulnerary herb, and as
being possessed of diuretic and emmenagogue faculties.


Βηχίον,

Tussilago, _Coltsfoot_, it is also called Bechicon; it is so named from
its proving useful for coughs, and orthopnœa in fumigations; and it is
composed of a hot and watery substance.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Tussilago Farfara_, or _Coltsfoot_. Both
Dioscorides and Galen recommend it in fumigations for the cure of coughs,
and this reputation it has retained down to the present day. Though
now expelled from our Dispensatories, a patent medicine, prepared from
coltsfoot, is still in considerable celebrity. It is retained in the
modern Greek Pharmacopœia (p. 67.)


Βλίτον,

Blitum, _Blite_, is an esculent potherb, which is humid and cold in the
second degree.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The blite, or _Amaranthus Blitum_, has been long celebrated
as a culinary and medicinal herb. (See vol. i, 114.) Galen and
Dioscorides, like our author, treat of its medicinal powers in very
brief terms. For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 518); Serapion (De
Simpl. 148); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 41); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 128);
Ebn Baithar (i, 154.) These Arabian authorities commend it strongly
as an application in diseases of the skin, and in phthiriasis, and
also in alopecia and apostemes. Archigenes, as quoted by Rhases, says,
the blite is more laxative than the mallow. It is treated of by our
older herbalists; but has long since ceased to occupy a place in our
Dispensatories.


Βολβὸς,

Bulbus; the esculent is possessed of a certain degree of bitterness, and
at the same time of astringency, and is desiccative and agglutinative of
wounds, and also detergent. The emetic is hotter in its properties.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have mentioned in the First Book that Harduin considers
the esculent bulbus to have been a species of onion, but that Sprengel
refers it to the _Muscari comosum_. In addition to the reasons there
mentioned for preferring the conjecture of Harduin, we have to add the
account of it given by the Scholiast on Theocritus: βολβὸς ἔιδος βοτἀνης
ὀμοίας κρομμύῳ Κολχικῷ. (Idyll, xiv.) There is also a good deal of
uncertainty with regard to the emetic bulbus; but the predominance of
authority is in favour of its being the _Hyacinthus comosus_. The fact of
the matter, however, we believe to be that various plants having bulbous
roots are possessed of emetic powers, and that the name emetic bulbus
was often applied in a loose manner. Dioscorides merely says of its
medicinal properties, that when eaten by itself, and when its decoction
is drunk, it cures diseases of the bladder and produces vomiting (ii,
200, 201.) Galen and the succeeding authorities, like our author, treat
very succinctly of it. The Arabians, also, merely copy from Dioscorides
and Galen. See particularly Avicenna (ii, 2, 85); Serapion (c. 355.)


Βότρυς,

Botrys, _Goosefoot_; some call it Ambrosia, and others Mugwort. It is a
plant sufficiently fragrant, and when drunk with wine cures orthopnœa.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There seems no reason to doubt that this is the plant
described by our old herbalists under the name of Oak of Jerusalem. It
has now got the scientific name of _Chenopodium Botrys_. It is briefly
recommended in orthopnœa by Dioscorides (iii, 120), and Pliny (N. H.
xxvii, 31.) It is not noticed by Galen, Aëtius, Oribasius, Celsus, nor we
believe by any of the Arabians, with the exception of Ebn Baithar, yet it
held a place in our English Dispensatory as late as the time of Quincy.


Βουβώνιον,

Bubonium, has been described under Aster Atticus.


Βούγλωσσον,

Buglossum, _Bugloss_, is humid and hot in its temperament. Hence when
added to wines it is said to produce hilarity.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The Borage, or _Anchusa Buglossum_, long held a place in the
Materia Medica. From Dioscorides down to Boerhaave, it had the reputation
of being a good cordial. See Dioscorides (iv, 126); Avicenna (ii, 2,
375.) We believe it is not met with in the works either of Hippocrates or
Celsus.


Βούνειον,

Bunium (or Arctium), _Rape_; it is hot, diuretic, and emmenagogue; and
the Pseudobunium in like manner.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We treated of this article, which, notwithstanding the
disagreement of the commentators and herbalists, we are willing to
believe to be the _Bunium Bulbocastanum_, or Earth-nut, as a culinary
herb in the First Book. The pseudobunium may be the _Pimpinella tenuis_.
Dioscorides represents it to be diuretic, calefacient, possessing powers
to promote the lochial discharge, and useful in affections of the spleen,
kidneys, and bladder (iv, 122.) Galen and the other authorities give the
same account of it as our author. It long held a place in our modern
Dispensatories.


Βόυπρηστις,

Buprestis, _Burncow_, is an insect resembling the Cantharis, and may
therefore be prepared like it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Whatever doubts others may have entertained respecting the
_Buprestis_ of the ancients, we are well satisfied that it was the _Meloe
vesicatoria_. We have treated fully of it as a poison in the Fifth Book §
31. Occasional mention of it is made in the Hipprocratic treatises. (De
Mulieb. i, et alibi.)


Βόυτυρον,

Butyrum, _Butter_, is possessed of digestive and moderately discutient
properties when applied to soft bodies; it is therefore of use for buboes
and parotis; it attenuates the gums, more especially of children during
the time of dentition, and in a linctus it concocts humours lodged in the
chest.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Though it certainly be true, as stated by Beckmann (History
of Inventions), that the Greeks and Romans made very little use of
butter as an article of food compared with the moderns, it is equally
clear that they were well acquainted with various kinds of it, and their
medicinal virtues. If, as he and Michaelis suppose, the Hebrew word,
which, in the Septuagint Scripture, is rendered _boutyron_, signifies
cream, or sour thick milk, the first mention of butter which occurs in
ancient literature is in the following passage of Hippocrates: “These
people (the Scythians) pour the milk of their mares into wooden vessels,
cause it to be violently stirred or shaken by their blind slaves, and
separate the part which arises to the surface, as they consider it more
valuable and more delicious than that which is collected below it.” (De
Aere, Aquis, etc.) The _Hippace_ is also described in another of the
Hippocratic treatises (De Morbis, iv.) Beckmann quotes a passage of
the poet Anaxandrides, preserved by Athenæus (iv, 131, ed. Casaubon),
to prove that butter is of Thracian origin. We having thus described
the origin of butter, shall now give a description of its medicinal
uses from the works of the medical authorities. In the Hippocratic
treatises butter is several times mentioned as an external medicine. (De
Natura Mulierum, v; De Morbis Mulierum, ii, 5.) But Dioscorides is the
first author who gives a distinct account of its medicinal properties.
Butter, he says, is possessed of emollient and oily powers, whence it
loosens the bowels when drunk in large quantity, and is useful in the
treatment of poisoning by deadly substances in the absence of oil; when
mixed with honey, and rubbed in, it is useful for painful dentition,
pruritus of the gums in children, and aphthæ; when rubbed in externally
it preserves the body plump and free from watery pustules (psydracia);
it is beneficial for inflammations and hardness of the womb, when not
fetid or old; for dysentery and ulceration of the colon, in a clyster;
it is mixed advantageously with suppurative applications, and more
especially in wounds of the nerves, membranes of the brain, the bladder,
and neck; it fills up, cleanses, incarnates, and proves useful as an
application in cases of persons bitten by the asp. Fresh butter in
cookery is used instead of oil, and in cakes instead of suet. His chapter
on butter concludes with directions for preparing the sort of butter,
which he represents as being desiccative and astringent in ophthalmic
applications, and capable of stopping defluxions and cicatrizing ulcers.
(ii, 81.) Pliny’s account of milk being mostly taken from Dioscorides,
we shall not dwell upon it. He is original, however, in stating that
most butter is got from cow’s milk. (H. N. xxviii, 35.) Celsus merely
enumerates butter among the articles which incarnate and fill up sores.
(v, 14.) Galen states that butter is contained in greatest quantity in
the milk of cows, and hence it derives its name. That it has concoctive
powers with a small portion of discutient, and is of intermediate powers
with regard to softness and hardness of the body, by which he means
that it has no powers to discuss preternatural tumours of very hard
bodies, but that it concocts and discusses soft inflammations, such as
parotis, bubo, boils in the mouth, and many others of a like nature. He
recommends it also in dentition and inflammatory affections of the mouth
in children. He also mentions it as a useful expectorant in pleurisy
and pneumonia, both when drunk and in the form of a linctus. (De Simpl.
ix.) Aëtius copies the description which he gives of butter from Galen.
(ii, 104.) Oribasius borrows from Dioscorides. (xv, 2.) Rhases quotes
Dioscorides, Galen, Oribasius, and Paulus, and gives nothing of his own.
(l. ult. 133.) Avicenna also recommends butter in exactly the same cases
as Dioscorides and Galen. (ii, 2, 110.) Serapion literally translates
Dioscorides and Galen. (De Simpl. 457.)


Βούφθαλμον,

Buphthalmum, _Oxeye_, has a flower like that of the camomile, but
much larger and more acrid. It is therefore discutient, so as to cure
indurations when mixed with cerate.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The old herbalists were much puzzled what to make of the
_Buphthalmum_, some contending for its being _Helleborus niger_, some a
species of _Consiligo_, some a _Chrysanthemum_, and so forth. See Gerard
(Herbal) and Sprengel (Ad Dioscor.) It would seem likely that it is the
_Anthemis Valentina_. Our author borrows all that was worth copying in
the chapter of Dioscorides (iii, 146.) Galen expresses himself respecting
it in nearly the same terms as Dioscorides. For the Arabians, see
Avicenna (ii, 2, 97.) It is not mentioned in the Hippocratic collection.


Βράθυς,

Sabina, _Savin_, being like the Cypress, it is heating and desiccative in
the third degree; and consisting of subtile particles, it is possessed
of subtilizing and discutient powers if drunk. It is applied to
mortifications like the Cypress.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The two species of savine described by Dioscorides are
probably the _Sabina cypressifolia_ and _tamariscifolia_. He recommends
it principally as an external application to spreading sores and
carbuncles. He says it produces bloody water and abortion when drunk in
wine, and when applied externally, or in the form of fumigation. (i,
104.) All the ancient authorities, including Macer Floridus (but his
works, we are well aware, are not generally reputed genuine), hold it to
be an uterine medicine. Its medicinal and deleterious powers are given
in like manner by the Arabians. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 6);
Serapion (c. 255); Ebn Baithar (i, 5.) Apuleius praises it strongly in
jaundice. We need scarcely mention that savin still retains its place
in our Dispensatory, being, according to Pereira, “the most certain and
powerful emmenagogue of the whole Materia Medica.” With regard to its
action on the animal economy, “it operates,” according to Sundelin, as
quoted by Pereira, “as a specific excitant and irritant on the kidneys,
and yet more obviously on the uterus.” All this shows how correctly the
ancient authorities had judged of its powers.


Βρεττανίκη,

Bretannica, _Water-dock_, is possessed of astringent and agglutinative
powers, and in appearance resembles the Wild-dock. The juice of it cures
mortifications in the mouth.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It would not be worth while, even if this were the proper
place, to touch upon the lengthened controversy which has prevailed among
the old herbalists and botanical authorities with regard to this plant.
Whoever would wish to investigate the subject may consult Professor
Munting’s elaborate work ‘De Vera Herba Britannica,’ (Amst. 1698,) and
Sprengel’s ‘Annotations on Dioscorides’ (iv, 2.) Suffice it to say, that,
in all probability, the plant in question was some species of water-dock.
All the authorities who treat of it give it much the same character as
our author. See particularly Avicenna (ii, 2, 102); Serapion (c. 222.)
It held a place in our English Dispensatory as late as Quincy, who
represents it (“the hydrolopathum, supposed to be the Bretannica of the
ancients”) as a specific for scurvy.


Βρόμος,

Avena, _Oats_, has powers resembling those of barley. It is desiccative,
and moderately discutient without pungency. It has also some astringency,
whence it cures diarrhœas.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is not well ascertained whether this be an _Avena_
or _Secale_. The chapter of Dioscorides under this head is probably
spurious. Our author abridges Galen. It is not treated of by Celsus nor
the Arabians.


Βρύον,

Bryum; the sea-bryum or lichen is cooling and astringent, and is
therefore useful when applied as a cataplasm to hot inflammations; that
kind which is called splanchnon, being found on oaks, white poplars, and
pitch-trees, is at the same time discutient and moderately emollient,
more especially that upon cedars.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears evident that it is a species of _Lichen_ or
_Usnea_, but what species is not clear. The term usnea is borrowed from
the Arabian authors. Our author copies closely from Galen. Dioscorides
recommends it as an astringent principally in affections of the womb, in
the form of a hip-bath or fumigation. Avicenna (ii, 2, 713) and Serapion
(c. 247) briefly notice several species of _usnea_ without appearing
to identify it with the bryon of the Greeks. Rhases, however, is quite
aware of their identity. (Contin. l. ult. i, 753.) Avicenna says it is
emmenagogue, and procures the delivery of the fœtus either dead or alive.
He adds that, in a dose of 10 drs. it acts as a deadly poison. Serapion
recommends it principally as being diuretic and emmenagogue. Several
species of the genera lichen and usnea are still to be found in the
shops, and have the reputation of being powerful astringents. See Gray
(Suppl. to the Pharmacop. pp. 11, 12.)


Βρυωνία,

Bryonia, _Bryony_; the White Vine is so named.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See under ἄμπελος. Mesue recommends it as a phlegmagogue,
deobstruent, and diuretic medicine; for epilepsy, vertigo, coldness of
the nerves, coughs, asthmas, especially in a linctus, in pleurisy, and as
an external application to hard aspostemes, inflammations of the spleen,
in the form of a plaster, with figs and wine; for the removal of whitlow,
spiculæ of bones, thorns, and the like. In a draught, he says, it proves
emmenagogue and procures abortion. He also commends it as a cosmetic in
diseases of the face. Both internally and externally he praises it in
scrofula. He adds further, that it is useful in the cure of persons who
have been bitten by venomous animals. In a word, no ancient author has
bestowed so flattering an eulogium upon bryony as Mesue (De Simplicibus.)
We need scarcely say that bryony (_Bryonia dioica_ or _alba_) is now
regarded in the light of a poison rather than a medicine. See Orfila
(Toxicol. Gen. i, 679), and Christison on Poisons (p. 445, First edition.)


Γἀλα,

Lac, _Milk_; every sort of milk consists of three substances, a cheesy, a
serous, and a fatty part, which last is contained in greatest abundance
in the cow’s milk, and from it butter is formed. Whey is possessed of
detergent properties, and hence it loosens the belly if separated by
boiling. The cheesy and thick part is more compact, and on that account
blunts acrid humours. When milk is boiled either by hot pebbles or any
other way, it is an excellent remedy for dysenteries and other acrid
defluxions on the bowels. The whole contents of milk are suitable
applications for acrid humours of the eye, and all other acrimonies. The
milk of a woman is of the best regulated temperament; after which the
goat’s, and then that of the ass and sheep; and last of all the milk of
cows.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of the properties of milk so fully in the
First Book that we need not enlarge on the subject in this place. Our
author’s account of it is abridged from Galen. Dioscorides, Galen,
Celsus, Serapion, and most of the authorities, recommend milk as a
remedy when acrid substances, such as cantharides or arsenic, have been
swallowed. Dioscorides says whey is beneficial in cases of melancholy,
epilepsy, lepra, elephantiasis, and exanthemata in all parts of the body.
He recommends new milk as a gargle in all ulcerations of the mouth, and
in defluxions on the bowels with ulceration and tenesmus. He says, the
milk of sheep, cows, or goats stops them, when boiled with pebbles, and
injected either by itself or with ptisan, or the decoction of chondrus;
it is also injected, he adds, in ulcerations of the womb. A woman’s milk,
he says, when sucked from the breast, relieves erosion of the stomach
and phthisis; it suits the cure of those who have drunk of the sea-hare,
and is otherwise useful as an application to the eyes, and to the
gout. All kinds of milk, he adds, are inapplicable in diseased spleen,
diseased liver, vertigo, epilepsy, all nervous affections, fevers, and
headaches, unless when the schiston is given to move the bowels. What
the schiston was we have explained in the First Book (§ 88.) All the
other authorities, whether Greek or Arabian, in treating of milk, follow
Dioscorides and Galen. See in particular Serapion (De Simpl. 457.)
Celsus entertained nearly the same views, with regard to milk, as the
Greek authorities. Thus he recommends it in phthisis, and as an antidote
to various poisons, but condemns it in headaches and acute fevers.
Hippocrates prescribes milk in various instances, and seems to have been
very partial to the use of it. He recommends the schiston, prepared with
pebbles, in affections of the bowels. (Epidem. vii.)


Γαλὴ,

Mustella, _the Weasel_; when burnt, its ashes are discutient. Wherefore
when rubbed in along with vinegar it relieves gout and rheumatism; when
prepared and dried it answers with epilepsies.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. According to Sprengel, the Γαλη is a species of mustella, but
neither the _M. communis_, called _weasel_ in English, nor the _M. Furo_,
or _Ferret_. Our author’s description of its medicinal virtues is taken
from Dioscorides.


Γάλιον,

Galium, _Yellow Ladies’ Bedstraw_, or _Cheese Rennet_; it derives its
name of Galium from its coagulating milk. It resembles the cleavers, and
is desiccative and subacrid. The flower of it suits with hemorrhages and
burns.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The very name, _Galium verum_, now generally given to the
yellow bed-straw, implies that it is generally admitted to be the galium
of the ancients. Dioscorides, besides assigning to it the virtues
enumerated by our author, states, that it is aphrodisiacal (iv, 94.) It
was principally celebrated, however, as a styptic, and this character it
continued to hold as long as it obtained a place in the Dispensatory.
See Quincy. For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 317); Rhases (Cont.
l. ult. i, 327); Ebn Baithar (ii, 229.) They all merely copy from
Dioscorides and Galen. We have not been able to find it in the works of
either Hippocrates or Celsus.


Γαλίοψις,

Galiopsis (called also Galiobdolon), is like the nettle, but smoother and
fetid, and acts as a discutient and emollient application to indurated
tumours. It also agrees with spreading ulcers in the form of a cataplasm.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our old herbalists generally held the galiopsis of
Dioscorides to be a species of _Lamium_. (See Gerard and Parkinson.) But
whether it be that or a species of figwort (the _Scrofularia peregrina_)
cannot be positively determined. Rutty says the _Lamium maximum_ of
C. Bauhin has all the marks which Dioscorides gives to the galiopsis.
It was used only externally in applications to foul ulcers, and this
character secured it a place in our Dispensatory until recent times. See
particularly Dioscorides (iv, 94.) Few of the other authorities have
noticed it.


Γάρος,

Garum, _Brine of Pickled Fish_, is powerfully calefacient and
desiccative, and is therefore used as an external application to putrid
ulcers, and is administered as an injection in dysentery and ischiatic
diseases.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. “Garum est exquisiti liquoris genus, intestinis piscium
cæterisque quæ abjicienda sunt sale maceratis.” Rendtorpi Notæ ap.
Fabricii Bibl. Gr. iv, 333; Geopon. xx, 46; Pliny (H. N. xxxi, 43);
Athenæus (Deipnos. ii); Apicius (c. vii.) Coray defines it, “the juice
or brine of pickled fishes.” (Ad Xenocrat. Fragment.) Sauce prepared
by macerating the intestines of the tunny was particularly esteemed.
Cælius Aurelianus praises that from the silurus. (Tard. Pass. ii, 1.)
Dioscorides recommends the sauce of pickled fishes as a cataplasm to
persons bitten by dogs, and as an injection in dysentery and sciatica
(ii, 34.) All the other authorities that treat of it give it the same
character. See Aëtius (ii); Avicenna (ii, 2, 486); Serapion (c. 184.)
It occurs in the works of Celsus (ii, 21), and also frequently in those
of Hippocrates. Foës gives a learned dissertation on this article in
‘Œconom. Hippocrat.’


Γεντιανὴ,

Gentiana, _Gentian_; the root is sufficiently efficacious in subtilising
and cleansing, and as a detergent and deobstruent medicine.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides states that the gentian (_Gentiana lutea?_)
has a heating and astringent faculty; that it is a remedy in cases of
persons bitten by venomous animals, with pepper and rue; that it is
useful in hepatic and stomachic affections; that it procures abortion
when applied in a collyrium; that it is a vulnerary herb, and is used
for many ulcers and other cutaneous affections. (iii, 3.) Galen justly
remarks that it owes its attenuant and deobstruent powers to its being
intensely bitter. (De Simpl. v.) Apuleius, like Dioscorides, recommends
it as an application for the bites of serpents. Hence it always obtained
a place in the Theriac. See Celsus (v, 23.) Serapion says it is the
best of all remedies in cases of hydrophobia, and this character it has
obtained in modern times. Avicenna gives a very circumstantial account
of it, enumerating all its virtues as stated by the Greek authorities,
namely, its abstergent, attenuant, deobstruent, diuretic, and emmenagogue
powers, and recommends it particularly as an application to parts stung
by venomous animals. (ii, 2, 281.) Ebn Baithar gives very interesting
extracts from Arabian authorities on this head. (i, 260.) It is found in
the Hippocratic collection. In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia it is stated
that the _G. lutea_ grows in the Alps of Switzerland. This would seem to
imply that it is not a native of Greece.


Γεράνιον,

Geranium, _Cranebill_; that species, the leaves of which resemble those
of the Anemone, and has edible roots, when drunk with wine to the amount
of a drachm, removes inflation of the uterus. The other species is of no
use in medicine.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides and the other ancient authorities describe only
two species of the _Geranium_, the former of which would certainly seem
to be the _tuberosum_, and the other the _rotundifolium_. They were not
acquainted with the _Geranium Robertianum_. Dioscorides merely says of
the geranium that when drunk in wine, to the amount of a drachm, it cures
inflation of the womb (iii, 121.) Few of the other authorities notice
it. See Ebn Baithar (i, 10.) The geraniums held a place in our English
Dispensatory until a recent period. See Quincy (p. 88.)


Γῆ,

Terra, _Earth_; all kinds are desiccants; that which is unmixed with any
other substance is also free of pungency; but if any fiery quality is
mixed with it, it lays the same aside when washed. The fatty part, then,
of wrought earth is an useful application to all organs that require
drying; they use therefore the clay of _Egyptian earth_ to dropsical and
splenitic affections, and to soft swellings, with manifest advantage. Of
medicinal earths, the _Lemnia rubrica_, or _Sigillum_, as it is called,
in addition to its being moderately desiccative and astringent, proves
an antidote to deleterious medicines, cures malignant ulcers with wine
or vinegar, stops all kinds of hemorrhage, and removes dysentery and
spreading ulcers of the intestines, the gut being first washed out by an
injection of honied water, and then of brine. The _Rubrica Sinopica_, or
_vermilion_, being stronger than the Lemnian, is used as an ingredient
in plasters, and when drunk it kills worms. The _Samian_ is much more
emollient than the Lemnian, as being glutinous and viscid. It is to be
used then in all cases in which emollients are indicated; but it also
cures spitting of blood from whatever part it proceed. The _Selenusian_
and the _Chian_ are more detergent, and are therefore used by some women
in the cleansing applications to their faces. It also produces the
incarnation and cicatrization of ulcers, more especially of burns. The
unwashed _Cimolian_ is possessed of mixed powers, being refrigerant
and discutient; but the washed is more cooling, and cures burns with
oxycrate. The _Terra Ampelitis_ (it is the kind of earth which is rubbed
upon vines to destroy the worms which breed in them) is powerfully
desiccant and discutient, but not without pungency. The _Cretan_ is full
of air and detergent, without pungency. The _Eretrian_ is decidedly
astringent, but when burnt and washed it is desiccant without pungency;
but the cineritious is preferable. The _Pnigitis_ has powers resembling
the Cimolian, but is black. The _Armenian_, called also _Bole_, is
powerfully desiccative, and therefore agrees excellently with dysenteric
cases, fluxes of the belly, spitting of blood, consumption, dyspnœa from
humidity, humid ulcers, and pestilential affections. It is drunk with a
thin diluted wine, or, if fever be present, with water. The _Alanabolus_
is possessed of similar powers to the Armenian. _Ochre_ is discutient and
septic in its powers; it therefore restrains the fungous flesh of ulcers,
and fills hollow ones when mixed with cerate.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We shall now give a brief explanation of the medicinal
earths of the ancients, and for a fuller account of them we would beg
to refer to the Appendix to Dunbar’s ‘English and Greek Lexicon,’ to
Hill’s ‘Annotations on Theophrastus on Stones,’ and to Sprengel’s ‘Notes
on Dioscorides.’ Of the ancient writers, Dioscorides and Galen give the
fullest account of them. The Arabians, also, especially Rhases, Avicenna,
and Serapion, treat of them in the most ample manner, but supply little
additional information. Geoffroy says of the _Lemnian earth_, that it is
“a fat, viscid, slippery clay, of a pale red colour.” The Lemnian ruddle
(μίλτος) was the red Armenian bole, consisting of silex, alumine, oxyd
of iron, &c. The Lemnium Sigillum was the Lemnian earth, made into cakes
and stamped with a seal, as a guarantee of its purity. The _Cretan earth_
is white chalk. The _Samian earth_, as Sprengel states, appears to have
been pure argil; Kidd supposes it to have been pipeclay. The kind called
aster was globose and thick. The _Chian_, _Selenusian_, and _Pnigitid
earths_, are also argils, more or less pure. The Sinopic ruddle was a
compact kind of ochre or marl, nearly resembling the Lemnian earth. Pliny
ranks the _Cimolian earth_ among the chalks or clays (cretæ.) Sprengel
and Kidd suppose it an argil. The purple Cimolian earth of the ancients
was our steatitis or _soap-rock_. From Dioscorides’s account of the
_Melian earth_, it appears to have consisted principally of alum, and was
different from the _Terra Melia_ of Theophrastus. The _Ampelites_ would
seem to have been a bituminous earth, formed from stone-coal, probably
resembling cannel coal. The _Armenian earth_, as Matthiolus remarks,
was different from the _Armenian bole_ now brought from the East. The
ancient is described to be a very dry clay, having the appearance of
stone, and very triturable, like lime. It was much celebrated as a remedy
for the plague. See Galen, Aëtius, and Serapion. It was introduced into
practice by Galen. It is clear, as Dr. Hill remarks, that it was the
_yellow Armenian bole_ which Galen used; the red being first used by the
Arabians. Dr. Hill found it an excellent astringent and absorbent. The
_Eretrian earth_ was an impure argil, of a snow-white colour. Geber makes
frequent mention of _magnesia_.


Γήρας ὄφεως,

_Senecta Serpentis_, the Slough of a Serpent, is decidedly desiccative:
when boiled with vinegar it, therefore, cures toothache. That of the asp,
when triturated with honey and rubbed in, sharpens the powers of vision.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Galen and Serapion likewise recommend the skin of a snake,
when boiled in wine or vinegar, as a remedy for earache and toothache.
See also Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 49, 530.) Dioscorides gives nearly
the same account of it, only he recommends the cast skin of the viper
as an ophthalmic remedy. (ii, 19.) The serpent’s slough is still used
medicinally in the East. See Ainslie (Materia Medica, ii, 291.)


Γῆς ἔντερα,

Vermes terreni, _Earthworms_, when pounded and applied to wounded nerves,
have immediately the most wonderful effects.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides says that earthworms, pounded and applied,
agglutinate divided nerves, and stop tertians; that, when boiled with
the grease of a goose, they cure affections of the ears when injected;
that, in like manner, when boiled in oil and injected into the opposite
ear, they relieve toothache; and that they promote the flow of urine
when pounded and drunk in wine. (ii, 72.) Galen commends earthworms as
being diuretic when drunk in must. He mentions further, that, according
to the report of certain physicians, earthworms have been given
internally and applied externally without burning or boiling. Of all the
ancient authorities, Aëtius is the fullest on the medicinal virtues of
earthworms. (ii, 168.) The Arabians do little more under this head than
copy the descriptions of them given by Dioscorides, Galen, and Paulus.
Avicenna recommends them, when pounded and drunk in wine, not only
as being diuretic but also lithontriptic. (ii, 2, 198.) The Lumbrici
terrestres, or earthworms, are described and very much commended for
their medicinal virtues in Quincy’s ‘Dispensatory’ (p. 140), and Lewis’s
‘Materia Medica’ (ii, 76.)


Γίγαρτα,

Gigarta vinacea, _Grape-stones_, are desiccative in the second degree,
but refrigerant in the first. Being, therefore, cooling, they agree with
all defluxions.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Galen mentions _Grape-stones_ as sour and astringent
remedies, and, therefore, applicable in all defluxions from the bowels.
Avicenna recommends the ashes of grape-stones with vinegar in torsion of
the nerves, and along with oil for contusion of the limbs and softening
of the joints. (ii, 2, 723.) See also Rhases (l. ult. Cont. i, 745.)


Γιγγίδιον,

Gingidium, _Toothpick Fennel_, is possessed of no manifest heat, but
is desiccative in the third degree, and astringent. It is, therefore,
stomachic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides says of the _Daucus gingidium_, that it is a good
potherb, and that as a medicine, when taken in a decoction with wine, it
is diuretic and lithontriptic. (ii, 166.) Galen defines its virtues to be
considerable astringency with slightly heating powers. The others treat
of it in like terms. Few if any of the Arabians have noticed it.


Γλαύκιον,

Glaucium, _Horned Poppy_, is rather disagreeably astringent, but
decidedly refrigerant, so that it cures erysipelas when the attack is not
severe.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. In the Fifth Book we have treated of the different species of
poppy used by the ancients. It appears from Dioscorides that it was its
expressed juice which was used in practice. It was used principally in
applications to the eyes. Our author borrows from Galen, and he follows
Dioscorides (iii, 90.) The Arabians recommend it, not only in affections
of the eyes, but also in boils and erysipelas. See particularly Avicenna
(ii, 2, 470); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 464.) As far as we can discover,
it does not occur in the works of the Hippocratists, nor in those of
Celsus. It has been scarcely known in the modern practice of medicine.


Γλαὺξ,

Glaux, _Milkwort_; the herb is hot and humid in temperament, and,
therefore, promotes the formation of milk.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides gives a very circumstantial description of it,
from which it has been concluded that the _Glaux_ was a species of
_Astragalus_. (iv, 139.) All the authorities mention it in the same light
as our author, but few of them have described it. We are not aware of its
having been used in modern practice.


Γλήχων,

Pulegium, _Pennyroyal_, is strongly calefacient and attenuant. Hence,
when applied externally, it proves rubefacient. It also promotes the
expectoration of thick and viscid humours lodged in the chest and lungs.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides commends the _Mentha Pulegium_ as an emmenagogue,
and for forwarding delivery; and the same character has descended to it
down to recent times. See Gerard, Culpeper, Quincy, and Hill. Even at the
present day it holds a place in our Dispensatories, but with a diminished
reputation: stat magni nominis umbra! The Arabians generally treated of
it along with the dittany. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 461); Serapion (De Simpl.
310.)


Γλοιὸς,

Sordes, that of baths, is moderately heating, emollient, and discutient.
It, therefore, agrees with fissures and condylomata.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See Dioscorides, with the commentaries of Matthiolus and
Sprengel. Suffice it to say, that the _Sordes balneorum_ was nothing but
the sweat scraped from the bodies of persons who were _shampooed_, in an
apartment of the bath for this purpose, namely, in the Laconicum. (See
Book I, 68.) Of course it would consist of nothing but animal sweat,
mixed up perhaps with either natron or the flower of beans, which was
generally used during the process. The _Sordes gymnasiorum_ is also
in like manner treated of by Dioscorides, and it must have been the
sweat collected from the statues and walls of the gymnasia. Dioscorides
recommends it for crude boils (phymata), desquamated surfaces, and old
sores. The _Sordes palestræ_ must have been pretty much the same as the
_Sordes balneorum_, and accordingly it was used in a similar manner. The
_Sordes ex gymnasio_ occurs in Celsus’s list of emollients (v, 15); and
is treated of likewise by the Arabians. It appears singular that mankind
should have so long retained a fancy for such an application, considering
how easy it was to find a more agreeable substitute for it.


Γλυκυρρίζα,

Glycyrrhiza, _Liquorice_, is of a tepid and humid temperament, having
also some astringency. Hence it smooths asperities, not only in the
trachea but also in a scabious bladder. It also quenches thirst.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It would appear to have been rather the _Glycyrrhiza
glandulifera_ than the _G. glabra_. The latter, according to C.
Bauhin, contains more saccharine matter than the _G._ of the ancients.
Dioscorides, in his usual empirical style, enumerates with considerable
judgment the cases in which it may be administered with advantage; such
as asperities of the trachea (hoarseness) in the form of a linctus, for
ardour of the stomach, ulcerations of the bladder and kidneys, and so
forth (iii, 9.) All the ancient authorities, from Dioscorides downwards
agree in stating that liquorice quenches thirst; and this we believe is
still the popular opinion in this country, and was the professional, down
to a late date. See Rutty (Mat. Med. p. 221.) The glycyrrhiza occurs in
the works of Hippocrates, Celsus, and the Arabians. As they all give
it the same characters, we need not occupy space with extracts from
them. See particularly Serapion (De Simpl. 147); Ebn Baithar (ii, 66.)
According to the Greek Pharmacopœia the _G. glabra_ is the species now
used in Greece.


Γλυκυσίδη,

Glycyside, _Pæony_, (called also Pentorobon and Pæonia); its root is
acrid, somewhat bitter and desiccative, having also some astringency.
Hence it excites the menstrual discharge, and cleanses the kidneys and
liver when drunk, to the size of an almond, with wine; but if the wine be
austere it restrains alvine defluxions. When appended as a periapt, it
cures the epilepsy of children.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sprengel makes the two species described by Dioscorides to
be the _Pæonia officinalis_ and _Corallina_. We have mentioned in the
Third Book that it has been much celebrated both in ancient and modern
times as a cure for epilepsy when appended as an amulet. See Andreas
Laurentius (De Mir. Strumar. Curat. pp. 40, 63), and Macer (De Viribus
Herb.) Quincy, in his ‘Complete English Dispensatory’ (London 1769),
says of the root of peony, “the good women highly esteem necklaces made
of it to hang about their children’s necks for convulsions and difficult
breeding of the teeth.” Considering the faith which many _educated_
persons now repose in the virtues of galvanic rings and garters, the
present generation has little ground for laughing at the credulity of
our forefathers, with respect to amulets and other phylacteries. On the
Pæonia, see particularly Dioscorides (iii, 147); Galen (De Simpl. v);
Serapion (c. 61); Ebn Baithar (ii, 240.) The _Pæonia officinalis_ is
still retained in the Greek Pharmacopœia (p. 121.)


Γναφάλιον,

Gnaphalium, _Cudweed_, is so called because its soft leaves have been
used in place of combed wool (gnaphalum.) They are white and moderately
astringent, and are, therefore, drunk with austere wine for dysentery.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There has been a great shifting of names by botanical
authorities of late, with regard to the _Gnaphalia_ and the cognate
genera. It seems now agreed that the medicinal cotton-weed of the
ancients shall be called _Otanthus maritimus_, Link. Our author borrows
from Dioscorides and Galen, who both give exactly the same character of
this plant, and this it retained down to a very recent period. See Quincy.


Γογγυλὶς,

Rapum, _Turnip_; the root and seed are flatulent, promote the formation
of semen, and rouse to venery.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The predominance of authority has determined us, after a good
deal of consideration, to set this down as the _Brassica Napo-brassica_,
the navew, or French turnip. All the authorities, in a word, from
Dioscorides downwards, held it to be aphrodisiacal. Dioscorides holds it
to be a sovereign remedy for chilblains in fomentation, cataplasm, or
prepared thus: a turnip is to be scooped out in the middle and filled
with rose-cerate, which is to be melted by placing the turnip in hot
ashes, when it forms an excellent application to ulcerated chilblains.
(ii, 134.) Pliny likewise says of the turnip, “Est et rapo vis medica.
Perniones fervens impositum sanat.” (H. N. xx, 9.) A roasted turnip
is still a popular remedy in Scotland for chilblains. Galen, Aëtius,
and Oribasius give brief descriptions of the _gongylis_, and from them
our author copies. Celsus treats of the _napus_ and _rapum_ only as
potherbs. The Arabians give a confused account of the matter; Avicenna
under _brassica_, and Serapion under _rapa_. (De Simpl. 191.) Rhases,
translating the 134th chapter of Dioscorides, renders _gongyle_ by _Rapa
rotunda_. (Cont. l. ult. 557.) Altogether it appears to us strange that
some of our late authorities should have referred the gongylis to the
_Brassica oleracea_. See Dierbach (Mat. Med. Hippocrat.) The introduction
of the different varieties of the latter into gardening is a very curious
but difficult subject. See Beckmann (Hist. of Invent.), and Loudon
(Encyc. of Garden. 674.)


Γορδύλιον,

Gordylium (called also by some Seseli), is hot, diuretic, and
emmenagogue. The root of it, when taken in a linctus, with honey,
promotes expectoration.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Most probably it is a species of Seseli. Either our author or
some copyist of his works has evidently been guilty of the mistake of
writing _gordylion_ for _tordylion_. See the chapter of Dioscorides on
the tordylium (iii, 56.)


Γύρις,

Pollen, _Fine Flour_, resembles starch in its properties, but is weaker.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. On the medicinal properties of _pollen_, see Pliny (H. N.
xxii, 60), who, however, borrows all his information from Dioscorides
(ii, 107.) Both recommend the pollen used for glueing books, in
hæmoptysis.


Γύψος,

Gypsum, _Parget_, or Mineral White, in addition to its desiccant, is
possessed of obstruent powers. Hence it agrees with hemorrhages, along
with pollen and the white of an egg. When burnt it has no longer its
obstruent powers, but it is more desiccant and repellent, especially with
oxycrate.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated pretty fully of this article in another
place (Vol. II, 233.) It is the sulphate of lime, of which selenite
or the foliated sulphate of lime is a sub-species. In the shops, when
pulverized, it is known by the names of mineral white and stucco.
Dioscorides merely says of its medicinal powers, that it is styptic
and emplastic, and restrains bleeding and sweats. Galen is somewhat
fuller in his account of it, recommending it, with the fine flour of
wheat, which is found sticking about the walls of mills, and the down
of a hare, for stopping bleeding. Aëtius and our author copy closely
from Galen. Serapion borrows both from Dioscorides and Galen (c. 379.)
Avicenna recommends it with Armenian bole, lentils, myrtle-water, and
some vinegar, as an application to the forehead in bleeding from the
nose. (ii, 2, 284.) Rhases copies verbatim from Galen, Dioscorides,
and our author. (Cont. l. ult. i, 235.) Averrhoes recommends it in the
manner described above from Galen as a styptic. (Collig. v, 43.) Celsus
prescribes it for stopping colliquative sweating in cardiac disease (iii,
19.)


Δάδες,

Tedæ, _Dead Pines_, have certain acrid, concoctive, and detergent powers.
Hence boiled in vinegar they cure toothache when the mouth is rinsed
with the vinegar; but if a little honey is added, they bring away phlegm.
When made into a linctus they promote the discharges from the breast.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This term properly signifies a small torch used in performing
lustrations, but here it is used for a small slip taken from a pine-tree.
The tree from which the _tedæ_ were taken was the _Pinus Cembro_; this
Matthiolus, Harduin, and our old herbalists have clearly made out. See
in particular Parkinson (p. 1537.) Gerard calls it by the English name
of torch-pine, and, evidently copying from Dioscorides, adds, “the
torch-pine, cut into small pieces and boiled in vinegar, is a remedy
against the toothache, if the teeth be washed with the decoction.” (p.
1361.) The other authorities treat of it in general terms, under the head
of Pinus.


Δαμασκηνά,

Damascena, _Damascenes_, will be treated of with Plums.


Δαμασσώνιον,

Damasonium, _Water-plantain_, has certain detergent powers, and proves
lithontriptic, and occasions a metastasis of the contents of the
intestinal canal to the urine.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt that it is the _Alisma_ of Dioscorides,
and therefore probably the elegant water plant now called _Alisma
Plantago_. On this point see Gerarde, Parkinson, Cordus, and Sprengel.
Dioscorides recommends its root in cases of poisoning by the sea-hare,
the red frog, and by opium; in tormina and dysentery when drunk by itself
and with carrot; and in convulsions and hysterical complaints. He adds,
that the herb binds the belly, is emmenagogue, and softens swellings when
applied. (iii, 159.) Galen states that he had never any experience of it
in the cases mentioned by Dioscorides; but that he had found it possessed
of lithontriptic powers. The other Greek authorities follow him. The
Arabians copy from both. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 244, 249); Ebn Baithar (ii,
513.)


Δαῦκος,

Daucus, _Carrot_ (called also Staphylinus), consists of two varieties.
The root of the cultivated carrot is flatulent and aphrodisiacal; the
seed of the wild is wholly devoid of flatulent properties, is diuretic
and emmenagogue; and so in like manner the stem.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Of the three species of _Daucus_ described by Dioscorides
(iii, 76), the leaves of the first are compared by him to those of the
fennel; the leaves of the second to those of the wild parsley; and the
leaves of the third to those of coriander. The first is the species which
was long known in this country by the name of Candy carrots, and which
has obtained various names of late years from our botanical authorities.
It seems now settled that it should be called _Athamanta Cretensis_. “The
second,” says our indefatigable herbalist, old Parkinson, whose practical
acquaintance with all sorts of plants entitles his opinion to high
consideration, “is acknowledged to be so like the first that the climate
and country only make the difference.” It is now called _Athamanta
cervaria_. The third, or coriander-leaved daucus, as the same authority
clearly indicates, was probably a species of _seseli_. It, however,
is not very certainly determined. The following description of their
medicinal virtues by our Quincy may be said to embody the concurrent
opinions of all the ancient authorities, Greek, Roman, and Arabian. “The
seed is aperient and good in disorders of the kidneys; as also to hasten
delivery, and bring away the after-birth. It is likewise accounted a
good alexipharmic, and proper against the bites of venomous creatures.”
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 214, 287); Ebn Baithar (ii, 462); Celsus (v, 23);
Hippocrates (De Ratione Vict. in Acut.); also under Staphylinus.


Δάφνη,

Laurus, _The Bay-tree_; its leaves are powerfully desiccant and
calefacient, but its fruit still more so. The bark of its root, being
bitter and sub-astringent, proves lithontriptic and cures hepatic
affections when drunk to the amount of three oboli with fragrant wine.


Δάφνη πόα,

Laurus herba (Ruscus? _Butcher’s-broom?_), called also Alexandrina, is
hot, acrid, and somewhat bitter; it therefore promotes the menstrual and
urinary discharges. The daphnoides and the chamædaphne are possessed of
the same powers; but the latter is edible.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes the virtues of the bay-tree (_Laurus
nobilis_) at considerable length, representing it to be heating
and emollient, and hence he says, the decoction of it makes a good
hip-bath in diseases of the womb and bladder; the green leaves, he
adds, are sub-astringent, and hence prove useful when applied to the
stings of wasps and bees. He recommends the berries in phthisis and
other complaints of the chest, as alexipharmic, and as forming a good
application to leprosy, and as an injection in earache and deafness. The
bark, he says, is lithontriptic, kills the fœtus in utero, and proves
useful in hepatic diseases. (i, 106.) Galen briefly calls it diuretic
and emmenagogue. The Arabians follow Dioscorides. See Avicenna (ii, 2,
444.) The _Laurus_ still holds a place in the Materia Medica, although
now seldom used. See Pereira (p. 800.) The concurrent authority of the
commentators and herbalists has settled that the Laurus Alexandrina was a
species of _Ruscus_, probably the _R. hypophyllum_. The chamædaphne was
also a species of _Ruscus_, perhaps the _racemosus_. The daphnoides is
generally held to be the mountain laurel of Parkinson, i. e. the _Daphne
Alpina_. All the other authorities treat of these plants in nearly the
same terms as our author. They are all generally held to be emmenagogue
and diuretic.


Δέρμα,

Pellis, _Skin_; that of a sheep newly taken off and still warm,
when applied to those who have been scourged with rods, cures them
wonderfully. The skin of the hippopotamus, when burnt and triturated
with water and applied, disperses hard tubercles. That of the viper,
when triturated and applied in cases of alopecia, promotes the growth
of the hair in a wonderful degree. The leather of old shoes burnt has
desiccative ashes; hence it cures sores in the feet from friction, if not
in an inflamed state; and also burns, intertrigo, and protuberances.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have mentioned, in the Fourth Book, that the fresh skin
of a newly-killed sheep was esteemed an excellent application to parts
which had been bruised or cut by scourges. (See Vol. II, 46.) Dioscorides
and most of the other authorities recommend the ashes of old shoes in the
cases mentioned by our authors. Avicenna recommends the fresh skin of a
goat as an application to poisoned wounds. (ii, 2, 539.)


Δίκταμνον,

Dictamnum, _Dittany_, consists of more subtile particles than pennyroyal,
but resembles it in other respects. That variety called Pseudo dictamnum
is weaker.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That the Dictamnus Creticus, so celebrated even in poetry
(Virg. Æn. xii, 412) as a vulnerary herb, was a species of _Origanum_,
has been long known and acknowledged. Until of late years it held a
place in our Dispensatories under the name of dittany of Candy. It
was always held to be alexipharmic, and as such it is commended by
Dioscorides. Such, he adds, is the power of this herb that by the smell
and touch it kills venomous reptiles; and the juice of it when poured
into a wound inflicted by an iron instrument or the bite of a venomous
animal immediately cures it. (iii, 34.) Galen would appear to have been
sceptical as to the great medicinal powers said to be inherent in this
plant, for he dismisses it with a brief notice to the effect that it
is more attenuant than the pennyroyal, but like to it otherwise. See
also Celsus (v, 25.) The Arabians follow Dioscorides, and represent it
to be diuretic and emmenagogue. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 461) and Serapion
(De Simpl. 310.) They describe it along with the pennyroyal. The
bastard dittany has been pretty generally recognized as the _Dictamnus
Fraxinella_. See Parkinson, Miller, and Pereira (ii, 1652, ed. sec.)
The last of these authors remarks regarding it, that “it was formerly
much used in medicine, but of late years has fallen into almost total
disuse.” Not very many years ago, however, it was in great repute as
being diuretic, emmenagogue, alexipharmic, anthelmintic, &c. See Alston’s
Lectures (i, 434.) It is still esteemed by the Arabians and Persians as a
tonic and stimulant. Ainslie (Mat. Med. 63.)


Διονυσίας,

Dionysias, is treated of under Androsæmum.


Διφρυγὲς,

Diphryges, _Husk of Brass_, is possessed of mixed powers, being somewhat
astringent and moderately acrid. It is therefore a good application for
malignant ulcers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides gives a very circumstantial description of three
varieties of this substance, which for many years has been lost sight of.
Matthiolus calls it the Husk of Bronze, and Sprengel says it is called
_Kupfermulm_ in Germany. Rutty ranks it among the obsolete medicines of
the ancients. (Mat. Med. pr. 27.) Rhases treats of it. (Cont. ult. 256.)
See Serapion (c. 418.)


Διψακὸς,

Dipsacus, _Teasel_; the root of this thorn is desiccant in the second
degree, and is also somewhat detergent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The root of the _Dipsacus fullonum_, or manured teasel, is
praised by Dioscorides as an application to fissures and fistulæ of the
anus, and it held a reputation in these cases down to a late period.
See Rutty (Mat. Med. 168.) Dioscorides further mentions its use as an
amulet in quartans, for which also it was long celebrated; for our Quincy
speaks of “the superstition of some people of his day in using it as a
charm against agues.” (Complete Dispensatory, 117.) For the Arabians,
see particularly Serapion (c. 106) and Ebn Baithar. It is not noticed by
Hippocrates nor Celsus.


Δορύκνιον,

Dorycnium, _Shrub Trefoil (?)_, is of a similar temperament with the
poppy and mandragora, that is, immoderately cold. When taken in a small
quantity it occasions torpor, and in larger doses it proves fatal.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. In the Fifth Book we have stated the difficulty of
determining what it was. Authorities are divided between the _Convolvulus
Dorycnium_ L. (Angl. Shrubby Bindweed), the _Solanum Sodomæum_, and
_Atropa Belladonna_. Dioscorides says of it that it is soporific, and
when taken in large doses proves fatal; he adds, some affirm that the
seed of it is sought after for philtres, or love potions. (iv, 75.) Galen
gives nearly the same account of it under the name of _Dorycnidium_. The
Arabians would appear not to have admitted it into the Mat. Med., for the
Doronicon of Serapion is a different plant. (c. 335.)


Δρακόντιον,

Dracontium, or Dracunculus, _Dragon-herb_, somewhat resembles the
Wake-robin (Arum), but is more acrid and bitter than it, and also hotter,
and consists of more subtile particles. It has also some astringency. The
root of it, therefore, when taken in a potion cleanses the bowels, and
is an excellent application to malignant ulcers; and the leaves in like
manner. But the fruit of it is stronger.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of the Dragon-herb (_Arum Dracunculus_)
as an article of food in another place. (Vol. I, p. 114.) Dioscorides
gives so circumstantial a description of its medicinal properties that
we cannot find space for it. Suffice to say, he uses it internally
in diseases of the chest, and as an aphrodisiac, externally, in
various cutaneous diseases, in collyria, in injections into the ears,
and as an alexipharmic. (ii, 195.) Galen embodies the substance of
Dioscorides’s empirical description of its virtues agreeably to his own
system, recommending it principally as a deobstruent internally, and
an application to sores and cancerous tumours externally. Aëtius also
gives an elaborate description of its powers. Oribasius merely states in
general terms that it is calefacient and attenuant. Apuleius recommends
it for the bite of the asp. Mesue ascribes to it powerfully cathartic and
carminative powers. His account of it is very elaborate, and deserving of
more attention than we can afford room to bestow upon it. He recommends
it in the form of a suppository to relieve hemorrhoids and flatulence.
(De Simpl. 24.) Avicenna borrows largely from Dioscorides. (ii, 2, 432.)
Rhases copies from Dioscorides, Galen, and Oribasius. (Cont. l. ult. i,
257.) Serapion does the same. (De Simpl. 43.) It remains to be mentioned
that Dioscorides, Oribasius, Mesue, and Avicenna, besides the species
of dracunculus which we have been treating of, also describe another by
the name of the Lesser. It is supposed to be the _Arum Italicum_. The
dragon-herb held a place in the Dispensatory down to a very late date.
Boerhaave calls it a powerful diuretic and promoter of the menses. Quincy
says it is reckoned alexipharmic.


Δρυοπτερὶς,

Dryopteris, _Oak-fern_, is sweet, acrid, and bitterish, and its root has
some sourness. It is septic, and hence it is depilatory.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. According to Dierbach, it comprehends both the _Polypodium
Dryopteris_ and the _Asplenium Adiantum nigrum_, and this opinion is
supported by that of the older authorities. See Parkinson (1042) and
Alston (§ 52.) Sprengel refers it to the former. Our author borrows
from Dioscorides, and Avicenna does the same. (ii, 2, 219.) Our older
herbalists, Parkinson and Gerard, treat of the oak-fern, but it has long
ceased to hold a place in our Dispensatory.


Δρῦς,

Quercus, _the Oak_; its leaves and fruit are possessed of desiccant and
tepid powers, so as to agglutinate recent wounds and cure incipient
inflammations. The membrane under the bark of the acorn which surrounds
the fleshy part of the fruit being much more astringent, is given for the
female fluor and other diseases attended with discharges.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dierbach states that three species of the oak with edible
roots grow in Greece, the _Quercus Æsculus_, the _Q. Ilex_, and the _Q.
Ballote_. He adds, that the first species is generally meant by δρῦς in
the Hippocratic writings. Eustathius remarks that the φηγὸς of Homer
was a species of oak. (Ad Iliad. v, 691.) In fact, it was the _Quercus
æschylus_, or rather comprehend it and the _Q. Robur_. See Parkinson
(1389.) After all the illustration which the subject has received from
the old herbalists, and more recent commentators on Dioscorides and
Theophrastus, it must be admitted that there is still considerable
difficulty in determining the various species of oak described by the
ancients. Our author borrows his account of the medicinal powers of the
oak from Dioscorides, whom all the other authorities also follow. The
quercus occurs in the Mat. Med. of Hippocrates, and in those of all the
Arabians. We need scarcely add that the _Quercus Robur_ still maintains a
place in our Dispensatory.


Ἔβενος,

Ebenus, _Ebeny_; the wood is calefacient, detergent, and consists of
subtile particles. Hence it is believed to remove films which obstruct
the pupil, and is an ingredient for other ophthalmic remedies.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The Latin poet Virgil, who applies the term India both to the
region of the East, which has always held that name, and to Abyssinia
(Georg. iv, 293), says, that India is the only country that produces
ebeny. (Georg. ii, 116.) This account of it will still be admitted to
be pretty correct. Dr. Royle mentions that “_Diospyros Ebenus_ yields
the best kinds in the Mauritius, perhaps also in Madagascar; but _D.
ebenaster_ and _D. melanoxylon_, the ebeny trees of the Coromandel coast,
yield it in the peninsula, of very good quality, as other species do in
other parts of India.” (Hindoo Med. 89.) See Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 48.)
In medicine it was principally used in collyria for psorophthalmia and
xerophthalmia as recommended by Dioscorides (i, 129), and in old ulcers
and watery pustules as recommended by Aëtius (i) and Galen. (De Simpl.
vi.) See also Celsus (v, 12.) The Arabians, who must have been still
more familiar with it than the Greeks, say of it, in addition, that it
is lithontriptic. Rhases (Contin. l. ult. 258), Avicenna (ii, 2, 226),
and Serapion (c. 152.) It is still imported to this country, but has long
ceased to occupy a place in our Dispensatory.


Ἐγκέφαλον,

Cerebrum, _Brain_; the boiled brains of a hare when rubbed in and eaten,
are useful (it is said) for forwarding dentition in infants. Some write
that brain when eaten proves useful for tremblings. Dioscorides says
that the brain of a cock when drunk with wine relieves those who have
been bitten by venomous animals, and that it stops hemorrhages from the
meninges. Galen says that the brain of a camel when dried and drunk with
vinegar cures epilepsy, and that of the weasel in like manner; that
the brain of a swallow with honey is of use in suffusions; while that
of sheep when prepared in like manner is an excellent remedy in the
dentition of children.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Galen and Serapion treat of the medicinal properties of
brains in much the same terms as our author. Indeed our author copies
from Galen. Avicenna says brains prove emetic after food, and are useful
in the case of a person who has swallowed any poison. (ii, 2, 125.)


Ἐλάια,

Olea, _the Olive_; the green shoots of it are possessed of the same
degree of coldness as of astringency; the fruit when perfectly ripe is
moderately hot, but the unripe is more astringent and cold. The tear
of Ethiopian olive resembling the slender ammoniac, is possessed of
detergent powers. It is used, therefore, for cicatrices, albugo, and
dimness of vision, and for the pains of the teeth when put into the
carious hole. But some say that it is the wild olive that does this.
Oil from fully ripe olives is sweet and moderately hot, and rather of
a moistening nature. But the unripe has just as much astringency as
coldness. The washed is freer from pungency. As to the old, the older it
is so much the hotter and more discutient is it, more especially if it
consist of subtile particles at first. This is ascertained from its being
pure and transparent, and from a small quantity of it being sufficient to
anoint a large part of the body, and from its being readily drunk in by
the skin. Such in particular is the Sabine. That from the wild olive is
at the same time detergent, astringent, and drying, as an oil. Castor oil
has the same powers as old oil. The other kinds, such as that of sesame,
or of radish and the like, derive peculiar properties from the substance
they are formed from.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of the olive as an article of food in another
place. (Vol. I, 135.) The Ethiopian or wild olive comprehended several
species of the _Elæagnus_. The tears of it, mentioned by Dioscorides
and our author, and likened to gum ammoniac, are now unknown. Some, as
Parkinson remarks, have supposed it our gum elemi, but that is probably a
mistake. All the authorities, Greek, Latin, and Arabian, mention it as a
sour, astringent medicine. Samonicus calls it “succis oleaster acerbis.”
Abu l’Fadli calls it a powerful astringent. (Apud Celsii Hierobot.) The
leaves of the cultivated olive Dioscorides says have the same kind of
powers as the wild, but in an inferior degree, and hence, from their
greater mildness, they are more suitable for ophthalmic remedies; he
also recommends the juice of the green olive in pityriasis, psora, and
other cutaneous diseases. (i, 136.) We need not follow out what has been
written by the others on this subject.

Ἔλαιον. For an account of the oils used by the ancients in the practice
of medicine, see in particular Dioscorides (i, 29 et seq.), Galen (De
Simpl. vi), and Mesue (De Oleis.) The _Oleum Cicinum_, i. e. oil of the
palma christi, now called _castor oil_, is often mentioned by the ancient
authors. Dioscorides states that it is purgative and anthelminthic.
Aëtius states that _linseed oil_ may often be used instead of it. _Almond
oil_ he particularly commends in complaints of the ears. The _oil of
Sesame_, he says, resembles common oil, being a gentle purgative; it is
the _gingilie_ oil of the modern Hindoos. Serapion recommends the oil
of olives as an astringent application to stop profuse perspiration,
to remove scabies and other cutaneous complaints on the head, to cure
aphthæ and ulcers of the mouth, and for various other complaints. He,
however, merely copies from Dioscorides, (i, 136.) But of all the
ancient authorities, Mesue is the one who gives the fullest account of
the composition and medicinal powers of the oils. Some of them are not
described by the Greeks before his time, as far as we know. We shall give
a specimen of a few of his prescriptions. His _oil of mandragora_, which
he recommends for extinguishing inflammation and procuring sleep, is
prepared from equal parts of the juice of its berries and oil of sesame
boiled in a double vessel until the juice be evaporated. Add, he says,
a little juice and boil again, do so a third time, and lay it aside.
For the oil of mandrake a much more complicated receipt is given by
Myrepsus (xvi, 50), which held its place in our Pharmacopœia down to the
days of Quincy. (Complete Dispensatory, 527.) The _oil of eggs_, which
Mesue commends strongly from experience for cleansing the skin, curing
cutaneous eruptions, making hair grow, and curing malignant ulcers, he
directs to be prepared thus: about thirty yelks of eggs hardened by
boiling, and broken down into pieces, are to be fried in an earthen
fryingpan that has been leadened, stirring with a wooden or iron ladle
until they grow red, and their oil is poured out, which they yield the
more largely if compressed with the ladle. This oil of eggs is described
in similar terms by Moses Charras, in the Royal Pharmacopœia (p. 200),
and is a popular remedy in Scotland to this day. Mesue describes the
composition of an oil of frogs, which he recommends much for soothing
the pains of arthritis, and the burning heat of ardent fevers, also the
oil of vipers, of wolves, and many others, which will be more properly
treated of by us in section xx of this Book. The oils are also well
described by Aëtius (i) and Myrepsus (De Oleis.)


Ἐλαιόμελι,

Elæomeli, _Honeyed Oil_. In Syria, an oil thicker and sweeter than honey,
flows from a certain trunk; when drunk to the amount of two cyathi with
a hemina of water, it produces a discharge of crude and bilious matters
from the bowels. Those who have taken it become torpid; yet one need not
be alarmed, but only rouse them.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Pliny describes it as a natural exudation from trees on
the maritime coasts of Syria. He adds, it is fat, thicker than honey,
thinner than resin, of a sweet taste, and is used in medicine: “Manat
ex arboribus pingue, crassius melle, resina tenuius, sapore dulci, et
hoc medicis.” (H. N. xxv, 7.) He states in another place that it is a
nauseous purgative. (xxiii, 56.) Dioscorides gives the same account of it
as our author, and describes an oil to be prepared from it. Avicenna and
Rhases recommend it as an application to ulcerated scabies. It appears
singular that this natural substance should have been entirely lost
sight of in modern times, inasmuch that unless we adopt the conjecture
of Alston, that it was some species of manna, we must admit ourselves
entirely ignorant of it.


Ἐλατήριον,

Elaterium; the juice of the fruit of the wild cucumber is so called,
being in the second order of calefacients. It promotes the menstrual
discharge, and destroys the fœtus when applied in a pessary, by its
extreme bitterness. When rubbed in with milk it evacuates by the nose.
When administered in an injection, it occasions a discharge downwards of
phlegm, and sometimes of blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It would appear that Hippocrates applied the term to all
drastic purgatives. See Eustathius, Iliad. (xviii, 564.) By Dioscorides
and all subsequent authorities, it is restricted to signify the fecula
of the _Momordica Elaterium_, or wild cucumber. It was much used by the
ancient physicians in the cure of dropsy, as we have stated in the Third
Book. Dioscorides correctly states that it evacuates bile and phlegm,
both upwards and downwards. He recommends it particularly in cases
attended with difficulty of breathing. As an emetic, he directs us to
administer it in oil, or with the ointment of iris. As a purgative, he
recommends it to be given with double the quantity of salt and some
mustard, in the form of a pill, of the size of a tare. Like our author,
he states that it is emmenagogue, and proves fatal to the fœtus when
applied in a pessary. Galen and the other authorities on the Materia
Medica give it nearly the same characters. Theophrastus states that it
is the most durable of all medicines, and that the oldest is the best.
(H. P. ix, 14.) It is said by Hippocrates, that if a woman or she-goat,
giving suck, partake of elaterium, it will affect her young. (Epid. vi,
5.) Galen in his commentary remarks, that other purgatives have the same
effect when given similarly. (Op. t. v, 218, ed. Basil.) The Arabians
also show a good practical acquaintance with this substance. Thus, for
example, Avicenna praises it strongly in affections of the chest attended
with difficulty of breathing, and more especially in cases of dropsy.
He recommends it also in the form of a clyster for the cure of diseases
of the joints and sciatica, and speaks of a plaster of it for the gout.
He directs a pill to be prepared from it with double the quantity of
salt. He states correctly that it occasions evacuations of phlegm and
blood; that it is diuretic, and emmenagogue, and kills the child in a
suppository. (ii, 2, 177.) Mesue also writes of the wild cucumber and
elaterium with great precision, recommending the latter internally as
an emetic, a phlegmagogue, and a hydragogue, more especially in dropsy.
He also recommends it in jaundice, and _engorgement_ of the liver
and spleen; and states that it is most beneficial in sciatica when
administered in a clyster or applied as a plaster. He speaks highly of
the efficacy of the roots of the wild cucumber when applied to the head,
in a cataplasm for hemicrania, and as an errhine in the same complaint.
(De Simpl. ix.) Serapion also, in treating of the wild cucumber, gives
interesting extracts, both from Greek and Arabian authorities, respecting
the medicinal powers of elaterium. (De Simpl. 204.) Ebn Baithar gives a
most ample account of it. (ii, 276.)


Ἐλάτη,

Abies, _the Fir_; this tree is calefacient and desiccative, like the
black poplar. Its resin will be treated of among the resins.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Pinus Abies_, L. The other
authorities in general do not treat of it, except under the resinæ. It
does not otherwise occur in Dioscorides, Galen, Serapion, or Avicenna.


Ἐλατίνη,

Elatine, _the Toadflax_; this herb is like the Helxine, and is moderately
refrigerant and astringent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That the Fluellin or Female Speedwell (_Linaria Elatine_)
is the elatine of the ancients has been long known and almost generally
admitted. See Parkinson, Gerard, Rutty, &c. Dioscorides recommends the
leaves with flour for inflammations and running of the eyes, and for
dysentery. Pliny, evidently translating Dioscorides, says of the elatine,
“eadem cum line semine cocta sorbitionis usu dysenteria liberat.” (H. N.
xxvii, 50.) It would appear that it had been omitted by the Arabians. It
held a place in our Dispensatory with its ancient character down to a
late period. See Parkinson, Gerard, Quincy, Rutty, and Hill.


Ἐλαφόβοσκος,

Pabulum cervi (_Parsnip?_), is of heating and drying powers in the second
degree, and consists of subtile particles.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our older herbalists and commentators are pretty well agreed
in holding it to be the garden parsnip (_Pastinaca sativa_.) Dioscorides
pronounces it to be alexipharmic, and Aëtius does the same. The other
authorities treat very briefly of it. Avicenna calls the _Pastinaca_
aphrodisiacal, and this reputation it maintained down to modern times.
See Quincy.


Ἐλελίσφακος,

Salvia, _Sage_, is decidedly calefacient and subastringent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The sage (_Salvia officinalis_) has held a place in the
Materia Medica from the earliest ages down to our times. Dioscorides
calls it diuretic, emmenagogue, alexipharmic, and vulnerary. The other
Greek authorities, like our author, speak more moderately in its praise.
The Arabians who treat of it follow Dioscorides. See Serapion (De Simpl.
153.) In modern times it was at one period held in much esteem. See
Quincy. It is retained in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia (p. 142.)


Ἑλένιον,

Inula, _Elecampane_ (?); it is calefacient and desiccative with some
recrementitious humidity. When mixed with linctuses it promotes
expectoration, and it acts as a rubefacient to the parts it is applied to.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. All the other authorities give the elecampane (_Inula
Helenium_) much the same characters as our author. Dioscorides says the
root is calefacient, and proves diuretic and emmenagogue; that in a
linctus, with honey, it is useful in coughs, orthopnœa, and the like;
and, further, that it is carminative and alexipharmic. The leaves he
recommends in a cataplasm with wine for ischiatic disease, and in powder
for hæmoptysis. (i, 27, 28.) Galen’s character of it mainly agrees
with that of Dioscorides, that is to say, he recommends elecampane,
internally, in chest complaints, and externally as a rubefacient in
sciatica, hemicrania, and a disposition of the joints to dislocation. The
Arabians give it all the characters ascribed to it by the Greeks, namely,
of being diuretic, emmenagogue, expectorant, carminative, alexipharmic,
and rubefacient externally; and, further, hold of themselves that it is
cordial. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 235), and Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 237.)
Serapion gives us the following extract from Hunain’s ‘Translation of
Hippocrates’ (Hunain ex verbo Hippocratis): “Elecampane drives away anger
and sorrow, strengthens the mouth of the stomach, clears the chest,
expels the superfluities in the veins by the menses and urine, and more
especially a wine made from it.” (De Simpl. 138.) In fact, as we ought
perhaps to have mentioned, the helenium is a Hippocratic herb. (Nat.
Mul. 572, ed. Foës.) It was also well known to Celsus (v, 11 et alibi.)
The elecampane still retains its place in our Dispensatory and also in
the modern Greek Pharmacopœia (p. 76.) The other species described by
Dioscorides as the Egyptian elecampane, and which he recommends solely
as being alexipharmic, is held by Sprengel to be the _Teucrium Marum_.
Parkinson, however, supported by high authority, seems to make out a
strong case for the _Cistus Helianthemum_, or rock rose (p. 655.) Old
Gerard, on the other hand, adopts the opinion of those commentators who
referred it to the _Marum_. (p. 67.) The _Teucrium Marum_ also holds a
place in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Ἐλεοσέλινον,

Apium palustre, _Marsh Parsley_; being formed in wet places, it has the
same properties as the cultivated parsley, and is larger than it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The smallage (_Apium graveolens_) is briefly treated of by
the other authorities. We need scarcely say that it is still retained in
our Dispensatory. See Quincy.


Ἐλέφας,

Elephas, _the Elephant_; the parings from its hoof, when applied in a
cataplasm, cure whitlow; and those of the bones and teeth of it, being of
a drying and detergent nature, are mixed with similar medicines.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides in like manner recommends a cataplasm prepared
with the shavings from the _elephant’s_ hoofs in cases of paronychia.
Most of the other authorities would appear not to have treated of it.
Ivory shavings were retained in the Dispensatory until late years. See
Quincy.


Ἑλκυσματα τοῦ ἀργύρου,

Recrementum argenti, _the Dross of Silver_, has the same powers as the
molybdæna, for it is astringent and epispastic, hence it is mixed with
the plasters called Fusca and Epulotic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. What the _Scoriæ argenti_ are will be readily understood
from the following description of the process of extracting silver from
the ores of it: “These ores are extremely hard, and also mixed with
bituminous, sulphureous, arsenical, or vitriolic substances, which carry
off with them a considerable part of the silver, or burn it to _scoriæ_
along with themselves.” Geoffroy, &c. (p. 272, Engl. ed.) Our author
copies almost verbatim from Dioscorides, and the other Greek authorities
supply nothing additional under this head. Aëtius treats of the _scoriæ_
in general terms, as we shall see in the proper place, and merely says
of the _Scoriæ argenti_ that they are possessed of desiccative powers.
Of the Arabians, Avicenna, in treating of this article, borrows every
word from the Greeks. (ii, 2, 693.) Serapion quotes an Arabian authority,
Adamasti, to the effect that the scoria argenti is of use in cardiac
disease (c. 415.) Rhases, after quoting from Galen, Dioscorides, and
Paulus, gives the opinions of two Arabian authorities, Damas (?) and
Chuz, the former to the effect that it is useful in palpitation of the
heart and fetor of the mouth, and the other, that it cures scabies and
pruritus. (Cont. l. ult. i, 74.)


Ἐλλέβορος,

Helleborus, _Hellebore_; both kinds are calefacient and desiccative in
the third degree. It (the white) is also acrid and detergent; and hence
it agrees with leprous affections of the skin. The black, when introduced
into fistulæ, makes the callus cast off in three days.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Those who wish to see the general literature of this
interesting article may find our opinions briefly stated under the
proper head in the Appendix to Dunbar’s ‘Lexicon.’ In this place it
will be sufficient to mention that we have come to the conclusion that
the Helleborus albus of the ancients was identical with our _Veratrum
album_. Hippocrates makes mention of both species; when he simply uses
the term helleborus, he means the white, as in Aphor. v, 1, and iv, 15,
16. He also recommends the _niger_ as well as the _albus_ in melancholy
and quartans (Epist. 1288, ed. Foës.) Aretæus, at the conclusion of his
work, as it has come down to us, pronounces a strong eulogy on hellebore,
which he calls the great remedy in cases of elephantiasis. Dioscorides
recommends it as an emetic, emmenagogue, and sternutatory. (iv, 148-9.)
Mesue and Serapion mention it as an emetic, but concur with Hippocrates
in stating that it sometimes induces convulsions if administered
unguardedly. Haly Abbas gives exactly the same account of it. Averrhoes
mentions that in his time the _Lapis lazuli_ was used as a purgative in
place of hellebore. (v, 42.) Rhases concurs with the Greek authorities
in praising its effects for the cure of epilepsy, melancholy, arthritis,
and mania. Macer Floridus praises it in the cure of epilepsy, mania,
quartans, &c. We would now beg to be allowed to depart from our general
rule, and to quote some modern opinions in illustration of the ancient
on this important subject,—the more important from hellebore forming, as
is supposed, one of the ingredients in the celebrated patent medicine
_eau médicinale_. Conrad Gesner, an upright and learned physician, as
Bergius calls him, had great confidence in the white hellebore, which
he took himself, and administered freely to his patients with great
success. He says of it, “recreat et roborat, et hilariorem facit, et
acuit ingenium, quod in me et aliis sæpissime expertus scribo. Ego, si
vixero, in ellebori historiâ multa proferam quæ medici admirentur.” The
following is his formula for preparing it: ℞ Hell. alb. dr. ij, vini
cretici oz. vj, stent in maceratione, per mensem, additis, si placet,
aromatibus. Of this preparation, from 6 to 9 scr. were given according
to circumstances. Baglivi calls hellebore the “Hercules remediorum,
pluriumque domitor incurabilium morborum.” Platearius, treating of
hellebore, says that the ancients used it as a purge, in like manner
as scammony is now used, for that men’s bodies, in former times, were
stronger than now; such a medicine would require to be given with great
caution. He says of it, that it purges phlegm and black bile. The
white, he adds, is a more violent medicine than the black. (De Simplici
Medicina.) For a great many years past, with the exception of the partial
administration of the _eau médicinale_ in cases of gout, the internal
use of the veratrum may be said to have been quite lost in the practice
of medicine, and that, not only in this country, but also in the land
of Hippocrates and Dioscorides. In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia it is
directed to be kept as a poison. (p. 76.) Mesue, Serapion, and many of
the authorities recommend the black hellebore in melancholy. That it was
either the _Helleborus niger_, or the species _orientalis_, Tournefort,
and not the _Veratrum album_ which was commonly administered in Anticyra,
in cases of mania and melancholy, is clearly proved from Dioscorides (iv,
149.) He further states of it that, applied _per vaginam_, it procures
menstruation, and kills the fœtus; he recommends it for the cure of
scabies, alphos, lichen, and leprosy; he also speaks favorably of it as
an external application to fistulæ, dropsies, toothache, and diseases
of the ears. Galen recommends both species equally in nearly the same
class of complaints. Notwithstanding the high authority of Pereira, who
maintains the contrary, we do not see the least reason to doubt that
the _black hellebore_ of the ancients was our _Helleborus niger_, or
Christmas rose. See Gerard (Paradisus, p. 386) and Parkinson (p. 211.)
Without doubt it was introduced into this country by the Romans for
their _H. niger_. The _H. officinalis_, Salisb., which Dr. Sibthorp
brings forward in its place, is a distinct species. See Alston’s Lectures
(42); also the Greek Pharmacopœia, Athens, 1837, (p. 77.)


Ἐλίχρυσον,

Elichrysum, _Shrubby Everlasting_ or _Eternal Flower_ (called also
Chrysanthemon and Amarantum), is a plant used for garlands, having
capillary leaves of a golden appearance. When drunk with wine it is
suitable for dysuria, the bites of reptiles, ischiatic disease, and
fractures. It also promotes menstruation, and dissolves coagula when
drunk with wine and honey, and relieves catarrhs.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Linnæus makes the ancient Helichrysum identical with his
_Gnaphalium_. (Gener. Plant. 946.) Accordingly Sprengel, in his R. H. H.,
refers it, with Cordus and Sibthorp, to the _Gnaphalium Stæchas_. But in
his edition of Dioscorides he rather inclines to the _Tanacetum annuum_.
Dr. Hill says of the tansy: “It has been greatly celebrated as an
uterine, a vulnerary, and a diuretic. It is recommended in suppressions
of the menses, and in cases of the gravel, and other nephritic
complaints.” This agrees so well with the characters of the elechrysus as
given by Dioscorides and Paulus, that we are inclined to identify this
article with the _Tanacetum annuum_. It is proper to admit, however, that
the virtues which Dioscorides ascribes to the elechrysus are ascribed by
old Gerard to the cudweed. It is one of those articles in the ancient
Materia Medica which can never be satisfactorily determined. See further,
Parkinson (p. 695) and Lewis’s Dispensatory (i, 411.)


Ἑλξίνη,

Helxine, or Parietaria, _Pellitory of the Wall_ (called also Perdicium,
Parthenium, Sideritis, and Heraclea); its powers are detergent and
slightly astringent, with a coldish humidity. The Helxine, called also
Cissampelos, is possessed of discutient powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This is evidently the second species of Dioscorides (iv,
86), who represents the leaves as being cooling and astringent, and
consequently proving a suitable cataplasm in cases of erysipelas,
burning, and other inflammations, and as proving useful in chronic
coughs, inflammations of the tonsils, and so forth. That this plant
is the pellitory of the wall (_Parietaria officinalis_) has been long
pretty generally acknowledged. See Parkinson, Gerard, and Sprengel.
Galen ascribes the same medicinal virtues to it as Dioscorides; and
Aëtius and Oribasius treat of it in nearly the same terms. It is the
muralis of Celsus, who recommends the juice of it, added to ceruse, as
an application to the gout. (iv, 24.) It may be proper to mention that
Dioscorides (l. c.), Pliny (H. N. xxii, 19), and Apuleius (81), also
recommend it as an application in cases of gout. The Arabians give the
pellitory exactly the same characters as the Greeks do. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 335) and Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 536.) The Arabians call it herba
vitri, because glass vessels were cleaned with it. It is now excluded
from the Dispensatory, but held a place in it down to a late date. See
Quincy, Hill, and Rutty. That the former species of helxine described
by Dioscorides was a species of _Convolvulus_ has long been known. See
Matthiolus and Parkinson. Dodonæus makes it the _niger_, and Sprengel
the _arvensis_. Dioscorides briefly states of its medicinal virtues,
that it is laxative. (iv, 39.) It is not treated of, as far as we have
discovered, by Galen, Aëtius, or Oribasius. The Arabians treat of it as a
species of _Volubilis_, by the name of _acfin_. See Serapion (De Simpl.
41); Mesue (De Simpl. 24.) Both agree with Dioscorides in making it to be
laxative. See further APP.


Ἔλυμος ἤ Μελίνη,

Panicum, _Panic_, is, like millet, desiccative and refrigerant in its
powers when applied externally. It also dries up alvine fluxes.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Panic, as Miller remarks, is a plant of the millet kind.
It is the _Panicum Italicum_. It is more an article of food than of
medicine. We have treated of it accordingly in the part of this work
devoted to Dietetics. See Vol. I, 124.


Ἔμπετρον ἤ Πρασσοδὲς,

Empetron, _Black-berried Heath_, is a medicine which purges phlegm and
bile. It is also saltish and therefore, detergent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is not well determined whether it be a species of
_Crithmum_, _Herniaria_, or _Salsola_. Dioscorides makes it to be a
purger of phlegm, bile, and water; and all the other authorities, both
Greek and Arabian, give it the same characters in the main. It does not
appear that the Arabians have noticed it; neither do we find it in the
works of Hippocrates or Celsus. In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia it is
set down as being the _Pimpinella Saxifraga_.


Ἐπίθυμον,

Epithymum (vel Cuscuta minor?) _Dodder of Thyme_, is desiccant and
calefacient in the third degree, being more drastic than thyme.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides says of the _Cuscuta Epithymus_, or lesser dodder
of thyme, that it purges phlegm and black bile, and agrees particularly
with melancholic and flatulent cases. (iv, 176.) Aëtius, likewise, calls
it a melanogogue medicine. Galen and Oribasius give exactly the same
character of it as our author. Serapion gives a most graphic description
of this singular parasitic plant, in the present instance quoting solely
from Arabian authorities. They agree in general that it is deobstruent,
cathartic, and emmenagogue, and join in recommending it particularly in
jaundice, obstructions of the liver and spleen, and in the fevers of
children. (De Simpl. 39.) Mesue, also, gives nearly the same characters
of it; he mentions of it that it is a weak and slow purge, unless taken
in a large dose, and, therefore, he recommends it to be given with
Indian myrobalans, black hellebore, mulse, salts, or the like. (16.)
See also Avicenna (ii, 2, 226) and Rhases (Cont. 270.) It held a place
in our Dispensatory, with the character of being a cleanser, down to a
late period. See Rutty (Materia Medica, p. 80.); Quincy (Complete Engl.
Dispens. p. 117.)


Ἐπιμήδιον,

Epimedium, _Barren Wort_; its powers are moderately refrigerant, with a
watery humidity. When applied in the form of a cataplasm it preserves
the breasts in a right state. It is also said to prevent conception when
taken in a draught.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author borrows his description of the Epimedium Alpinum,
or Barren Wort, from Dioscorides; and none of the others supply any
additional information respecting it.


Ἐπιμηλὶς,

Epimelis, _Crab-tree_, called also Unedo by the Italian husbandmen. It
is a sort of wild apple, the fruit of which, being sour, is bad for the
stomach, and occasions headache.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears, from Dioscorides (i, 170), that it is a species
of Medlar. Probably, then, it was the _Mespilus Germanica_. Dioscorides,
Galen, and all the other authorities that treat of it give it the same
character as our author. As a medicine, it has the same characters as the
other Medlars.


Ἐπιπακτὶς,

Epipactis (called also Helleborine, or _Bastard Hellebore_), is drunk as
an antidote for deadly poisons, and for diseases of the liver.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The older herbalists, supported by the authority of
Anguillara, incline to refer this article to the genus _Herniaria_, or
Rupture Wort. The epipactis, it would seem, is still in great repute
throughout Greece, as being alexipharmic, and curing complaints of the
liver. Our author and all the others who notice it take its medicinal
characters from Dioscorides. (iv, 107.) As far as we have been able
to discover, it is not noticed by Hippocrates, Celsus, nor any of the
Arabians.


Ἐρέβίνθος,

Cicer, _Vetch_ or _Chick-pea_, a common kind of pulse; is flatulent,
nutritious, a proper medicine for the bowels, diuretic, engenders milk
and semen, and proves emmenagogue. The kind called Arietinum is more
diuretic than the others. A decoction of them, more especially the black
sort, breaks down stones in the kidneys. The species called Ervinum, is
hotter than the others, and bitterish. The wild are in every respect
stronger than the cultivated.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It comprehends several species of the Cicer. The κριὸς is
undoubtedly the _Cicer arietanum_. The two other species cannot be
so readily determined. Probably they are but varieties produced by
cultivation. We have treated of them among the articles of food, in the
79th section of the First Book. As a medicine, Dioscorides recommends
them especially in a cataplasm for inflammations of the testicles,
scabies, achor, lichen, cancerous and ill-conditioned ulcers. All kinds
of vetches, he says, are diuretic, and prove useful when given with
rosemary, for jaundice and dropsy. (ii, 126.) Galen gives the chiches the
same character, and further holds them to be lithontriptic. (De Simpl.
v.) Aëtius follows him closely. (i.) The Arabians in addition say that
chiches are anthelminthic, diuretic, and purgative, and that they are
useful in arthritic diseases. See Serapion (80); Avicenna (ii, 2, 128);
and Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 209.) Avicenna, in particular, gives a long
list of their medicinal virtues. In addition to those already stated, he
joins Hippocrates in holding chiches to be aphrodisiacal; and hence he
says procreating animals, such as camels, are fed with them. He joins
the others in holding them to be deobstruent, lithontriptic, cathartic,
and diuretic. Chiches long held a place in our Dispensatory with the
characters given to them by Dioscorides and Avicenna. See Quincy (111)
and Rutty (122.) Three sorts were used in modern as in ancient times,
namely, the white, the red, and the black, but, as Quincy remarks, their
medicinal virtues are all pretty much the same.


Ἔρια,

Lana, _Wool_; that which is unscoured is useful for embrocations, for the
Œsypum is digestive, like butter. That which is scoured is simply the
vehicle for other applications. That which is burnt has acrid, hot, and
desiccative powers, with some tenuity of parts so as to melt down the
flaccid flesh of ulcers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides, Galen, Serapion, and the other authorities give
nearly the same account of the medicinal properties of wool.


Ἐρίκη,

Erica, _Heath_, is possessed of discutient powers without pungency. Its
flower and leaves are principally to be used.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sprengel and Schneider agree that it is the _Erica arborea_,
but the description of it given by Dioscorides, namely, that “it is like
the tamarisk but much smaller,” would rather seem to apply to one of the
lesser species. Dioscorides commends it as an application to the bites of
reptiles. (i, 116.) Our author copies from Galen. The Arabians, with the
exception of Ebn Baithar, would appear not to have treated of it, and it
has not held a place in our Dispensatory for a long time past. The old
herbalists, copying from the ancient authorities, ascribe to the heath
the virtues which Dioscorides and Galen held it to be possessed of.


Ἔρινος,

Erinos, _Water-basil_, is an aquatic herb, two drachms of the fruit of
which with four drachms of honey, when rubbed in stops defluxions of the
eyes. Its juice is also a remedy for earache.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That it is a species of _Campanula_ has been long agreed
upon. Columna held it to be the _C. Rapunculus_ or _Rampions_, but
Sprengel names it _C. Erinus_. It is the _echinos_ of Galen, as is
obvious from the similarity of the descriptions of the two articles.
Few of the other authorities notice it. Our author merely abridges
Dioscorides (iv, 29.) The rapunculus or rampion is still cultivated as a
salad. See Loudon (Encycl. of Garden. 734.)


Ἑρμοδάκτυλος,

Hermodactylus, _Hermodactyl_; the root of it is possessed of purgative
properties, and also the decoction. It is given for affections of the
joints in rheumatism, but it is bad for the stomach.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We cannot afford room here to discuss fully the much agitated
question respecting the ancient hermodactylus, and beg to refer to what
we have said on the subject in the Appendix to Dunbar’s Lexicon. See
also particularly the commentators on Mesue and Dioscorides. It is to
be remarked that our author has entirely omitted to notice the Κολχικὸν
of Dioscorides by name, and that the only article which he has in place
of it is the Ἑρμ. This is a presumptive proof of the identity of these
two medicines. Serapion moreover, in his chapter on Hermodactylus, gives
the words of our author in this place along with Dioscorides’s account
of the colchicum. Accordingly, Bergius, Tournefort, Humelbergius, and
Geoffroy are decidedly of opinion that they were identical. Prosper
Alpinus, in like manner, says of it “hermodactylus qui est radix colchici
Græcorum.” (De Med. Meth. iii, 9.) See also Hill’s Mat. Med. On this
side of the question we further beg to quote the authority of Dr. Paris:
“The active ingredient of the _Eau médicinale_ has been discovered to
be the _Colchicum Autumnale_ or meadow-saffron; upon investigating the
properties of this medicine, it was observed that similar effects in the
cure of the gout were ascribed to a certain plant called hermodactylus
by Oribasius and Aëtius (Paulus _Æg._?), but more particularly by
Alexander of Tralles, a physician of Asia Minor, in the fourth century;
an inquiry was accordingly instituted after this unknown plant, and upon
procuring a specimen of it from Constantinople it was actually found to
be a species of colchicum.” (Pharmacologia, 58.) We have already given
a full account of the administration of hermodactylus in gout. (Book
III, 78.) Alexander of Tralles, as far as we know, is the earliest
authority that treats of the hermodactylus by name, and he recommends
it for the cure of arthritic diseases. (xi.) Our author is the only
one of the Greek writers who admits it into the Materia Medica. The
Arabians treat of it fully, but some of them confusedly, by mixing up the
ancient descriptions of the _ephemeron_ and _colchicum_ with it. Thus
Serapion, after quoting, as already stated, Dioscorides’s account of
the _colchicum_, gives the opinions of various Arabian authorities, all
of whom concur in representing it to be a calefacient herb, and most of
them in recommending it in diseases of the joints. (De Simpl. 194.) Mesue
recommends it as a phlegmagogue in diseases of the joints, when given
internally with cumin, ginger, pepper, myrobalans, &c.; and externally in
the form of a cataplasm. He also states it to be a good application to
foul ulcers. (De Simpl. vii.) Avicenna quotes no Greek authority in his
chapter on Hermodactylus but Paulus, from which it may be inferred that
he did not identify it with the colchicum of Dioscorides, like Serapion.
He recommends it especially in gout, both internally and in the form of
plaster. (ii, 2, 343.) Rhases refers to no other Greek authorities on
this head except Paulus and Alexander, but quotes the opinions of several
Arabians, all of whom agree in recommending hermodactylus in gout and
foul ulcers. An anonymous authority makes it to be aphrodisiac. (Cont.
l. ult. 362.) See also Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 43.) It is particularly to
be remarked that the Arabian authorities all notice three varieties of
the hermodactyl root, the white, the red, and the black; and restrict the
medicinal use of the H. to the first of these, and condemn the two others
as being deleterious. Nicholaus Myrepsus (i, 1) and Actuarius (De Compos.
Med. i), however, prescribe also the red, which the learned Fuchsius, in
his annotations on the former, sets down as being the _behen rubrum_.
We know not what are his grounds for this opinion. It is the white
variety which has been always used medicinally. See Boerhaave, Quincy,
and Pereira. We would beg particularly to refer our readers who wish to
obtain the modern literature of this subject, to the Materia Medica of
Pereira (p. 949.)


Ἕρπυλλος,

Serpyllum, _Wild Thyme_, is heating, so as to promote the urinary and
menstrual discharge.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. All agree that the _Thymus Serpyllum_ is possessed of
diuretic and emmenagogue powers. Dioscorides recommends it in tormina,
convulsions, &c., and as an alexipharmic. The others, like our author,
treat more briefly of it in general terms. Serapion and Avicenna borrow
freely from Dioscorides. The _Serpyllum_ held a place in our Dispensatory
with its ancient characters down to a very recent date. See Quincy and
Rutty (Mat. Med.) The latter, however, questions its identity with the
ancient _Serpyllum_.


Ἐρυθρόδανον,

Erythrodanum, _Madder_, is the Rubia Tinctorum. Being sour and bitter, it
purges the spleen, liver, and kidneys, so as to occasion a discharge of
bloody urine. It acts as an emmenagogue, and cleanses the sordes of the
skin.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There seems scarcely any reason to hesitate in admitting
it to be the _Rubia Tinctorum_, madder and dyer’s madder. Dioscorides
holds it to be powerfully diuretic, insomuch as sometimes to occasion
a discharge of blood in the urine. He recommends it in sciatica and
paralysis; as an alexipharmic medicine, and as producing abortion,
menstruation, and the lochial discharge when applied as a pessary. He
adds, that it cures alphos (mild leprosy) in a cataplasm with vinegar.
(iii, 150.) Our author borrows from Galen, who sets it down as being
deobstruent, diuretic, and emmenagogue. Aëtius uses nearly the same words
as our author in treating of it. All the Arabians follow the Greeks in
giving madder the character of being diuretic and deobstruent when given
internally, and emmenagogue and alexipharmic when applied externally.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 573), Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 590.) The Arabian
writers mention that a bread was sometimes prepared from madder in times
of famine. (Casiri, Bibl. Arab. Hisp., 336.) It is still sometimes given
as an emmenagogue, notwithstanding that Dodonæus questioned the truth
of Dioscorides’s opinion as to its possessing the powers of occasioning
bloody urine and a discharge of the menses. (De Purgant. 97.) Our old
herbalists, Parkinson and Gerard, dispute whether Dioscorides or Dodonæus
is to be followed in this instance. The _Rubia Tinctorum_ holds a place
in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Ἐρύσιμον,

Erysimum, _Hedge-mustard_; its seed is fiery and heating, equally as
cresses. Wherefore, when boiled in leaven and added to linctuses, it
purges the chest. It also softens indurations, and in the form of a
cataplasm is of use for latent cancers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We may pretty confidently set it down as the _Erysimum
officinale_, Hedge-mustard. Our author abridges Galen, who, in the
present case, borrows almost everything from Dioscorides. Aëtius copies
from Galen even more closely than our author. The Arabians, in like
manner, borrow everything from Dioscorides and Galen under this head.
See in particular Serapion (De Simpl. 357.) It is worthy of remark that
Dr. Hill gives the same medicinal character to the hedge-mustard which
Dioscorides gives to the _Erysimon_, which it will be admitted forms a
strong presumption of their identity; at all events, they were evidently
congeners, a fact which is not disputed by those who question their
identity. See Rutty (Mat. Med.) and Sprengel (ad Dioscor.)


Εὔζωμον,

Eruca, _Rocket_, being also like it in temperament, is flatulent. It
therefore produces venereal incitement, and the seed of it is diuretic.
The wild is stronger than the cultivated.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt that it is the _Brassica Eruca_,
L. Dioscorides agrees with our author in setting it down as being
aphrodisiacal and diuretic, and Aëtius does the same. The latter proposes
to correct its tendency to induce headache by giving it with lettuce.
(ii, 169.) Celsus ranks the “eruca” among the things “quæ contrahere
semen videntur.” (iv, 21.) The Arabians agreed with the Greeks as to its
aphrodisiacal properties. (Casiri, Bibl. Arab. Hisp. i, 336.) See also
Serapion (224), Avicenna (ii, 2, 227.) Even down to a late date rocket
retained this character. See Rutty (183), and Quincy (109.) It is still
cultivated in gardens. See Loudon (Encycl. &c. 744.)


Ἐυπατώριον,

Eupatorium, _Hemp-agrimony_, consists of subtile particles, and is
possessed of incisive powers without manifest heat. Hence it clears away
obstructions of the liver, and has also some astringency.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That the _Eupatorium_ of Dioscorides and the other Greek
authorities is the _Agrimonia Eupatorium_, will hardly be questioned now
by any competent judge who has investigated the question. Dioscorides
recommends its leaves in ill-conditioned ulcers, and its seed and stalk
in wine, for dysentery and the stings of reptiles. (iv, 41.) Galen makes
it to be deobstruent and tonic. Serapion copies from Dioscorides and
Galen, and merely adds, in the end, from Rhases, that southernwood is
more suitable in complaints of the liver; and from Mesue, that it is good
in protracted fevers. (De Simpl. 77.) Avicenna’s chapter on Eupatorium
is entirely compiled from Dioscorides, Galen, and Serapion, without the
slightest change or addition. (ii, 2, 239.) No one who has examined into
the matter can therefore doubt that the Eu. of these two Arabians, was
the same as that of the Greeks. The Eupatorium of Mesue, however, has
been generally held to be a very different plant, namely, the _Eupatorium
Cannabinum_, according to some, from his comparing the leaves to
those of the lesser centaury. It is to be borne in mind, however, that
the Latin translations of the Arabians are not to be trusted in small
matters, and therefore this comparison may be all a mistake. And that the
Eu. of Mesue was the same as that of the others, seems highly probable
from his recommending it in the same complaints, namely, in obstructions
of the liver, and chronic fevers. (De Simpl. 15.) Such is the conclusion
to which an impartial examination of the question has brought us. It is
but fair to mention, however, that all the old herbalists and writers on
the Mat. Med. down to Rutty and Quincy, are against us, and hold that the
Eupatorium of Mesue was different from that of the Greeks. See Matthiolus
(in Dioscor.); Parkinson (Theatre of Plants); and the commentators on
Mesue.


Ἐυφόρβιον,

Euphorbium, is possessed of caustic powers, and consists of subtile
particles like the other juices.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. A gum-resin produced from some species of _Euphorbia_
still holds its place in the Materia Medica. Alston remarks, “neither
Dioscorides nor Galen take any notice of the cathartic quality of the
Euphorbium, but Pliny does, as do also Aëtius, Paulus, and the Arabians;
but all make it excessively acrid, upon account of which its internal use
is now generally condemned.” Mesue particularly commends it in diseases
of the joints. It was formerly supposed that Euphorbium is procured from
a species called the _E. antiquorum_, but it is now admitted that the
species is still undetermined. See Pereira (1127.) Probably, as stated in
the modern Greek Pharmacopœia, it is procured from several species of the
Euphorbia. (66.)


Ἐφήμερον,

Ephemerum (or Colchicum Autumnale?), not the poisonous species but
that which is called the Wild Iris. It is possessed of mixed powers,
repellent, and discutient.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See Ἑρμοδάκτυλος, and Book V (48.) The E., here said to be
the same as the wild iris, is the _Convallaria verticillata_. Dioscorides
recommends its root in toothache, and its leaves as possessing
discutient powers when applied to swellings and tumours. (iv, 75.) Galen
is at great pains to explain its _modus operandi_ agreeably to his theory
of the action of medicines.


Ἐχίδνα,

Vipera, _the Viper_; its flesh is decidedly hot and dry in temperament,
so that it cleanses the whole body by the skin. Wherefore many persons
affected with elephantiasis, by eating or drinking of it have been cured.
Those which live by the sea-side, or in other dry situations, rather
occasion thirst.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. As stated by us in the Fifth Book, the Echidna Asiatica of
Nicander is the _Coluber Ægyptius_, and the E. Europæa the _C. Berus_.
The ἔχις, probably is the _C. Amodytes_. Dioscorides recommends vipers,
having their head and tail cut off, and the entrails taken out, boiled
with oil, wine, a little salts and dill, for nervous affections and
scrofula. He gives no credit, however, to the vulgar belief of his time,
that living upon vipers prolonged life, or that they prevented lice from
forming on the body. He describes distinctly the process of preparing
salts from vipers, but says they have not the same efficacy as the flesh.
(ii, 18.) The Arabians display much more credulity than Dioscorides, in
describing the medicinal virtues of vipers, ascribing to them wonderful
powers, not only of preserving life, but even of restoring youth. See in
particular, Avicenna (ii, 2, 608), and Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 731.)
Galen gives a very lengthened disquisition on the medicinal virtues
of vipers. (De Simpl. xi.) Aëtius abridges the same. (ii, 160.) See
Oribasius (Med. Collect. xv, 2.) We shall have occasion, however, to
treat further of the medicinal properties of the viper when describing
the composition of the theriac; and, instead of collecting the sentiments
of the ancient authorities on this head, we shall in this place merely
subjoin the opinion of a modern author, who appears to have been familiar
with the use of it: “The powder of vipers is very much enlivened with the
volatile salt wherewith the vipers abound, which enables it to force its
virtues through the pores, though never so close shut, to the more remote
parts of the body. It is a singular medicine to cure scabs, itches, and
erysipelas, and particularly the leprosy. It restores plumpness of
body to persons wasted with long agues and tedious diseases. It is to
be taken fasting, in broths, wine, or any other cordial liquor, or else
incorporated with some syrup, or in some confection like a bolus.” (Moses
Charras.) In Scotland the adder (which is a variety of the _Coluber
Berus_) is a popular remedy for malignant diseases of the skin. It is
taken in the form of soup, as described by Dioscorides. The viper broth
is described in Quince’s Dispensatory (400) in nearly the same terms as
by Dioscorides, and recommended “as doing good service in leprous and
other obstinate cutaneous complaints.”


Ἐχίνος,

Echinus; the herb is austere, repellent, and desiccant. Of the Land
Echinus, or _Hedgehog_, the flesh when strongly dried is discutient
and desiccant; when taken in a draught, therefore, it is beneficial in
elephantiasis, cachexia, and many other complaints. Its skin, when burnt,
becomes more desiccant and discutient. It therefore cures alopecia when
rubbed in with liquid pitch. Of the Sea Echinus, the edible part is
diuretic, and agrees with the bowels. Its shell, when burnt, resembles
that of the land echinus.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The herb is not described by Dioscorides, Theophrastus, or
Pliny. It would appear to be the same as the _Erinus_, which see. The
Ἐ. χερσᾶιος is undoubtedly the _Hystrix Cristata_, and the Ἐ. θαλάττιος
the _Echinus Esculentus_. Dioscorides and Galen give the same account
of their medicinal properties as our author. Serapion, after giving the
description by Dioscorides and Galen, adds, from an Arabian authority,
that the flesh of the land echinus is beneficial in protracted fevers.
(De Simpl. 435.) Avicenna (ii, 2, 234,) treats of the two echini at
greater length than any other ancient author, recommending the flesh of
the land, in phthisis, dropsy, elephantia, scabies, scrofula, and other
complaints of a formidable nature. Upon the whole, however, his account
of it is mostly made up of extracts from Dioscorides and Galen. See in
like manner Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 273.) He recommends the land echinus
in the irretention of urine to which children are subject, adding that
when frequently administered, it brings on dysuria. He and Avicenna quote
Serapion as an authority for its use in protracted fevers. Both the
echini disappeared from our Dispensatory a considerable time ago.


Ἔχιον,

Echium, _Viper’s Bugloss_, (some call it also _Dorias_, and others
_Alcibiadium_,) is a prickly herb, which not only relieves those who have
been bitten by reptiles when drunk in wine, but, if taken beforehand, it
preserves them from being injured.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears to us quite clear that this article is the _Echium
vulgare_ or Viper’s Bugloss, which we have no doubt was introduced
into Britain with other medicinal herbs by the Romans, for it is never
found remote from cultivated places, and therefore we believe it not to
be truly indigenous. Some have taken it for the _Echium rubrum_, from
Dioscorides having described the flowers as being _purplish_, whereas,
purplish signifies a bright blue, and not red as is supposed. Parkinson
thus describes the colour of the flowers of the _Echium vulgare_:
“The flowers are of a purplish violet colour, in them that are fully
blown, but more reddish while they are in bud; but in some places of
a paler purple colour,” &c. (p. 413.) We, then, have no hesitation in
acknowledging it as the _Echium vulgare_. Our author borrows his account
of its medicinal powers from Dioscorides. (iv, 27.) The Arabians would
seem to confound it with the Anchusæ, to which it is closely allied. Our
old herbalists, in treating of the viper’s bugloss, follow Dioscorides;
but it has long ceased to hold a place in our Dispensatory. It still,
however, is known in the shops, where its root retains the character of
being aperient and slightly astringent. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p.
54.)


Ἕψημα ἢ σίραιον,

Defrutum, _Boiled Must_; it is moderately heating and digestive, and is
also emplastic and free from pungency.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Pliny gives the following account of it: “Siræum quod alii
hepsema, nostri sapam appellant, ingenii, non naturæ opus est, musto
usque ad tertiam partem mensuræ decocto: quod ubi factum ad dimidiam
est, defrutum vocamus.” (H. N. xiv, 11.) Harduin states that the Hepsema
is called _Rob_ or _Sapa semplex_. (l. c.) Moses Charras gives the
following directions for preparing it: “℞. Of the new juice of white
grapes perfectly ripe, lb. xxx; boil it over a gentle fire in an earthen
glazed vessel, or a copper vessel tinned within, until a third part of
the juice only remains. But if you desire a _defrutum_, boil it only to
the consumption of the third part.” (Roy. Phar. p. 70.) The following
prescription, taken from a still later writer, will further be useful
in illustrating the meaning of a term which often occurs in the course
of this work, but which has now fallen into disuse. “The Simple Rob
or Sapa. Take of juice newly expressed from generous and white grapes
any quantity, and boil it over a slow fire, until one pint of it only
remains out of three, or it becomes of a honey consistence.” Quincy’s
Dispensatory (432.) Few of the other authorities treat of this article at
all, and those that do, despatch their notice of it in few words. Thus,
for example, Avicenna says of rob, that it is expectorant, and hence it
is made an ingredient in the syrup of poppies; and that it is useful in
pain of the kidneys and bladder. (ii, 2, 570.)


Ζέια,

Far, _Spelt_, has powers like the kinds of wheat, holding an intermediate
place as to heating and cooling; it is also gently desiccative and
emplastic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This, as we have explained elsewhere (Vol. I, 123), is the
_Triticum Spelta_, to which our older herbalists give the names Greek
Wheat, Spelt Wheat, or Spelt Corn. That the _Zeia_ of the Greeks was
identical with the _Far_ of the Romans, is proved beyond all dispute from
a passage of Asclepiades preserved by Galen. (De Locis Affectis, ix.) The
term _spelta_ is derived from the latino-barbarous translations of the
Arabians. See Serapion (122), who quotes under this head the chapter of
Dioscorides on _tragus_, which was spelt deprived of its hull. The other
authorities say little of spelt as a medicine; but commend it highly as
an article of food. (See Vol. I, l. c.) Avicenna describes it by the name
of _harcoman_ (ii, 2, 323); and Rhases by that of _haratinam_ (Cont. l.
ult. i, 352.)


Ζιγγιβὲρ,

Zingiber, _Ginger_; its root is powerfully heating, but not on its first
application, as it contains some crude and thick juice, on which account
it readily becomes carious, but it preserves the heat.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt the _Amomum Zingiber_. Dioscorides after
describing the country of the ginger, and the characters of the best
kinds of it, states its medicinal powers to be heating, digestive, mildly
aperient of the bowels, and stomachic; and recommends it in nebulæ of
the cornea, and adds of it, that as an ingredient in antidotes and
otherwise it resembles pepper (ii, 189.) Galen writes very elaborately
in explanation of the action of ginger on the animal frame; and, in
accounting for the difference between it and pepper and other articles of
the same class practically, his conclusions regarding it are the same as
our author’s. Aëtius and Oribasius copy from him. Serapion, after quoting
the opinions of Dioscorides and Galen, gives a very sensible account of
the virtues of ginger from Mesue and another unknown authority. Mesue
says it is beneficial in obstructions of the liver, arising from coldness
and humidity; that it softens the belly, heats the stomach and the whole
body; promotes digestion; is alexipharmic and aphrodisiacal; removes
phlegm (water brash?) and is beneficial in obscurity of vision. The
unknown authority says it improves the memory, and removes the humidity
in the stomach, arising from the eating of fruit, such as melons and the
like (De Simpl. 336.) In the works of Mesue, now extant, ginger is not
treated of. Rhases gives very interesting extracts from Dioscorides,
Galen, and various Arabian authors. Of the latter, one says of ginger,
that it softens the belly, and another that it binds it. (Cont. l. ult.
i, 762.) Avicenna quotes Dioscorides as stating that it is aperient, and
Alcanzi as holding that it is astringent. He agrees with the latter, that
ginger binds the bowels, when their loose state arises from indigestion
and viscid humours. He agrees also with the other authorities, that it is
stomachic and aphrodisiac. (ii, 2, 735.)


Ζύθος,

Zythus, _Ale_, is of a compound nature; for it is acrid, as being formed
by a putrefaction (“fermentation?”), and cold, as being possessed of an
acid quality. It therefore produces bad chyle.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The plan of our present work prohibits us from entering
into an exposition of the general literature of this subject, but we
think this the less necessary as in another work, to which we have often
referred in this part of our Commentary, we have given an elaborate
disquisition on the ancient Ales, into which we have condensed all the
information which we could procure respecting them. We would also beg
leave to refer to Gruner’s learned annotations on Zozimus Panopolita (De
Zythorum Compositione); to Ludovicus Nonnius (De re Cibaria, iv, 15);
Eustathius (Comment. in Iliad. xiii, 640); and Athenæus (Deipnos. x, 67,
ed. Schweigh.) Our proper business now is to state the opinions of the
medical authorities with regard to their medicinal powers. Dioscorides
mentions two kinds of ale or beer, in his Mat. Med., both of them
prepared from barley, but does not state wherein the difference between
them consisted. The Zythus, he says, is diuretic, apt to affect the
kidneys and nerves; peculiarly calculated to prove prejudicial to the
membranes of the brain; is flatulent; engenders depraved humours, and
occasions elephantiasis. Of the Courmi, he also says, that it occasions
headache, forms bad humours, and is hurtful to the nerves; he adds,
that drinks of this nature are also formed from wheat, in Spain and
Britain (ii, 109, 110.) See further, Pliny (H. N. xxii, 82.) Aëtius,
Oribasius, and our author, copy almost verbatim from Galen. Rhases
treats of the Zythus, by the name of _foca_, first quoting the chapter
of Dioscorides on the Zythus, and then adding, upon the authority of
an Arabian writer, Bimasuy (Mesue the elder?), that ale prepared from
barley, cloves, and rue, is prejudicial to the head; but that prepared
from fine bread (similago?) mint, and parsley, forms good chyle, and
is good for the stomach (Cont. l. ult. i, 306.) Avicenna’s account of
Zythus, which he also describes by the name of _foca_, is entirely made
up of extracts from Dioscorides and Rhases. (ii, 2, 272.) Serapion, as
far as we can discover, does not treat of this article. A liquor is
treated of pretty copiously by Symeon Seth, under the head of _Fucas_,
which, as his editors remark, is probably a corruption of Posca. In his
account of it, he introduces a short sentence from Dioscorides’s chapter
on Zythus, to the effect that “ivory steeped in it becomes as ductile
as wax.” It was not, strictly speaking, an ale or beer, being merely
a mixture of vinegar and water, rendered more agreeable to the palate
by some aromatics. See Harduin ad Plinii (H. N. xix, 29.) Respecting
this beverage Seth states, as his own opinion, that it is wholesome,
especially when used by persons of a hot temperature of stomach; that it
quenches thirst; whets the appetite; increases the alvine and frequently
the renal discharge.


Ζύμη,

Fermentum, _Leaven_; it also is composed of opposite ingredients; for it
is possessed of a cold acidity and putrefactive (“fermentative?”) heat,
and moreover of salts and flour. It is, therefore, heating and discutient
in no ordinary degree.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. On the ancient modes of preparing Fermentum or Leaven,
see ‘Geopon.’ (ii, 31); and Pliny (H. N. xviii, 26.) The kind in most
common use was prepared from millet and must, or the fresh juice of the
grape. Our author’s description of its medicinal powers is taken from
Galen. Aëtius treats of it in nearly the same words. Dioscorides praises
the leaven of wheat as being heating and epispastic, and suiting with
complaints of the heels, phymata, and furunculi. (ii, 107.) Serapion
under this head gives two extracts from Dioscorides and Galen, followed
by one from Abenmesuai (the elder Mesue?), who recommends it in the
fevers of children for quenching thirst. (De Simpl. 29.) Rhases gives a
formula for a draught to be prepared from leaven, which he in like manner
praises as being wonderfully efficacious in the fevers of children.
(Cont. l. ult. i, 306.)


Ζωμὸς,

Jusculum, _Broth_, loosens the belly if drunk by itself or with wine,
when made from fresh fish; but particularly that which is simply prepared
from hakes, scorpion-fishes, rainbows, perches, and other tender fishes
which dwell among rocks, with water, oil, dill, and salts. In like
manner, also, the broth of the Crustacea, especially of the Tellinæ
(limpets), the Chamæ (cockles), and Conchylæ (oysters). The broth of an
old cock, boiled with salt to a great degree, is laxative; but that of a
hen, on the other hand, is astringent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The account here given of the broth of fishes is taken from
Dioscorides (ii, 35.) Galen directs the broth of fish to be prepared in
the following manner: first pour in plenty of water, then add of oil _q.
s._ with a little dill and leek; then, when the fish are half boiled,
sprinkle a little salt. (De Alim. Facult. iii); (Meth. Med. ix.) Apicius
in the tenth chapter of his work, gives fourteen different receipts for
preparing soups from fishes. Most of them contain wine, honey, vinegar,
and oil, with pepper, lovage, cumin, rue, &c., among the ingredients
which enter into their composition. On the fishes mentioned under this
head, see Book I (90.) The Arabians generally condense the substance of
Dioscorides’s two chapters on Garum and Jus into one, under the title
of _Muria_. See Serapion (184), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 486.) Serapion’s
Arabian authorities recommend it as a gentle purgative and phlegmagogue
in sciatica, both when given by the mouth and in clysters. One of them
says of it, that it makes the pustules of smallpox come out, when the
eruption is slow in taking place.


Ἡδύσμον,

Mentha, _Mint_, is hot, consists of subtile particles; its powers are
acrid in the third order, with some half-concocted fluids; it therefore
provokes to venery. It has, likewise, some bitterness, by which means
it kills intestinal worms; and by its sourness its restrains recent
discharges of blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We need have no hesitation in referring it with all the
best commentators to the _Mentha sativa_, L. Dioscorides says it has
calefacient, astringent, and desiccative powers; and hence, he adds,
it stops the discharge of blood when drunk with vinegar, and kills
the round worms. (iii, 36.) According to him, it stimulates the male
to venery, but prevents conception in the female when applied on a
pessary before coition. He further says of it, that it stops hiccup,
vomiting, and cholera, when taken in a draught along with the juice of
an acid pomegranate. He also recommends it, in the form of an external
application, for headache, complaints of the breast, and other cases.
Galen pronounces mint to be one of the most attenuate articles in the
Mat. Med. He agrees with Dioscorides that it is useful in hæmoptysis; and
that it is anthelminthic and aphrodisiac. The author of the Hippocratic
treatise ‘_De Diætâ_,’ while, like Dioscorides, he gives mint the
credit of promoting the urinary discharge and stopping vomiting, says,
that taken in great quantity it weakens the semen and stops erections.
Aristotle likewise holds the opinion that mint is anaphrodisiac. (Bibl.
ii, 20.) Aëtius, seemingly with the desire of reconciling these great
authorities, maintains that mint indeed generates much semen, but of a
feeble nature. (Tetr. iv, 4, 26.) Ludovicus Nonnius, by the way, also
attempts to account for the difference among the professional authorities
on this point. (De re Cib. i, 15.) See also Rutty, (Mat. Med. 323), and
Parkinson (35.) The Arabians in treating of it follow Dioscorides and
Galen closely, and add little or nothing of their own. They all agree
with Dioscorides, that it is aphrodisiac and stops vomiting. See in
particular Serapion (290), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 188.) We need scarcely
mention that this species of _Mentha_ is now rejected from our Mat. Med.,
but that three other species of it are still retained.


Ἡδύσαρον ἢ Πελέκινος,

Hedysarum, _French Honeysuckle_, is bitter and subastringent. It is
therefore stomachic, when taken in a liquid form, and clears away
visceral obstructions.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There has been great difference of opinion among the
commentators and herbalists respecting this herb; but we are inclined to
decide, with considerable confidence, that it was the Hatchet Vetch, or
_Coronilla securidaca_. Dioscorides says of it that it is stomachic and
alexipharmic, and that, in a pessary, it prevents conception. Our author
abridges Galen, and Aëtius does the same; and so likewise Oribasius. We
have been unable to find it in the Mat. Med. of the Arabians, with the
exception of Ebn Baithar, who merely copies from Dioscorides (i, 80.)


Ἡλιοτρόπιον,

Heliotropium, _Sunflower_; the large one (called also Scorpiurus) is
possessed of calefacient, desiccant, and detergent powers. Its decoction
when drunk brings away phlegm and bile. Its fruit in a cataplasm dries
myrmecia and such like cutaneous complaints. The small Sunflower also
removes these complaints and kills worms if drunk with the fruit along
with natron, hyssop, and cardamom.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides calls the great Sunflower (_Heliotropium
Europæum_) phlegmagogue and cholagogue, and says it is useful in the
bites of scorpions, both internally and externally. He adds, that it
was used as an amulet to produce sterility. He also recommends it in
intermittent fevers, and as a cataplasm and fomentation to various
tumours, sprains, &c. He adds, that it is emmenagogue, and procures
abortion when powdered and applied on a pessary. (iv, 190.) None of the
other Greek authorities, as far as we have been able to discover, have
treated of either of the heliotropes; and if the Arabians describe them,
we have not been able to discover under what name it is. The lesser
heliotrope is probably the _Croton tinctorius_.


Ἤλεκτρον,

Electrum, _Amber_; they say that it is the tears of the poplar, which are
discharged into the river Po, and get concreted into a golden-coloured
substance. This, being pulverized and drunk, stops defluxions of the
stomach and bowels and discharges of blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is well known that the ancient authors in general
represent amber as an exudation from the poplar tree, commonly found
on the banks of the Po. Some of them, however, such as Lucian (De
Electro), held that it is a bituminous substance. See also Theophrastus
(De Lapidibus, with the annotations of Hill.) Serapion says of it,
that it is formed in the sea as mushrooms are formed on land; and when
the sea is troubled it casts forth large stones, and with them are
cast out crusts of amber. He also gives an account, which is not very
intelligible in the Latin translation, of its being swallowed up by a
fish, from which, when killed, amber was procured. What is of a citrine
colour, he says, is good; but what is white, like an ostrich’s egg, is
bad. Upon the authority of Aben Mesuai (Mesue the elder?), he calls
it a hot and dry medicine, and says it strengthens the brain, all the
senses, and the heart, and is useful to old persons and men of a cold
temperament. (De Simpl. 196.) Avicenna’s account of it is mostly made
up from Serapion. Amber, he says, in my opinion, is an emanation from a
fountain in the sea. He also repeats the account from Serapion, of its
being procured from the belly of a fish which has swallowed it and dies.
He must allude to the ambergris which is procured from the sperm-whale.
He determines it to be hot in the second and dry in the first degree. He
recommends it in exactly the same cases as Serapion. He makes mention
of a species used for dyeing the hair black. (ii, 2, 62, and 364.)
Rhases merely gives its medicinal character, which is the same as that
quoted above from Serapion. (Cont. l. ult. 44.) But no ancient writer
has given so full and correct an account of amber as Symeon Seth. He
says it abounds in various places, and that there are fountains of it
as of pitch, bitumen, and the like; that the best kind is of a grayish
colour (grisea ambra?) and fat, which is sold in a certain city of India,
called Silachetum. The ambergris or ambra-grisea, is found in a city of
Arabia Felix, called Syachria. The worst kind, he says, is black, and
is collected from fishes that have swallowed amber at its fountains. It
has, he adds, calefacient and incisive powers, and therefore some add
it to stomachic remedies. It strengthens the head and heart; and when
smelled to in drinking accelerates intoxication, and still more so if
added to the wine. (De Alimentis, xiii.) Psellus says, it cures dysury
when appended as an amulet, removes fever, stops defluxions of the
stomach, and sharpens the sight. (De Lapidibus.) Having been led along in
the present instance by the ancient authorities who have given the most
correct description of amber, we omitted to mention at the commencement,
that Dioscorides describes the electrum under the head of populus, as
being said to be the tears of poplars which have dropped into the Po, and
become coagulated. He adds, it is of a fragrant smell when rubbed, and
of a golden colour; and when triturated and drunk, it stops defluxions
of the stomach and belly. (i, 110.) See also Pliny (H. N. xxxvii, 11),
who supposes amber an exudation from pines, and gives otherwise a very
authentic and interesting account of its origin. He makes mention of
amber being used as an amulet in diseases of children, a practice which,
like other superstitions of the like kind, has been transmitted to modern
times. We need scarcely remark that the ancient opinions regarding the
origin of amber, are now looked upon as being not far removed from the
truth. Amber, although now in a fossil state, is supposed to have been an
exudation from some tree of the genus Pinus. See Pereira (Mat. Med. 223);
and the Appendix to this section.


Ἡμεροκαλλὶς,

Hemerocallis, _Lily of the Valley_; its root has powers like those of the
lily, and, like it, is useful for burns.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This is undoubtedly a plant of the lily tribe; probably the
_Lilium bulbiferum_. Dioscorides, besides recommending it in burns,
like our author, says of it that when drunk and applied in a pessary
of wool it produces discharges of water and blood; and that its leaves
form an excellent application to the inflammations of the breasts after
parturition, and to those of the eyes. Our author follows Galen. Serapion
treats of it under the head of Lilium. (189.)


Ἡμιονίτις,

Hemionitis, _Moon Fern_, is possessed at the same time of astringency and
bitterness. It therefore relieves affections of the spleen when taken
with vinegar.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Galen calls it also by the names of _Scolopendrium_ and
_Asplenium_. (ii, 292, ed. Basil.) Dioscorides describes it so as to
leave no doubt of its being a cryptogamous plant. It is a species of the
_Scolopendrium_. The other authorities praise it in enlarged spleen.


Ἧπαρ,

Hepar, _the Liver_; if that of a mad dog be roasted and eaten, it is said
to relieve those who have been bitten by him. The sanies of a boiled
goat’s liver relieves nyctalopia when injected into the eye. They also
direct the vapour of it when boiling to be received into the eyes, and
also to be eaten. They say that it rests epileptics if eaten, and that
the liver of the buck-goat does the same. The liver of a lizard when
put into carious teeth relieves the pain. That of the wolf is added to
the hepatic medicine prepared from eupatorium. The liver of an ass when
roasted is of use to epileptics when eaten fasting. That of a bear when
dried in its fresh state and triturated with wine is drunk for the
bites of reptiles. The liver of the cormorant, when dried and taken in a
draught, makes calculi be discharged.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of the livers of animals in the dietetical
part of the First Book. See also in particular Galen and Serapion. Our
author copies from the former, who in his turn follows closely in the
footsteps of Dioscorides.


Ἠριγέρων,

Senecio, _Groundsel_, has mixed powers, being refrigerant and moderately
discutient.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides recommends it (_Senecio vulgaris_) in
inflammatory complaints, and also says of it that when drunk with must
it relieves the pains of the stomach proceeding from bile. Galen and
the other authorities, like Paulus, treat of it in general terms as an
antiphlogistic application. Apuleius recommends it in sciatica (75, 5.)
In modern times it had the character of being emetic, but the ancient
authorities do not say that it has this property.


Ἠρύγγιον,

Eryngium, _Eryngo_, is calefacient in no imperceptible degree, and has no
little heat and subtility of parts.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That it is a species of _Eryngium_ or sea holly seems
indisputable. It may either be the _maritimum_, the _planum_, or the
_campestre_, all of which are brought into view and figured by our
careful herbalist Parkinson. (Theatre of Plants, 986.) Dioscorides’s
description of its localities would seem to agree best with the
_campestre_; he calls it calefacient, and says it is diuretic and
emmenagogue, removing tormina and flatulences, and proving serviceable in
hepatic diseases, and as an alexipharmic. He adds, that it is related of
it that it discusses hard tumours, both when appended as an amulet and in
a cataplasm; and that the root of it cures opisthotonos and epilepsy when
drunk with hydromel. (iii, 21.) Galen and the other Greek authorities
treat of it in general terms like Paulus. The _secacul_ of the Arabians
has been taken for this article, but erroneously, as Matthiolus has well
remarked. (Ad Dioscor. iii, 21.) But Serapion treats of it under the
name of _Iringi_, as being a white variety of the Aster Atticus. He
merely translates the words of Dioscorides and Galen. (De Simpl. 96.) We
cannot find any mention of it in the works of the other Arabians, except
Ebn Baithar, who also does little more than copy from Dioscorides and
Galen. The eryngo long retained its place in our Dispensatory, indeed
it can scarcely be said to be yet formally expelled from it. Pereira
briefly notices the _Eryngium campestre_. It is the _Eryngium maritimum_,
however, which is described in the Edinburgh Mat. Med. Quincy, by the
way, in imitation of Serapion, confounds the Eryngo with the Aster
Atticus. (Complete Engl. Disp. 113.) Boerhaave gave the candied root and
decoction of eryngo as an attenuant and deobstruent in obstructions of
the viscera, and for coughs; and Tournefort makes mention of the same as
being in common use in his days. (Mat. Med. 98. Engl. edition.)


Θάλάσσιον ὕδωρ,

Aqua Marina, _Sea Water_, is acrid, moderately calefacient, and
desiccant; it is bad for the stomach when taken in a draught, disorders
the bowels, and proves phlegmagogue. If poured hot on a part it attracts
and discusses.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The ancient authorities who have written most learnedly on
this important, although common-place article of the Mat. Med., are
Dioscorides, Avicenna, and Rhases. Sea water, says Dioscorides, is
heating, acrid, and bad for the stomach, for it disorders the belly,
bringing away phlegm and bile. When poured hot on a part it attracts and
discusses, suiting with affections of the nerves and chilblains before
they become ulcerated. It is proper for mixing with raw barley-meal, and
is suitable for plasters and discutient malagmata. For evacuating the
bowels it is injected in a tepid state, and for tormina in a hot. It is
a suitable fomentation in cases of scabies, pruritus, lichen, enlarged
tonsils, and turgid mammæ. In hot fomentations it dispels lividities,
and is useful in the bites of venomous animals, such at least as induce
tremblings and rigors, but especially of scorpions, phalangia, and asps,
and if, in such cases, one go into a hot bath, it proves useful; and
in chronic cachexiæ of the body and nerves the bath of it is useful.
Its hot vapours soothe dropsies, headaches, and dullness of hearing.
It is given as a purge either alone or with oxycrate, wine, or honey;
and after the purging takes place the broth of a hen or of fishes is
exhibited to dilute its acrimony and pungency. (v, 19.) Avicenna borrows
largely from Dioscorides, but supplies some additional remarks of his own
by no means devoid of interest and importance. He recommends sea water
for chilblains, for killing lice, and discussing extravasated blood.
He also, copying from Dioscorides, praises it in pruritus, scabies,
and impetigo. Epileptics, he says, are benefited by tepid salt water,
but injured by hot. The vapour of salt water, he adds, is beneficial
in vertigo and dropsies. (ii, 2, 58.) From Rhases’s very lengthened
dissertation on this subject we can only find room for a few extracts.
Upon the authority of Johannitius (Serapion?), he states that the use
of salt water to one unaccustomed to it proves laxative and pinches the
belly, but to one accustomed to it, it proves astringent. Another of his
authorities, Judæus, says salt water proves beneficial in pain of the
head and chest, in dropsy, and a watery stomach. He also states of salt
water, that although at first it proves laxative, the continued use of it
brings on constipation, because, he says, its salt dries, astringes, and
strengthens the belly. (Cont. l. ult. i, 70.)


Θαλίκτρον,

Thalictrum, _Meadow Rue_, has desiccant powers, without pungency. It
therefore heals chronic ulcers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sprengel confidently pronounces it to be the _Thalictrum
minus_, L., that is to say, the lesser meadow rue of our herbalists. See
Parkinson (265.) Dioscorides and Galen state its medicinal properties in
the same terms as our author. It is the Thalitruum of Pliny, who likewise
praises it as an application to ulcers. (H. N. xxvii, 112.) We have not
been able to find it described by any of the Arabian authorities on the
Mat. Med. except Ebn Baithar, and it has had no place in our English
Dispensatory for many ages past.


Θαψία,

Thapsia, _Deadly Carrot_, is acrid and strongly calefacient, with some
humidity. It therefore attracts strongly the deep-seated fluids, and
dispels them when attracted.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The authorities are divided between the _Thapsia Garganica_
and the _Thapsia Asclepium_. Old Gerard gives it the name of deadly
carrot, but Parkinson that of scorching fennel. Theophrastus mentions
that it purges upwards and downwards. (P. ix, 10, 24.) Pliny describes
it as a very acrid poison. (H. N. xxiii, 43.) See Dioscorides (iv, 154.)
Serapion states that it is a violent emetic and cathartic, and operates
powerfully as an external application. The thapsia has long ceased to
be employed in medicine; even old Culpeper calls it “a venomous foreign
root, and therefore no more of it.”


Θεῖον,

_Sulphur_; it likewise is possessed of attractive powers, is hot, and
consists of subtile particles, so as to be an antidote against many
poisonous animals, more especially the sea-turtle and dragon, either
sprinkled dry or mixed with saliva, or with the urine of a child, or oil,
or honey. It is also a wonderful remedy for scabious complaints.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sulphur was extensively used in medicine from the earliest
times. Pliny gives a very full and interesting account of it. (H. N.
xxxv, 50.) The sulphur vivum, of which mention is so often made in this
work, was evidently native sulphur, that is to say, the prismatic sulphur
of Jameson. The sulphur ignem expertum was clearly the factitious sulphur
or brimstone, namely, that which is procured from pyrites by sublimation.
We need scarcely mention that sulphur was extensively used as an
application in cutaneous diseases, and more especially scabies. It was
also given internally in catarrhs and other complaints of the chest. See
Dioscorides and Pliny. The words of the latter are well worth quoting in
the present instance. “Natura ejus calfacit, concoquit, sed et discutit
collectiones corporum: ob hoc talibus emplastris malagmatisque miscetur.
Renibus quoque et lumbis in dolore cum adipe mire prodest impositum.
Aufert et lichenas a facie cum terebinthi resina et lepras. Harpacticon
vocatur a celeritate avellendi, avelli enim subinde debet. Prodest
et suspiriosis linctum. Purulenta quoque extussientibus, et contra
scorpionum ictus. Vitiligines vivum nitro mixtum atque ex aceto tritum
et illitum tollit, item lendes in palpebris, aceto sandarachato admixto.”
We have not found the acetum sandarachatum mentioned by any other writer;
from its name, it was no doubt composed of vinegar and arsenic, that
is to say, realgar. Serapion, in treating of sulphur, confines himself
entirely to Greek authorities (407); and so in like manner Avicenna (ii,
2, 612), and Rhases (Cont. ult. 694.)


Θέρμος,

Lupinus, _Lupine_; that which is edible is possessed of emplastic powers;
but the bitter is detergent, discutient, and desiccative, without
pungency. It kills worms, both when applied externally and when taken in
infusion, and it cleanses the bowels when drunk with rue and pepper. It
also cleanses the skin, and discusses tumours when applied with oxymel.
The wild is more bitter and stronger than the cultivated in all respects.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Two varieties of the lupine, the _sativus_ and _sylvestris_,
were used in medicine from the days of Dioscorides down to our Quincy.
Though the former of these, which was the one principally used, be
well known, there is some doubt as to the species; whether it was the
_pilosus_, or the _hirsutus_, or, what is more probable, whether it
comprehended both. Dioscorides and Galen agree in enumerating a long list
of cases to which the lupine is applicable, but as our author’s account
embraces the sum of what they have written on it, we need not enter
here into an exposition of their opinions. Suffice it to say, that as
an emmenagogue and deobstruent it was much relied upon internally, and
applied in a great variety of external complaints in fomentations. The
same virtues are ascribed to it by the Arabians, who, however, supply
no additional observations of any importance. Avicenna’s account of its
medicinal powers is particularly full. (ii, 2, 440.) Rhases derives
almost all his information from the Greeks. (Cont. l. ult. i, 435.)
Serapion copies altogether from Dioscorides and Galen (De Simpl. 74.)


Θηλύπτερον,

Which some call Nymphæa or Filix, _Female Fern_, is like the fern in all
its properties. When drunk with wine it kills the broad and round worms.
It also destroys the fœtus in utero. Its leaves, when eaten, soften the
belly.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There seems every reason to refer it to the _Asplenium
Filix fœmina_, Bernh., or _Polypodium_, L. Theophrastus recommends it
as a vermifuge medicine. (H. P. ix, 20.) Galen, Avicenna, and all the
authorities that treat of it, concur in assigning to it this faculty.
Dioscorides also sets it down as a medicine calculated to induce
sterility and occasion abortion. The powder of it is recommended as an
application to ill-conditioned sores. In the days of Quincy it still held
an equivocal place in the Dispensatory.


Θλάσπι,

Bursa Pastoris, _Shepherd’s Purse_, is possessed of acrid powers, so
that when drunk it breaks internal abscesses, and occasions a flow of
the menses; and if injected by the anus it relieves ischiatic disease
by occasioning a bloody discharge. It otherwise purges bile upwards and
downwards when drunk to the amount of an acetabulum.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sprengel holds that the Θ. of Dioscorides is the _Thlaspi
Bursa Pastoris_. Dioscorides describes another species, which is either
the _Iberis umbellata_, or the _Viola latifolia_. Pliny recommends the
Thlaspi as a phlegmagogue and cholagogue. (H. N. xxvii, 113.) Dioscorides
assigns it the same character, and also holds that it is emmenagogue. Our
author copies closely from Galen. Avicenna dwells at considerable length
upon the virtues of Thlaspi, calling it emetic and purgative, and also
anthelminthic, emmenagogue, and carminative. The _Thlaspi arvense_ held
a place in the Dispensatory, with all the characters of the ancient T.,
down to a late date. See Quincy (Compl. Engl. Dispens. 66.)


Θρίδαξ,

Lactuca, _Lettuce_, is a juicy and cold potherb, yet not extremely so,
but of the temperament of spring water. It therefore suits with hot
inflammations, and also quenches thirst. When taken in an infusion it
stops gonorrhœa and libidinous dreams. The wild lettuce is less cooling
and diluent than the other, and is also more juicy.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The cultivated kind is certainly the _Lactuca sativa_: the
wild the _L. virosa_. The ancients, as we have stated in another place,
were well acquainted with the hypnotic powers of lettuce. See Celsus (ii,
32); Dioscorides (ii, 164); Athen. (Deipnos, ii, 80, ed. Schweig.); Pliny
(xix, 38); Galen (De Alim. Facul. ii, 40); Geopon. (xii, 13); Aëtius
(i, 168); Symeon Seth (De Alimentis); Macer Floridus (De Herb. vir.);
Serapion (De Simpl. ex Plant.) According to Dioscorides, it is also
anaphrodisiac, and removes the pollutio nocturni somni. One of Serapion’s
Arabian authorities commends it in jaundice; and another of them says
that it dispels the unpleasant effects produced by intoxication. (De
Simpl. 240.) Avicenna’s account of its medicinal virtues is very
interesting, but is in the main derived from Dioscorides and Galen. He
represents it to be an eminently cold, that is to say, a sedative plant,
and recommends it in all complaints of a hot nature, in watchfulness,
alienation of mind, and in _coup de soleil_. He also speaks highly of its
milk in hot affections of the eyes. (ii, 2, 441.) Rhases likewise gives
an excellent description of its powers, but in nearly the same terms as
Avicenna. He makes it to be soporific, anaphrodisiac, and alexipharmic.
(Cont. l. ult. i, 386.) Dioscorides states that the wild lettuce is a
hydragogue purgative, and we may mention that the late Dr. Collin, of
Vienna, gave it with great success in dropsies. Avicenna says the wild,
in virtue, resembles the black poppy. We need scarcely say that both
the _L. sativa_ and _virosa_ have, of late years, been restored to the
Materia Medica. Upon reference to the works of Orfila, Paris, Pereira,
and other authorities of the day, it will be seen that the ancients had
correctly stated the medicinal virtues of both species.


Θύμος,

Thymus, _Thyme_, heats and dries in the third degree. It also incides
viscid and thick humours.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have little hesitation in describing it to be the _Thymus
vulgaris_. Dioscorides states that thyme is expectorant, diuretic,
emmenagogue, and discutient; and all the authorities, down even to modern
times, confirm this character of it. Galen says it is to be placed in the
third order of desiccants and calefacients. He recommends it as being
diuretic and emmenagogue, and says that it destroys the fœtus in utero,
clears out the viscera, and is useful in discharges from the chest and
lungs. Oribasius gives it the same character. Aëtius, from personal
experience, as he says, writes of its virtues more elaborately than any
other ancient author. Thus he gives a prescription for a draught composed
of oxymel and finely powdered thyme, which he says proves beneficial in
arthritic diseases by purging bile and the acrid humours, both by the
belly and by the bladder. He recommends similar compositions in sciatica,
pleuritic pains, meteorism of the hypochondria, and tympanitis. He
prescribes, in like manner, thyme and oxymel to melancholic persons, to
those disordered in mind, and possessed with morbid apprehension; and in
gout, when given with undiluted wine. He also recommends it to be given
in swellings of the testicles, to the patient fasting, in undiluted
wine. The Arabians write fully on this head, but borrow almost all their
information from Dioscorides and Galen, and make no reference to Aëtius.
See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 328), and Serapion (De Simpl. 281.)
They all agree in giving it the character of being diuretic, emmenagogue,
anthelminthic, and phlegmagogue.


Θύμβρα,

Thymbra, _Savory_; the wild has the same powers as thyme. The garden is
in all respects weaker, but is better for food.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The ancients made use of _Savory_ (_Satureia Thymbra_) as
a condiment. Aristophanes (Nubes, 420.) Dioscorides recommends it in
the same cases as thyme, and all the others write of it in much the
same terms. Symeon Seth says it promotes digestion, is emmenagogue,
diaphoretic, and carminative. Macer Floridus affirms that it is
aphrodisiacal, and produces abortion in pregnant women when applied on a
pessary. It long held a place in the Dispensatory with the character of
being “warm and discussive.” See Quincy (127.)


Θυμελάια,

Thymelæa, _Spurge-flax_; from it the _Granum Gnidium_ is produced, which
has similar powers to it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The confusion about the Thymelæa and Chamelæa of the ancients
may be partly removed by the following account of the matter given by
Alston. There are three species of Laureola, 1st, the _L. officinalis_,
or _L. Mas_, _Dwarf Laurel_, or _Spurge Laurel_, which grows in hedges
and woods in England; 2d, the Chamelæa, or _Laureola femina_ namely, the
true _Mezereon_, or _Spurge Olive_, which grows plentifully in Germany;
3d, the Thymelæa, _Spurge Flax_, or _Mountain Widow Wail_, which grows in
the south of France. We will treat further of the Chamelæa, or Mezerion,
in its proper place. Sprengel is decidedly of opinion that the Thymelæa
of the ancients is _Daphne Gnidium_, L., or flax-leaved daphne, and one
of the latest and best authorities on the Mat. Med. comes to the same
conclusion respecting it. Dr. Pereira says, “_Daphne Gnidium_ is the
Θυμελάια, or Thymelæa of Dioscorides, whose fruit is the κόκκος κνίδιος,
or Gnidium berry, used by Hippocrates. Its properties are similar to
those of the _D. Mezereon_.” (Elements of Mat. Med. 807.) For an account
of its effects on the animal economy, see Orfila (Toxicol. ii, 3.) We
will treat of its medicinal virtues under _Coccus gnidius_.


Ἰδαῖα ρίζα,

Idæa Radix, _Idæan Root_; being sour as to taste and powers, it agrees
with hemorrhages and rheumatic affections when drunk or applied
externally.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. As may be seen upon referring to Bauhin, Woodville, Sprengel,
and Pereira, several of the authorities have been disposed to hold this
plant for the _Arbutus Uva Ursi_; but the probability is that it was the
Laurus Alexandrina, or _Uvularia amplexifolia_. Dioscorides recommends
it in fluxes from the bowels and womb, and in all kinds of hemorrhage.
(iv, 44.) Pliny translates the chapter of Dioscorides. (H. N. xxvii, 69.)
Our author copies from Galen; and Oribasius, in like manner, borrows
his description of the plant from him. As far as we can discover the
Idæa Radix is not treated of by the Arabians; and even in the days of
Matthiolus it had disappeared from the Mat. Med.


Ἰδρῶς.

Sudor, _Sweat_; it is troublesome to collect by itself; but is mixed
with the powder of those who exercise themselves in the palestra, which
powder, being only repellent before, thus becomes altogether discutient.
It is, therefore, a powerful remedy for inflamed nipples, and for
extinguishing the heat in them. It also answers with buboes; but if too
dry it must be softened with oil of privet or oil of roses.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. _Sweat_, or the matter of Perspiration. “Sweat,” says Galen,
“is one of the fluids formed in the animal body, consisting of the same
materials, and having the same mode of formation, as the urine, for both
are formed from the liquids drunk, these being heated, and acquiring
also some bilious property. But the sweat is more elaborated, as having
passed through so many intervening bodies to the skin.” (De Med. Simpl.
x.) This is a very ingenious account of the nature of the sweat and
urine, which, it is certain, bear a close analogy to one another, and
are often vicarious discharges. Thus, in cases of suppression of urine,
the perspiration has often an urinous taste and smell. But this is not
the place for enlarging further upon this subject. Our author’s account
of the medicinal properties of sweat is taken from Galen. (l. c.) All
the other authorities, in like manner, copy from him. See in particular
Serapion (De Simpl. 466), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 648.)


Ἰξὸς,

Viscum, _Birdlime_, is heating with acrimony. It attracts, therefore, the
deep-seated humours powerfully, and is discutient, like the Thapsia, but
is much more inefficacious than it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The Viscum, or Birdlime, is got from the _Loranthus
Europæus_, or Misseltoe. The Viscum quercinum held a place in the Materia
Medica from the earliest times down to a very late date. Dioscorides
mentions that birdlime is also got from the apple tree, the pear tree,
and other trees, and is found upon the roots of certain shrubs. Pliny
describes the ordinary mode of preparing it. (H. N. xvi, 94.) Dioscorides
recommends it principally as an agglutinative and attractive application
to indolent tumours and sores. When mixed with the caustic ley (quicklime
and potass) he says birdlime increases its efficacy. With orpiment and
sandarach, and applied in a cataplasm, it draws off diseased nails.
(iii, 93.) Galen remarks that, like Thapsia, its calefacient powers do
not come into immediate operation. The other authorities, in treating of
this substance, follow Dioscorides and Galen. See in particular Avicenna
(ii, 2, 717), and Ebn Baithar (i, 410.) The Viscum album is retained in
the modern Greek Pharmacopœia. (Athens, 1837, 167.)


Ἰὸν,

Viola, _the Violet_; its leaves have a watery and coldish substance for
their prevailing ingredient.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be little or no doubt that the purple violet of
Dioscorides is the _Viola Odorata_. On the violet, see a most interesting
disquisition by Celsius (Hierobotanicon in voce Dudaim); also Sprengel
(R. H. H.) Dioscorides calls it refrigerant, and recommends it as an
external application in ardor of the stomach, inflammation of the eyes,
and prolapsus ani; and mentions, that it had been taken internally in
quinsy and epilepsy of children. (iv, 120.) Galen merely recommends it
externally in the same cases as Dioscorides. The Arabian authorities
extend the use of this article. Thus, Avicenna recommends it in heat
of the stomach, both internally and externally; in a syrup for coughs,
pleurisies, and other affections of the lungs; in pains of the kidneys as
a diuretic, and as a cholagogue. (ii, 2, 715.) See also Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. 3, 21), and Ebn Baithar (i, 170.) Serapion, on the authority of Aben
Mesuai, says further of it that it is laxative in doses of from three to
seven drachms. (De Simpl. 141.)


Ἰὸς,

Ærugo, _Verdigris_, has a bitter quality to the taste, being discutient,
cathartic, and corrosive, not only of soft but also of hard flesh; but
by mixing a little of it with much cerate, one may render the medicine
detergent without pungency.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That it was the _Ærugo Æris_, or Verdigris, seems
indisputable. The scraped verdigris (ἰὸς ζυστὸς) was the common kind,
and the name is still retained in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia (61.)
Hippocrates, Dioscorides, Pliny, and Galen recommend verdigris in
complaints of the eyes. Dioscorides describes very minutely the process
for preparing verdigris, which is not very unlike that which is now
practised in France. He also makes mention of another species, namely,
the _Ærugo Scolecia_, with which we are now unacquainted. He gives an
interesting account of the cases in which it is applicable. (v, 92.)
Galen also writes of it with great precision. He says, when lightly
applied it relieves fungated sores; and when diluted with cerates, it
cleanses them. (De Simpl. ix.) The other Greek authorities give much the
same account of it. The Arabians treat fully of the two kinds, which
they call _Ærugo rasilis_ and _subtilis_, but borrow almost all their
information from Dioscorides and Galen. Like the Greek authorities,
they apply it principally in intractable ulcers and in diseases of the
eyelids. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 739), and Serapion (De Simpl. 383); Haly
Abbas (Pract. ii, 44); Ebn Baithar (i, 540.)


Ἱππόκαμπος,

Hippocampus, is a sea animal, the ashes of which when burnt thicken the
hair in alopecia, along with liquid pitch.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is, indisputably, our _Syngnathus Hippocampus_. Ælian
relates that it has proved useful in cases of hydrophobia. (Hist. Anim.
xiv, 20.) Our author borrows from Dioscorides (ii, 3.) The Arabians do
not treat of it.


Ἱππολάπαθον,

Hippolapathum, _Horse Burdock_, grows in marshes, being like the Burdock.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This article, which would seem to be the _Rumex
Hydrolapathum_, is treated of in the same brief terms by the other
authorities. See Dioscorides (i, 141.)


Ἱππομάραθρον,

Hippomarathrum, _Horse Fennel_; that variety which resembles the Cachrys
is more desiccant than the common Fennel. It is, therefore, astringent,
lithontriptic, and emmenagogue; but that species which has seed like
coriander seed, is also like it in other respects, but weaker.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There is little doubt that the former species is the _Cachrys
Sicula_. The other is undetermined. Our author copies closely from
Dioscorides (iii, 76); and the others follow his example. The modern
herbalists, in like manner, borrow from Dioscorides. See Parkinson (884.)


Ἱπποπόταμος,

Hippopotamus, _Sea-horse_; its testicle, when dried and drunk, is a
remedy for the bites of reptiles.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This brief notice of the _Hippopotamus amphibius_, or
Water-horse, is taken from Dioscorides (ii, 25.) Most of the other
authorities have omitted it.


Ἱπποσέλινον,

Hipposelinum, _Horse Parsley_, has properties resembling those of
parsley, but weaker.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Smyrnium Olusatrum_, according to Dierbach,
Stackhouse, Sprengel, and all the best authorities. Dioscorides
represents it to be emmenagogue and diuretic, and as proving beneficial
in rigors. (iii, 71.) Galen and the others treat of it briefly like our
author. The Arabians treat of it under Selinum (_Apium_.)


Ἱππουρὶς,

Hippouris, _Horse-tail_, has astringent qualities with bitterness, and
on that account it is at the same time powerfully desiccant, without
pungency. It is agglutinant, therefore, of the largest wounds, and is
useful in intestinal hernia, and cures defluxions when drunk with wine.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The first species of Dioscorides corresponds to our author’s,
and is marked as the _Equisetum Fluviatile_ by Sprengel, which is called
in English the _Horse-tail_. The other is the _E. Limosum_. Apuleius
recommends it in dysentery and spitting of blood. Aëtius recommends it
in the same complaints. But both, in fact, only borrow from Dioscorides
and Galen, especially the latter, who treats of it more fully than
Dioscorides. The Arabians give exactly the same account of the Equisetum;
indeed they profess to borrow everything from Dioscorides and Galen. See
in particular Serapion (137), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 200.)


Ἱπποφαὲς ἤ Ἱπποφαῖος,

Hippophaes, used for scouring clothes. It is a branchy shrub, the root
of which contains juices which are extracted like those of Thapsia. One
obolus of the juice mixed with the flour of tares, purges phlegm and
bile; and the whole plant, when dried, becomes purgative.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without entering into the discussion regarding this plant,
we shall merely observe that we are disposed to agree with those who
refer it to a species of spurge, namely, _Euphorbia spinosa_. Dioscorides
describes it as being cholagogue, hydragogue, and phlegmagogue. (iii,
159.) It does not appear that it is treated of by Galen, nor by the
Arabian authorities.


Ἰρίς.

Iris, _Fleur-de-lys_, is calefacient, consists of very subtile particles,
and is detergent and digestive. It therefore agrees with coughs, renders
expectoration easy, cures tormina, and cleanses foul ulcers. When drunk
with honeyed water it evacuates the bowels.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Probably it comprehends the _Iris Germanica_ and _I.
Florentina_. It is the first article treated of by Dioscorides, who gives
a full account of it, and concludes by saying that the different species
of it are useful for many purposes. He recommends them as an external
application in cutaneous diseases and ulcers, and as being soporific
and alexipharmic; when drunk with wine as proving emmenagogue, and also
applied in pessaries, malagmata, and acopa. The others treat of its
virtues less copiously, with the exception of Serapion and Avicenna.
One of Serapion’s Arabian authorities, Aben Mesuai, says it purges
yellow bile and black bile, and is deobstruent in obstructions of the
liver. He also mentions it as a sternutatory and masticatory. (De Simpl.
189.) Avicenna’s characters of the Iris are in the main derived from
Dioscorides, but altogether his description of it is very interesting.
He recommends it very particularly in diseases of the rectum and uterus,
both when administered internally and in a hip-bath. He also represents
it as proving useful in gonorrhœa, and in the pollutio nocturni somni.
He concludes by calling it a general alexipharmic (ii, 2, 349.) The
root of the Florentine Iris or Flower de Luce, was used in the practice
of medicine down to a late date. See Quincy and Boerhaave. It is still
kept in the shops, and has the character of being a drastic hydragogue.
Gray, Suppl. to Pharmacop. (251.) It retains a place in the Modern Greek
Pharmacopœia.


Ἰσάτις.

Isatis, _Woad_; the garden species which dyers use, is of a desiccative
nature, having also some astringency. By means of these powers it
agglutinates even the large wounds of hard bodies, is of use in
hemorrhages, discusses œdematous swellings, and opposes the progress of
all malignant diseases. The wild is more pungent, and on that account
being more desiccant, it the more strongly resists all humid gangrene,
but for all other purposes it is worse as being pungent. Owing to its
strong powers, it is useful in affections of the spleen.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dr. Martyn says, “The _Woad_ is called Isatis and Glastum,
and affords a blue tincture.” (Ad Virg. Ec. iv, 43.) See also Miller,
Parkinson, and Gerard. It is the _Isatis Tinctoria_. The second species
of Dioscorides, or Sylvestris, is the _Saponaria Vaccaria_, L., but the
passage is probably spurious. Our author’s account of the Isatis is
abridged from Galen, who has an elaborate article under this head. Aëtius
copies still more closely from Galen. Both these authorities direct
bread or barleymeal to be mixed with its pounded leaves when they are
otherwise too strong. Of the Arabians, Avicenna gives the most accurate
account of it under the head of _Nil_ seu Glastum sativum et sylvestre.
In its external use he follows Dioscorides and Galen, and joins Rhases in
recommending it internally as an emetic for the cough of children, ulcers
of the lungs, and pleurisy arising from black bile. He further commends
the wild species in affections of the spleen. (ii, 2, 505, 290, 299.)
Serapion and Rhases give a confused account of the Isatis, under the head
of Indicum. (De Simpl. 47); (Cont. l. ult. 370.) The Woad held a place
in our Dispensatory down to a recent date. See Quincy (91.) Woad and
indigo were long used together in dyeing, which probably is the reason of
these two articles being confounded together by certain of the ancient
authorities.


Ἰσόπυρον ἢ φυσίολον,

Isopyrum or Faseolus, (Bog Bean?); its seed is bitter and somewhat sour.
It is, therefore, detergent, and exudes the thick and viscid humours at
the same time that it contracts bodies, and is astringent. It therefore
purges deep-seated humours, and is not against persons affected with
vomiting of blood.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. From our author’s account of it, it would seem to be the
same as the fasil, or kidney-bean; but Dioscorides clearly distinguishes
between them. (iv, 119.) Dodonæus had referred it to the _Menyanthes
trifoliata_, or bog-bean; but this opinion is rejected by Sprengel. He
inclines to the _Corydalis claviculata_, Pers., but is not decided.
We rather incline to the opinion of Dodonæus, on the ground that its
medicinal character, as given by Galen and our author, applies very well
to the _Menyanthes trifoliata_. It is not treated of by Aëtius, nor can
we find it in the Mat. Med. of the Arabians.


Ἰτέα,

Salix, _the Willow_; the leaves and flower are possessed of desiccant
powers without pungency. It has also some astringency; but the bark is
drier, and when burnt, the ashes of it are powerfully desiccant, for they
remove clavi and myrmecia with vinegar.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Several species of the _Salix_ are described by Theophrastus
and other ancient authors. Milligan refers that of Celsus to _S. alba_,
_fragilis_, and _purpurea_; but to define the species, which are so
numerous in this genus, is futile. But that the _Alba_ was _one_ of the
medicinal willows of the ancients, can admit of no doubt. See Parkinson
(1430.) Dioscorides says the fruit and leaves, and bark and juice of the
willow tree are possessed of an astringent power, and accordingly he
recommends them both externally and internally in various complaints for
which astringents are indicated, such as hæmoptysis, and as a fomentation
in arthritic complaints. He also mentions the ley of it when prepared
with vinegar for the removal of callus and corns. (i, 35.) Galen also
gives a very elaborate statement of its medicinal virtues; he says it is
desiccative without pungency, and has some astringency; and he recommends
it strongly in the same cases as Dioscorides and our author; indeed, the
latter merely abridges Galen. Aëtius copies from Galen almost word for
word. The Arabians treat fully of it; but in the same terms as their
Grecian masters. See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 2, 250); Avicenna (ii, 2, 319,
677); Serapion (De Simpl. 136); Ebn Baithar (i, 122.) In the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia both the _Salix fragilis_ and _alba_ stand for the ancient
ἰτέα.


Ἰχθυοκόλλα,

Ichthyocolla, _Fish-glue_; its powers are emplastic and desiccant. It
answers well for the composition of cephalic and agglutinative plasters,
and of those which are prepared for leprosy; also for removing wrinkles
from the face.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That described by Dioscorides and our author was got from the
_Acipenser Huso_. The large fish described by Herodotus, and Eustathius,
in his commentary on the work of Dionysius the geographer, under the name
of Antacæus, was, most probably, nearly the same as the Huso. See the
modern Greek Pharmacopœia (83.) Artedi makes the _Huso_, _Ichthyocolla_
and _Antacæus_ to be varieties of the species of _Acipenser_, which he
calls _Acipenser tuberculis carens_. It would appear to be the ὀξυρύγχος
of Ælian. (H. A. xvii, 32.) He makes mention of its gluten or isinglass.
Our author’s account of its medicinal virtues is mostly copied from
Dioscorides. The others supply no additional information. The Arabians
treat of it under the general head of gluten, and recommend it in the
same cases as the Greeks, quoting Dioscorides, Galen, and Paulus.
Serapion and Rhases recommend it in hæmoptysis. See Avicenna (ii, 2,
202); Serapion (c. 138); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 336.)


Κάκανος,

Cacanus; its root is moderately desiccative and not pungent, also
emplastic, and hence it relieves roughness of the windpipe in a linctus
with wine, and when chewed like tragacanth and liquorice.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is not mentioned by Dioscorides, Pliny, Theophrastus,
Aëtius, or any other ancient author but Galen and Paulus; nor has any one
of the commentators noticed it. We are unable, therefore, to determine
anything for certain respecting it. But as Dioscorides and Pliny ascribe
nearly the same medicinal powers to the _Cacalia_ as our author does to
the Cacanus, it seems not improbable that they may have been identical.
Our author evidently borrows from Galen.


Κάγκαμον,

Cancamum; it is the tear of an Arabian wood, resembling myrrh, fragrant,
and hence used in perfumes. It has the power of extenuating fat bodies,
and is detergent and deobstruent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides treats of it in the portion of his work devoted
to aromatics, calling it the tear of an Arabian wood, having some
resemblance to myrrh, which was used in fumigations with myrrh and
storax. He calls it emmenagogue; mentions that it is given in asthmatic,
epileptic, and splenetic cases; says it is useful as a cleanser in
diseases of the eye; but that it is most particularly applicable for
fungous gums and toothache. (i, 23.) Galen has omitted it from his Mat.
Med. Of the Arabians, Avicenna is the authority who has treated of it
most distinctly. He calls it a gum of a bad taste which is brought from
the region of the west. (This account of the country which produces it
may warrant suspicion that he had confounded it with some other gum, the
production of Italy or Spain.) He says of it, that some had confounded
it with sandaracha (gum vernix?). In giving its medicinal virtues, he
copies closely from Dioscorides (ii, 2, 382.) It is doubtful, from this
imperfect description of the Cancamum, what substance it applies to;
probably either to _Gum anime_ or to _Gum elemi_. There seems no good
ground for referring it, as some have done, to _Lacca_; nor to some
nondescript species of the _Amyris Katef_, as Sprengel does. (Ad Dioscor.
l. c.)


Καδμία,

Cadmia, _Calamine_; both kinds of it are desiccant, but that which
is called Botryitis, consists of the more subtile particles, and the
Placitis, of the grosser. When calamine is burnt, it becomes desiccant
and detergent, without pungency, and is also useful for sores requiring
to be filled up, about the eyes and in the whole body, more particularly
those on softer bodies, which are more humid, for those upon harder
bodies require stronger means.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Under this head we cannot do better than in the first
place copy the account of the ancient cadmia given by the learned and
accurate Geoffroy. “The name _Cadmia_ has been applied to several things.
Dioscorides understood by καδμέια the recrements which arise from brass
while melting in the furnace. Galen applied it to two substances, one
which comes from brass (chalcos?), which is the same with the cadmia
of Dioscorides; the other a native substance found in the island of
Cyprus, which he terms λιθῶδης or stony. Pliny, besides the factitious
cadmia of Dioscorides and Galen, mentions another by the name of _Lapis
ærosus_, which he says was an ore out of which copper was made, and this
perhaps is the same with the _Cadmia lapidosa_ of Galen.” (ii, 2, 6.)
The botryital or clustered cadmia was Tutty, or the _Cadmia fornacis_
seu _factitia_. It is the _Zinci Oxydum impurum_. The _Capnitis_ and
_Placitis_ were merely varieties of the same, the former being in the
shape of a fine powder, collected at the mouths of the furnaces, and the
latter consisting of coarser and heavier grains. The minerals from which
all these preparations of cadmia were prepared, are the two varieties
of calamine, now called by mineralogists “the siliceous oxide of zinc”
and “the carbonate of zinc.” See Cleavland’s ‘Mineralogy’ (656, 657.)
Dioscorides gives a very distinct description of the cadmia, which he
recommends principally in the composition of ophthalmic remedies (v,
84.) Galen’s account of it is to the same effect, and is couched in his
peculiar logical language. (De Simpl. ix.) The Arabians give a confused
description of cadmia and the other mineral substances used by the
Greeks in medical practice. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 163, 164); Serapion
(418); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 150.) For an elaborate disquisition on
the _cadmia_ of the ancients, we beg to refer to Beckmann’s ‘History of
Inventions.’


Κακκαλία,

Caccalia; its powers and use are like the Cacanus.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See under _Cacanus_.


Καλαμαγρώστις,

Calamagrostis, is desiccative; wherefore, its juice and the decoction of
the roots of it are mixed up as ingredients with ophthalmic remedies; but
its seed is diuretic and stomachic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This is decidedly the _Calamagrostis Epigeios_ Roth. or
Small Reed. Dioscorides says it proves destructive to cattle when eaten
by them, especially the variety which grows in Babylon by the wayside.
Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 1181) figures and describes a species of
reed-grass, bearing a considerable resemblance to our _Epigeios_, but of
more luxuriant growth; which, he says, Lobel calls _Calamagrostis forte
Babylonica_. Neither Galen nor Aëtius treat of it. The Arabians briefly
notice it under the head of _Theil_ or Gramen, but merely copy from the
Greeks. See Serapion (De Simpl. 119), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 704.)


Καλαμίνθη,

Calamintha, _Calamint_, is of a hot and drying temperament in the third
degree, consists of subtile particles, is acrid, and much stronger than
mint; for it is a sort of wild mint. It, therefore, attracts readily the
deep-seated fluids to itself, and hence evacuates dropsies, and discusses
swelling of the whole body, and stops periodical rigors, when strongly
rubbed in externally with oil, and when taken internally in a draught.
When applied in a clyster it removes pains of the hip-joint, and clears
away impurities from the skin.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Apuleius says, “Græci calaminthen Latini mentham vocant, alii
nepetam,” (De Herbis.) R. Stephens says, “Calaminthæ Dioscoridi tria sunt
genera, quorum primum nihil aliud quam vulgare _Calamenthum_; secundum
Latine Nepeta appellatur; tertium est nostra herba Cataria, _l’herbe
du chat_.” Sprengel makes the first species of Dioscorides to be the
_Melissa Cretica_, L.; the second, the _Thymus Nepeta_, Scop.; and the
third, the _Melissa altissima_. Our author’s calamint is evidently the
first species. Galen, Dioscorides, Aëtius, and Serapion, like Paulus,
describe it as a hot and acrid medicine, which proves useful in diseases
of the joints. They all, also, say that it is emmenagogue; and recommend
it as a discutient and expectorant medicine. Dioscorides and Aëtius
recommend it in elephantiasis, for attenuating and cutting the gross
humours which give rise to the disease. All agree in praising calamint in
the cure of intermittent fevers. Dioscorides recommends it as a vermifuge
when given with salts and honey. Dioscorides, and, after him, Aëtius and
other of the authorities, say that calamint-water, when injected into the
ear, kills worms in it. Galen and Dioscorides both affirm that when taken
internally and applied on a pessary, it procures abortion. All agree that
it is also beneficial in asthmatic complaints. Avicenna gives a lengthy
and very elaborate account of the three species of calamint; but it can
hardly be said that he adds anything of importance to the information
which he drew from his Grecian masters. He agrees with them that it is
diuretic and emmenagogue, and holds that it is anaphrodisiacal, and
removes the pollutio nocturni somni. He also, like them, commends it as a
deobstruent in jaundice and other obstructions of the viscera. He praises
it as a stomachic. (ii, 2, 154.) None of the other Arabian authorities
treat so fully of this article as Avicenna. Rhases, however, is worth
consulting. (Contin. l. ult. i, 466.) The calamint, that is to say, the
first species of Dioscorides, would appear to be the “mentastrum” of
Celsus, who recommends it as a remedy in the bites of venomous animals.
(v, 277.) It also occurs in the ‘Flora Hippocratica.’ See Dierbach. The
three kinds of calaminth were long retained in the Materia Medica of the
moderns. See Tournefort’s Materia Medica (i, 6, 4.) More recently only
one kind was used. See Quincy. Of late all the kinds have been nearly
discarded from our Dispensatories, but are still to be found in the shops
of apothecaries. See Gray’s Supplement to the Pharmacopœia (p. 47.)


Κάλαμος ἀρωματικὸς,

Calamus Aromaticus, _Sweet-cane_, is heating and desiccant in the second
order. It also consists of subtile particles, and has some astringency.
It is, therefore, diuretic, and is mixed up with stomachic remedies, and
those prepared for the liver and womb. The species called phragmitis is
detergent, but the leaves of it are green and moderately cooling, and the
bark of it, when burnt, is heating and desiccant in the third degree. The
root of it, when applied with bulbi, is said to extract darts and thorns.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Having shown above that the acorus of the ancients is the
_Acorus Pseudacorus_, we need have little hesitation in stating that we
agree with the older authorities, who refer the present article to the
_Acorus Calamus_. Dr. Royle, however, holds that it was the _Andropogon
Calamus aromaticus_. See Hindoo Med. (34) and Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 133.)
The φραγμίτης of Dioscorides and our author is decidedly the _Arundo
Phragmites_, or Common Reed. Our author follows the description of them
given by Dioscorides and Galen, and more especially the latter. Galen
says of the aromaticus that it is more desiccative than calefacient,
and that it has some volatility, like all the aromatics. Aëtius, in
like manner, copies mostly from Galen. The Arabians, in treating of
these reeds, borrow closely from Dioscorides. Thus Avicenna, among
other virtues which he holds that they possess, commends them as being
diuretic, emmenagogue, and alexipharmic. (ii, 2, 64.) The calami do
not occur as articles of medicine in the Hippocratic collection. The
Calamus Alexandrinus of Celsus (v, 24), was no doubt the C. aromaticus.
Although a native of India, as Dioscorides states, it is likely that the
Romans would get it through Alexandria. It occurs in the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia, and is now found growing in Laconia.


Κάμπαι,

Erucæ, _Caterpillar_; those upon potherbs, when rubbed in with oil, are
said to preserve from the bites of venomous animals.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The metamorphosis of _Caterpillar_ is accurately described by
Theophrastus (C. Pl. v.) See also Aristotle (H. A. v, 20), and Pliny (H.
N. xi, 32.) Our author’s account of these erucæ is taken word for word
from Dioscorides (ii, 64.) Few of the other authorities treat of them.


Κανθαρίδες,

Cantharides; those found among wheat, have pale, transverse zones, and
being suffocated by the steam of hot vinegar, are used for many purposes.
For, with cerate, they cast off scabious nails, and relieve clavi and
scabious affections. They are also corrosive and caustic. Some mix a
small quantity of them with diuretic remedies, and give them in this form.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides and Galen direct the species which is found among
corn to be used medicinally. As the _Meloe vesicatorius_ is commonly
found upon trees, such as the fraxinus, sambuchus, and ligustrum, it is
evidently different from the ancient cantharis, and yet their effects
upon the human frame would appear to have been very much alike. It
appears to be now agreed upon by all competent judges that the medicinal
cantharis of the ancients is the _Mylabris Cichorii_ or _M. Füsselini_,
which is still used for forming blistering plasters by the profession in
Constantinople and by the native practitioners in Hindostan. See Ainslie
(Mat. Ind., i, 622), Royle (Antiq. of Hindoo Med.), and Pereira (1834.)
The _Buprestis_, however, which also is included by Dioscorides in his
Materia Medica, can have been no other than the _Meloe vesicatorius_.
See Book V of this work. It is the tellini fly of the Hindoos. See
Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 417.) The ancients prepared the cantharides for
medicinal use in the same manner as the Spanish fly is now prepared,
namely, by killing them with the fumes of vinegar. Dioscorides says
cantharides are septic, ulcerative, and calefacient, and hence are mixed
up with the medicines that cure cancerous diseases, leprosy, and lichen
agrius; they are also emmenagogue when applied in a pessary; and some,
he adds, relate that cantharides are beneficial in dropsies, by acting
as diuretics. Their wings and feet are further said to be antidotal,
that is to say, we suppose, to counteract the operation of the body of
the insect. (ii, 65, 66.) Galen treats of the cantharis and buprestis
in very nearly the same terms as Dioscorides. Instead of using only
the wings and feet, as mentioned by Dioscorides, he says that he used
the whole insect. (De Simpl. xi.) In moderate doses he held it to be a
safe diuretic. (ii, 463, ed. Basil.) Aëtius and Oribasius give nearly
the same account of the cantharis as Galen. Cantharides are frequently
mentioned in the Hippocratic treatises (De Nat. Mulier. 565, ed. Föes; De
Intern. Affect. 552), and in the works of Celsus. (199, ed. Milligan.)
Aretæus is the first author, as far as we know, who notices the external
use of cantharides as a rubefacient. (De Curat. Morb. Chron. i, 4.) The
Arabians, in treating of cantharides, borrow nearly all the information
they give from Dioscorides and Galen. See Serapion (c. 441), Avicenna
(ii, 2, 201), Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 162.) Rhases on his own authority,
affirms, that administered in small doses cantharides cleanse the
kidneys. We are rather surprised to find that the _Mylabris_ does not
occur in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Κάνναβις,

Cannabis, _Hemp_; the fruit is carminative and desiccative, so as to dry
up even the semen. The juice of it when green is useful for pains of the
ears and obstructions of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears evidently to be the _Cannabis sativa_, or Hemp.
The species _sylvestris_ of Dioscorides, is the _Althæa Cannabina_. See
Sprengel (ad Dioscorid. iii, 155), and Parkinson (Theatre of Plants,
307.) Dioscorides recommends the latter in the form of a cataplasm to
soothe inflammations and discuss tumours. Our author copies from Galen,
who, like him, only describes the _sativa_. The Arabians describe both
species with more accuracy than the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 170,
656), Serapion (207.) Avicenna calls them carminative and desiccative;
and hence he holds that they dry up the semen. He says a middling dose
proves laxative of the bowels.


Κάνωπον,

Canopum, _the Flower of the Elder-tree_, which has been already treated
of.


Κάπνιον,

Fumaria, _Fumitory_ (called also Capnos), and is so named because the
juice of it provokes a great discharge of tears; and it sharpens the
vision. It is also acrid and bitter; hence it occasions a discharge of
much bilious urine, and cures obstructions and atony of the liver. It
also strengthens the stomach and softens the belly.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. All the commentators seem agreed that it is the _Fumaria
officinalis_, except Sibthorp, who prefers the _F. parviflora_, Lam.
Our author’s account of it is mostly taken from Dioscorides and Galen.
The others give nearly the same description of its medicinal virtues.
See particularly Serapion (c. 71), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 275.) They
represent it as being a stomachic and hepatic medicine, gently purgative
and diuretic. Fumitory is described as a medicinal herb by all our old
herbalists, and held a place in the Dispensatory down to a late date. See
Quincy (125.) The _F. officinalis_ is still retained in the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia.


Κάππαρις,

Caparis, _Caper-tree_; its root deterges, purges, incides, and discusses
by its bitterness and acrimony. It also contracts, astringes, and
condenses by its sourness. It therefore cures indurated spleens when
drunk and when applied externally. It is also emmenagogue, and occasions
a discharge of phlegm. It cures ill-conditioned ulcers, and relieves
pains of the teeth, dispels tumours and alphos, and kills vermin in the
ear. The leaves and fruit of it are possessed of similar powers, but
weaker.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Capparis spinosa_, namely, the plant which
produces our officinal capers. Dioscorides and Serapion mention that
pickled capers act as a gentle laxative, but say that they are bad
for the stomach. The Arabians held that they are good whetters of the
appetite. Casiri (Bibl. A. H. i, 337.) Galen gives a very elaborate
article on the virtues of capers, which, he says, are the best medicine
which we possess in scirrhous enlargement of the spleen. He says it
clears away the humours by the belly and by urine, and also acts as
an emmenagogue. Their taste, he says, is a combination of bitterness,
acrimony, and sourness. He concludes by stating that capers produced
in very warm climates, such as Arabia, are much more acrid than in his
country. (De Simpl. vii.) The Arabians held that capers are aphrodisiacal
and alexipharmic. See Rhases (Contin. l. ult. i, 164), Avicenna (ii, 2,
138), and Serapion (c. 291.)


Κάρδαμος,

Nasturtium, _Cress_; the seed of it is caustic like mustard. When applied
externally, therefore, it proves rubefacient, incides also the thick
humours when drunk with other things. And the dried herb is possessed of
similar powers, but the juicy one is more moderate; it therefore is eaten
raw.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It was indisputably a species of cress, probably the
_Lepidium sativum_. We have treated of it as an article of food in Book
I. Our author’s account of it is mostly derived from Galen. Symeon Seth,
with most of the authorities, calls it aphrodisiacal. Macer says, on
the contrary, that its powers are equal to those of rue for repressing
venereal desires. Dioscorides calls it alexipharmic, and says of it,
that in fumigations it drives away venomous reptiles. It occurs in
the Flora Hippocratica. See Dierbach. The Arabians treat of it very
elaborately. See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 472), Avicenna (ii, 2, 502),
and Serapion (c. 359.) They agree that it evacuates bile both upwards
and downwards, that it is aphrodisiac and alexipharmic. The cress
(_Nasturtium_), until very lately, was admitted into our Dispensatory.
See Gerard, Parkinson, Culpeper, and Quincy.


Καρδάμωμον,

Cardamomum, _Cardamum_, is also acrid, but weaker than the Cardamus. It
has also some bitterness, by which it destroys intestinal worms, and with
vinegar clears away scabies.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The officinal cardamom of the present time has now got the
scientific name of _Elettaria Cardamomum_, and as far as we can see
there is no reason to doubt its being identical with the cardamomum of
the ancients. There are, however, several varieties of the cardamom
which are not satisfactorily defined, any more than the four species
mentioned by Pliny. (H. N. xii, 29.) See Ainslie (Mat. Ind. 32), and
Pereira (Mat. Med. 694.) Dioscorides recommends it for various purposes,
both externally and internally; for epilepsy, coughs, ischiatic disease,
nephritis, and as an alexipharmic and lithontriptic medicine. (i, 5.)
Galen is more guarded in enumerating its virtues, and all the other Greek
authorities follow him. The Arabians rather imitate Dioscorides. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 156), and Serapion (c. 64.) One of Serapion’s Arabian
authorities, Isaac eben Amram, describes two species, the greater and the
lesser, a distinction still recognized. We need scarcely add that it is
well known at the present day, and is used for various purposes both in
this country and in the East.


Καρὶς,

Squilla, _a Legless Lobster_, when triturated and drunk with the root of
bryony it kills lumbrici.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The squilla belongs to the order of μαλακόστρακα. (See Book
I, 91.) The present article we suppose is the _Cancer Squilla_, L. It is
treated of very cursorily by the other authorities.


Καρκίνος,

Cancer, _Crab_; of the ashes of burnt crabs, that of river-crabs is
equally desiccative with those of the sea urchins and cockles. By the
peculiarity of its whole substance it proves wonderfully efficacious when
applied to persons bitten by mad dogs, as mentioned in another place. The
ashes of the sea-crabs being extremely desiccative, do not indeed agree
with them, but rather relieve those who stand in need of desiccative
remedies. The river-crab when pulverised and applied, ejects thorns and
the points of darts.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The _Cancer Pagurus_, a large edible crab, would appear to be
the sea animal treated of under this head. The river-crab, we suppose, is
the _Astacus fluviatilis_, or crawfish. Dioscorides recommends the ashes
of the river-crab most especially in hydrophobia, and as an application
to fissures in the feet and anus, chilblains, and cancers, and also
as an antidote to the bites of venomous animals. Galen also gives an
interesting account of the use of them in hydrophobia, and Serapion
repeats Galen’s account of them. See further, Book V, 3, of this work.
Galen speaks with great confidence of their efficacy in this case, indeed
he affirms that he had never known them fail when they had got a fair
trial. The other authorities supply no additional information of interest
under this head. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 147), Rhases (Cont. l. ult. iii,
42.) These two agree that the flesh of the river-crab with the milk of
asses is beneficial in phthisis.


Κάρον,

Carum, _Caraway_; the seed is desiccant and heating in the third degree;
and not only the seed, but also the whole plant is carminative and
diuretic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt that it is the _Carum Carui_. It is
evidently the careum of Pliny, and derives its name from Caria. (H. N.
xxix, 49.) Our author copies closely from Galen. Dioscorides calls it
diuretic, stomachic, pleasant to the taste, digestive, &c. The Arabians
further give it the character of being a cordial and anthelminthic
medicine. (See Serapion (c. 279), Avicenna (ii, 2, 137), and Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. i, 178.)


Καρπήσιον,

Carpesium, is aromatic, and consists of subtile particles. It therefore
clears away visceral obstructions, proves diuretic, and removes calculi
of the kidneys.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The Arabians identified this substance with their own
_Cubebæ_. See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 242), Avicenna (ii, 2, 134),
and Serapion (c. 188.) But we will show in another place that this was
a mistake on their part. Nothing satisfactory has been ascertained
regarding it, and we have no pleasure in dwelling upon the conjectures of
the commentators on Dioscorides and of the herbalists.


Καρύον,

Nux Juglans, _Walnut_; the tree has some astringency in the shoots, but
more in the bark of the nuts. The juice of them, therefore, when boiled
with honey, becomes a stomachic medicine. The rind of it, when burnt,
consists of subtile particles, and becomes desiccant without pungency;
but the edible part of it being oily, is readily converted into bile.
The oil formed from them consists of subtile particles, and discusses
swellings and gangrenes. Walnuts which are rancid from age prove
detergent of cutaneous affections. But the Pontic, called the slender
nut, is colder and austere, but in other respects is like the large.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of this article in the portion of our work
devoted to dietetics. See Book I. We shall merely repeat that the two
species of nuts described by Paulus and other ancient authorities are
evidently the _Nux Juglans_, or walnut, and the _Nux Avellana_, or
filbert. This is very evident from Galen’s description of them. (Opera.
ed. Basil, ii, 88.) Our author copies closely from him. Dioscorides
treats of the nuces still more circumstantially, recommending them both
internally and externally as being vermifuge, and curing ill-conditioned
ulcers, and many other diseases. The filbert, when triturated with axunge
or bear’s grease, he recommends for the cure of baldness. (i, 178,
179.) The Arabians, under this head, do little more than condense the
information supplied to them by their Grecian masters. See in particular
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 505), Avicenna (ii, 2, 42, 494), and Serapion
(c. 162.) Serapion states that the nux avellana is useful in catarrhs,
and as an application in cases of alopecia. Here, however, he professes
to borrow from Dioscorides. Avicenna and Rhases recommend the oil of the
hazel-nut in herpes esthiomenos, erysipelas, and fistula lachrymalis.
They speak favorably of both as a remedy for the bites of venomous
animals. They also are agreed that the walnut is expectorant.


Καρυόφυλλον,

Caryophyllum, _Cloves_; they are not the substance which their name might
imply, but, as it were, the flowers of a tree which are brought from
India; like chaff, black, nearly a finger’s length, aromatic, acrid,
bitterish, hot, and desiccative in about the third degree. They serve
many useful purposes for condiments and other medicines.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. From our author’s description there cannot be the least
hesitation on our part in acknowledging it to be the _Caryophyllus
aromaticus_, L. (_i. q._), _Eugenia Caryophyllata_, Thunberg, that is
to say, the Clove-tree. We are equally well convinced that no mention
of this article is to be found in the works of Dioscorides, Pliny,
Theophrastus, Galen, Aëtius, Oribasius, nor, in short, in those of any
preceding author. Whence Paulus drew his knowledge of it cannot now
be ascertained. The Arabians display a very correct acquaintance with
it. Avicenna, in treating of it, refers to no other Greek authority
but Paulus. After describing it in much the same terms as our author,
he states it to be hot and dry in the third degree, says it renders
the breath fragrant, improves the sight, and is useful in pterygium;
is stomachic and hepatic, and removes vomiting and nausea. (ii, 2,
311.) Serapion, in treating of the _Gariofilus_, first quotes from a
translation of Galen the description of the _Garyophyllon_ given by
Paulus, which he affirms is taken line for line from Galen. This is
evidently a mistake, founded on some erroneous translation of Galen into
Arabic. He then gives its characters from several Arabian authorities
to the effect that it is stomachic, hepatic, cordial, aphrodisiacal,
and digestive; and says that it is brought from India. (c. 319.) Rhases
says cloves are hot and dry, and are both stomachic and cordial. (Ad
Mansor. iii, 22.) We have not been able to find the passage in the
‘Continens’ where they are treated of, there being some mistake in the
marginal reference of Avicenna. Symeon Seth says of the caryophyllon
that it is hot and dry in the second, or, perhaps, in the third degree;
is the fruit of a tree, and is stomachic, hepatic, and cordial; removes
nausea connected with humidity, but is bad for the bowels. (c. 15.) The
caryophyllon also occurs in one of the antidotes of Myrepsus. (c. 22.)
Ebn Baithar, however, is the ancient authority who gives the fullest
account of cloves, which he represents as being useful in diabetes and
strangury, in black bile, diarrhœa, and chronic coughs. He says in
particular that they are uterine and aphrodisiac, and hence warm the
uterus and promote impregnation. He also holds that they are stomachic,
carminative, and hepatic. (ii, 281.)


Κάσσαμον,

Cassamum; some say that it is the fruit of the balsam-tree, of which we
have treated under that word.


Κασσία,

Cassia, is heating and desiccative in the third order, consists of
sufficiently subtile particles, is acrid, and moderately astringent. It
is therefore incisive and discutient, imparts strength to the organs, and
is also emmenagogue.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Salmasius contends that the ancient Cassia was the same as
our cinnamon. See Needham (ad Geopon. vii, 13), and Celsus (Hierobot.
in voce Kiddah.) Stackhouse affirms, however, that the ancients were
unacquainted with the _Laurus Cinnamomum_. He refers it to the _Laurus
gracilis_. (Comment. in Theophrast.) Sprengel, in his R. H. H., makes
it to be the _Laurus Cassia_, which has now got the scientific name
_Cinnamomum Cassia_. The close connexion between the cinnamon and cassia
has occasioned difficulty in distinguishing them from one another, down
even to the present times. They are often sold for one another in the
Indian bazaars. The _Cassia lignea_ of the ancients would appear to
have been the same thing as the _Cassia bark_ of the moderns. According
to Ainslie, the odour of it is very like cinnamon, but fainter. (Mat.
Ind. 35.) The _Cassia Fistula_ was merely the bark rolled up into
_fistulæ_, or pipes. The Greeks, as we shall show in another place, were
unacquainted with the true _Cassia Fistula_. Dioscorides describes
several varieties of it which cannot now be readily recognized. He calls
it heating, diuretic, desiccant, and mildly astringent, and recommends it
as an emmenagogue, and for various other medicinal purposes. He concludes
by saying it may be used in place of cinnamon, and that it is useful for
many purposes. (i, 12.) Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of
it briefly, in nearly the same terms as Paulus. All the Arabians treat
of it fully. See in particular Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 183), Serapion (c.
301), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 151.) Avicenna describes circumstantially
several kinds of cassia, which he says is closely allied to cinnamon
in nature and in virtues. He recommends it in diseases of the eyes and
uterus, and joins Serapion in holding it to be alexipharmic. The only
Arabian authority quoted by Rhases under this head (namely, Misib) calls
it stomachic, hepatic, and attenuant. The same authority is quoted by
Serapion. Another of Serapion’s authorities says it has strong powers for
procuring abortion. The cassia occurs in the works of Hippocrates, and in
those of Celsus. The latter ranks it in his list of discutients. (v, 11.)
Galen states that, in the absence of cinnamon, a double dose of cassia
or of carpesium may be used in place of it. (ii, 434, ed. Basil.) It is
described by Theophrastus (H. P. ix, 5), and Pliny (xi, 43).


Καστόριον,

Castorium, _Castor_, is heating and desiccative, with excessive tenuity
of parts, by which, in addition to its other actions, it is rendered a
suitable remedy for affections of the nerves proceeding from a collection
of humours. It also readily warms parts which are immoderately cooled,
both when applied externally and when drunk, without at all injuring
any other part, even if they should be in a state of moderate fever, as
in cataphora and lethargy. It is likewise emmenagogue, and expels the
secundines. In affections of the brain and lungs it is a very efficacious
remedy, even when inhaled in respiration.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. All the ancient authorities describe the Castor as being the
testicles of the beaver (_Castor Fiber_, L.) Matthiolus, we believe, was
the first to rectify this error. It is a substance contained in follicles
situated between the anus and genital organs. The use of castor in
hysteria is mentioned by Herodotus. (iv.) Dioscorides, Galen, Rhases,
and Serapion, like our author, recommend it as an emmenagogue; Celsus
prescribes castor with pepper in cases of tetanus. (iv. 3.) He also
recommends it in lethargy and deafness. (vi.) Pliny also mentions its
being used in tetanus and other cases where soporifics are indicated.
(H. N. xxxii, 3, 8.) Of all the ancient authorities Avicenna treats
of it most fully, recommending it particularly in nervous affections,
stupor, and paralysis, also in hiccough when drunk with vinegar, and as
a carminative in flatulence of the bowels. The best counter-agents to
it are acid citrons, vinegar with wine and asses’ milk. He says of it,
that it is alexipharmic, and proves beneficial in the suffocation induced
by hellebore. (ii, 2, 122.) Serapion copies literally from Dioscorides
and Galen (c. 445.) Rhases recommends it as a calefacient medicine for
warming the nerves, promoting menstruation, and dissolving swellings. (Ad
Mansor. iii, 30.) The account which he gives of it in his ‘Continens’ is
made up of extracts from Dioscorides, Galen, and our author. (l. ult.
188.) Ebn Baithar gives a very lengthy and not uninteresting account of
this substance. (i, 263.)


Καυκαλὶς,

Caucalis, _Wild Carrot_; it is heating, like the carrot, desiccant,
diuretic, and is pickled as a preserve.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sibthorp supposed it to be the _Tordylium officinale_; but
perhaps we may venture to refer it rather to the _Caucalis maritima_,
Lam. R. Stephens calls it _Persil batard_, i. e. _Bastard parsley_. It
is more properly an article of food than a medicine. Our author borrows
his account of it from Dioscorides and Galen, and none of the other
authorities supply any additional information of interest respecting
it. In modern times its application in medicine has been extended. See
Matthiolus (in Dioscorid.) and Parkinson (922.)


Κέγχρος,

Milium, _Millet_, is cooling in the first degree, and desiccant in the
second. It also, to a certain degree, consists of subtile particles.
When used then for a fomentation in small bags, and in the form of a
cataplasm, it is of a desiccant nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dierbach inclines to the _Holcus Sorghum_, a species of
millet called _Sorgo_ or _Guinea corn_. Most of the other authorities
refer it to the _Panicum Italicum_. (See Sprengel, Schneider, and
Parkinson.) We have treated of it among the articles of food in Book I.
As a medicine, it is principally in the form of a fomentation that it is
prescribed by Dioscorides and the other authorities. Galen does not speak
very favorably of the cataplasm prepared from it. The Arabians treat of
it in much the same terms as the Greeks. See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
532), Avicenna (ii, 2, 288), and Serapion (c. 102.) They all speak of it
as being a very inferior article of food; and as a medicine, recommend it
only in a fomentation. It was retained in our English Dispensatory down
to a late date. See Quincy. To this day it is much prized by the native
practitioners of Hindostan. See Ainslie (Mat. Ind. 124.)


Κέδρος,

Cedrus, _Cedar_ (?), or _Juniper_; the shrub, which resembles juniper,
and the tree are calefacient and desiccative in the third degree; but
the oil prepared from them, which they call cedræa, touches upon the
fourth, being composed of sufficiently subtile particles. It therefore
corrodes soft flesh readily, and without pain; and the hard flesh, more
particularly of dead bodies, it dries and preserves from putrefaction. It
kills lice, nits, ascarides, worms in the ears, and has many other powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes two species, the larger being probably
the _Juniperus Phœnicea_, and the smaller the _Juniperus communis_.
The ἄρκευθος was a species of the same genus. Pliny calls the pitch of
the tree by the name of _Cedria_, and the oil by that of _Pisselæon_.
Is the cedria the gum vernix, called sandarax by the Arabians? We will
discuss this question in the Appendix to this Book, when we come to treat
of the substances introduced into the Materia Medica by the Arabians.
Dioscorides says of the fruit of the cedar or juniper, that it is
calefacient and bad for the stomach, that it is useful in coughs, as an
emmenagogue, and alexipharmic. (i, 105.) Galen says the fruit is edible,
but apt to occasion headache and pain of the stomach. (De Simpl. vii.)
The Arabians treat fully of it. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 160, 668.) He and
the other Arabians borrow nearly all their information from the Greeks.
Even Ebn Baithar contains little that is original under this head. (ii,
94.) We observe, by the way, that his translator, Dr. Sontheimer, marks
it as the _Pinus Cedrus_, but this it clearly cannot be.


Κεντάυριον,

Centaurium, _Centaury_; the root of the great centaury is acrid and
heating, with a terrene astringency. It therefore promotes menstruation,
kills and expels the fœtus, agglutinates wounds, relieves hæmoptysis,
and other affections of the chest. The root of the small centaury is
possessed of no powers, but the branches are strongly desiccative, and
without pungency. Hence they are applicable in those cases in which the
great centaury was mentioned as being useful; and in ischiatic complaints
the decoction of it given in an injection evacuates bile and sometimes
blood, which affords great relief.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The _Centaurea Centaurium_, L., and the _Erythræa
Centaurium_, Pers., would appear to be the greater and less centaury
of the ancients. See Parkinson, Sprengel, and the other commentators
on Dioscorides. Pliny describes three sorts, but would seem to have
fallen into a mistake as to the meaning of a passage in Theophrastus.
See Harduin ad Plinii H. N. xxv, 32, and Parkinson (Theatre of Plants,
273.) Dioscorides recommends the greater centaury in the same cases as
our author, who abridges him and Galen under this head. He says very
particularly of it, that it produces menstruation, and expels the fœtus
when applied in the form of a collyrium (tent) to the vagina. (iii,
6.) The Arabians give it the same characters as their Grecian masters.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 158), Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 176), and Serapion
(c. 202.) Serapion and Mesue likewise recommend the lesser centaury
in sciatica, either in a potion to the amount of two drachms, or in a
clyster to the amount of three ounces, with oil of sesame. Galen has a
whole book on the virtues of the lesser centaury, in which there is a
prescription for an extract of it. The ancients had great faith in it
for the cure of hydrophobia. According to Galen, (who it may well be
supposed had devoted great attention to the study of its virtues), it is
possessed of bitterness with some astringency, and is most especially
excellent as a deobstruent in obstructions of the liver and scirrhus
of the spleen. He mentions that some gave it in a potion for nervous
affections, and that in a clyster it relieves sciatica by occasioning
evacuations of bile. He also recommends it strongly in the form of a
fomentation to ill-conditioned and obstinate ulcers. The lesser centaury
(_Erythræa Centaurium_, Persoon) still continues to hold a place in our
Dispensatory, but, as Dr. Pereira remarks, “is rarely used by medical
practitioners; yet it might be used as an indigenous substitute for
gentian.” (Materia Medica, 809.) In the days of Quincy it retained
all its ancient characters. (Engl. Dispens. 103.) Galen’s tract on it
must have been in great repute anciently, since Serapion has given a
translation of the whole of it. It is retained in the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia.


Κέρας ἀιγὸς,

Cornu Capri, _Goatshorn_, and Κ. ἐλάφου, Cornu Cervi, _Hartshorn_,
cleanse the teeth when burnt, and restrain the progress of foul ulcers.
The hart’s horn, when pulverised and then applied, fastens loose teeth;
when washed after burning, it relieves dysentery, cæliac affection,
spitting of blood, and jaundice, when given to the amount of two
spoonfuls. It is also mixed up with ophthalmic remedies. The horn of a
bull, when taken in water, restrains hemorrhages.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides, Galen, and Serapion speak of the medicinal
properties of _horn_ in nearly the same terms as our author. We need
scarcely say that the stag’s or hart’s horn has been much used in modern
times for the preparation of ammonia, which is hence called the spirit of
hartshorn. Dioscorides recommends hartshorn when burnt until it become
white, and cleaned like calamine, in affections of the eyes. It will now
be readily understood, that when so treated it is reduced to a phosphate
of lime. Avicenna further prescribes it for removing the swelling of
dropsy; and, like Dioscorides, he recommends it in jaundice. (ii, 2,
178.) We would remark, in conclusion, that it was the red deer which
furnished the medicinal hartshorn of the ancients, but that the moderns
have commonly used the horns of the fallow-deer instead. See Hill’s
Materia Medica (835.)


Κεράσια,

Cerasia, _Cherries_; the sweet are more laxative, the austere more
stomachic, but the acid agree best with pituitous and foul stomachs,
owing to their being incisive. The gum of the tree smoothes asperities of
the trachea, and relieves calculous affections when drunk with wine.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This unquestionably is the _Prunus Cerasus_, L. We have
given some account of cherries in the portion of our work devoted to
ancient dietetics. Galen, in his work on Simples, treats of them with
great precision; he remarks that in some the austere quality, in some the
sweet, and in others the acid prevails, and that when unripe the sour is
predominant. In fact, our author’s account of them is manifestly abridged
from Galen. Aëtius and the other authorities, in like manner, copy from
Galen. See also Serapion (c. 145.)


Κερατωνία,

Ceratonia, _Carob-tree_, and the fruit of it (_siliquæ_) are possessed of
desiccant and astringent powers, with a certain share of sweetness.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is unquestionably the _Ceratonia Siliqua_, L., or
_Carob-tree_. We have given some account of it among the articles of food
in Book I. All the other authorities on the Materia Medica give it nearly
the same characters as our author. The writer who is fullest on this head
is Avicenna, who treats of it under the name of _Carob_, i. e. _Siliqua_.
(ii, 2, 193.) See also Serapion (c. 135), and Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
366.) Our modern herbalists treat of it in nearly the same terms as the
ancients. See Parkinson (236.) It is still used on the Continent and in
Asia as an inferior article of food, and holds a place in the modern
Greek Pharmacopœia.


Κεφαλαὶ,

Capita, _Heads_; those of pickled herrings, when burnt, acquire a
desiccative power without being very acrid. They therefore relieve
fissures about the anus, and chronic cases of indurated uvula. The
entire head of the anchovy (_smaris_), when burnt, is useful in alopecia
when applied with bear’s grease. The burnt head of a mouse when applied
with honey does the same thing. The dried head of the kite without its
feathers, when drunk in water to as great an amount as can be lifted with
three fingers, relieves gouty affections. They say that the head of a
lizard extracts sharp-pointed things, and removes myrmecia, acrochordon,
and clavus.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of the medicinal properties of _Heads_
is taken from Galen. See also Aëtius and Serapion. Dioscorides treats
of the different articles separately, and not under a general head like
Galen and his successors. (See ii, 31, 32, &c.) The Arabians merely copy
from Dioscorides and Galen, especially the latter. See in particular
Serapion (c. 571.)


Κηκὶς,

Galla, _Gall_; that sort called Omphacitis is a very sour medicine, and
hence it proves desiccant, repels defluxions, contracts and astringes
relaxed and debilitated parts. It agrees also with all cases of
defluxion. It is to be placed in the third rank of desiccants, and the
second of refrigerants. The other sort, which is yellow, porous, and
large, is desiccant indeed, but less so than the other, inasmuch as it
is deficient in astringency. In a decoction it relieves inflammations of
the fundament and prolapsus ani when burnt. Extinguished in vinegar they
become styptic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes two species of galls, of which the
better kind, called omphacitis, consisted of small, hard, and solid
pieces without perforations, and is not to be confounded with the
ὄμφακις, or cupula of the acorn, mentioned by Paulus. (iii, 62.) See also
Theophrastus (Hist. Plant. iii, 9), Pliny (H. N. xvi, 9), and Serapion
(De Simpl. c. 237.) Galls were much used by the ancient physicians in
all cases requiring powerful astringents. According to Dr. Hill, the
_Gallæ omphacitæ_ of the ancients were the same as the Aleppo galls now
in use, and the other kind, sometimes called _Onocicæ_, the same as
the European. Dioscorides describes the gall as the fruit of the oak,
an error which is to be found, as Dr. Pereira remarks, in the works of
comparatively recent writers. We need scarcely say that the excrescence
is now well ascertained to be the production of a hymenopterous insect
on the _Quercus infectoria_. Dioscorides treats largely of the cases in
which galls are applicable, concluding with the remark that their use is
indicated whenever it is wished to astringe, restrain, or dry. (ii, 146.)
Our author’s description of their medicinal properties is mostly taken
from Galen. Nearly the same may be said of Aëtius and Oribasius. The
Arabians, in treating of them, borrow all the information which they give
from the Greeks. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 308), Rhases (Cont.
l. ult. i, 234), Serapion (c. 98.)


Κηπέα,

Cepea, resembles the Purslain. The leaves of it in an infusion relieve
scabious bladder when drunk; and the root of it, when taken in a draught
with rock asparagus, relieves strangury from obstruction.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Little is known for certain of this herb; but the most
probable conjecture that has been made regarding it is, that it is the
_Sedum Cepæa_, L. Our author’s account of it is taken literally from
Dioscorides. Galen does not treat of it, nor have we been able to trace
it out in the Materia Medica of the Arabians. Our old herbalists treat
of it very hesitatingly under the head of brooklime. See Gerard and
Parkinson.


Κηρὸς,

Cera, _Wax_, being of a moderate temperament, forms the basis of many
other medicines. By itself it is slightly detergent, and has some
discutient and calefacient powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This article is so well known that it requires no
illustration. Dioscorides describes very circumstantially the process
for bleaching wax and making it white. It was done with salt water and
natron in a manner quite different from the process now pursued for this
purpose. (ii, 105.) The Arabians treat fully of it, but without making
any addition of much importance. See in particular Serapion (c. 10) and
Avicenna (ii, 2, 462.) Avicenna says that wax, when applied to the wound
inflicted by a poisoned arrow, prevents it from being followed by any bad
effects. He recommends it as an expectorant in diseases of the chest,
both in a liniment and in a potion. One of Serapion’s authorities,
Abugerig, in like manner, recommends it in diseases of the chest.


Κήρυκες,

Buccinæ (a species of shell-fish); their shell when burnt is possessed
of sufficiently desiccative powers without pungency, they therefore
agree with malignant ulcers, and are to be used for putrid ulcers with
vinegar, wine, or oxymel. That part of them which is as it were their
flesh when alive, if boiled in oil, renders the oil an useful injection
for relieving earache.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sprengel makes them to be the _Buccina Harpa_ and _Lapillus_.
They are noticed among the articles of food in the ninety-first section
of the First Book. Dioscorides correctly remarks that a species of
quicklime is got from their shells. He recommends it as a dentifrice, and
as an application to burns. (ii, 5.) Galen very properly inculcates the
necessity of getting them finely levigated before applying them to sores.
Avicenna treats of the buccina along with other crustacea under one head.
His information is almost entirely borrowed from Dioscorides and Galen.
(ii, 2, 529.) See also Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 224.)


Κίκι,

Ricinus, _Palma Christi_; its fruit, which is also purgative, has
detergent and discutient properties, and so also has its leaf, but
weaker. We have already spoken of its oil.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt that the κίκι or κρότων was the
_Ricinus communis_, the Castor-oil plant, or Palma Christi. It is
mentioned by Herodotus (Euterpe, 94) and in several passages of the
Hippocratic treatises. See Œconom. Hippocrat. (218.) It does not occur,
however, in the works of Celsus. Dioscorides informs us that it is called
_croton_, from its resemblance to the dog-tick, and it is worthy of
observation that both the plant and the dog-tick bear the name of Ricinus
in Latin. See Pliny (H. N. xi, 34, and xv, 7.) Dioscorides says that the
oil is used for lamps and plasters, and also as a purgative and emetic;
but that it is a very loathsome and harsh medicine when administered
internally. He further mentions the seeds as being used in cutaneous
diseases, and the leaves in diseases of the eyes (iv, 141.) Galen notices
it but very briefly as a purgative having detergent and discutient
powers. Aëtius and Oribasius appear to have overlooked it. Mesue commends
it as a purgative in cases of colic attended with flatulence. He says
it produces vomiting and painful dejection of the bowels, but that its
operation occasions a discharge of phlegm and bile, which often proves
effectual in diseases of the joints. (De Simpl. 28.) He calls it by the
names of _Albemesuch_, _Granum regum_, and _Kerva_. Avicenna says of
the oil, that it is laxative, and is a good application to scabies and
other cutaneous diseases. (ii, 2, 523.) It is deserving of remark that
the _Grana regia_ of Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 339), are applicable to
the _Lathyris_, and not to the _Cici_. Indeed Mesue jumbles together his
description of these two substances. (l. c.) We have mentioned already
that the _Oleum Cicinum_ or _Castor-oil_, was used as a purgative by the
ancient physicians. Dr. Hill says of it, “the ancients obtained an oil by
expression, and also by boiling, from the seeds; they called it _Oleum
Cicinum_; they used it, for burning in their lamps, and in some of their
ointments and plasters. Dioscorides commends it internally against worms;
and Piso tells us that it is sometimes used in the same manner in the
Brazils, with success.”


Κιννάβαρις,

Cinnabaris, _Sanguis Draconis_, is possessed of moderately acrid powers
with some astringency.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We must refer to what we have stated in another work, which
we have already often quoted, for the general literature of this subject.
It will be sufficient in this place to state that the substance here
treated of under the name of Cinnabaris is indisputably the _Sanguis
Draconis_, or concrete juice of the _Dracœna Draco_. This is obvious
from Dioscorides’s description of it, who says that it is of a deep
colour, and hence some had thought it the blood of the dragon. (v, 109.)
See further, Pliny (H. N. xxxiii, 38), and the very interesting note of
Harduin, in which the origin of the confusion of the dragon’s blood with
cinnabar is fully explained. Serapion treats of the _Sanguis Draconis_ as
the production of a tree, and quotes a description of it from Dioscorides
and Galen. What vegetable substance in their Mat. Med. Serapion refers
to, we are at a loss to decide. One of his authorities, Constantinus,
calls it the juice of a plant, possessed of styptic powers, and therefore
used as an astringent both internally as a suppository, and externally
when so applied. (De Simpl. 341.) Avicenna recommends it similarly,
but gives no description of it. (ii, 2, 627.) It is to be borne in
mind that besides the vegetable cinnabar, the ancients described two
other substances under this name, viz., the native mineral cinnabar or
sulphuret of quicksilver, and a factitious cinnabar, which was their Sal
Atticum. See Hill (Mat. Med. 60), and Geoffroy (215.) The dragon’s blood
is retained in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia, where it is set down as the
product of the _Calamus Draco_.


Κιννάμωνον,

Cinnamomum, _Cinnamon_, is composed of extremely subtile parts, yet is
not extremely heating, but only in the third degree. But of those in the
same rank of calefacients none is so desiccative owing to the tenuity of
its parts. The cinnamomis is a sort of weak cinnamon; but some call it
pseudo-cinnamomum.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sprengel and Dierbach acknowledge it as the _Laurus
Cinnamomus_. We have stated, however, under Cassia that Stackhouse
is of opinion that the ancients were unacquainted with our _Laurus
Cinnamomus_; but we see no good grounds for this opinion. We shall give
the words of Sprengel: “Cassia lignea nostratum et cassia cinnamomea
eadem esse videntur, unde et cassiam ipsam ex eadem arbore provenire,
quæ cinnamomum largiatur, veteres jam statuerunt.” (ad Dioscor. i, 13.)
Dioscorides recommends cinnamon in uterine affections, that is to say,
for promoting the flow of the menses and for the expulsion of the fœtus.
We need scarcely mention that this use of it has been revived of late.
He also holds it to be alexipharmic, recommends it in coughs, dropsies,
and diseases of the kidneys and bladder; in complaints of the eyes,
and in the formation of elegant ointments; in short, he adds, it is a
medicine much in use. (i, 13.) Galen and the other Greek authorities
give its medicinal characters in more general terms. The Arabians treat
of it at great length, and more especially Avicenna, who recommends it
in the same cases as Dioscorides, namely, as a diuretic, emmenagogue,
and alexipharmic medicine, and also as a stomachic and deobstruent in
congestion of the liver. He also holds it to be cordial and expectorant.
(ii, 2, 124.) Serapion professes to borrow his account of cinnamon from
Dioscorides and Galen; but the extract which he gives from the latter,
is not to be found in his works as they now exist. In it cinnamon is
commended as being an aromatic medicine, applicable in complaints of the
stomach and liver, in affections of the eyes, and as an emmenagogue and
diuretic. (De Simpl. 266.) Rhases copies from Dioscorides, Galen, and our
author. (Cont. l. ult. i, 213.)


Κιρκέα,

Circea, _Enchanter’s Nightshade_; its root, which is desiccative and
fragrant, when drunk with wine, cleanses the uterus. Its fruit, when
taken in gruel, promotes the formation of milk.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The commentators are much divided respecting it. Sprengel
inclines to the _Cynanchus niger_. Lobelius took it to be the _Solanum
Dulcamara_. One thing is certain, that it was quite different from any
known species of the modern genus _Circæa_. See Parkinson (351.) Both
Galen and our author, in treating of it, borrow from Dioscorides, the
former of these professedly. We have not been able to detect it in the
Mat. Med. of the Arabians.


Κίσσηρις,

Pumex, _the Pumice-stone_, is detergent, and more particularly of the
teeth, not only in power, but also by its asperity. It is also joined to
the medicines used for the incarnation of ulcers, and to the abstergent
plasters applied to the skin. If burnt, its parts became finer, but it is
then pungent; but if washed it lays aside its pungency.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt that it was Pumice. Pumice, according
to the latest analysis, is found to contain silica, argil, magnesia,
soda, oxyd of manganese, and some water. For an account of it, see Pliny
(H. N. xxxvi, 42.) He recommends it in diseases of the eyes. It appears
evident, however, that he had copied from his contemporary, to whom he
is so frequently indebted, we mean Dioscorides, who gives a similar
description of pumice, and also recommends it in diseases of the eyes,
more especially in opacity of the cornea, and likewise as an ingredient
in applications to sores, and as a dentifrice. (v, 124.) Galen, after
some preliminary discussion whether pumice be a metal, a stone, or an
earth, proceeds to state its medicinal properties, in which he agrees
with Dioscorides, most especially commending it as a dentifrice. (De
Simpl. ix.) We may just mention in this place that modern authorities
do not think so highly of this substance as a dentifrice. See Jameson’s
‘Mineral.’ (i, 333.) The Arabians under this head merely copy from
Dioscorides and Galen. See in particular Serapion (De Simpl. 417.) Pumice
anciently was used for polishing the leather with which books were bound.
(Catullus, Epig. i.) Theophrastus (De Lapidibus), states that pumice
is formed by the action of fire; and M. Dolomieu suspects that it is a
vitrified granite or gneiss. The pumice, for some time past, has ceased
to hold a place in our Dispensatory. Neither is it to be found in the
modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Κιστὸς ἤ Κίσσαρος,

Cistus, _Rock-rose_; it is an astringent shrub, and of gently cooling
powers. Its leaves and shoots are so desiccative as to agglutinate
wounds; but the flowers are of a more drying nature, being about the
second degree, and hence when drunk they cure dysenteries and all kind of
fluxes. Externally they relieve putrid ulcers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Stackhouse marks it simply as the _Cistus_, L., called by
Miller the _Rock-rose_ (Index to Theophrastus.) Woodville calls it the
_C. Creticus_ (Medical Botany.) Dioscorides describes two species of
it, which probably are the _C. salvifolius_ and _C. villosus_. Galen
particularly commends the former in uterine diseases. He also treats
under this name of a much more celebrated species of the cistus, namely,
the _Ladaniferus_, of which we will have to give some account under
Λάδανον. Aëtius and Oribasius are the copyists of Galen. The Arabians
treat separately of the _Cistus_ and _Ladanum_, recommending the former
as a powerful astringent, both in external ulcers and in those of the
intestines and womb. Avicenna speaks favorably of it in deafness and
other affections of the ear. (ii, 2, 111.) Serapion would appear to
have confounded it with the κισσὸς (ivy); or at least he has given a
very confused account of it in his chapter on the Ivy. (De Simpl. 41,
42.) Rhases does not appear to notice it separately from the _Landanum_
(Ladanum) (Cont. l. ult. iii, 67.) The two species of cistus treated
of under this head have long ceased to hold a place in our modern
Dispensatories.


Κισσὸς,

Hedera, _Ivy_, is composed of opposite powers, for it is astringent and
cooling, and acrid and hot; consisting of a watery and tepid ingredient
when green. Its leaves, when boiled with wine, are agglutinative of
wounds and relieve burns and splenic affections. Its juice is an errhine,
and cures chronic defluxions from the ear. Its tears, being more acrid,
kill lice and act as a depilatory.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We need have no hesitation in referring it with the best
authorities to the _Hedera Helix_, L. Dioscorides describes three
varieties of it, the white, the black, and the helix; but it is easy to
see that they are all varieties of the same species. His distinctions,
however, occasioned great trouble and confusion both to his Arabian
copyists and to the modern herbalists. See Serapion (De Simpl. 41), and
Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 680), and Gerard (History of Plants, 857.)
Our author’s account of its medicinal properties is taken from Galen.
The tears of it, mentioned by Dioscorides and our author, were evidently
its resin, now generally known by the name of gum ivy. All the ancient
writers recommend it for thinning the hair and killing lice.


Κίτριον,

Citrium, _Citron_, called also Malum Medicum; its middle part is acid
or devoid of qualities; but the part in which the seed is contained
belongs to the third rank of cooling and desiccative medicines. The bark
is desiccative in the second degree, but not cooling, for it is acrid.
Its flesh engenders thick chyme, is phlegmatic and cold. Its seed is
discutient and desiccative in the second degree; and the leaves of the
tree are possessed of desiccative and discutient powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt, as Sprengel states, it is the _Malus Medica_,
L., or Citron. Most of the commentators on Virgil agree that it is his
“felix malum” (Georg, ii, 127.) Dr. Paris remarks that it probably
deserves the praises bestowed on it by him as an antidote to poisons
(Pharmacol. 254); and on this head there is a very interesting dispute
between the celebrated Fr. Hoffmann and Moses Charras, the famous
French authority on the Pharmacopœia. See Pharm. (ii, 39.) According to
Macrobius, it is the θύον of Homer, who mentions it in the following line:

    θύον ἄνα νῆσον ὀδώδει.—_Odyss._ v.

Pliny, however, is not of this opinion (H. N. xiii, 16.) Our author
copies closely from Galen. Dioscorides’s account of its medicinal
properties is far more precise and interesting. Citrons, he says, when
drunk with wine, counteract the operation of deadly poisons, and loosen
the belly; the decoction is a gargle for occasioning sweetness of the
breath; its juice is much used by women labouring under pica (see Book
I, 1, of this work), and their seeds seem to preserve clothes in a
chest from being moth-eaten. (i, 166.) The Arabians treat very fully of
the medicinal properties of the citron. See Serapion (De Simpl. i, 1),
Avicenna (ii, 2, 116), and Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 219.) They all agree
that its seed is alexipharmic, both when taken in hot water, and when the
juice is applied to a poisoned wound. See particularly Avicenna (De Med.
Cord. ii.) They also hold that it is an excellent cordial and stomachic;
that it stops bilious purgings, fluxes, and vomiting; and that it dispels
sorrow. They hold, however, that it is prejudicial to the lungs and
nerves. They speak highly of the oil of citrons in paralysis and other
affections of the nerves. We need scarcely remark that this preparation
has been much celebrated in modern times (see Charras, l. c.), and is
still retained in our Pharmacopœia. See Pereira, 1235.


Κιχόριον ἤ πικρὶς,

Cichorium, _Succory_, is, as it were, a wild endive, being cooling and
desiccant in the first degree. It has also some astringency, and hence it
agrees with hepatic dysenteries.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Cichorium Intybus_. We have treated of it among
the pot-herbs in the First Book. It occurs in the Flora Hippocratica.
Dioscorides recommends both the garden and the wild succory as being
astringent, cooling, and stomachic, in various cases, both internally
and externally, for binding the bowels in dysentery, as a cataplasm in
cardiac affection, and as a remedy for gout and ophthalmy. (ii, 159.)
Celsus also ranks the intybus and ambubeia, which are the wild and
garden succory, with astringents. (ii, 30.) Galen and the other Greek
authorities give it the same general characters. The Arabians treat of
the seris and intybus at greater length, and seem to confound the latter,
or endive, with the taraxacon (Leontodon taraxacum?). See in particular
Avicenna (ii, 2, 229, 683.) He recommends the latter most particularly
as a deobstruent in obstructions of the liver and other viscera; he
speaks favorably of it as a plaster in palpitations of the heart, and as
a gargle along with Cassia fistula in inflammations of the throat. All
the Arabians recommend both species as antidotes to the bites of venomous
animals. See Avicenna (l. c.), Serapion (c. 143), and Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. i, 266.) The wild succory (Cichorium Intybus) is still sometimes
employed in medicine. Dr. Pereira says, “the medicinal properties of
_Cichorium Intybus_ are analogous to those of Taraxacum Densleonis.”
(Mat. Med. 698.) It occurs in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Κλήματις,

Clematis, _Virgin’s-bower_, (called also Myrsonöides, Daphnöides,
and Polygonöides,) has twigs as long as the thickness of a May-rush,
(holoschænus,) and petals like the bay, and is of a desiccant nature; it,
therefore, stops diarrhœas, dysenteries, and pains of the teeth, and is
useful for the bites of venomous animals. The other species of clematis
twines around trees like ivy, being of an acrid and caustic nature. Its
fruit, when drunk with water, evacuates bile and phlegm downwards; and
its leaves in a cataplasm, remove leprosy.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The former species, distinguished by the synonyme of
Daphnöides, is the clematis described by Dioscorides (iv, 179), and is
the second species of Galen, who expresses himself contemptuously of
Pamphilus for confounding the two species together. It is clearly a
species of _Clematis_, either the _vitalba_ or _cirrhosa_. All agree
in recommending it as a safe astringent. The other species described
by Dioscorides (iv, 7), and which is the former species of Galen, may
be decidedly determined to be either the _Vinca major_ or _minor_.
It, according to Galen, is possessed of acrid and caustic powers. The
Arabians would appear not to distinguish properly the _clematis_ from the
_hedera_. See Serapion (c. 41), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 169.) The modern
Greek Pharmacopœia contains the _C. erecta_.


Κλινοπόδιον,

Clinopodium, _Field Basil_, is possessed of heating and desiccative
powers, not caustic however, but of the third degree.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It may with considerable confidence be set down as being the
_Clinopodium vulgare_, although doubts have been started on this head.
See Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 23), and Sprengel (Ad Dioscorid.)
Our author follows Galen very closely. Dioscorides represents it to be
diuretic and emmenagogue (iii, 99.) We have not been able to discover any
traces of it in the Mat. Med. of the Arabians, nor in Hippocrates.


Κνίκος,

Cnicus, _Bastard Saffron_; its seed is used only for purgings, but if
applied externally it belongs to the third order of calefacients.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The preponderance of authority is decidedly in favour of
its being the _Carthamus tinctorius_, a plant which held a place in
our Dispensatory with its ancient characters down to recent date. (See
Quincy, 167.) Dioscorides mentions of it that it is used as a potherb,
and as a medicine for opening the bowels. Galen gives it exactly the same
character as our author. The Arabians give rather a confused account of
it by treating of it along with _Atractylis_, which they held to be the
wild cnicus. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 159.) All the Arabians
hold that it is not only laxative, but also powerfully alexipharmic. They
call it _Kartam_ or _Cartamus_. See further Serapion (c. 202), and Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. iii, 46.)


Κογχύλια,

Conchylia; their powers resemble those of the buccinæ.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This name was applied to various Testacea, or _Shell-fish_.
See Harduin (Ad Plinii H. N. ix, 60); Athenæi Deipnos, iii; Aristotle,
H. A. v, 14; and Gesner, De Aquat. Oysters are frequently called by this
name, as in the following lines of Petronius Arbiter:

                              Lucrinis
    Eruta littoribus vendunt Conchylia, cænis
    Ut renovent per damna famem.—_Satyricon._

Dioscorides does not treat of this article, at least, under this name.
The Arabians would appear to have identified them with the _Cochleæ_. See
in particular Serapion (c. 434.)


Κοιλία,

Venter, _the Belly_ of the cormorant, either when boiled, fresh, or
dried, is said to be stomachic if eaten; and in like manner, the inner
coat of the stomach of hens when dried and taken in a draught. But Galen
says, that he found upon trial both these statements false. Dioscorides
relates that the stomach of a wood-pigeon, if drunk, gradually makes
stones be expelled by urine. The stomach of a weasel, when drunk, is a
preservative against all poisonous animals.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Properly speaking _the Stomach_. Our author, as he
acknowledges, borrows from Galen and Dioscorides. Serapion repeats the
same characters of this article upon the authority of Dioscorides. (c.
469.) We may be allowed to mention that the inner membrane of the crop of
a fowl is still a popular remedy for indigestion in the north of Scotland.


Κόκκος κνίδιος,

Granum Gnidium, is the fruit of the Thymelæa and not of the Chamelæa as
some have supposed. Being possessed of acrid and caustic powers, when
drunk, it purges water downwards.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See under Θυμέλαια. All the authorities, from Hipprocrates
downwards, describe it as an acrid purgative. Dr. Pereira says, “_Daphne
Gnidium_ is the _Thymelæa_ of Dioscorides, whose fruit is the κόκκος
κνίδιος, or _Gnidian-berry_, used by Hippocrates. Its properties are
similar to those of D. Mezereum.” (Mat. Med. 807.) Dioscorides gives a
full description of the thymelæa, and states, with excellent precision,
its operation on the animal economy. He says it purges, bringing away a
watery discharge, and kills the fœtus in utero when applied on a pessary.
(iv, 170.) Galen and Aëtius and Oribasius state its characters in brief
terms, like our author. It would appear, in fact, to have been little
used in medicine. The Arabians confound the thymelæa, chamelæa, and
chamæleon together, so that there is great difficulty in making out what
were their exact views on the _Thymelaceæ_. Indeed, the genera of this
tribe of plants are still with difficulty distinguished from one another.
See Lindley’s Vegetable Kingdom, 530.


Κόκκος βαφικὸς,

Granum tinctorium, is desiccative without pungency. It agrees, therefore,
with large wounds and wounds of the nerves when triturated with vinegar
or oxymel.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is _Vermilion_ or _Scarlet grain_, being the product of
a little hemopterous insect called _kermes_ or _Coccus ilicis_. See
Theophrastus (H. P. iii, 16), and Pliny (H. N. xvi, 12.) It was anciently
used in dyeing, but is now superseded by the cochineal. An interesting
account of kermes and cochineal is given by Beckmann. (History of
Inventions.) Dioscorides and the other authorities, like Paulus, commend
it as a vulnerary medicine, especially in wounds of the nerves. The
Arabians, in treating of the kermes, merely repeat what Dioscorides and
Galen had written on this head. See in particular Serapion (De Simpl.
321); Avicenna (ii, 2, 718); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 740.)


Κοκκομηλέα,

Prunus, _the Plum_; its fruit loosens the belly, if fresh, in a greater
degree, or if dried, in a smaller. The decoction of it in gargles, cures
inflammations about the uvula. The gum of the tree has the powers of an
incisive and attenuate substance, so that some relate that when drunk
with wine it proves lithontriptic. With vinegar it is said to cure the
lichen of children. The fruit of the wild plums is manifestly astringent,
and constipates the belly. This plant in Asia is called _Prumnum_. The
dried garden plums, now called damascenes, appear to be similar, as Galen
says.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Prunus insiticia_ or _Bullace tree_,
a well known species of plum. The _Damask-plums_ are much celebrated by
ancient authors. We have treated of plums as an article of food in the
First Book. Pliny and Marcellus Empiricus recommend them particularly
in diseases of the tonsils and gums; but, indeed, all the ancient
authorities prescribe them as astringents in such cases. There is a
slight difference of opinion between Dioscorides and Galen regarding
the virtues of the plum. Dioscorides says, “the fruit is esculent, but
bad for the stomach, and loosens the bowels. But the dried fruit of
the Syrian plums, and more especially those which grow about Damascus
(damascenes?), are stomachic and astringent of the bowels.” Galen says,
“the fruit of the plum tree loosens the bowels, the fresh in a greater
degree and the dried in a less. I know not how it is that Dioscorides
says that the dried damask-plums bind the bowels, for even these
manifestly loosen, but in a less degree than the Spanish; for the damask
are more astringent, and the Spanish more sweet, &c.” (De Simpl. vii.)
This slight difference created a keen controversy in modern times between
Brasavolus, who impugns, and Matthiolus, who defends the strictures of
Galen. To us it appears that the only mistake committed by Dioscorides
consists in stating his views too succinctly. He, no doubt, never meant
to deny that the damask-plums have a certain purgative faculty mixed
up with astringency, like plums in general. Galen’s language is more
precise, but we do not see that there is much real difference between his
views and those of Dioscorides. The Arabians gravely state this mighty
controversy between the two ancient sages, but scarcely pretend “tantas
componere lites.” See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 565); Avicenna (ii, 2,
532); and Serapion (c. 139.) One of Rhases’s authorities says of plums,
that they moisten the stomach and loosen the belly, purging yellow bile.
Another of them, named Chuz, says the water of them is emmenagogue, and
their gum, mixed with sugar, cures impetigo. Avicenna quotes this opinion
with approbation. All agree that they are lithontriptic.


Κόλλα,

Gluten, _Glue_; that prepared from the similago and pollen is of an
emplastic and digestive nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. _Gluten_ or _Paste_. Dioscorides mentions that the best kind
is prepared from the hides of bulls in Rhodes. Galen makes mention of
another kind prepared from flour, and used in binding books. (De Simpl.
vii.) See further, Pliny (H. N. xiii, 26.) The Arabians, in treating of
it, derive most of their information from the Greeks. See Serapion (c.
138); Avicenna (ii, 2, 202); and Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 336.) They
treat of the ichthyocolla under this head.


Κολοκύνθη,

Cucurbita, _the Gourd_, is of a humid and cold temperament in the
second degree. Hence, when applied entire in a cataplasm, it cools hot
inflammations.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have stated the difficulty of determining this article in
the chapter of the First Book on the summer fruits. It would appear to
be sometimes put for the _Cucumis sativus_ or _Cucumber_, and sometimes
for the _Cucurbita_ or _Gourd_. About the species, however, there is some
doubt. On its medicinal properties, besides the medical authorities,
see Geopon. (xii, 19.) Dioscorides recommends it raw, as a cooling
application for various swellings and apostemes; also for the siriasis
of infancy (See Book I, 13), for inflammations of the eyes, and those of
gout in like manner. He also speaks of it as being useful in earache and
heat of the stomach. He states that it is laxative of the bowels; and
for this purpose directs a raw gourd to be hollowed out, and wine having
been poured into it, it is to be exposed for a time to the heat of the
sun, when it will become gently laxative. (ii, 161.) Galen, Aëtius, and
others give it much the same characters as our author. The Arabians, as
usual, borrow freely from the Greeks without making any addition of much
consequence. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 175); Serapion (c. 248); and Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. 1, 344.) One of Serapion’s authorities, called Masarugie,
says of the gourd, that when it is surrounded with paste and roasted,
the water thus squeezed out of it is beneficial in acute diseases and
cough, that it quenches thirst, and when taken with sugar gently opens
the bowels. Another of them, Habix, gives nearly the same account of it.
Another of them says of its seed, that it is diuretic, and softens the
belly. In modern times the seeds of gourd were formerly held as one of
the four greater cold seeds. See Charras (Roy. Pharm. 66) and Quincy (p.
197.)


Κολοκινθίς,

Cucurbita sylvestris, _Colocynth_, is possessed of a strong purgative
power. If the juice of it, while in a green state, be rubbed into the
part, it relieves ischiatic disease.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt that it is the _Cucumis Colocynthis_,
_Coloquintida_, or _Bitter Gourd_. It was used in medicine from the
earliest times, being the κολοκύνθη ἀγρία of Hippocrates (De Mulieb.
621, ed. Föes), as Galen has explained. It does not occur, however,
in the works of Celsus. Dioscorides gives an excellent account of it,
recommending it as a powerful phlegmagogue and cholagogue, both when
given by the mouth and in clysters; and as a gargle in toothache. He
says it kills the fœtus _in utero_ when applied on a pessary. (iv, 175.)
Our author’s account of it is copied from Galen. The Arabians treat
of it more fully. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 127); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
222); Serapion (c. 272); Mesue (De Simpl. 4); Averrhoes (Collig. v,
421); and Ebn Baithar (i, 331.) Avicenna is very precise in giving
directions for the preparation of the medicine. His statement of its
medicinal properties is so long that we cannot find room for it. He says
it evacuates phlegm, bile, and perhaps blood from the intestines; that
it is useful in dropsy, and that it is alexipharmic, in proof of which
he refers to the report of a case of a person who had been stung by
scorpions, and was immediately cured by it. But of all the authorities,
Mesue is, perhaps, the one who treats of it most elaborately: he
recommends it as purging phlegm and yellow bile, in cephalæa, hemicrania,
epilepsy, apoplexy, vertigo, defluxion in the eyes, cold gout, and other
affections of the joints; asthma, chronic cough, dyspnœa, &c. But, he
adds, it is more especially useful in pituitous and flatulent colic,
and in dropsy. For this purpose it may be administered by the mouth,
in clysters and in suppositories. Applied _per vaginam_ it kills the
fœtus. He directs its bad effects to be corrected by means of mastich,
tragacanth, &c. He forbids it to be administered either in great heat or
cold. Averrhoes ranks it with the strongest phlegmagogues, and recommends
that its activity should be abated by almonds, tragacanth, fistics, &c.
Ebn Baithar treats of it at very great length. Serapion says that, being
a drastic purgative, it ought not to be given during the heat of summer,
or cold of winter; for that, at these seasons, Hippocrates had forbid to
administer purgatives. Pliny recommends it in injections for diseases
of the intestines, kidneys, and loins. He says that an embrocation of
it with oil cures pains of the spine and hip-joint, and is useful in
jaundice when followed by oxymel. (H. N. xx, 7, 8.) Marcellus, the
Empiric, says of it that it purges phlegm, yellow and black bile, when
given with oxymel. (c. 30.) Ruffus Ephesius says of colocynth, that it
purges phlegm and pure bile: in a word, he adds, it is useful in asthma,
pleurisy, chronic headache, vertigo, and dimness of vision. (De Med.
Purg.)


Κόμαρος,

Arbutus, _the Arbute Tree_, is of a sour quality, both the tree and its
fruit, which is called memycœlon. It is hurtful to the stomach, and
occasions headache.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Apuleius says “Comaron Græci, Romani fragum vocant.” It
is the _Arbutus Unedo_ or _Wild Strawberry Tree_, which must not be
confounded with the _Fragaria vesca_, L., Angl., Wood Strawberry. It
seems difficult to account for its holding a place in the ancient Materia
Medica, since all the authorities, like Paulus, speak unfavorably of its
medicinal powers. See Dioscorides and Galen.


Κόμμι,

Gummi, _Gum_, is of a desiccative and emplastic nature, and manifestly
cures asperities (hoarseness?).

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. For an account of the ancient gums see Pliny (H. N. xiii,
20.) He says the best kind is got from the Egyptian thorn or Acacia; this
must have been either the _Acacia vera_, L., or _Acacia Senegal_. Galen
delivers the medicinal character of gum in the same terms as our author,
and the other Greek authorities do the same. Dioscorides recommends the
gum of the acacia (gum-arabic?) as possessing emplastic powers, and for
blunting acrid medicines when mixed with them. He adds that, when mixed
with the white of an egg, it prevents blisters from rising on burnt
parts. (i, 133.) The Arabians concur in recommending gum-arabic as being
beneficial in hot coughs, in ulcers of the lungs, and for clearing the
voice; they also held it to be stomachic and theriacal. See Avicenna (ii,
2, 310); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 345); and Serapion (c. 229.)


Κονία,

Lixivium, _Lye_; the washings, as it were, of ashes are so named. The
most detergent and desiccative of all are those made from the ashes of
figs and of the spurges, so that they are possessed of almost septic
powers. If a little quicklime be added to the ashes it renders the lye
caustic, which is then called protostactos, being mixed up principally
with medicines administered by injection. But the strongest of all is
that prepared from quicklime alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have given some account of the _Lixivial Ashes_ or _Lyes_
of the ancients in the 9th section of Book VI. They were all of them
preparations of potass mixed up with various impurities. The term was
applied not only to the solution, but also to the dried _cineres_ of the
same. Even quicklime is sometimes called by this name: κονία ἢ ἄσβεστος.
(Scholiastes in Theocrit. Idyll. i.) The Cinis lixivius of the fig-tree
is the one most frequently mentioned of them. See Pliny (H. N. xv, 18);
Geopon. (v, 33); Dioscorides (i, 186); Serapion (183); and Avicenna
(ii, 2, 188.) Avicenna recommends the lye of the mezerion in quinsy
and affections of the eye. See also Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 214.) The
protostactos was a composition of potass and lime. (See Book VI, s. 9.)
On the alkalies or Cineres lixivii of the ancients, see further, Dutens
(Découvertes attrib. aux Modern. 187.)


Κόνυζα,

Conyza, _Fleabane_; both species of it are desiccant and calefacient
in the third degree. Hence, even the oil in which it is boiled stops
periodical rigors; and the flowers have similar powers. The decoction of
them promotes menstruation, and expels the fœtus. That which grows in
moist situations is more fetid and has weaker powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There is considerable difficulty in determining exactly the
conyzæ of the ancients. See Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, i, 44), and
Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. iii, 126.) The preponderance of authority seems to
lead to the conclusion that they all were species of _Inula_, namely, the
greater _I. viscosa_, Act., the lesser _Inula saxatilis_, and the third,
_I. oculus Christi_. The conyzæ were employed in medicine at a very early
period, being frequently mentioned in the Hippocratic treatises. See
Dierbach, who, however, has decided differently from us as to the plants
to which the conyzæ are referable. He marks the fetid conyza as being
_Ambrosia maritima_, and the fragrant as _Inula bifrons_. The greater
conyza of Dioscorides would appear to be the cunilago of Pliny (H. N.,
xx, 63), where see the note of Harduin. Our author follows Dioscorides
and Galen, who agree in the main as to the medicinal properties of these
plants. All the authorities concur in opinion that the greater conyza
is emmenagogue, and procures abortion in pessaries. Ebn Baithar seems
to treat of it rather confusedly under the head of _Thuback_. (ii,
150.) Few, if any, of the other Arabians have noticed it; and it is not
contained in the Greek Pharmacopœia.


Κόπρος,

Stercus, _Dung_; all kinds of it are of a heating, desiccative, and
discutient nature, but they differ from one another according to the
temperament and diet of the animal which voids it. The dung, then, of
dogs fed on bones, when dried, cures dysenteric affections if taken in a
draught with divided milk (lac scissum), and old ulcers, if mixed with
suitable medicines. In cynanche and inflammations about the tonsils, it
is rubbed into the parts mixed with honey. These complaints are greatly
relieved by the dung of children who have not been permitted to take too
much food. The dung of wolves and the whiter sort which is found upon
certain shrubs, is an admirable remedy for colics, and that, not only
in a draught, but also when appended as an amulet. It may be fastened
either with the wool of a sheep recently killed by a wolf, or the skin
of a stag. Goat’s dung, being more acrid and discutient, discusses
scirrhous tumours when applied externally, more especially upon hard
flesh. When burnt it is more detergent and attenuate. The dung of oxen
has some attractive powers, and, therefore, cures the stings of wasps and
bees. And if the whole body of persons affected with dropsy be rubbed
with cow’s dung in the sun they will be much relieved thereby. Sheep’s
dung with vinegar cures myrmecia, acrochordon, furunculus, and clavus.
That of wild pigeons, being much more acrid than the other kinds, proves
rubefacient when applied with the seed of cardamus. That of domestic
fowls, when drunk with oxymel, vinegar, or wine and honey, causes the
suffocative mushrooms to be vomited, and proves a preservative from them.
Some have given it to drink also in colics. They say also that the dung
of storks, when drunk, is useful in orthopnœa. That of mice, being more
detergent than all others, agrees with alopecia, and when applied to the
anus of children provokes evacuation. The dung of starlings, when they
feed on rice, becomes detergent so as to clear away freckles. That of
land crocodiles removes alphos, as that of the crocodiles of the Nile is
believed to attenuate leucoma (white films on the eyes).

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of the medicinal properties of _Dung_
is abridged from Galen. As we have no wish to see this article restored
to the Materia Medica, we shall not enlarge upon the subject. Those who
wish to improve their knowledge of the medicinal articles mentioned under
this head by our author, may find them treated of _usque ad nauseam_ by
Dioscorides, Galen, Serapion, and Avicenna. Many of them were retained in
the Dispensatory down to a comparatively recent date. For example, the
white dung of dogs, usually called _Album Græcum_, was long used in the
cure of quinsies. See Quincy (140, 206.)


Κοράλλιον,

Corallium, _Coral_, is a sort of petrified arboret, not growing on dry
land, but among the mud of the sea, being of a red colour, and like
stone. Its powers are decidedly desiccant and moderately astringent. It
answers, therefore, with cases of hæmoptysis and dysentery.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The Coral of the ancients is the _Isis nobilis_, Pall.; the
name Isis being borrowed from Pliny. (H. N. xiii, 52.) Pliny mentions,
in another place, that corals, burnt and pulverised, and drunk in water,
are useful in some pains of the bowels and bladder, and in calculus.
He adds that they are also soporific. Corals were much used as amulets
or phylacteries. (H. N. xxxii, 5.) See also Solinus (ii), and Geopon.
(xv, 1.) Celsus ranks the corallium with those substances which burn:
“Veratrum, album et nigrum, corallium, cantharides, pyrethrum, adurunt.”
(v, 208.) This article does not occur in the Hippocratic treatises, nor
in Galen’s work ‘On the Faculties of Simples.’ The latter, however,
prescribes it for spitting of blood in another place. (De Comp. Med.
sec. loc. vii.) Dioscorides and Serapion, likewise, recommend it as an
astringent in hæmoptysis and in dysentery. It appears from the Royal
Pharmacopœia of Moses Charras, that it was used for the cure of these
complaints in his time. He prefers the red coral, and directs us to
give it in the form of an impalpable powder. The red coral held a place
in our English Dispensatory until a recent date. See Quincy (101.) It
was much used in infantile convulsions. It is still admitted to be a
good antacid. See Gray (Pharmacol. 146.) According to Dr. Ainslie, the
Tamool practitioners prescribe it, when calcined, in cases of diabetes
and bleeding piles. The Arabians place it among their astringents and
cordials. (Mat. Ind. 52.) The sea-coralline is retained in the modern
Greek Pharmacopœia, under the title of _Helminthochortos_, which,
however, as is there stated, comprehends several species of the _Ceramium
helminthochortum_, mixed up with ulvæ, confervæ, but especially red
corallines. (77.) On the use of it by the Arabians, see the commentators
on Mesue. (De Electariis, 89.) The Electarium de Gemmis, in which
it occurs as an ingredient, is said to be most efficacious in cold
affections of the brain, heart, stomach, liver, and womb; an excellent
exhilarant and cordial; and restorative in palpitation of the heart, and
in syncope.


Κόρεις,

Cimices, _Bugs_; these animals are of an acrid nature. Some write that
when drunk with vinegar they eject leeches.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides recommends _Bugs_ in quartan intermittents,
uterine suffocation, and as an antidote to the bite of the asp. (ii, 36.)
Galen properly recommends garlic as a substitute for them in the case
of leeches which have been swallowed. Pliny, apparently deriving his
information from Dioscorides, ascribes to bugs alexipharmic properties of
the most general nature; and more especially commends them as being a
remedy against the bite of asps. (H. N. xxix, 17.) The Arabians copy all
that the Greeks had recorded respecting the medicinal virtues of bugs,
without making any addition. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 270.)


Κορὶς,

Coris, the herb; some call it Hypericum (_St. John’s Wort_). It is acrid
and fragrant; but the fruit of it, in a draught, promotes the urinary
and menstrual discharges. It is also a remedy for the bites of venomous
spiders; and in cases of opisthotonos it is rubbed in with oil.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is _Hypericum Coris_. This name is taken from Pliny,
who recommends it in strangury and pleurisy. (xxvi, 54.) Our author’s
statement of its medicinal powers is abridged from Dioscorides. (iii,
164.) Galen does not treat of it by name, but ascribes nearly similar
powers to hypericum. We cannot find it described in the works of the
Arabians.


Κορριαννὸν ἢ κόριον,

Coriandrum, _Coriander_, is composed of opposite powers. For it consists
of a terrene part formed of subtile particles, which is bitter, and of
a watery juice, which is tepid (mild?). It has also a small degree of
astringency, so as to accord with inflammations and cases of erysipelas,
which are not of too hot a nature; and it also discusses the softer
tumours with some of the other subtile remedies. The seed, when drunk in
small quantity with sweet wine, expels worms; but when taken in larger
doses it disturbs the understanding.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It certainly is the _Coriandrum sativum_. Dioscorides says
that its action is refrigerant, but Galen insists that it is calefacient.
Symeon Seth, Mesue, as quoted by Serapion, and most of the ancient
authorities adopt the opinion of Dioscorides. Our modern views would
seem to correspond better with those of Galen; coriander-seed being now
generally looked upon as an aromatic stimulant, and as being carminative
and stomachic. Galen’s remarks under this head are highly interesting.
The coriander was used in the age of Hippocrates. (359, etc. ed. Föes.)
Celsus, like Dioscorides, holds it to be refrigerant. (84, ed. Milligan.)
He also calls it diuretic. (Ibid.) The Arabians say that when the juice
is taken to the extent of four ounces, it proves destructive of life.
Avicenna (ii, 2, 143); Serapion (c. 44); and Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
229.) They also hold that it is possessed of soporific powers. They
prescribe it for the cure of epilepsy, in which case they say it checks
the aura which ascends from the stomach to the brain. The _Coriandrum
sativum_ holds a place in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia. (58.) It is also
still retained in our Materia Medica. See Pereira (1073.)


Κόρυδος ἢ Κορύδαλλος,

Alauda, _the Lark_; this bird when boiled with plain broth is of use in
colic affections. But one must eat it perseveringly and frequently with
the broth.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. No one can doubt, from the ancient descriptions of it,
that it was the _Alauda cristata_. Galen remarks, that it is correctly
described by Aristophanes, in his ‘Birds;’ and that it is noticed by
Theocritus. (Idyll. vii.) It is also mentioned by Aristotle and Ælian
in their works on Natural History. Pliny calls it _Galerita_. Galen
says there is a herb of the same name. Like our author, he praises it
when given in broth, for the cure of colic. Both, however, copy from
Dioscorides. (ii, 59.) It is not noticed in the works of Hippocrates and
Celsus. It would appear that it is the _hanabroch_ of Serapion, who, in
describing it, merely gives extracts from Dioscorides and Galen. (436.)
It is also briefly noticed by Ebn Baithar in nearly the same terms as
Serapion. (ii, 329.)


Κορωνόπους,

Coronopus, _Buck’s-horn Plantain_; the root of it is believed to be
useful in colic affections when eaten.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Plantago Coronopus_, called in English Buckshorn
Plantain. See Parkinson, Gerard, and Quincy. Dioscorides says it is used
as a potherb, and that it is given as a medicine in colic. (ii, 157.)
None of the others supply any additional information regarding it worth
quoting.


Κόστος,

Costos, is possessed of a small degree of a bitter, but a greater
degree of an acrid and hot quality. Wherefore, when a part requires
to be heated, or a deep-seated humour attracted to the surface, one
has recourse to the costus. It is therefore diuretic, emmenagogue, and
anthelminthic. It has also some flatulent powers, so that it excites
to venery when drunk with wine and honey. It suits with ischiatic and
paralytic affections, and with periodical rigors when rubbed in with oil.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We should occupy more space than we can afford to devote to
it if we were to enter into a disquisition on the general literature
of this article. Those who feel curious to know our opinions on this
subject, are referred to the Appendix to Dunbar’s Lexicon, already
frequently quoted by us. Much interesting information respecting the
costus has been supplied by very recent writers. See Royle (Ant. of
Hindoo Medicine, 88), Ainslie (Mat. Ind. 152), and Pereira (Mat. Med.
699.) Dr. Lindley says of it, “Dr. Falconer has ascertained that the
costus of the ancients is the root of his Auklandia Costus, a plant
inhabiting the moist open slopes surrounding the vale of Cashmere. In
Cashmere the plant is not held in repute as a medicine, but is chiefly
employed for protecting bales of shawls from the attacks of moths.”
(Vegetable Kingdom, 708.) We may add, that although the zeduary be not
the same as the costus, as has been supposed, there can be no doubt that
it was often used in place of the costus. (See M. Charras’ Pharm.) More
recently, we have reason to think, our costmary, _Balsamita vulgaris_,
was used as a succedaneum for the ancient costus. Compare Parkinson
(80) with Hill (M. M. 624.) The three kinds of costus described by
Dioscorides, namely, the Arabian, the Indian, and the Syrian, would
appear to have been only varieties of the same substance. He says it is
possessed of calefacient, diuretic, and emmenagogue powers, and is useful
in uterine affections, in pessaries, fomentations, and fumigations.
He recommends it as being alexipharmic, expectorant, aphrodisiacal,
vermifuge, a good application externally in paralytic cases; and,
in short, he gives it nearly the same characters as our author, who
evidently copies from him and Galen. Aëtius and Oribasius do the same.
The Arabian authorities on the Mat. Med. in like manner, do little more
than quote what Dioscorides, Galen, and our author have written on
the subject. See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 236); Avicenna (ii, 2, 161);
Serapion (c. 318.) Avicenna and Rhases agree that it dries up humid
ulcers when sprinkled over them. One of Rhases’s authorities states that
the oil of costus is useful in relaxation and coldness of the nerves,
and in sciatica; and that a fumigation made with it by means of an
instrument for the purpose (per embotum), kills the fœtus, and promotes
menstruation. All join in giving it the character of being alexipharmic.
The costus, as far as we have been able to discover, does not occur in
the works of Hippocrates. Celsus mentions it along with other aromatics
(iv, 14, et alibi). It is often noticed as a precious ointment and
aromatic by the classic authors. See Pliny (H. N. xii, 24); Columella
(xii, 20); Propertius (iv, 6, 5); Lucan (ix, 917); Horace (Carm. iii, 1,
44); Ovid (Met. x, 308.)


Κοτυληδὼν,

Cotyledon, _Navel-wort_, is cooling, repellent, detergent, and
discutient. It is believed that when the leaves of it are eaten along
with the root, they prove lithontriptic and diuretic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes two species, which are the _Cotyledon
umbilicus_, and the _C. serrata_. Our author’s description applies to the
former of these, and is abridged from Galen. Galen further recommends it
strongly as an application to inflammatory erysipelas and erysipelatous
inflammation, the nice distinction between which he has stated under
coriander, and in his work Therap. ad Glauc. (ii.) See Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. i, 138.)


Κοχλίαι,

Cochleæ, _Snails_, when burnt are of a moderately desiccative nature,
and somewhat heating. They are useful in dysenteries when mortification
has not yet taken place, if to four parts of them, one part of white
pepper, and two parts of galls be added. Unburnt, they are triturated and
applied whole to the belly in dropsical complaints, and to the joints in
arthritic, with advantage, being allowed to remain until they drop off
spontaneously; and upon the whole they dry strongly deep-seated humours.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The κ. χἔρσᾶιος is the _Helix Pomatia_, _Escargot_,
or _Vinegar Snail_. The snail was esteemed a delicacy by the Roman
gourmands. See Varro (de R. R. iii, 14) and Pliny (H. N. ix, 25.) The
use of it, however, was forbidden by the Mosaic law. In one of the
Hippocratic treatises, the cochleæ are recommended for procidentia
ani. (De fistul.) Pliny, in like manner, recommends them in dysentery.
(H. N. vii, 30.) Dioscorides and Galen give nearly the same account of
their medicinal properties as our author. The latter says that they are
difficult to digest, but very nutritious when digested. Celsus, on the
other hand, ranks them among the weak articles of food. Horace seems to
say that they whet the appetite.

    Tostis marcentem squillis recreabis et Afrâ
    Potorem cochleâ.—_Satir._


Κρανέα,

Cornus, _the Cornel_; the fruit of the tree being sour, proves strongly
astringent of the belly when eaten. The leaves and shoots, by their
sourness, are strongly desiccative, so as to agglutinate the largest
wounds of hard bodies.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Cornus Mas_. Dioscorides recommends it as an
application to lichen. (ii, 72.) Our author abridges Galen’s account of
it. The Arabians speak favorably of it in the same cases as the Greeks,
and also recommend it for cholera, diabetes, and vomiting. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 315), Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 357.)


Κράμβη,

Brassica, _Cabbage_; that sort which is esculent has desiccative powers
both when eaten and when applied externally, but it is not sensibly
acrid. It therefore agglutinates wounds and ill-conditioned ulcers,
and cures tumours which are difficult to discuss. It is also somewhat
detergent, by which property it cures leprosy. Its seed when drunk kills
worms, and especially the seed of the Egyptian cabbage does this. The
ashes of its stalks when burnt are possessed of caustic powers, and
with grease are applicable in chronic pains of the sides. The wild is
stronger than the garden cabbage in all respects; hence it cannot be
taken internally without inconvenience. The sea-cabbage being saltish and
bitterish loosens the belly.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The Brassica sativa of the ancients no doubt comprehended
several species of cabbage. Dioscorides dwells largely on its medicinal
properties, but in nearly the same terms as our author. He calls it
laxative and alexipharmic, and recommends it as an application to
erysipelas, epinyctis, and leprosy; with salts, he says, it breaks
anthrax, and when boiled and mixed with milk, it is a good application
to spreading gangrene. The Brassica sylvestris (which Sprengel inclines
to set down as being the _Brassica incana_, Zenor.), he says, is
agglutinative of wounds, and discutient of swellings and inflammations.
Its cyme, he says, is not unpleasant to the taste. To the sea-cabbage
(_Convolvulus soldanella_) he assigns the same characters as our author.
(ii, 146, 147, 148.) Galen gives nearly the same account of the three
species of brassica. In the Hippocratic treatises, the decoction of
cabbage is recommended as an injection to the womb. (De Mulieb. ii.)
According to Celsus, the brassica when half raw is laxative, but when
twice boiled, astringent. (ii, 29, 30.) The Arabians treat of the
different kinds of brassica at great length; as usual, drawing largely
from the stores of the Greeks. One of the Arabian authorities quoted by
Rhases, says its seed, if applied per vaginam post coitum, will prevent
impregnation, and that the decoction of it expels the tape-worm. Another
of the same authorities recommends a decoction of it as an application
to the joints in gout, and to blistered surfaces after burning, more
especially when its ashes are mixed up with the white of an egg. (Contin.
l. ult. i, 198.) See in like manner, Serapion (c. 32) and Avicenna
(ii, 2, 139.) As we have stated in our commentary on the 95th section
of the First Book, all the ancient authorities held that the cabbage
counteracts the intoxicating powers of wine. The brassicæ held a place
in our Dispensatory, and retained their ancient character down to a
comparatively recent date. See Parkinson, Culpeper, and still more
recently Quincy. (116.) They are still much prized as medicines by the
Arabians and Persians. See Ainslie (M. Ind.)


Κραταιόγονον,

Cratæogonon; the fruit of this herb is acrid to the taste and cold like
millet.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides assigns it wonderful powers in promoting
procreation, and hence its name. He calls it intensely acrid. Galen and
the other Greek authorities, treat of it very succinctly like Paulus.
We have not been able to find any traces of it in the Mat. Med. of the
Arabians. What plant it was seems a puzzle. Both Parkinson (Theatre of
Plants, 858) and Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. l. c.) incline to the _Polygonum
Persicaria_, but the medicinal virtues of it, as given by our older
herbalists, do by no means agree with the characters of the cratæogonon
as given by the ancients.


Κρῆθμον,

Crethmum, _Samphire_, is somewhat saltish with a little bitterness, and
therefore its powers are detergent and desiccative.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the Crithmum maritimum, _Samphire_, or _Sea-fennel_.
Dioscorides recommends its fruit, root, and leaves, when boiled in
wine, for dysuria and jaundice. He further mentions it as a potherb
and pickle. (ii, 156.) Galen and the other Greek authorities state its
characters briefly like our author. Pliny, like Dioscorides, mentions it
as a potherb and pickle, but says nothing of it as a medicine. (H. N.
xxvi.) We do not find it noticed by Celsus nor by the Arabians, with the
exception of Ebn Baithar. (ii, 280.)


Κριθὴ,

Hordeum, _Barley_, is of the first order of cooling and desiccative
medicines, and is also somewhat detergent. It is more desiccative than
the flour of beans, and less flatulent. The polenta of barley is more
desiccative than barley itself. Its ptisan is not only more diluent, but
is also more detergent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Hordeum vulgare_, comprehending no doubt several
species. We have treated of it among the Cerealia in the First Book (Vol.
I, p. 123.) The ἄλφιτον, or polenta, was a sort of malt. See Pliny (H.
N. xviii, 14.) We have treated of it in the same place; and also of the
mode of preparing ptisan. It was a favorite remedy with Hippocrates (de
victu acut. et alibi.) Dioscorides calls it suitable to the acrimony,
roughness, and ulceration of the windpipe, and says it attracts milk
when taken boiled with the seed of fennel, and is diuretic, detergent,
flatulent, bad for the stomach, and digestive of swellings. He further
recommends the flour of barley for discussing boils and inflammations,
when boiled with figs and honeyed water. See further (ii, 108.) Galen,
Aëtius, and Oribasius, treat of it in nearly the same terms as our
author. The Arabians give nearly the same statement of its virtues as
a medicine. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 530.) He recommends barley-water very
much as a drink in fevers, being, as he says, diluent and cooling; in hot
fevers it is to be given pure, and in cold, with parsley and fennel. Ebn
Baithar treats of it at great length, (ii, 97.)


Κρίμνον,

Crimnon, _Bran_; the thick part of the flour of wheat and of spelt is so
named, being more nutritious than polenta, but more indigestible.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is, properly speaking, groats or coarse meal; it was
also applied to spelt and other species of grain coarsely ground. See
Dioscorides, from whom our author’s account of it is principally taken.
Both Dioscorides and Galen recommend the coarse meal of spelt which has
been toasted for binding the belly. From the coarse meal of wheat, pap or
porridge, they add, is prepared.


Κρίνον,

Lilium, _the Lily_; its flower is of a mixed temperament, being
composed of a subtile part, a terrene, and a certain water substance
of a moderate temperament. Hence the oil composed from it being of a
discutient and emollient nature agrees well with inflammations of the
uterus. The root of it and its leaves are desiccative, detergent, and
moderately discutient, and hence are useful for burns. The juice of it is
serviceable for wounded nerves, with oxymel.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Lilium candidum_. Dioscorides
praises the seed of the lily, given in wine, as an antidote to
poisonous serpents; and, by the way, the same character is given of
it by Walafridus Strabo in the ninth century, and by Macer Floridus
in the tenth. Dioscorides further recommends it as an application to
burns, ulcers, erysipelas, and so forth. He further describes a species
of lilium with purple flowers, which grows in Syria and Pisidia of
Pamphylia, and was famous for the composition of unguents. This might
be the _Lilium Martagon_. Galen writes elaborately on this article, but
in the main agrees with Dioscorides as to the medicinal virtues of the
lily, of which he mentions only the former species. He recommends it
principally in external applications to wounds, ulcers, and diseases
of the skin, such as scabies, leprosy, and achores, and also very
particularly to diseases of the uterus. Aëtius and Oribasius briefly
give it the same characters. Celsus mentions a decoction of the leaves
of the lily boiled in old wine and oil, as an application to burns. (v,
17, 18.) For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 436); Serapion (c. 189);
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 422); Ebn Baithar (ii, 68.) They commend it as a
general alexipharmic, both when applied to the bites of venomous animals,
and as an antidote to hyoscyamus, coriander, and mushrooms. They all
agree that it is one of the best applications to burning with hot water.
Avicenna says the oil of lilies given internally, is useful in ileos. Ebn
Baithar treats of the lily at very great length.


Κροκοδείλιον,

Crocodilium; the seed and juice of it are possessed of desiccative,
heating, and discutient powers, and are, therefore, diuretic and
emmenagogue; the root is of great use as an expectorant, and occasions a
discharge of blood by the nose.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes it immediately after the black
chamæleon to which he compares it. We therefore are inclined to join
the modern commentators and herbalists, who hold it to have been the
_Carlina vulgaris_, rather than those who refer it to the _Eryngium
maritimum_. See Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 971, 988) and Sprengel (Ad
Dioscor. iii, 10.) Galen calls its seed aromatic and acrid, and says
it is diuretic and emmenagogue. The juice of the seed and stalk being
possessed, he says, of similar powers, is useful in nephritic diseases.
The root is expectorant, and produces a discharge of blood from the
nostrils. (De Simpl. vii.) We have not been able to discover any traces
of it in the Mat. Med. of the Arabians, except in Ebn Baithar. (ii, 253.)
His German translator holds it to be the _Eryngium maritimum_.


Κρόκος,

Crocus, _Saffron_, is of the second order of heating and of the first of
desiccative medicines. It is also astringent and digestive.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Crocus sativus_. Dioscorides gives
an interesting account of the different varieties of it which were used
in his time. Suffice it to say, that the best decidedly was the Cicilian,
from Mount Corycus, which is often alluded to by classical authors. See
Pliny (xxi, 6); Celsus (v, 22); Statius (Silv. v, 3, 41); Galen (De
Antid. i.) With regard to its action on the animal economy, he mentions
that Thessalus held that it is merely fragrant, while some, on the other
hand, maintained that it is a deadly poison in doses of dr. iij, but that
in truth it is diuretic and sub-astringent, and therefore applicable to
erysipelas and defluxions of the eyes, as a cure for surfeit, and for
producing a discharge of urine (i, 25.) See, in like manner, Pliny (l.
c.) It occurs in the Hippocratic treatises, and in the works of Celsus,
who calls it purgative, emollient, and discutient. (196.) By the way,
we may mention that by purgative, Celsus evidently means cleansing in
external applications, as is evident from the substances with which it is
enumerated, namely, verdigris, orpiment, &c. His editor, Dr. Milligan,
therefore evidently mistakes the meaning of his author. (l. c.) Galen
and his followers call it heating in the second degree, and drying in
the first, with some astringency. The Arabians adopt the views of the
Greeks as to its virtues, but prescribe it in a great many more cases
than their predecessors. See Serapion (c. 173); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
241); Avicenna (ii, 2, 126.) Thus they held that it is both aphrodisiacal
and cordial, and recommend it accordingly. They also used it in cases
of difficult labour, and as a deobstruent in obstructions of the liver
and spleen. One of Rhases’s authorities says that in doses of three
drachms it proves fatal. Another of them says of it, that it improves
the breathing and appetite. Symeon Seth says that it is stomachic and
improves the colour. He, Serapion, and other of the ancient authorities,
affirm that in large doses it occasions involuntary laughter, immoderate
mirth, and the other effects which result from intoxicating liquors. From
late experiments, it would appear that its powers had been overrated.
See Pereira (Mat. Med. 696.) It was much used by the ancients as a
perfume. See Beckmann’s ‘Hist. of Inventions,’ Joh. Bodæus a Stapel (Ad
Theophrast. H. P. vi, 6), and Hertodt’s ‘Crocologia,’ as quoted by him.
Its medical use, he adds, has always continued among the Orientals.


Κρόμμυον,

Cepa, _Onion_, is of the fourth order of heating medicines, its substance
consisting of thick matter, and hence when applied to hemorrhoids it
opens them. It is also sufficiently detergent, and removes alphos with
vinegar; and in alopecia it occasions a more rapid growth of hair than
alcyonium. Its juice is useful in suffusion and dimness of vision from
thick humours.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Allium Cepa_, or onion. Galen, Dioscorides, and
Serapion recommend it as an application in cases of alopecia or _Porrigo
decalvans_. Dioscorides says that some applied it as a suppository
to promote the discharge of blind piles, and he mentions its being
introduced into the nose to promote the discharge from it. As a cataplasm
with salt, rue, and honey, he recommends it for the bites of rabid
dogs. He says it concocts and breaks hard tumours. Upon the whole,
Galen, Aëtius, Oribasius, and our author, do little more under this head
than abridge the more ample account of it given by Dioscorides. Celsus
calls it an aperient of the bowels (ii, 29) and a diuretic (ii, 31.)
He recommends it to be chewed in paralysis of the tongue. (iv, 2.) The
Arabians treat of it at great length. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 119); Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. iii, 18); Serapion (c. 354.) They speak favorably of it as
a rubefacient, and all ascribe great powers to it as an alexipharmical
medicine.


Κύαμος,

Faba, _the Bean_, is not far removed from a middle temperament as to
cooling and drying. Its flesh is also somewhat detergent. It agrees,
therefore, with expectorations from the chest and lungs. Its outer skin
having also some astringency renders the whole bean, when boiled in
oxycrate, a suitable remedy for cæliac and dysenteric affections. In a
cataplasm it cures inflammations and swellings, and dispels the milk in
the breasts.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have stated in the First Book the difficulty of
determining exactly the nature of the ancient faba. See Parkinson
(Theatre of Plants, 1054) and Dickson (Husbandry of the Ancients.)
Dioscorides describes two species, the Egyptian and the Greek, of which
the former, there can be little doubt, is the _Nelumbium speciosum_.
See Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. ii, 128), and Lindley (Veget. King. 414.) The
other, as we formerly stated, was probably a variety of our small bean.
The characters of both are fully stated by Dioscorides, from whom Galen
and our author borrow largely under this head. They treat, however,
only of the Greek bean. Dioscorides says the Egyptian is astringent
and stomachic; that the flour of it made into a poultice, answers in
dysenteric and colic affections, and in earache. The Arabians give a very
full account of the two species of bean, both as articles of food and as
medicines. See in particular, Avicenna (ii, 2, 241); Serapion (c. 97);
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 279.) Avicenna and Rhases agree in commending
beans for spitting of blood, and other affections of the chest.


Κύανος,

Cyanus, is possessed of acrid, purgative, and discutient powers, greater
than those of the cinnabar. It has also some astringency.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Matthiolus determines it to be the _Lapis Lazuli_, and
Sprengel agrees with him that it was a mineral containing copper and some
impurities, and nearly allied to the _L. Laz._ Serapion describes the
ἀρμένιον by the name of _Lapis Lazuli_, and, in fact, the ἀρμένιον and
κύανος seem to have been nearly the same thing. He recommends it as a
purgative which evacuates black bile. Rhases, in his chapter on the Lapis
Lazuli, gives the observations of Dioscorides and Galen on the ἀρμένιον,
and in his chapter on the _Lapis Armenus_, he compares it to the _Lapis
Lazuli_ (Cont. l. ult. i, 393, 404.) The following is Sprengel’s account
of the armenium and cyanus: “Armenium est cuprum carbonicum terreum,
lapidi Lazuli simile. Id in australibus petris arenosis, has ipsas
penetrans mineram æris arenosam format. Ea vocatur κύανος.” (Ad Dioscor.
v, 105.) From what has been stated, any person acquainted with mineralogy
can have no difficulty in deciding that the _cyanus_ and _armenium_
were varieties of the mineral called “blue copper” by Jameson, that is
to say, the “blue carbonate of copper” of Cleaveland (566.) For further
information regarding it, we would refer to Matthiolus and Sprengel (Ad
Dioscor. l. c.), Beckmann (Hist. of Invent.), and our article under this
head in the Appendix to Dunbar’s Greek Lexicon. Our author copies his
account of it from Galen. Dioscorides recommends it only as an external
application, possessed of repressing, moderately septic, escharotic, and
ulcerative powers. (v, 106.) The Arabians, who, however, evidently do not
distinguish properly this mineral from the lapis lazuli, recommend it as
an emmenagogue and purgative. When boiled with lentils, Avicenna says, it
acts as an emetic in the case of a person who has swallowed any poison.
He also prescribes it in asthma and pain of the kidneys. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 56); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 692); Serapion (c. 389.) The later
Greek writers on medicine, like the Arabians, confound this substance
with the lapis lazuli. See Theophanes Nonnus (c. 125, 143); Myrepsus (i,
30.) The former of these prescribes it as a specific in the plague. In
modern times also the cyanus or blue copper has been confounded with the
lapis lazuli. See Lewis (M. M. ii, 50.)


Κύκλάμινος,

Cyclaminus, _Sow-bread_, is possessed of various powers; for it cleanses,
incides, opens the mouths of vessels, and discusses; the juice of it,
therefore, when applied to hemorrhoids opens them, and it discusses
hardness along with other things. Along with honey it agrees with
suffusions and purges by the nose. When rubbed into the epigastrium, it
loosens the belly and kills the fœtus. The whole root, though weaker than
the juice, is also strong, so that when drunk with honeyed water to the
amount of three drachms, it purges the internal parts. To the skin it
also proves detergent. The root of the other species of sow-bread (called
Cissanthemon) is of no medicinal use, but its fruit is drastic, so that
when drunk it acts like the former.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides treats at considerable length of the medicinal
virtues of the former species, which was the _Cyclamen Europæum_,
recommending it as being phlegmagogue, hydragogue, emmenagogue, and
alexipharmic; as an errhine in diseases of the head, and a suppository
per vaginam. His other species, which he describes as having leaves
like the ivy, and which some of the commentators set down as being
the _Lonicera Periclymenum_, and others as the _Solanum Dulcamara_ he
recommends in splenic affections, in orthopnœa, and retention of the
lochial discharge. (ii, 193, 194.) Pliny recommends also the second
species as a remedy for coughs (H. N. xxv, 68.) Harduin agrees with
Dodonæus in holding it to be the _Dulcamara_. The scholiast on Theocritus
recommends the cyclaminus as an application to chilblains. (Ad Idyll, v.)
Galen writes of it in such terms as shows that he looked upon it as a
very important article. He says it promotes menstruation, both when taken
internally and when applied per vaginam; and that it cures jaundice,
not only by purging the viscus, but by evacuating the whole body with
sweats; he also recommends it as an external application in hardness
of the spleen. The other species he praises in asthma. The other Greek
authorities supply nothing of much interest under this head. The Arabians
treat of it largely, but somewhat confusedly. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 6,
61, 271); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 281); Mesue (De Simpl. 26); Serapion (c.
259.) Avicenna directs it to be given to the extent of three drachms with
wine or mulse in cases of jaundice, and the patient is to be then covered
up with many clothes, when he will sweat out the bile from his body.
He says it purges the body, not only when given by the mouth, but in a
suppository, and when rubbed into the skin. Rhases (l. c.) describes it
under the names of _Falamios_, or Panis porcinus, whence the English name
Sow-bread. His extracts from Dioscorides, Galen, Oribasius, and Bimasay
comprise all the information on the subject possessed by his Grecian
masters and his countrymen. Mesue gives a very elaborate article on the
Sow-bread, which, like Avicenna, he praises as a general purger of bile,
when taken by the mouth, in a suppository, and as a liniment rubbed into
the belly; he also praises it as an emmenagogue, both when taken by the
mouth and when applied as a pessary, and as a tried remedy in jaundice
and induration of the spleen. Even as late as the days of Quincy, the
cyclaminus held a place in the Dispensatory, and retained all its ancient
characters. (i, 4, 293.) Orfila ranks it with the acrid poisons (iii, 3.)
See further (ii, 242.)


Κύμινον,

Cuminum, _Cumin_, belongs to the third order of heating medicines, and is
diuretic and carminative.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The C. of our author is no doubt the Cyminum sativum of
Dioscorides, i. e. _Cuminum Cyminum_ L. The two varieties of the wild
cumin of Dioscorides have never been satisfactorily determined. See
Parkinson, Matthiolus, and Sprengel. Dioscorides represents it as
being calefacient, astringent, desiccative, and relieving tormina and
flatulence, and describes a variety of cases in which he calls it
applicable. (iii, 61.) Galen says it is diuretic and carminative, being
calefacient in the third degree. Aëtius and Oribasius give it much the
same character. Celsus assigns to it diuretic powers. (iv, 9.) The
Arabians treat of it at so great length, that we can scarcely do justice
to their views on this head. See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 212); Serapion
(c. 287); Avicenna (ii, 2, 136); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar
(ii, 394.) Avicenna says the immoderate use of it renders the face pale.
This property of cumin is alluded to by the poets as well as the medical
authors. See Horace (Epist. i, 19, 18); Persius (Sat. v.) This character
of it is confirmed by modern authority. See Matthiolus (Ad Dioscor. l.
c.); Bodæus a Stapel (in Theophrast.) Cumin now barely holds a very
undistinguished place in our Mat. Med. (See Pereira, 1057.)


Κυνόσβατος,

Rubus caninus, Hip-tree or Dog-rose; the fruit is no bad astringent; the
leaves are moderately astringent; but we must guard against the woolly
part of the fruit, as it is injurious to the trachea.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides’s description is not so precise as to enable us
to pronounce decidedly what it was; but we incline with several of the
best authorities to refer it to the _Rosa canina_, or Hip-tree. Galen,
our author, and the other Greek authorities, follow Dioscorides.


Κυπάρισσος,

Cupressus, _Cypress_; the spherical fruit and shoots of it are possessed
of desiccative powers, having no sensible heat, so that they agglutinate
large wounds in hard bodies. In moist gangrene it consumes deep-seated
humours without trouble, and is useful in intestinal hernia.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears unquestionably to be the _Cupressus sempervirens_.
See Stackhouse (Tab. Syst. in Theophrast.) Its fruit, being of a globular
shape, was called σφάιρια by the Greeks and _Pilulæ_ by the Latins. Pliny
(H. N. xvii, 14.) Pliny recommends this as a cure for the stings of
serpents, and in cases of hæmoptysis. (H. N. xxiv, 10.) Dioscorides and
Serapion recommend it in these and various other cases. The cypress-nut
is powerfully astringent and balsamic: hence it proves an excellent
remedy in diarrhœas and dysenteries, and, as such, it is celebrated by
many authors ancient and modern. Dioscorides in particular recommends it
for stopping bleeding, for agglutinating wounds, and as an application
to erysipelas and anthrax. Galen writes fully of it, but borrows largely
from Dioscorides. Serapion does little more than give the notices of it
by Dioscorides and Galen. (c. 55.) Avicenna recommends the cypress, and
more especially the nut, in various cases requiring astringents, and
among others as an application to polypus of the nose; he also speaks
favorably of it in cases of hæmoptysis and dysuria. Like the others, he
says it is a good application in ruptures. (ii, 2, 146.) See further
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 216.) The cypress is found in the ‘Flora
Hippocratica,’ and in that of Celsus. The cypress-nuts are commended
as astringents by all our older herbalists, and held a place in our
Dispensatory as late as the time of Quincy. (93.)


Κύπερος,

Cyperus, is heating and desiccative, without pungency. Hence it promotes
the cicatrization of the more humid ulcers in a wonderful manner, and
relieves those in the mouth. It has also some incisive quality, and is
lithontriptic, diuretic, and emmenagogue.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is undoubtedly the _Cyperus rotundus_. Our author’s
account of its medicinal uses is taken from Galen, and is confirmed
by Serapion, Avicenna, and Rhases. All of them, however, are indebted
to Dioscorides, who gives it the character of being calefacient,
anastomotic, and diuretic, recommends it in uterine complaints as an
emmenagogue, in ulcers of the mouth, and as an ingredient in emollient
plasters. (i, 4.) A modern author, Dr. Hill, gives it nearly the
same character as the ancients; he calls it stomachic, deobstruent,
emmenagogue, and diuretic. It likewise occurs in the Materia Medica of
Tournefort, who also calls it deobstruent and emmenagogue. Quincy gives a
confused account of it under the name of _Cyprus_ (Engl. Dispens. i, l,
69); see also Lewis. Dioscorides describes also an Indian species having
a root resembling ginger. Both Matthiolus and Sprengel are inclined to
refer to the _Curcuma_. We shall have occasion to notice it afterwards,
when describing the substances introduced into the Mat. Med. by the
Arabians.


Κύπρος,

Ligustrum, _Privet_; its leaves and tops are possessed of mixed powers,
being discutient and astringent, and desiccative without pain or
pungency. Hence the decoction of it, when poured on a part, is useful for
burns, and agrees with inflammations of a hot nature. When chewed it also
relieves aphthæ, and is mixed up with splenic remedies.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We must decline entering upon the general literature of this
subject, which has created a good deal of discussion. Suffice it to
say, that we have now no hesitation in deciding it to be the _Lawsonia
inermis_, namely, the plant from which the henna of Egypt is obtained.
See Lindley’s Veg. King. (575.) It is used by females for staining
their hands and feet of an orange colour. Dioscorides mentions that an
infusion of its leaves in the juice of saponaria, or soapwort, was used
for painting the hairs yellow. He says of the ointment prepared from it
(unguentum cyprinum), that it is calefacient, emollient, and fragrant.
(i, 124.) Galen, Aëtius, and Oribasius give it the same characters as
our author. The Arabians describe it under the name of _alcanna_, which
seems to be _henna_ with an Arabic prefix. See in particular Serapion (De
Simpl. 110), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 50.) Both copy freely from Dioscorides
and Galen. They say its virtues in female complaints are similar to
those of the Sanguis Draconis. All praise it as a vulnerary herb, and a
good application in cases of burning. They further commend it in pleurisy
and quinsy as a plaster. Ebn Baithar treats of it at very great length.
(i, 338.) It would appear that the privet is still used as a medicine and
dye by the native physicians of Hindostan. See a very interesting account
of it in Ainslie’s Mat. Indica (ii, 190.)


Κύτισος,

Cytisus; its leaves are of a gently discutient and tepid nature, like
those of melons.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. After maturely weighing the opinions which have been held
respecting this classical herb, we have no hesitation in agreeing
with those who refer it to the _Tree-medick_ (_Medicago arborea_ L.)
Dioscorides says its leaves are cooling and discutient when applied
externally, and diuretic when taken in decoction. (iv, iii.) Galen and
the other Greek authorities treat of it very succinctly, like our author.
Avicenna briefly recommends it as a diuretic medicine, and one which is
applicable in diseases of the spleen. (ii, 2, 24.)


Κώνειον,

Cicuta, _Hemlock_; that it is possessed of extremely cold powers is
obvious.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears unquestionably to be the _Conium maculatum_.
Stoerck and Bergius, contrary to the opinions of the ancient physicians,
affirm that it is aphrodisiacal. This, however, seems doubtful. We have
treated of its effects as a poison in the Fifth Book. As a medicine it
does not appear to have been much used latterly, although Dioscorides
says that its inspissated juice is of great use in the healing art,
being mixed with wine in anodyne collyria, and used as a cataplasm for
the cure of erysipelas and herpes. He also speaks of its being applied
as a cataplasm to the testicles for the removal of the pollutio nocturni
somni, and with the view of inducing impotence; and to the breasts, in
order to dispel milk and render them atrophied. (iv, 79.) Galen, Aëtius,
and Oribasius, like our author, merely state of it, in their works in
the Mat. Med., that it is possessed of intensely refrigerant powers.
It would appear that Galen was in the practice of administering it
internally. (T. ii, 451, ed. Basil.) Of the Arabians, Avicenna gives
the fullest exposition of its remedial powers, but he copies closely
from Dioscorides, recommending it as a cold and narcotic application in
the same cases as Dioscorides. He says it stops bleeding, congeals the
blood, and induces torpor. (ii, 2, 662.) See also Serapion (c. 347.) It
is, most probably, the cicuta of Celsus, who places it in his list of
emollients. (v, 15.) It occurs also in the Hippocratic Collection, where
both its leaves and seeds are recommended in fomentations. (De Steril.;
de Fistulis, &c.)


Κῶνος,

Strobilus, _the Wild Pine_; the bark and leaves have powers like the
pine, but more acrid and drastic. As to the fruit, which is called
strobilus, the green has some bitterness and acrimony, with humidity, and
hence it is applicable for promoting expectoration from the chest. The
esculent kind, when soaked in water, so as to lay aside its acrimony,
becomes of a good temperament, being free from pungency and emplastic,
and hence it smooths asperities.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It here signifies the _Pinus sylvestris_, or Wild-pine;
but it is commonly put for the _Nux Pinea_, or the cones of the _Pinus
Pinea_, called in the shops _Pignoli pines_, and the seeds _pine-nuts_.
Athenæus says that Theophrastus called the tree πέυκη and the fruit
κῶνος. Diphilus, as quoted by the same, calls the pine-nuts nutritious,
and says that they lubricate the trachea, and promote expectoration.
(Deip. ii.) Galen, Serapion, and the other authorities also commend
them in similar cases. Dioscorides treats of this subject in the 86th,
87th, and 88th chapters in the First Book, but not under the same head
as our author. He recommends the different articles in nearly the same
cases as Paulus and the other authorities. The fruit of the wild pine he
commends as a demulcent in affections of the bladder and kidneys, and as
a sedative in pains of the stomach. Celsus prescribes “nuclei ex pinu
silvestri duodecim,” among his remedies for ulcerated kidneys. (iv, 10.)
Avicenna treats of the subject under different heads, like Dioscorides,
whom he closely follows. (ii, 2, 280, 301, 555, 693.) He recommends
these articles in diseases of the chest and kidneys. He calls the fruit
aphrodisiacal. See also Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 3, 20); Serapion (c.
63); Averrhoes (Coll. v, 42.) All speak favorably of these medicines in
diseases of the kidneys and bladder.


Λαγώπους,

Lagopus, is possessed of desiccative powers and dries up fluxes of the
belly.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This plant, the description of which is passed over by
Dioscorides as being well known, may be set down among the articles of
the ancient Materia Medica, which are least known to us. We may just
mention regarding it, that some take it for _Trifolium arvense_, and
others for _Lagurus ovatus_. Dioscorides calls it an astringent of the
bowels, and mentions that it was used as an amulet in buboes. (iv,
17.) Galen, Aëtius, and Oribasius briefly notice it as a desiccative
medicine. We have not been able to find this article in the Mat. Med. of
the Arabians, but are aware that it may be concealed under some of their
odd corruptions of the Greek terms. It seems probable that this is the
_lagopyrus_ of Hippocrates. (De Ulcer.)


Λάδανον,

Ladanum; it is formed from the Cistus called Ladanus; the goats feeding
upon it bring away upon their beard and thighs the fatter and more juicy
part of the herb. Ladanum, when collected, is an excellent medicine, hot
in about the second degree, and consisting of subtile particles. It is
moderately emollient, discutient, and digestive; it therefore agrees with
uterine affections in particular. It has also some astringency, and hence
it strengthens hairs which are falling out.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dierbach and Sprengel agree with the elder commentators in
calling it the _Cistus Creticus_. See also Royal Pharm. (i, c. 20.) Dr.
Lindley says of the ladanum, that it is a resinous balsamic substance
obtained from Cistus Creticus, and other species of the genus; he adds,
that it has been esteemed as a stimulant and emmenagogue, and recommended
in chronic catarrh. (Veg. King. 350.) Dioscorides mentions that it was
procured either from the beards of goats which had browsed upon it, or by
scraping the tree with thongs. Dioscorides, Pliny, and Galen deliver its
medicinal characters in much the same terms as our author. Dioscorides
recommends it not only in uterine diseases, but also as a diuretic. He
also speaks favorably of it as an ingredient in anodyne and expectorant
plasters. (i, 128.) See Galen (ii, 160 ed. Basil.) The Arabians treat
fully of it, but borrow almost every word they say respecting it from
Dioscorides and Galen. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 422); Serapion (c. 43);
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 361); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) The labdanum
was retained in the Dispensatory as late as the time of Quincy, who
has given an accurate account of it. (70.) It is also very correctly
described by Tournefort, both in his voyage to the Levant and in his Mat.
Med. (363.) Its use, however, is now obsolete. See Pereira (1263.) In
Pemberton’s edition of the Dispensatory, there is given a formula for the
composition of a “stomach plaster,” one of the ingredients of which is
labdanum. (359.) We would vote for its being restored to the Pharmacopœia.


Λαθυρὶς,

Lathyris, is a species of spurge, and some say that its juice purges in a
similar manner. Its seed in particular has purgative powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt, from our author’s brief notice of
it, that it is the _Euphorbia Lathyris_, L. Dioscorides says of it that
it evacuates phlegm, bile, and water. He mentions that its leaves were
boiled along with a fowl or pot-herbs to loosen the bowels. Galen and
the other Greek authorities treat of it in brief terms, like our author.
The Arabians treat of it at greater length, recommending it strongly in
diseases of the joints, gout, and sciatica. They also mention its being a
remedy for dropsy. They say it acts as an emetic. They direct its seeds
to be boiled in the broth of an old cock, and taken. See in particular
Avicenna (ii, 2, 473); Serapion (c. 354.) It is not met with in the works
either of Hippocrates or of Celsus. It does not occur in the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia, but is briefly noticed in Dr. Pereira’s Materia Medica
(777.)


Λαμψάνη,

Lampsana, _Nipplewort_, when eaten supplies bad juices to the body. In a
cataplasm it is detergent and discutient.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears pretty certain that it is the Charlock, that is
to say, either the _Raphanus Raphanistrum_ or _Sinapi Arvense_. Both are
known by the English name of _Charlock_. It is rather a potherb than a
medicine.


Λάπαθον,

Lapathum, _Dock_, is possessed of moderately discutient powers; but the
oxylapathum is also somewhat repellent. The seed, particularly of the
oxylapathum, being astringent, cures diarrhœas and dysenteries. The
leaves, in so far, have opposite qualities to the seed; for they, when
eaten, loosen the belly, whereas it, when drunk, proves astringent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Of the _Rumices_, the Oxylapathum, or _Rumex acutus_, was
the species most used in medicine, and is the only one particularized by
our author, with the exception of the hippolopathum already described.
Of the four other species described by Dioscorides, the ὀξαλὶς is
pretty generally acknowledged as the _Rumex acetosa_. The others cannot
be determined with any degree of accuracy. See Sprengel, Sibthorp,
Matthiolus, Parkinson, Gerard, and Rutty. Dioscorides gives the first
of his species much the same characters as our author, recommending it
most especially as a discutient application to leprosies and scrofulous
tumours. He also speaks favorably of it as applied on a pessary in the
fluor albus. The roots, he adds, boiled in wine, cure jaundice, and act
as lithontriptics, emmenagogues, and alexipharmics. He further speaks
of the dock as being appended in the form of an amulet for scrofulous
swellings. (ii, 140, 141.) Galen and the other Greek authorities treat
cursorily of the lapatha, like our author. They occur in the works of
Hippocrates and of Celsus; the latter ranks the _lapathum_ among the
articles of food which contain bad juices (ii, 21), are bad for the
stomach (ii, 25), and are laxative of the bowels (ii, 29.) Pliny’s
account of the lapatha is mostly taken from Dioscorides. (H. N. xx,
85.) The term rumex, now generally applied to the genus dock, is taken
from Pliny (xix, 60.) The dock is recommended by Africanus in jaundice,
dropsy, and for the cure of leprosy, lichen, and alphos. (Geopon.
xii, 38.) Macer, in the tenth century, describes it under the name
of _paratella_, and, like the more ancient authorities, commends it
externally for the cure of cutaneous diseases, and internally as an
astringent. The Arabians, in like manner, prescribe it in these cases,
and in general copy from Dioscorides in treating of the different species
of dock. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 53); Serapion (c. 3); Ebn
Baithar (i, 324.) The last of these treats fully of the rumices, but does
not seem to describe any species not noticed by the Greeks.


Λειμώνιον,

Limonium, _Sea Lavender_; its fruit being austere, is given to the amount
of an acetabulum, with wine, in cæliac and dysenteric affections, in
hæmoptysis, and for the uterine discharge.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of the limonium is borrowed from
Dioscorides, who describes the plant as having leaves like beet, but
more slender and longer, a slender straight stem, like that of the
lily, filled with red fruit of an astringent taste. Like our author, he
recommends it in cases requiring astringents. As far as we can judge,
the characters here given it by Dioscorides apply very well to the plant
called sea lavender or red behen, namely, the _Statice Limonium_, L.
Compare Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 1234) and Gray (Suppl. to the
Pharmac.) with Dioscorides (iv, 16.) There seems no necessity, therefore,
for following Gesner in transferring it to the _Polygonum Bistorta_. The
other authorities, both Greek and Arabian, follow Dioscorides closely in
treating of the limonium. See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 423); Avicenna
(ii, 2, 433); Ebn Baithar (ii, 452.) The German editor of the last of
these, we are glad to find, agrees with us in referring this article to
the _Statice Limonium_.


Λειχὴν,

Lichen; that upon rocks, which is like moss, being possessed of detergent
and, at the same time, moderately refrigerant and desiccative powers,
cures lichen, and is anti-inflammatory; and, as Dioscorides says, also
stops hemorrhages. The lichens of horses, when triturated with vinegar,
are said to cure epilepsy and the bite of every venomous animal.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of the vegetable is abridged from
Dioscorides, who, as stated by him, recommends it for stopping
hemorrhages, and also for dispelling phlegmons and curing lichens: he
adds, that it cures jaundice and removes defluxions of the mouth when
rubbed in with honey. (iv, 53.) To which of the Lichenales of modern
botanists it is applicable is somewhat doubtful: whether to the _Sticta
pulmonacea_, as Matthiolus held; to the _Peltidea aphthosa_; or to the
_Peltigera canina_. Compare Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. l. c.) with Lindley
(Veg. King. 48), and Parkinson (1315.) This is also evidently identical
with the second species of lichen described by Pliny. (H. N. xxvi, 10.)
His former species is the _Marchantia conica_, L. (Ibid.) See Harduin
(apud l. c.)

The λέιχηνες ἱππῶν are the well-known callosities forming at the knees
of horses, called _spavins_ in English. See further, Harduin ad Plin.
H. N. xxviii, 49. They are thus described by Cælius Aurelianus: “Sunt
autem squamulæ anteriorum crurum sub armorum partibus in ipsis animalibus
(equis) nata; has Græci lichenas vocant, sive chelidonas, nos vero
impetigines vel hirundines.” (Tard. Pass. i, 4.) The Empirics gave them
for the cure of epilepsy. (Ibid.) See Avicenna (ii, 233) and Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. 271.)


Λεοντοπέταλον,

Leontopetalum, _Lion’s-leaf_; its root is heating and desiccative in the
third degree, and is possessed of discutient powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Although Dioscorides has described this plant with more than
his wonted accuracy, there is still some uncertainty regarding it, some
holding it to be the _Leontice Leontopetalon_, and others the _Corydalis
bulbosa_. The latter would appear to agree better in character with the
description of Dioscorides than the other. See Lindley (Veg. King. 436.)
The other authorities treat of it in very general terms, like our author,
except Oribasius, who gives a pretty minute description of it, like
Dioscorides. It is noticed by Ebn Baithar (ii, 186), who, however, does
not supply much additional information. Dr. Sontheimer sets it down for
the _Leontice Leontopetalon_.


Λεπίδιον,

Lepidium, _Pepperwort_ (by some called Iberis), belongs to the fourth
order of calefacients, being like the cress in powers, but less
desiccative.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of this plant (which is _Lepidium
latifolium_, Pepperwort) is mostly taken from Galen. Dioscorides says
it is made into a pickle with milk, and that the power of its leaves is
acrid and ulcerative, and hence it is used in a cataplasm for sciatica.
He says further of it, that it is also applicable in diseases of the
spleen, removes leprosy, and that its root _would seem_ to soothe pains
of the teeth when appended to the neck as an amulet. (ii, 205.) It is
to be remarked that Dioscorides always speaks of the virtues of amulets
in ambiguous terms. It is described by the Arabians under the name
of _Sitarig_ or _Scitaragi_. See Rhases (Contin. l. ult. i, 655) and
Avicenna (ii, 2, 657.) Avicenna’s description of it is somewhat confused,
and cannot be easily reconciled with that of Dioscorides, but with regard
to its medicinal virtues, they are quite agreed. Bimasuy, one of Rhases’s
authorities, says of it, that its seed is like the seed of nasturtium,
but not so heating. Beckmann mentions that the _Lepidium latifolium_ was
at one time used as a kitchen vegetable, and was called, in England,
_poor man’s pepper_. (Hist. of Invent.)


Λεπὶς,

Squama, _Flake_; all kinds are strongly desiccative and astringent, and
pungent in no inconsiderable degree. But the squama æris (_Flakes of
copper_) is more desiccative, consists of more subtile particles, and has
also some verdigris, more especially that from Cyprian nails, which is
hence called clavaris. The squama ferri is possessed of more astringency,
and still more that which is formed from the edge of sharp instruments,
called stomoma, hence it is better for ill-conditioned ulcers. But the
squama æris cleanses and melts down flesh more.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The squama æris was a black per-oxyd of copper. The squama
ferri, a black oxyd of iron. The stomoma was the chalybs or steel. See
Dioscorides (v, 89), with the Commentaries of Matthiolus and Sprengel,
and also the Appendix to Dunbar’s Lexicon. Geoffroy says of the squama
æris, that it is little different from the æs astum being only the
particles of burnt copper that fly off when hammered. Dioscorides calls
it astringent and epulotic: when drunk with honeyed water, he says, it
is phlegmagogue; some give it in flour as a pill; it is mixed, he adds,
with ophthalmic remedies, drying defluxions, and removing asperities
of the eyelids. The stomoma, he says, is inferior to the squama æris
as a purgative. (v, 89, 90.) Our author’s account of these substances
is borrowed from Galen. Aëtius also copies from Galen. Oribasius
gives a fuller description of them, differing very little from that
of Dioscorides. The Arabians treat of all these substances, as usual,
borrowing freely from Dioscorides, and not adding much of their own. See
in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 231); Serapion (c. 404); Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. vi, 48); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 43.) They prescribe the squama æris
internally as a purge, and say of it that when the palate is smeared
with it vomiting is excited. These substances occur in the Hippocratic
treatises and in the works of Celsus. They have not been used medicinally
in this country for some time past. The Hindoos use the preparations of
copper both internally and externally, according to Dr. Royle. (Hindoo
Med. 90.)


Λευκάκανθον,

Leucacanthon, _White Acanthus_ (called also Polygonaton and Ischias); its
root is of a cutting nature and desiccative in the third degree, and it
is heating in the first.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We can only determine for certain that it belonged to the
_Carduineæ_, but can scarcely venture to fix the genus, so loose is the
description which the ancient authors have given of it, and so various
the conjectures of modern commentators and herbalists respecting it.
Upon the whole, the preponderance of the authorities is in favour of
the _Cirsium tuberosum_. Dioscorides says of it, that its root is
intensely bitter, and that the decoction of it with wine relieves
chronic pleurisy and sciatica, ruptures and sprains, and further, that
it relieves toothache. (iii, 19.) Galen recommends it in cæliac and
stomach affections and hemoptysis; as a cataplasm to swellings, and a
cure to toothache when used as a gargle. Aëtius gives the same character
of it. The Arabians ascribe the same virtues to it, and also hold it to
he alexipharmic. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 80, 671) and Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. i, 118.) The use of it in medicine is as old as the
Hippocratic age. See Dierbach’s Materia Medica Hippocr.


Λευκὰς,

Leucas, is heating and desiccative in the third degree, but its
prevailing property is acrimony.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears certainly to be a species of _Lamium_, either
the _album_ or the _maculatum_. See Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 672)
and Sprengel (Ad Dioscor.) Dioscorides commends it as an application to
venomous animals, especially those of the sea. (iii, 103.) The other
authorities treat of it in general terms, like our author, who copies
almost word for word from Galen.


Λευκοΐον,

Viola alba, _Stock Gillyflower_; the whole plant is detergent and
attenuating, especially its flowers, and those in particular which are
drier, so that it promotes menstruation, kills and ejects the fœtus; and
if their powers are blunted by a mixture with water, they will answer
with inflammations, particularly those of the uterus. The roots being
possessed of similar powers, are composed of more gross matter, and are
more terrene. But with vinegar they relieve indurated phlegmons.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That the plant here described was stock, i. e. _Cheiranthus
Cheiri_, is unquestionable. Dioscorides evidently included also another
plant of the same order under this head, which, as stated by Sprengel,
may probably be a variety of the _Matthiola incana_. He gives nearly the
same account of its medicinal virtues as our author. Dioscorides says
it kills the fœtus _in utero_ when applied on a pessary; and Galen and
Aëtius ascribe the same powers to it when taken in a draught. By the
Arabians it is obscurely treated of, their authorities in general seeming
to confound it with the violet. See Rhases (Ad Mansor. iii, 21); Haly
Abbas (Pract. ii, 37, 226); Ebn Baithar (i, 403.) The last of these does
little more than copy from Galen and Dioscorides. It is not contained in
the modern Greek Pharmacopœia. It is the _Viola lutea_ of our herbalist
Gerard, and held a place in our Dispensatory as late as Quincy.


Λέυκη,

Populus alba, _the White Poplar_; the tree being composed of a watery,
tepid, and terrene substance, has detergent properties.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt of its being the _Populus alba_, L.
Dioscorides says of it, that its bark, when taken in a draught, cures
sciatica and strangury; that it is said to prevent conception; and that
it is a remedy for earache and other complaints. (i, 109.) Our author
copies from Galen. The Arabians, under this head, are servile copyists
from the Greeks. See Serapion (c. 30); Avicenna (ii, 2, 333); and Ebn
Baithar (i, 340.)


Λιβανωτὶς,

Rosmarinus, _Rosemary_; there are three varieties of it, one of which is
sterile, and the other two bear fruit. They are possessed of detergent,
incisive, discutient, and emollient powers. The juice of them, with
honey, cures dimness of sight occasioned by thick humours. A decoction of
that variety, which is used for garlands, proves serviceable in jaundice.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides, like our author, describes three species, of
which the first bears a fruit called _cachrys_, a term previously used
by Theophrastus and Nicander, and from which the plant has now got the
scientific appellation of _Cachrys Libanotis_. The root of this plant
is still kept by our apothecaries, although it has long ceased to hold
a place in our Dispensatory. See Gray’s Suppl. to the Pharmacop. (80.)
The second species is probably the _Ferula nodiflora_. The third cannot
be satisfactorily determined. Our old English herbalists give the
libanotis the name of “herb frankincense.” (See Parkinson and Gerard.)
These libanotides, however, must be distinguished from “the libanotis,
called rosmarinus by the Romans,” which was the well-known _Rosmarinus
officinalis_, and of which the flower, known by the name of _anthos_, was
in frequent use as a medicine in the age of Sydenham, and still retains
a place in our Dispensatory. We have been obliged to enter with more
length than usual into the general literature of this subject, to prevent
the mistake of confounding the _cachrys_ with the _rosmarinus_, which
might be readily done, if the distinction now adverted to had not been
clearly pointed out. Dioscorides recommends the libanotides for various
medicinal purposes, as being emmenagogue, diuretic, and discutient. Our
author’s character of them is mostly taken from Galen. The Arabians treat
obscurely and confusedly of this subject. See particularly Avicenna (ii,
2, 67); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 71); Serapion (c. 327.) Rhases says of
the rosemary, that it is calefacient and attenuant, and hence proves
carminative, diuretic, and emmenagogue. In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia
the _Rosmarinus officinalis_ stands as the representative of the
λιβανωτὶς. (Athens, 1837.)


Λιβανωτὸς,

Thus, _Frankincense_ is heating in the second order, and desiccative
in the first. It has also a slight sub-astringency. The bark of it is
perceptibly astringent. It is, therefore, desiccative in the second
degree complete. Consisting of thicker matter than the frankincense, and
being less acrid, it cures hæmoptysis, dysentery, cæliac and stomachic
affections, both externally and when taken internally. The green shoot of
it is heating and desiccative in the third degree. It is also somewhat
detergent, by which property it cleanses and fills ulcers in the eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is still by no means satisfactorily determined what tree
it is which produces the frankincense; but the best authorities are
now inclined to think that it is the _Boswellia turifera_. See Pereira
(Mat. Med., 1185); Ainslie (Mat. Ind. 78); and Lindley (Veg. Kingd.
459.) Dioscorides says the best kind of incense is “the male,” by which
the ancients meant the purest kind of it, or that consisting of the
larger grains. See Gray (Pharmacop. 200.) The Indian is of an inferior
quality. He calls it heating, astringent, and cleansing; and recommends
it in hemorrhages, recent wounds, burns, chilblains, and other diseases
of a like nature. He gives minute directions for the use of it in
fumigations. The bark of the frankincense tree he recommends in fluxes
and hemorrhages, and in ulcers of the eyes. The _manna_ of frankincense
will be explained by us under that head. (Mat. Med. i, 81-3.) Oribasius
gives a perfectly similar account of the frankincense; indeed, he
avowedly copies from Dioscorides. (Med. Collect. xi.) Our author’s
account is mostly taken from Galen. On the _Thus_ see further Pliny (H.
N. xii, 30) and Rhases (Contin. xxxvii, § 716.) Most of the ancient
authorities affirm that it acts beneficially in mental disease, that it
sharpens perception, and improves the memory. They also recommend it in
fumigations for removing the pestilential constitution of the atmosphere,
as we have stated in the Second Book. Symeon Seth, mostly borrowing from
Galen and our author, says, under the head of frankincense, that it is
of a drying nature, with a certain astringent quality; that it binds the
bowels; in fumigations helps coughs and defluxions; is emmenagogue both
when drunk and applied per vaginam; that in fumigations it is possessed
of powers for averting the pestilence; and hence in a pestilential season
that houses should be diligently fumigated with it, in order to correct
the pernicious quality of the air. The Arabians used it very freely as
an ingredient in their applications to ulcers, including those of the
eyes. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 525) and Serapion (c. 278.) Averrhoes, like
preceding authorities, recommends the bark in fluxes, hæmoptysis, and
ulceration of the intestines. (Collig. v. 42.) The frankincense occurs
frequently in the treatises contained in the Hippocratic collection, and
in the works of Celsus. The latter used all the kinds mentioned by the
Greeks, such as, “thus masculum,” “fuligo thuris,” and “cortex thuris.”
These he uses for the same purposes as the Greeks, that is to say, for
suppressing bleeding, concocting pus, cleansing sores, and so forth.


Λιγνὺς,

Fuligo, _the Soot_ arising from certain kinds of substances when they are
burnt, such as frankincense, myrrh, turpentine, storax, liquid pitch, and
cedar, is desiccative, terrene, and attenuate: but there are varieties
of it agreeably to the material that is burnt. It is used for ophthalmic
remedies and those for adorning the eyebrows. That which is most used
is the soot from frankincense, as being the mildest; and again, that
from the pine, wild pine and pitch tree, as being the strongest. It is
applied, therefore, for baldness of the eyebrows, and for watery and
ulcerated canthi of the eyelids, and weeping eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Little need be said under this head. Pliny recommends it
along with vinegar as an application to erysipelas. Galen recommends it
in the same cases as our author. He defines the _soot_ to be the remains
of the fire which consumed the _materiel_. Serapion’s account of it
is entirely taken from Galen. Dioscorides (i, 84) and Oribasius (Med.
Collect. xi) describe more minutely than any of the others the process
for preparing the _Fuligo Thuris_. It was used principally in ulcers of
the eyes. The soot of storax and myrrh, as Serapion says, is prepared
agreeably to the same process as that of frankincense.


Λιγυστικὸν,

Ligusticum, _Lovage_; the root and seed of it are heating to such a
degree as to promote menstruation. It is also very carminative.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have always thought that the _Ligusticum Levisticum_ had
been introduced into this country by the Romans, in order to supply them
with an article frequently used by them at home, as a condiment. See
the works of Apicius (pluries.) Dioscorides describes it minutely, and
recommends it in a great variety of complaints, as an emmenagogue and
diuretic, to promote digestion and dispel flatulence. He also mentions
that it was often used as a condiment in place of pepper. (iii, 51.)
Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of it very succinctly. The
Arabians ascribe to it anthelminthic and alexipharmic powers. See in
particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 377); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. iii, 17.) It is
not met with in the works of Celsus, nor, as far as we can discover, in
those of Hippocrates. Lovage held a place in the Materia Medica with all
its ancient characters down to a late date. See the works of Parkinson,
Gerard, Culpeper, Rutty, and Quincy. It holds a place in the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia (97.)


Λιθάργυρος,

Spuma Argenti, _Litharge_, is of the middle order among metallic
substances; we therefore often use it as the vehicle for other remedial
powers. It is moderately desiccative, detergent, and astringent; hence it
is used for excoriations of the thighs from friction.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The ancient Litharge was nowise different from the modern,
being a secondary product in the cupellation of argentiferous lead. It
was, therefore, a protoxide of lead. The varieties of it known to the
ancients, and their modes of preparing it, are circumstantially described
by Pliny (H. N. xxxiii, 35), Dioscorides (v, 72), and Oribasius (Med.
Collect. xiii.) It was used by the Hippocratists in the practice of
medicine. (De Morb. Mulier. ii.) It is the “Spuma Argenti” of Celsus,
who notices it in various parts of his works as a cooling and cleansing
medicine. (v, 290.) Dioscorides merely says of it, that washed litharge
seems to suit ophthalmic remedies, unseemly cicatrices, wrinkled faces,
and maculæ. (v, 102.) Our author condenses what Galen says under this
head. The Arabian authorities treat of it fully, but supply little or
no additional information respecting it. See Serapion (De Simpl. 410);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 460); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 43); Rhases (Cont. l. ult.
i, 428.) They recommend it generally as an astringent in fetor of the
armpits, to restrain copious perspiration, to dispel extravasated blood,
and remove unseemly cicatrices, and especially the marks of variolæ and
morbilli. It does not appear that any of the physicians administered it
internally; but Avicenna mentions that he had known women give it in
fluxes and ulceration of the intestines. Ebn Baithar is very full on this
head (ii, 513.) One of his Arabian authorities, Ibn Ben Amram, recommends
it in diarrhœa, as a clyster to stop the discharge; and mixed up with
vinegar and rose-oil, it is said to be useful in congenital hernia and
other complaints about the scrotum.


Λίθοι,

Lapides, _Stones_; all kinds are desiccative like earth; but the
Hæmatites, or _Blood-stone_, is astringent and desiccative in a
considerable degree, so that it agrees with trachoma of the eyelids,
and if they are free from inflammation it is to be used with water; but
if inflamed, with an egg. It is drunk also with advantage for spitting
of blood; and it restrains the fungous flesh of ulcers. The _Schistos_
or _Scissilis_ has similar properties, but is weaker: and after it the
Galactites, or _Milk-stone_. The Melititis, or _Honey-stone_, has also
a certain degree of heat. The Moroxus (called also Leucographis), being
so much softer than the others, and possessing no active quality,
is much more mild, and occasions less pain; it is, therefore, used
as an application to the soft parts of the body with cerate for the
cicatrization of ulcers. The greenish _Jasper_, being possessed of
stronger powers, attenuates cicatrices and pterygia. The Green Jasper
is useful in stomach complaints, when appended as an amulet, and when
worn in a ring. That called the _Judaic-stone_ breaks renal calculi,
and hence the moderns have called it Tecolithos. The _Pyrites_ acts as
a powerful discutient of tumours and coagula; and when it is not at
hand, the _Molaris_ may be used instead. The _Phrygian_, in addition to
being powerfully desiccative, has also some astringency and pungency;
hence it is repellent and discutient, and is therefore mixed up with
ophthalmic remedies. The _Ageratus_, being possessed of astringent and
discutient powers, is of use in inflammations of the uvula. The flower
of the _Asian-stone_ is composed of so subtile parts that it corrodes
flabby flesh without pungency. The _Gagate-stone_, being considerably
desiccative, agrees principally with chronic cases of emphysema. The
_Magnet_ (called also the Heraclean-stone) has similar powers to the
Hæmatites. The _Arabian-stone_ is like ivory, desiccative and detergent.
Some give those affected with stomach complaints a draught composed of
burnt _Alabaster_. The Smeris, _Emery_, having detergent powers, cleanses
the teeth. The stones found in _Sponges_ break down renal calculi; and
those formed on the Argæan mountain of Cappadocia are possessed of
similar powers, and in like manner the stone called _Ophites_, which is
appended as an amulet with advantage to those bitten by the viper. The
_Ostracites_ and _Geodes_ are said to be considerably desiccative so as
to cure inflammatory swellings. The Retrimentum Naxiæ cotis, _filings
of the Naxian Whetstone_, is said to be refrigerant, so as to repress
the breasts of virgins, and the testicles of children. The filings of
the _Cos oleraria_, being detergent, suit with alopecia. It is said that
the _Hieracites_ and _Indian-stone_, when appended as amulets, stop
the discharge of blood from hemorrhoids, and that the _Sapphire_, when
drunk, relieves persons bitten by the scorpion, and the _Aphroselinum_,
epileptics. The _Armenian-stone_ purges the belly downwards, but is
prejudicial to the stomach.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The following account of the stones used by the ancients in
the practice of medicine is derived from a careful study of the ancient
writers on this subject, especially Theophrastus, Pliny, Orpheus, and
Psellus. We have also availed ourselves freely of the labours of the
modern commentators who have written on these ancient authors, namely, De
Laet, De Boet, Marbodeus, Hill, and others. For a fuller description of
some of the articles, we would beg to refer to our Appendix to Dunbar’s
English and Greek Lexicon.

The _Hæmatites_ or _Blood-stone_ was so called from its colour, or
because it was used as a styptic for stopping hemorrhages, as stated by
Galen. It consists principally of the oxide of iron. Professor Cleaveland
says it contains from 60 to 80 per cent. of iron of excellent quality.
It was used for the cure of ophthalmy. See Dioscorides (v, 143); Galen
(De Simpl. ix); Serapion (De Simpl. 421.) They also recommend it in
menorrhagia. Alexander praises it in hæmoptysis. Averrhoes recommends it
in diseases of the eyelids and eyes. (Collig. iv, 43.) Dr. Hill says it
is accounted astringent and desiccative. He adds, “it is given from 10
to 25 grains in hemorrhages and in distemperatures of the eyes.” Besides
this, the ancients were acquainted with another Blood-stone which they
call Heliotrope.

The _Schistos_ is only a variety of the hæmatites, having a fibrous
appearance and ochre colour. Pliny says it is used in diseases of the
eyes.

The _Lapis Melitites_ of Pliny is supposed by Dr. Kidd to have been
borax, or the borate of soda. Pliny recommends it mixed with wax for
ulcers of the throat. (H. N. xxxvi, 33.) See Isidorus (Orig. xvi, 4.) It
seems likely that it was the same as the tincar of the Arabians, although
on this point we do not venture to pronounce a decided opinion. One of
Serapion’s authorities speaks highly of it in caries of the teeth, and
says it kills the worms in them. Is this the original of the popular
belief, that toothache is connected with worms in the teeth? (De Simpl.
423.)

The _Galactites_ most probably consisted principally of chalk. Matthiolus
and Sprengel mention that it is found in Saxony. Dr. Hill remarks that
it is, properly speaking, a species of indurated clay, and not a stone.
Dr. Jameson conjectures that it may have been Fuller’s earth. Dioscorides
recommends it as a liniment in defluxions of the eyes. (v, 149.)

The _Morochthus_, according to Sprengel, is called _Speckstein_ and
_Seifenstein_ in German. It consists of talc, argil, and silica, with a
small proportion of iron and manganese. Dr. Hill says it is an indurated
clay, and is now known by the name of _French chalk_. Dioscorides
recommends it in hæmoptysis, cæliac affections, and pains of the bladder;
and for the cure of fluor albus on pessaries. (v, 151.) Avicenna speaks
favorably of it also in fistula lachrymalis. (ii, 2, 431.)

The _Achates_, or Agate, is well described by Orpheus, and recommended as
a remedy for fever and various other complaints. It does not seem to be
noticed by the medical authorities.

The ancients were acquainted with several varieties of _Jasper_.
See Pliny (H. N. xxxvii, 37.) They contained talc and various other
ingredients. Dioscorides recommends it solely as a phylactery _or_ amulet
to expedite delivery. (v, 159.) Galen and Avicenna speak of its being
useful as an amulet in affections of the stomach and bowels. The latter
calls it _Lapis aneseb_. (ii, 2, 408.) Even in modern times the Jasper
has been celebrated as an amulet. See Andreas Laurentius (De Mirab.
Strum. Sanat. 69), and Hill (Mat. Med. 276.)

The _Judaic-stone_ appears to be the Tecolithos of Pliny. It is now
ascertained that it is formed from the quills of the _Echinus Marinus_,
impregnated with calcareous earth, silica, and perhaps some magnesia.
Most of the ancient authorities commend it as a lithontriptic. V.
Harduin in Plin. H. N. xxxvii, 68. Dioscorides recommends it not only
as a lithontriptic medicine, but a remedy for dysuria in general. (v,
154.) Galen and Serapion also affirm that they had experienced good
effects from it when given in calculus of the kidneys or bladder. See in
particular Serapion (c. 390.) Rhases, however, affirms that he had tried
the lapis vesicæ, by which he probably means this article, but had not
found it to be lithontriptic. (Cont. l. ult. 414.) Dr. Hill says it is,
undoubtedly, diuretic, but it is not so certain that it is lithontriptic.

The _Pyrites_, when burnt, forms an oxide of copper with sulphur. From
our author’s account, it is evident that the Molaris nearly resembled
it, and the same may be understood from Pliny. It will, of course, be
understood that it is the copper pyrites, and not the iron. This is
very obvious from the description of it given by Dioscorides. He calls
it heating, detergent, and a cleanser of obscurities of the eyes, and
recommends it for repressing fungated ulcers. When burnt, he adds, some
call it _diphryges_. It is described under the name of _marchasita_ by
Serapion (c. 395), Phases (Cont. l. ult. i, 449), and Avicenna (ii, 2,
464.) They all recommend it with vinegar in leprosy and other obstinate
diseases of the skin.

The _Phrygian-stone_ was a pumice with alum and some other ingredients.
Dioscorides says it has astringent, cleansing, and moderately escharotic
powers, and proves a remedy for burns. (v, 140.) Galen professes to have
had great experience of it in diseases of the eyes. (Ed. Basil. t. ii,
122, 208.) See also Avicenna (ii, 2, 405.)

The _Ageratus_ does not occur we believe in Dioscorides or Pliny. Galen
calls it a stone which the curriers of leather use. He says it is
astringent and acrid, and recommends it particularly in inflamed uvula.
Avicenna copies from him. (ii, 2, 409.)

The _Anthrax_ or _Carbuncle_ of the ancients comprehended the ruby and
a multitude of other gems of the same colour. It was scarcely used in
medicine.

De Boet says that the _Asian-stone_ is light and spongy, and contains
alum, nitre, and salt. Dioscorides calls it slightly septic and
discutient, and recommends it as an application to old, and more
especially fungated, ulcers, and those of a malignant nature. The flower
of it, by which was meant an efflorescence on the surface of it, he says
does good in phthisis. He further says of it, that a hip-bath prepared
with it is highly beneficial in the cure of gout. (v, 141.) Galen and the
other authorities treat of it in more general terms. (De Simpl. ix.) See
also Serapion, who merely copies from Dioscorides and Galen. (c. 393.)

The _Amethyst_ of our times is the same gem that the ancients knew by
this name. Except that it was suspended from the neck as an amulet to
prevent drunkenness, we are not aware that it was used in medicine. See
Pliny (H. N. xxxvii, 40); Marbodeus (De Lapid. 4.)

The _Gagate_ is a fossil, bituminous substance, containing carbon and
ethereal oil. It is jet. The _Thracian-stone_ was similar to it; indeed,
we suppose, a variety of it. The Gagate was used by the ancients as a
test of epilepsy, and a restorative from hysterical fits. Galen gives
an interesting account of his experience in the medicinal use of gagate
and Thracian-stone, the result of which is, that he found gagate rather
to weaken than increase the powers of the bitumen which he had picked up
upon the shores of the Dead Sea; but that as a desiccant, it operated
beneficially in the cure of sores, and that not only of recent, but also
of sinuous ulcers. (De Simpl. ix.) He mentions that he could not discover
the river Gagas in Lycia, from which, according to Dioscorides, this
stone derives its name. (Ibid.) There is an interesting description of
the Thracian-stone in a passage of Nicander quoted by Galen, under this
head, _Theriac_. (45.) The Arabians who treat of it merely copy from the
Greeks. See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 399, 400), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 107.)
Mesue gives a formula for an oil of gagate. (De Oleis, i.)

Aristotle suggests that perhaps the _Magnet_ is animated. (De Anima.)
To comprehend his reasons for maintaining this singular opinion,
it would be necessary to understand his theory of motion, as fully
exposed in his ‘Auscultationes Naturales.’ Lucretius, with considerable
ingenuity, attempts to explain the manner in which the magnet attracts
iron. (vi, 1000.) Plato (in Timæo) and Hippocrates (De Sterilibus) also
allude to its attractive property. Galen recommends it in dropsies.
Dioscorides, Galen, and the other Greek authorities treat of it in a
very cursory manner, merely stating of it that it has the same virtues
as the hæmatite. The Arabians, more especially Serapion, give a much
fuller description of it, which at all events identifies the Magnetis or
Heraclean-stone of the ancients with our loadstone, that is to say, the
magnetic oxide of iron. It was used by the Arabians as an application to
poisoned wounds. See Serapion (De Simpl. 394); Avicenna (ii, 2, 463.)
It was used in the practice of medicine from the earliest date. See
Hippocrates (De Sterilibus.) Ebn Baithar recommends it in pains of the
head and feet, if taken hold of, and in cramps. He copies Aëtius. (ii,
25.)

The _Arabian-stone_ is a species of white marble. It is recommended by
Dioscorides for hemorrhoids and as a dentifrice. (v, 145.)

The _Alabastrites_ is a thick concrete gypsum. See Kidd’s ‘Mineral.’
(i, 63.) Galen says of it, that when burned it is adapted for medicinal
use, and that it is sometimes administered in a draught to persons
affected with stomach complaints. Dioscorides speaks of its being applied
externally in such cases along with wax; calls it discutient, and says
it represses the gums. (v, 152.) It would appear that this article is
the Lapis eburneus of Rhases, who calls it an astringent and dentifrice.
(Cont. l. ult. i, 395.)

Geoffroy says that the Smiris is the _Emery_ of the shops. It is held
by the mineralogists to be a variety of Corundam. See Cleaveland’s
‘Mineral.’ (278.) A specimen of it, from the Isle of Naxos (which may
be supposed a good representation of the ancient Smiris), was found
by Tennant to consist principally of alumine, with small proportions
of silex and oxide of iron. Dioscorides recommends it in looseness of
the gums, and as a dentifrice; he ranks it with septic and caustic
substances. (v, 165.)

The _Stones in Sponges_ consist principally of the muriate of lime. They
were much commended as lithontriptics. See Dioscorides, Pliny, Galen, and
Avicenna.

The _Ophites_ is a pellucid stone, so called from its serpentine streaks.
It was that variety of serpentine called _verde antico_. See Jameson’s
‘Mineralogy.’ According to Dioscorides, it was useful as an amulet in the
case of persons stung by snakes, and was also reported to be useful in
lethargy and headache. (v, 161.) Galen holds it to be lithontriptic. (De
Simpl. viii.) The Arabians copy from Dioscorides and Galen. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 406.)

The _Ostracites_ appears to have been petrified oysters. Dioscorides
recommends it in menorrhagia, in inflamed breasts, and spreading sores.
(v, 164.) Galen also recommends it for clearing the cornea. (De Simpl.
viii.) See in like manner Avicenna (ii, 2, 393.)

The _Geodes_ contains iron, argil, and silica. It is nearly allied to the
Eagle-stone, and hence it is often called the Bastard Eagle-stone. See
Hill’s ‘Theophrastus.’ Dioscorides recommends it as an ophthalmic remedy,
and as a liniment for inflammations of the mammæ and testicles. (v,
168.) Avicenna says the vapour of vinegar in which it is dissolved checks
the flow of blood and cures hot aspostemes. (ii, 2, 398.)

Matthiolus confesses himself quite unacquainted with the _Naxian
Whetstone_. Sprengel reckons it allied to the Smiris. Galen would rather
seem to make it a variety of the Ostracites.

The _Lapis Lyncurius_ of the ancients was our Jacinth or Hyacinth.
See Beckmann, and De Laet, ‘de gemmis.’ Dioscorides recommends it in
affections of the stomach and bowels. (ii, 100.) Serapion describes
minutely the _Lapis iacinctus_, or hyacinth, but merely mentions of it
that it was used as a seal to avert the thunderbolt. (c. 398.) The stone
which he describes in the following chapter, would appear decidedly to be
the Tourmaline. He calls it Lapis rubeus, _seu_, _hager albuzedi_. Used
as a seal, he says it dispels bad dreams.

The _Cos_ is composed of a schistose argil. The _Cos Olearia_ would
appear to have derived its name from requiring the use of oil to answer
the purpose of whetstone. See Pliny (H. N. xxxvi, 47.)

It is impossible to determine accurately the nature of the _Hieracites_.
Aëtius, who has given the fullest account of it, describes it as a
darkish green stone.

The _Indian-stone_ would seem to be identical with the Arabian-stone.
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 401.)

The _Lydian-stone_ is ranked by Dr. Thomson as a sub-species of
Flint-slate. He remarks that it was used as a touchstone by the ancients.

The _Ætites_, or _Eagle-stone_, is a species of oxide of iron. Dr. Hill
remarks that custom has given the name of ætites to every fossil that
has a loose nucleus within it. The ancients used it very frequently as
an amulet and incantation. See particularly Dioscorides and Aëtius. The
Arabians also confirm, in the strongest terms, the imaginary efficacy of
the Eagle-stone when used as an amulet. That it accelerated the delivery
of woman in tedious labours, Serapion and Rhases declare, from ample
experience, and that it would produce this beneficial effect on those who
had faith in it _we_ can readily believe. Indeed, we have often regretted
that such innocent modes of working upon the imagination of women in
labour had given place to more dangerous methods of practice in such
cases. The Eagle-stone was retained in the English Dispensatory with all
its ancient characters as late as Quincy. (165.)

The _Thyites_, according to Fuchsius, was a Turquoise; but Matthiolus is
of a different opinion. Sprengel thinks it may have been a species of
turquoise, although not the common one. Dr. Hill says it contains a small
quantity of copper, which rendered it a valuable ingredient in collyria.
It is prescribed for this purpose by Dioscorides. (v, 153.)

The _Amiantus_ is composed of talc, calcareous and siliceous earth, clay,
and a small proportion of iron. It is often confounded with the _Alumen
plumosum_ of the ancients, to which it is compared by Dioscorides. He
does not mention any medicinal use to which it was applied, but merely
states of it that it was used for forming the _linum asbestinum_. (v,
155.) See further Harduin in Plin. H. N. (xxxvi, 31.)

The _Sapphirus_ of the ancients is supposed by Beckmann to have been
the Lapis lazuli. (History of Inventions.) This opinion is now pretty
generally established, and yet there is a difficulty attending it;
for the Arabians, in treating of the _Lapis lazuli_, do not quote the
descriptions of the sapphirus given by Dioscorides and Galen, but
apparently refer to the _cyanus_. Dioscorides recommends the sapphirus
as an alexipharmic, and a remedy for internal ulcerations and diseases
of the eyes. (v, 156.) Galen merely recommends it as an antidote to the
stings of scorpions. Rhases, under the head of “Lapis lazuli,” quotes
Dioscorides as saying of it that it promotes the growth of the eyelashes,
that it restrains fungous flesh, is septic, caustic, and ulcerative; and
Galen, as saying of it, that it has abstergent powers, with a moderate
degree of attenuating and styptic virtues; that it may be mixed in
collyria for the eyes, and especially for the eyelids when affected with
sharp humours, which it represses, and also prevents the growth of the
hairs. (Cont. l. ult. i, 404.) See also Serapion (c. 389); Averrhoes
(Collig. v, 43); and Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 45.)

The _Calais_ of Pliny and the ancients is said by Dr. Hill to be the
_Turquoise_, or _Gemma Turcica_, which consists principally of lime and
iron. See the Thyites.

The _Memphites_ contains bitumen and ethereal oil. It is the
retinasphaltum of Mr. Hatchett, or retinite of Jameson. (Mineral, iii,
478.) According to Dioscorides, when rubbed smoothly upon places about
to be burnt or cut, it renders them insensible without danger. (v, 157.)

The _Selenites_ consists principally of a compact lamellated gypsum.
According to Eustathius, it is the same as the _Lychnitis_, which
Dionysius the geographer describes as resembling fire in lustre. (Orbis.
Descrip. 328.) It is soft, pellucid, and colourless. Dioscorides
describes it minutely, and mentions of it that it was given as a draught
to epileptics, and used as a phylactery by women. He adds, that it was
also appended to trees in order to make them keep their fruit. (v,
158.) Rhases, under the head of “lapis lunaris,” copies this chapter of
Dioscorides. (Cont. l. ult. i, 405.)

The _Lapis Specularis_ was the same as the Moscovy talc. It was much
used by the ancients for windows in place of glass. It is a variety of
selenite, or sparry gypsum. See Kidd and Jameson. We have treated of it
under the head of Gypsum in the Fifth Book.

The _Smaragdus_ of the ancients is unquestionably referable to our
emerald, but there is every reason to believe, also comprehended coloured
crystals and certain stones of the jasper kind. It does not occur in the
works of Dioscorides or Galen; and, as far as we know, Aëtius is the
first medical author who describes it. He says of it, that when roasted
and levigated with Attic honey, it cures dimness of vision; that it is
most useful in elephantiasis, both externally and internally; and that
as an amulet it restrains bleeding. (ii, 39.) We are not aware that any
other ancient authority, whether Greek, Roman, or Arabian, has noticed it.

We will treat of the _Bezoar-stone_ and _Gall-stone_ of the bull in the
Appendix to this section.


Λιθόσπερμον (called also λειόσπορμον ἢ ἡράκλειον),

Lithospermon, _Gromwel_, is the seed of the herb called Aegonychus, of
a stony hardness, and white, which, when drunk with white wine, proves
lithontriptic and diuretic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Lithospermum officinale_, or
_Gromwel_. Pliny expresses himself respecting it in the following
terms: “Nec quidquam inter herbas majore quidem miraculo aspexi. Tantus
est decor, velut aurificum arte alternis inter folia candicantibus
margaritis: tam exquisita difficultas lapidis ex herba nascentis.” (H.
N. xxvii, 74.) Dioscorides describes it minutely, and, like our author,
calls it lithontriptic and diuretic. (iii, 148.) Serapion and Avicenna
give it the same characters, which it maintained in modern times, as
long as it held a place in the Dispensatory. See the works of Parkinson,
Culpeper, and Quincy.


Λινόσπερμον,

Lini Semen, _Linseed_, is heating in the first order, and holds the
middle rank of diluents and desiccants. When eaten, it is flatulent, even
although roasted.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the seed of the _Linum usitatissimum_, Angl. _Linseed_.
Dioscorides gives a long account of its medicinal virtues, recommending
it externally for ephelides, vari, and other complaints, and internally
as an expectorant and aphrodisiacal medicine. He further commends it
as an enema in pains of the bowels and womb, and as a hip-bath in
inflammations of the uterus. (ii, 125.) Galen, like our author, treats
of it in very general terms. The Arabians, and especially Avicenna, give
a more circumstantial account of it. (ii, 2, 598.) See Serapion (c. 21);
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 426.) Like Dioscorides, they recommend it as an
external application to apostemes of a hard character, and internally for
the cure of diseases of the chest and intestines.


Λινόζωστις,

Mercurialis, the herb _Mercury_, is considerably laxative of the belly,
and applied in cataplasms it is discutient. It ought to be known that
when its seed is rubbed upon those preternatural excrescences of the
body, which the vulgar call narphia, it is found to make them disappear.
But the seed must be green, and they must be often rubbed with it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Most of the botanical authorities agree that it is the
_Mercurialis annua_, L. It occurs frequently in the Hippocratic treatises
as an article of diet and gentle laxative. Dioscorides, who describes it
in two separate places of his Materia Medica, (iii, 130 and iv, 188),
speaks of it as being a laxative pot-herb, and a medicine of which the
decoction in water proves cholagogue and hydragogue. He also alludes to
the popular notion that the leaves of the female plant, when applied to
a woman’s parts of generation after her menstrual period, will promote
conception of a female, while those of the male plant will promote
conception of a male. It does not occur in the works of Celsus, nor,
as far as we can discover, in those of any of the Arabians, with the
exception of Averrhoes, who calls it a gentle purgative of the same class
as Cassia fistula, tamarinds, and the like, and says it evacuates yellow
bile and phlegm; and boiled in wine proves an excellent application
to large sores, and in particular to the ulcers produced by burns. He
further recommends its leaves boiled in vinegar for diseases of the
spleen, and its flower in a masticatory and errhine. (Collig. v, 42.)
What our author says of its virtues in the diseases called _narphia_,
by the vulgar, is taken from Aëtius (i), where, however, the reading
is _carphia_. Galen says of it, “everybody uses the herb mercury for
purging the belly.” (De Simpl. Med.) Notwithstanding this testimony,
which is, in fact, confirmed by that of all the ancient writers who have
treated of it, Bergius says, “Virtus suspecta: vis emolliens nondum ritè
nobis constat.” However, Moses Charras, who appears to have written from
experience, affirms of it that “it loosens the belly, and provokes the
menstruums. The dose is from oz. j to iij.” (Roy. Pharm. 106.) Alston
likewise acknowledges its laxative powers. Dr. Hill says of it, “This
plant is of an emollient nature, and is eaten by many people in the
manner of spinach, which, when cultivated in the garden, it greatly
excels. If eaten largely it gently opens the bowels.” (Mat. Med.) It held
a place in our Dispensatory as late as Quincy. (106.)


Λίτρον,

Nitrum, _Nitre_ (or _Soda_?), is possessed of intermediate powers between
the aphronitrum and salts. When burnt it becomes more attenuate and
discutient. If taken internally it cuts and attenuates the thick and
viscid humours more than any other. The Chalestræan (so called from
Chalestra, a place in Thessalonica) is more acrid and desiccative,
so that it is used for defluxions from the head, and for arthritic
complaints.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The following extract from Pliny’s description of the
nitrum clearly indicates the substance to which he applies it: “Non
est differenda et nitri natura, non multum a sale distans. Exiguum fit
apud Medos, canescentibus siccitate convallibus, quod vocant halmyrhaga.
Optimum copiosumque in Litis Macedoniæ quod vocant Chalestricum,
candidum, purumque, proximum sali. Lacus est nitrosus, exsiliente e
medio dulci fonticulo. In Ægypto autem conficitur multo abundantius, sed
deterius. Fit pæne eodem modo quo sol, nisi quod salinis mare infundunt,
Nilum autem nitrariis.” (H. N. xxxi, 46.) Compare the above with the
following account of the native carbonate of soda: “In Egypt it is
plentifully found in what are called _the Lakes of Natron_. These lakes,
six in number, are westward of the Nile, not far from Terrana, in a
valley surrounded by limestone. The carbonate and muriate of soda exist
together in these waters; but when the water is diminished by natural
evaporation, these salts are deposited in distinct layers.” (Brogniart,
in Cleaveland’s Mineral., 133.) It would be superfluous to bring any
further proof that the ancient nitrum generally applies to our natron
or the native carbonate of soda. Were the Greeks, Romans, and Arabians
then entirely ignorant of saltpetre or the nitrate of potash? This seems
incredible, considering how largely it is distributed in Europe, Asia,
and Africa; and, therefore, we cannot bring ourselves to think that this
mineral can have entirely escaped the observation of the ancients; and
if this were the proper place for such a disquisition, we believe that
we could state satisfactory reasons for drawing the conclusion, that
“nitrum” was applied to it as well as to the other mineral. But at the
same time, as mentioned above, we are quite satisfied that by _litrum_
and _nitrum_ the medical authors generally, if not universally, meant
the native carbonate of soda. Dioscorides, with regard to its medicinal
powers, merely states of it that it has alterative or metasyncritic
powers. (v, 129.) We have given his views respecting the _Aphronitrum_
under that head. Our author abridges Galen’s account of it, but omits to
mention, as stated by Galen, and also by Aëtius, that the different kinds
of nitre were popularly used as counter-agents in cases of poisoning by
mushrooms. All the Arabians treat largely of this substance generally
under the name of _baurach_. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 84); Rhases (Cont. l.
ult, iii, 115); Mesue (De Simpl. xvii); Serapion (c. 401); Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 46, 487); Ebn Baithar (i, 187.) Rhases marks what it is:
“Nitrum appellatur Arabicè natrum et est simile sali gemmæ.” (Cont.
l. ult. ii, 508.) They used it externally for the cure of prurigo and
scabies, and as an application to diseased joints, and along with figs
to remove dropsical swellings. They recommend an injection of it into
the ear for the cure of deafness. The aphronitrum, or African nitrum,
is said by Avicenna to be possessed of emetic powers, and that it was
more incisive of gross humours than the other varieties of it. It was
used by them in cases of poisoning with mushrooms, cantharides, and
bull’s blood; and as an application to the bites of mad dogs. Mesue, with
his wonted precision, states its powers very distinctly, recommending
it, when given by the mouth, in clysters, and in suppositories as an
evacuant of crude and viscid phlegm, for colic and affections of the
stomach. Like Avicenna, he says that it will sometimes occasion vomiting.
His commentator, Costa, has many ingenious observations on the ancient
nitrum, which will be found very interesting to those who desire to
become better acquainted with this subject. Haly Abbas states that
friction with it before the hour of invasion will prevent an attack of
ague.


Λόγχιτις,

Lonchitis, _Rough Spleenwort_; the root of that species which has
triangular seed, like a spear, resembles that of the carrot, and is
diuretic. But the green leaves of that species which resembles the
scolopendrium, are agglutinative of wounds; and when dried, and drunk
with vinegar, they cure indurated spleens.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of the two species of _Lonchitis_ is
taken from Dioscorides. Of these, the former, which has been conjectured
to be the _Serapias Lingua_, he says is diuretic. The other, which
would seem to be the species of _aspidium_, to which the name is still
appropriated, he calls vulnerary and anti-inflammatory, and recommends
for reducing the size of the spleen. Galen and the other authorities
give a similar account of it. Such of the Arabians as treat of it follow
Dioscorides. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 336.)


Λύκοψις,

Lycopsis, _Hound’s-tongue_; having an astringent root, Dioscorides says,
that when applied with polenta in a cataplasm, it agrees with erysipelas,
and that if rubbed in with oil it is sudorific.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is either the _Echium Italicum_, L., or the _Lycopsis
echioides_, L., probably the former. Our author, as he acknowledges,
borrows from Dioscorides. Galen, Aëtius, and Oribasius, as well as
Hippocrates and Celsus, do not treat of it at all. If the Arabians notice
it, they do so under the head of _Anchusa_.


Λύκιον,

Lycium, _Buckthorn_, is composed of heterogeneous powers, one part
of its ingredients being heating, attenuate, and discutient, and the
other, or terrene part, being cooling and gently astringent; so that it
is desiccative in the second degree, and calefacient and refrigerant
in an intermediate degree. They use it, therefore, as a detergent in
obstructions of the pupil, and as an astringent in cæliac and dysenteric
cases and ill-conditioned ulcers; and in inflammations as a discutient.
The Indian is the best.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides gives a sufficiently distinct description of the
tree which produces the _lycium_, so as to leave no doubt that he points
to the _Rhamnus infectorius_. The _Lycium Indicum_ of the same author, is
now satisfactorily determined to be the product of the _Berberis Lycium_.
See Royle (Antiq. of Hind. Med. 32), and ‘Linn. Transact.’ (xvii, 83);
also Pereira (Materia Medica, 1152.) Dioscorides recommends the former
of these as an astringent for the cure of various complaints, such as
obscurities of the cornea, psoriasis, and pruritus of the eyelids,
purulent ears and tonsils, ulcers of the gums, chapped lips, fissure
of the anus; in cæliac and dysenteric affections, both in draughts and
clysters; in hæmoptysis and coughs; in female fluxes, hydrophobia, and
so forth. The Indian, he states, cures inflammation of the spleen and
jaundice, prevents menstruation, purges water, and is a counter-agent to
deadly poisons. (i, 132.) Galen’s account of it being nearly the same as
our author’s, we need not expound at any length. He holds that the Indian
species is far stronger than the other. (De Simpl. ix.) Oribasius and
Aëtius in like manner follow Galen. Celsus recommends lycium strongly
in ulceration of the throat. (iv, 4, 3.) As far as we have been able to
discover, it does not occur in the works of Hippocrates. The Arabians
treat fully of this article. See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 429); Avicenna
(ii, 2, 390); Serapion (c. 7); Averrhoes (v, 42.) We do not find that
they supply any new views regarding its medicinal virtues. In the modern
Greek Pharmacopœia the extract of catechu is set down as being the
_Lycium Indicum_. We agree, however, with the authorities quoted above
regarding it.


Λυσιμάχιον,

Lysimachium, _Moneywort_; its prevailing power is astringency; hence it
agglutinates wounds, and is styptic, both itself and its juice. It also
relieves dysentery when drunk and injected.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The L. of Dioscorides and our author is most probably the
Yellow Loose-strife of our English herbalists, namely, _Lysimachia
vulgaris_, L. Our author abridges Dioscorides, who recommends it as an
astringent in various cases, such as hæmoptysis, dysentery, fluor albus,
hemorrhage from the nose, and as a vulnerary and styptic herb. (iv, 3.)
Galen and Aëtius treat of it in nearly the same words as our author.
We have not been able to find it in the works of the Arabians, except
Ebn Baithar, and yet we do not assert that it may not be treated of
under some name which we have not been able to interpret. Ebn Baithar
merely quotes Dioscorides and Galen. The lysimachia, although not now
included in our Dispensatories, still holds a place in the shops of
the apothecaries, with the character of being astringent. See Gray’s
Supplement, &c. (48.)


Λυχνὶς,

Lychnis, _Campion_; the seed of that species which is used for garlands
is hot and desiccative, according to the second order complete.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This plant is the _Lychnis coronaria_ of Dioscorides, and
still retains this name. Dioscorides recommends it in the case of persons
stung by scorpions. The wild lychnis of Dioscorides may be either the
_Lychnis dioica_ or _Agrostemma githago_; it is said by Dioscorides to
be a cholagogue, and a remedy in the case of persons stung by scorpions.
(iii, 104-5.) Galen and the other authorities merely state the characters
of the _Lychnis coronaria_ in general terms. We have not found this
article in any of the Arabians, not even in Ebn Baithar.


Λωτὸς,

Lotus, _Bird’s-foot Trefoil_ (?); the cultivated species is by some
called trifolium. It is possessed of detergent and moderately desiccative
powers, and is of a proper temperament as to heat. The seed of the wild
lotus belongs to the second order of calefacients, and is also somewhat
detergent. The seed of the Egyptian lotus is also made into bread.
The _Lote_, or _Nettle-tree_, consists of subtile particles, and is
moderately desiccative and astringent. Hence it is applicable for the
female fluor, and for fluxes of the bowels, both when drunk with wine or
water, or when used in an injection. It also strengthens the hairs that
are falling out.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We need not enter further into the literary history of this
interesting subject, which we have given at some length in the Appendix,
already so often referred to, than to mention that the Lotus, called also
Trifolium, is referable to the _Melilotus officinalis_, and probably
some of its congeners, and the Lotus Arbor to the _Zizyphus Lotus_, with
perhaps some other trees of the same tribe. Dr. Lindley says of it, “The
Lote-bush, which gave its name to the ancient Lotophagi, is to this day
collected for food by the Arabs of Barbary, who call it sadar, and its
berries nabk.” (Veg. Kingd. 582.) The wild lotus of Dioscorides and the
other authorities has never been satisfactorily determined. Perhaps it
was the species of _melilotus_ named _cærulea_. The Egyptian lotus, there
can be no doubt, was the _Nymphæa Lotus_, L. Dioscorides gives a striking
description of this last, which, he says, the inhabitants of Egypt
use for making bread; and it is deserving of remark that the rhizomes
of the nymphæa are still roasted and eaten by the Negroes of Senegal.
See further under _Nymphæa_ in this section. Our author’s characters
of the other loti are copied from Dioscorides or Galen, who agree, in
the main, under this head. See, in like manner, Aëtius and Oribasius.
The Arabians treat at great length of the different loti, and more
especially of the L. Arbor, with which they must have been familiarly
acquainted. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 298, 513); Serapion (c. 120); Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. i, 487); Ebn Baithar (ii, 539.) They all recommend it as a
powerful astringent in looseness of the bowels, bloody flux, menorrhagia,
ulcers of the bowels, and in asthma and affections of the chest. One of
Serapion’s authorities calls it stomachic and a whetter of the appetite.
The lotus occurs in the Hippocratic treatises; indeed, from the fable of
the Lotophagi, contained in the Odyssey of Homer, there can be no doubt
that the lotus had been known and used as an article of food long before
the time of Hippocrates.


Μάκερ,

Macer is a bark brought from India, being desiccative in the third order,
and intermediate as to heating and cooling properties. It consists of
subtile particles, and is astringent; hence it agrees with cæliac and
dysenteric complaints.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Under this head we cannot do better than quote the words
of an excellent living authority: “_Macer_, a bark from the Barbaric
region, has been thought to be _Wrightia antidysenterica_, supposing
this to be the _macre_ described by Crist. d’Acosta. (Clus. Exot. 266.)
Though _macer_ is always described as a bark, I had given me as such the
highly aromatic leaves of _Rhododendron lepidotum_ under the name of
_talisfur_. _Mafur_ and _mafurbooz_ are in Persian works assigned as the
Greek names of _talisafar_, under which name the _macer_ of Dioscorides
is alluded to by Avicenna.” (Antiq. of Hindoo Med. 91, by Dr. Royle).
Though the _macer_ of the Greeks, then, was different from mace, there
can be no doubt that the Arabians confounded the two substances together.
Thus Avicenna, in his chapter on mace, quotes the words of Paulus on
the macer. (ii, 2, 448.) Serapion in like manner, under mace, which he
correctly describes as the rind or membrane of the nutmeg, gives the
characters of macer from Dioscorides. (De Simpl. 2.)


Μαλάβαθρον,

Malabathrum; the leaf of it has powers like the spikenard.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dr. Ainslie, treating of the Cassia Lignea, or Cassia bark,
says, “the narrow-pointed leaves of the _Laurus Cassia_, as well as the
oblong, ovate, shining leaves of the Cinnamon-tree, are sold in the
Indian bazaars under the names of _lawangapatery_ and _tejpat_, from
a notion that they are the leaves of the _Laurus Cassia_. In commerce
these leaves are called _Folia Indica_, or _Malabathra_, a name which
more especially applies to the leaves of the Laurus Cassia.” (Med. Ind.
§ 35.) Geoffroy, Sprengel, and Royle also agree in holding the Cassia,
or Cinnamon-leaf, to be the _Folium Indicum_. Dr. Sontheimer, then, in
his translation of Ibn Baithar, makes it to be a peculiar species of
_Laurus_, calling it _Laurus Malabathrum_, and Dr. Pereira does the
same. In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia, the query is put whether the
Cassia-buds be the product of _Laurus Cassia_, or _L. Malabathrum_.
Isidorus says of it, “_Folium_ dictum quod sine ulla radice innatans
in Indiæ littoribus colligitur.” (Orig. xviii, 9.) It is always simply
called _Folium_ by Apicius. Horace applies the word to an ointment.
“Malabathro Syrio capillos,” (Od. ii, 7); on which passage his
commentator, Porphyrion, remarks, “Malabathrum unguenti speciem esse
scimus.” This is the Unguentum Malabathrinum of Dioscorides. (i, 76.)
The ancients, as Dr. Hill remarks, have said much of the virtues of
Malabathrum. They call it stomachic, sudorific, and cephalic. Dioscorides
ascribes to it all the virtues of the Indian spikenard; but he says it
possesses them in a superior degree. He also mentions it as a scent. (i,
11.) Galen and the other Greek authorities, like our author, dismiss
it with a brief notice, comparing it to spikenard. The Arabians treat
of it at greater length, but do little more, after all, than copy the
characters of it given by Dioscorides. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 253);
Serapion (c. 53.) It occurs only once in the works of Celsus (v, 23), as
an ingredient, in one of his antidotes; and does not occur at all, we
believe, in the Hippocratic Collection.


Μαλάχη,

Malva, _Mallows_; the wild is moderately discutient and emollient; but
the garden, as being more moistening, is also weaker. Its fruit, however,
is as much stronger as it is drier.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There seems no reason to doubt that it applies to _Malva
sylvestris_, but probably comprehended other species. Dioscorides
describes minutely the cases to which it is applicable, namely, as a
cataplasm in incipient fistula lachrymalis, with oil for achores and
furfures, and also so prepared for burns and erysipelas; its decoction as
a hip-bath in diseases of the uterus; and as a suitable enema in pains of
the bowels, womb, and anus; its broth he praises in cases of poisoning,
as producing evacuation of the stomach, and says it is beneficial to
persons stung by phalangia, and attracts milk to the breasts; its fruit,
when the reed of the wild lotus is mixed with it, allays pains about the
bladder. (ii, 144.) Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of it as
a medicine in more general terms, representing it to be gently discutient
and demulcent. It occurs in the works of Hippocrates and Celsus; the
latter praises it as a pot-herb, and recommends it as a gentle laxative.
(vii, 27.) The Arabians treat of it fully; but have little to add to
the excellent description of its medicinal powers given by Dioscorides,
whom they all copy. One of Serapion’s authorities briefly commends
it as a demulcent in affections of the chest and bladder, and as a
cataplasm in hot apostemes. (c. 149.) Avicenna’s account of it is highly
interesting, but too lengthy for our purpose. He recommends it internally
in complaints of the lungs and liver, and externally as an emollient
application in a variety of cases. (ii, 2, 194.)


Μαμιρὰς,

Mamiras, is a sort of radicle of a herb, having, as it were, thick knots,
which are believed to attenuate cicatrices and leucomata, being of a
decidedly detergent power.

COMMENTARY. This article is not mentioned by Dioscorides, Pliny, Galen,
Oribasius, nor, we believe, by any of the Arabian writers, with the
exception of Avicenna, who calls it abstergent and cleansing, and
recommends it for clearing away albugo of the eye, and for cleaning the
nails; he adds of it that it is useful in jaundice and pungent pain of
the belly. (ii, 2, 479.) It further occurs in one of the antidotes of
Nicholas Myrepsus (c. 138), where, his commentator says, the description
of it given by Paulus applies very well to the root known officinally by
the name of _Doronicum_.


Μανδραγόρας,

Mandragora, _Mandrake_, belongs to the third order of cold medicines. But
its apples have a certain share of heat and humidity, and hence they are
possessed of a soporific power. The bark of the root of it being stronger
is not only cooling, but also desiccant; but the inner part of it is weak.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Waiving disputed points regarding the ancient Mandragora,
we shall merely mention in this place that we believe the _M. Mas_ of
Dioscorides to have been _Mandragoras vernalis_, Bertolin, and the M.
Femina _M. autumnalis_. The ancient authors make frequent mention of its
narcotic and soporific powers. Celsus directs its apples to be placed
below the patient’s pillow in cases of obstinate insomnolency. (iii, 18.)
Dioscorides, in like manner, says, its apples are narcotic when smelled
to, and also their juice; that if persisted in, they will deprive the
person of his speech. He mentions mandrake as an ingredient in anodyne
collyria and pessaries, and says that in an enema it induces sleep.
He recommends the wine of mandragora to be given to patients before
they are subjected to the operation of cutting or burning. He gives
minute directions for making the various preparations of mandragora. He
concludes his chapter on it by giving from information an account of
another species of mandragora, called morion, which he represents as
being powerfully narcotic; and hence as being administered by medical men
when about to operate by cutting or burning. This plant we agree with
Dodonæus and Cordus in thinking must have been the M. of Theophrastus,
namely, the _Atropa Belladonna_. Considering the diligence of the ancient
herbalists, it is not likely that they should have wholly overlooked so
prominent and important an article as the _Belladonna_. The objections
stated to this opinion by Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 344) do not
appear to us of much force. The account of mandragora given by Pliny is
mostly taken from Dioscorides. (H. N. xxv, 94.) Our author and Aëtius
borrow almost word for word from Galen. Isidorus says of it, “Cujus
cortex vino mixtus ad bibendum iis datur quorum corpus propter curam
secandum est, ut soporati dolorem non sentiant.” Serapion in like manner
describes it as a powerful narcotic, and says that it was administered
before the performance of amputation to diminish sensibility. (c. 333.)
Avicenna particularly commends the narcotic and soporific powers of
this medicine. He says that it exerts its action in a suppository. The
milky juice of it, he adds, evacuates phlegm and yellow bile. He states
that if a young person, by mistake, partake of its berries, they bring
on vomiting, purging, and perhaps death. The seed mixed with sulphur
vivum, is said by him to stop menorrhagia. Like Dioscorides, he says,
that mandrake evacuates the stomach and bowels like hellebore. (ii, 2,
357.) Averrhoes briefly says of its apples, that they are soporific, and
that its bark is desiccative, but its root weaker. (v. 42.) See also
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 446.) Servitor describes both a concrete and an
expressed juice of mandragora. The former, which he calls lachryma, he
says could not be procured everywhere. Even the non-professional writers
allude to its soporific powers. Thus Lucian speaks of ὕπο μαδραγόρας
καθεύδειν. (Timon.) Pollux says that it produces heaviness of the head,
that is to say, stupor. Our old herbalists, Turner, Gerard, Parkinson,
and Culpeper, mention the soporific powers of the mandrake, but in such
a way as implies that they had not much practical acquaintance with
it. By the days of Boerhaave and Quincy, its internal use had been
abandoned, both in this country and on the continent. Although it has
now disappeared from our Dispensatories, we see no good reason why its
well-regulated use might not be revived. That the ancients have described
its operation on the animal economy correctly, is admitted by our latest
writers on Toxicology and the Materia Medica. See the works of Orfila,
Christison, and Pereira. In conclusion it may be proper to state, that
the modern Arabians and Persians still use the mandragora as a narcotic
and antispasmodic. See Ainslie (Mat. Ind. i, 1, 116.) It is not contained
in the Greek Pharmacopœia of the present day.


Μάννα λιβάνου,

Manna Thuris, has similar powers to frankincense, but enfeebled and
gently astringent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Gesner says of it, “Manna thuris est fragmina minora corticis
ramentis permista.” (Lexicon Rusticum.) Dr. Hill calls it the fragments
of the cluster frankincense broke off in the carriage. It is singular
that the Greek and Roman writers make no mention of the manna now in
use, namely, the concrete juice of the _Fraxinus Ornus_. Actuarius had,
no doubt, learned the use of it from the Arabians. (Meth. M. v, 8.)
We will treat of the true manna more properly in the Appendix to this
section, among the medicinal substances introduced by the Arabians.


Μάραθρον,

Fœniculum, _Fennel_, is heating in the third degree, but desiccative in
the first; it therefore forms milk and relieves suffusions of the eye.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides gives a fuller exposition of the medicinal
properties of this substance (_Anethum Fœniculum_) than any of the other
authorities on the Mat. Med., representing it as being possessed of
powers to promote the secretion of milk; as being useful in complaints
of the kidneys and bladder as a diuretic, and in those of the uterus as
an emmenagogue; as being alexipharmic, and as a suitable application to
the bites of mad dogs; and an excellent ingredient in collyria, and more
especially the gum of it, which is produced on the plant in Spain. (iii,
74.) Galen, in the main, gives it the same characters, holding it to be
diuretic, emmenagogue, and a suitable ingredient in collyria. Aëtius
and our author follow Galen. It occurs frequently in the Hippocratic
treatises. (551, &c. ed. Foës.) Celsus ranks it among his diuretics (ii,
31), and among the articles which at the same time repress and mollify
(ii, 33.) The Arabians treat fully of the fennel in nearly the same terms
as the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 274); Serapion (c. 324); Averrhoes
(Collig. v, 42); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 293.) They all represent it as
being diuretic, emmenagogue, alexipharmic, and an excellent application
in diseases of the eyes. They quote Democritus (?) as stating that vipers
and other venomous creatures rub their eyes upon fennel to improve their
sight. This species of fennel, namely, the _Fœniculum vulgare_, is not
now employed as a medicine in this country. The other species, _Fœniculum
dulce_, or Sweet Fennel, although Matthiolus takes it for the ancient
_Marathron_, would seem to have been unknown to the ancients. The former
species, however, held a place in our Dispensatory down to a recent
period. See Quincy (77.) It still holds a place in the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia (68.)


Μαστίχη,

Mastiche, _Mastich_; the Chian is heating and dessicant in the second
degree; but it is possessed of complicated powers, being at the same
time astringent and emollient; hence it agrees with inflammations of
the œsophagus and stomach, and those of the intestines and liver; but
the Egyptian, being darker, is more desiccant and discutient, and less
astringent; wherefore it discusses furunculi.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Mastich is correctly described as the resin of the lentiscus
by Dioscorides (i, 90), and Pliny (H. N. xxiv, 28.) Both mention that
it is used in the formation of agglutinative plasters for the cure of
trichiasis. Serapion joins the Greek authorities in recommending it for
hæmoptysis. Its use in medicine is as old as the time of Hippocrates. The
“resina ex lentisco” is an ingredient in one of the discutient plasters
recommended by Celsus for the cure of phymata. (v, 18, 22.) Honain, one
of Serapion’s authorities, recommends it in inflammations of the stomach,
and in cough. Another of them says of it, that when mixed with aloes it
forms a good masticatory. (c. 183.)


Μέλαν,

Atramentum; the Indian, as Dioscorides says, is of the class of slightly
refrigerating medicines, and of those which occasion the rupture of
phlegmons and swellings, and cleanse ulcers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes two distinct substances by the name
of Ἰνδικόν. The one is the vegetable pigment, still called Indigo; the
other was probably a red mineral of copper, some variety, we suppose,
of the mineral called “tetrahedral red copper ore” by Jameson, or “red
oxide of copper” of Philips. Dioscorides recommends it in much the same
cases as our author. (v, 107.) The other Greek authorities scarcely treat
of it. Our author seems evidently to refer to Indian ink. The Arabians
confound together the dye-producing plants, and accordingly treat of
the woad (Isatis tinctoria) along with the plant which produces indigo.
See Serapion (c. 47), and under _Isatis_ in this section. Averrhoes’s
description is very indistinct, so that it is difficult to know what to
make of his _Indicum_. (Collig. v, 42.) Avicenna in one place alludes to
the mineral pinguent of our author, which he calls Tinctura Inda. (ii, 2,
689.) We beg to refer our readers to Beckmann’s ‘History of Inventions’
for much curious information under the head of _Indigo_.


Μελαντηρία,

Atramentum metallicum, is powerfully astringent with subtilty of parts.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides gives a pretty circumstantial description of
three or four varieties of it, and yet none of them can be recognized
with any degree of certainty. One thing only is certain, that they must
all have contained more or less of copper, being found in mines of
copper. As far as we can judge, the mineral named “ferruginous arseniate
of copper” by Cleaveland, is the most likely to be the melanteria of
Dioscorides. He says it has the same caustic powers as misy. (v, 117.)
Galen calls it only powerfully astringent and of subtile parts; and hence
Sprengel inclines to set down his melanteria as being different from that
of Dioscorides; but between the action of a strong astringent and a weak
caustic, the distinction is not great. In describing the melanteria,
Aëtius follows Galen, and Oribasius Dioscorides. There is no mention of
it in the works of Hippocrates, Celsus, and Pliny. The Arabians confuse
their description of it by mixing together those of misy, chalcitis, and
sori along with it, under the head of _Atramentum sutorium_. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 47.) Serapion also fails to give any distinct account of it. (De
Miner.)


Μέλαν ᾧ γράφομεν,

Atramentum scriptorium, _Writing Ink_; this, too, is decidedly desiccant;
but when dissolved in oxycrate and rubbed in, it straightway relieves
burns.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. _Writing Ink._ Dioscorides describes the composition of
two different kinds of ink; the former consisting of the soot of pines
with gum, and the other containing the soot of rosin, bull’s glue, and
copperas. For a fuller account of the inks used by the ancients, see
Pliny (H. N. xxxv, 6), Oribasius (Med. Collect, xiii), Isidorus (Orig.
xix), and Montfauçon (Palæog. Græca, c. i.) Dioscorides says of it that
it is adapted to the healing of putrid ulcers and burns, when rubbed in
thick with water and allowed to remain, until cicatrization takes place;
for, he adds, when the application falls off the ulcers are healed. (v,
182.) Celsus alludes to the same principle of treating aphthous sores in
the throat, but directs the crusts to be formed with alum, chalcitis, or
the Atramentum sutorium. The Atramentum scriptorium he only notices once,
in describing the operation of trephining the skull. (viii, 4.) Avicenna
alludes also to the practice of Dioscorides. (ii, 2, 689.)


Μελάνθιον,

Nigella sativa, _Gith_, is calefacient and desiccant in the third degree.
It is also distinguished for tenuity of parts; and hence when smelled
to it cures catarrhs, and is most carminative when taken internally. It
is also bitter, and hence it is anthelminthic. It is also detergent and
incisive, and hence it agrees with orthopnœa, cleanses leprosies, ejects
myrmecia, and promotes menstruation.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Nigella sativa_, or Gith. Dioscorides, with great
precision, and in his usual empirical style, enumerates all the cases
in which this substance is applicable. As these in the main are the
same as those in which our author recommends it, we need not enter much
into an exposition of the views of Dioscorides on this head. He says
it promotes the secretion of urine, menses, and milk; removes dyspnœa
when drunk with wine; remedies persons stung by venomous spiders; drives
away reptiles, in the form of a fumigation; and that it is reported to
prove fatal when drunk in large quantity. (iii, 83.) Galen explains
its medicinal virtues most scientifically, upon the principles laid
down by him in his preliminary dissertation to the Materia Medica, of
which we have given an exposition in an extract from Aëtius. Gith, he
says, is heating and drying according to the third order, and seems to
be attenuant, _or_ of subtile parts; wherefore it cures catarrhs when
applied hot in a linen cloth, so as to be constantly smelled to. And it
is most carminative, when taken into the body, as is obvious from its
being of subtile parts, and of a substance fine-wrought by the heat,
wherefore, also, it is bitter; for it was shown in the Fourth Book of
these Commentaries, that when a terrene substance arrives at an extreme
tenuity and elaboration, the bitter quality is formed. No wonder,
then, if it proves vermifuge, not only when eaten, but when applied
externally to the belly; for it was formerly shown that a bitter juice
does this. Nor that it removes leprosy, clavus, and myrmecia, need it
seem wonderful to one who remembers what was formerly said. And thus it
relieves orthopnœa, and promotes menstruation, when it is restrained
by the thickness and viscidity of the humours; and, in a word, when we
wish to incide, cleanse, dry, and heat, it is a most useful medicine.
(De Simpl. viii.) Having given so full an exposition of Galen’s views,
we must be brief on those of the other authorities. The gith occurs in
the Mat. Med. of Hippocrates, but is not to be met with in the works of
Celsus. For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 516); Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. i, 496); Serapion (c. 328.) They all follow closely in the footsteps
of Dioscorides and Galen. Though the gith has ceased for some time past
to be used in medicine, it is still sometimes sought after as a spice.
See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 123.)


Μέλι,

Mel, _Honey_, is heating and desiccant in the second order, and is also
considerably detergent. When boiled it becomes less acrid, detergent and
cathartic, but more nutritious. But bitter honey, like that in Sardonia,
is of mixed powers, being terrene and hot. The _Sacchar_ (Sugar) which is
brought from Araby the Blessed is less sweet than that with us, but is
possessed of equal powers, with the additional advantage of not injuring
the stomach and occasioning thirst like it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. On the use of honey, see Book I, s. 69. “The honey of reeds”
is mentioned in a fragment of Theophrastus. (ed. Heinsius.) It is
distinctly noticed by Dioscorides (i, 104), Strabo (Geogr. xv), Pliny
(H. N. xii, 17), Galen (Med. Simpl. vii), Oribasius (Med. Collect. xi),
Isidorus (Orig. xvii, 7), Alexander Aphrodisiensis (Probl.), and Symeon
Seth (in voce Sacchar.) It is alluded to by Statius in the following line:

    “Et quas præcoquit Æbusita cannas.”—_Silv._ i, 6, 15.

Lucan also mentions it. (Pharsal. iii, 237.) All the Arabian medical
authors, in a word, make frequent mention of it. It is obvious, however,
as is remarked by Harduin, Salmasius, Freind, Millward, and Sprengel,
that the ancient sugar was a concretion formed upon the surface of
reeds by the heat of the sun, and consequently it was different from
the sugar of the moderns, which is formed by boiling. Symeon Seth says
of sugar that it is heating and humid in the first degree, detergent,
and diaphoretic like honey. Mesue recommends it for the composition of
electuaries. Dr. Hill states that although the _Bambu_ be the sugar-cane
with which the ancients were most familiar, it would appear that the
“tenera arundo” of Lucan was rather the common sugar-reed of our times.


Μελία,

Fraxinus, _the Ash_, is a well-known tree, the leaves of which, when
taken in a draught, agree with the bites of vipers. Its bark, when burnt
and rubbed in with water, removes leprosies. The sawdust of the wood when
drunk is said to be deadly.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt of its being a species of _Fraxinus_,
or perhaps both the _F. Ornus_ and _F. rotundifolia_. Our author’s
account of it is taken literally from Dioscorides. (i, 108.) Avicenna
mentions it as a vulnerary herb, and recommends it in the same cases as
Dioscorides does. (i, 108.)


Μελίλωτον,

Melilotum, _Melilot_, is possessed of mixed powers, being astringent,
discutient, and digestive.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Melilotus officinalis_, L. Dioscorides says of
it, that it has some styptic power, and is an emollient of all kinds of
inflammations, especially about the eyes, womb, anus, and testicles, when
boiled with must and applied, or along with albumen of an egg, flour of
fenugreek, &c.; that it cures meliceris when recent, achores, and pain
of the stomach, and earache when injected into the ear, and headache
when used as an embrocation with vinegar and oil of roses. (iii, 41.)
Galen and the other Greek authorities state its application in general
terms like our author. For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 445);
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 465); Serapion (De
Simpl. 18.) They scarcely suggest any new cases for its administration,
but borrow what they say of its medicinal powers from Dioscorides and
Galen. The melilot was used in medicine, and held a place in our English
Dispensatory even as late as the time of Quincy. (118, 204.)


Μελισσόφυλλον,

Apiastrum, _Baum_; its action is in every respect like that of horehound.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. According to Dioscorides, Baum (_Melissa officinalis_),
when its leaves are taken in a draught with wine, or when applied as a
cataplasm, is alexipharmic in the case of persons stung by scorpions
or venomous spiders, and of those who have been bitten by mad dogs;
the decoction in the form of a fomentation (or effusion) does the
same; it makes a good hip-bath for promoting menstruation; is a gargle
for toothache and a clyster for dysentery; its leaves, in a draught,
cure those who have taken poisonous mushrooms, and those suffering
from tormina; it forms a linctus in orthopnœa, and along with salts a
discutient application to scrofula and ulcers; and as a cataplasm it
soothes pains of the joints. (iii, 108.) Our author borrows from Galen,
who, like him, gives its characters in general terms. Aëtius, under this
head, copies from Galen, and Oribasius from Dioscorides. We believe it is
not to be found either in the works of Hippocrates, or those of Celsus.
Serapion gives a full account of it, first quoting from Dioscorides and
Galen, and then from Abenmesuai and Isaak ebn Amran; the former of whom
says it is exhilarating, and the other that it is useful in a cold and
humid intemperament of the stomach, promotes digestion, proves cordial,
&c. (c. 23.)


Μεμάικυλος,

Memæcylus, being the _Fruit of the Arbute_, has been treated of under the
letter Κ.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is, as here stated, the fruit of the wild
_Strawberry-tree_, that is to say of the _Arbutus Unedo_, L.


Μέσπιλα,

Mespila, _Medlars_ (called also Tricocca); their fruit being decidedly
sour and scarcely edible, proves astringent of the bowels: and its shoots
and leaves are also decidedly sour.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes the two species of Medlar in such
distinct terms as leaves no doubt that they are the _Mespilus Azarolus_
and _Germanica_. He represents their fruit as being esculent and slightly
astringent. (i, 169, 170.) Galen says of the medlar, that it is acid and
austere, and barely esculent, and that it restrains fluxes. (De Simpl.
vii.) The other Greek and Arabian authorities give the same account of
it. See in particular, Avicenna (ii, 2, 742) and Ebn Baithar (i, 532.)
The Arabians prepared an ointment from it for making the hair black and
curled. Casiri (Bibl. Arab. Hisp. 330.) The term _azarolus_ is borrowed
from the Arabic. See Avicenna (l. c.)


Μήδιον,

Medium; the powers of the root are contrary to those of the fruit, for
the former is austere and astringent of fluxes, so as to restrain the
female fluor. But the seed even promotes menstruation, being possessed of
attenuating and incisive powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The description of this article given by Dioscorides is
sufficiently precise to decide its belonging to the genus _Campanula_. It
was at one time generally referred to the species called _Medium_, but,
as Sprengel remarks, the appearance of the leaves does not agree with
those of the _medium_. Sibthorp, therefore, in his ‘Flora Græca,’ has
decided that it is the _C. laciniata_. (i, 141.) Dioscorides and Galen
agree in giving it the same medicinal powers as our author. We are at
a loss to determine whether or not it occurs in the Materia Medica of
the Arabians, with the exception of Ebn Baithar, who merely gives the
descriptions of it by Dioscorides and Galen. (ii, 541.)


Μήκωνες,

Papavera, _Poppies_; there are several species, but of the garden poppy,
which they call _Thylacitis_, the seed is edible, and when eaten with
bread is moderately soporific. That species which is called _Rhæas_,
because its seed soon falls off, is stronger than the garden. It is
therefore not eaten by itself, but a small quantity of it is mixed with
much honey. That which has a sessile head has seeds which are black and
strongly medicinal, being considerably cold. That the top of which is
longer and more contracted, is the most strongly medicinal of all, so
as to induce torpor even to mortification. For it and its juice, which
is called, _per excellentiam_, opium, belong to the fourth order of
congealing medicines. But that variety which is called _Cornutum_ is
possessed of detergent powers, so that the decoction of it when drunk is
serviceable in hepatic complaints. Its leaves and flowers cleanse foul
ulcers and remove eschars. That species which is called _Heraclium_ and
_Spumosum_, has seeds which purge phlegm.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. In the Fifth Book we have treated fully of the different
species of poppy known to the ancients. See also Schulze (Toxicol. Vet.)
The _Rhæas_ would seem to be the _Papaver dubium_, the _sativum_ is the
_P. Rhæas_. The Papaver cornutum appears to be the _Glaucium luteum_,
Scop. The _P. spumeum_ may be the _Gratiola officinalis_, Angl. Hedge
Hyssop. The ancients distinguished two kinds of the inspissated juice of
the poppy: the one was the juice obtained by wounding the poppy-heads,
and was called μήκωνος ὄπος, and ὄπιον; the other was an expressed juice,
much weaker than this, called μηκώνιον. The second sort is not known at
present. We will treat more fully of opium under that head, and therefore
we shall dismiss the present subject with a briefer notice than we should
otherwise have thought it necessary to bestow upon it. The views of the
Arabians regarding the different kinds of poppy may be best learned from
Avicenna (ii, 2, 563.) He copies, however, almost all his information
from Dioscorides. He recommends the application of the Papaver cornutum
in diseases of the eye, with certain cautions, explained under opium. He
follows Dioscorides in strongly commending the leaves of the same as an
application to foul ulcers, when he says they have the effect of removing
all the eschars upon the sores. Dioscorides, by the way, mentions that
the veterinarians used the horned poppy for removing the albugo and
nebulæ on the eyes of cattle. He speaks favorably of the effects of the
poppy in general for the cure of hot catarrhs, defluxions on the breast,
and hæmoptysis. See further Serapion (c. 72); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
533); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) The last of these joins Avicenna in
approving of the poppy for affections of the chest. Ebn Baithar, in
different parts of his great work, treats of the several species of poppy
noticed under this head.


Μῆλα,

Mala, _Apples_; a common property of all apples is that of an
excrementitious and cold juice, but those which are dissolved and watery
are colder and more humid than the others. The sweet are watery, but not
sensibly cold. Those which are austere are colder than the sweet, but
less humid. Those which are acid are also cold, and cut the thick humours
in the stomach. The sour, such as _Quinces_, and that species of them
called _Struthia_, are of a cold and terrene temperament, and, on that
account, prove astringent of the belly, and agglutinative of wounds. Thus
the leaves, juices, and barks of trees differ from one another.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. By _Mala_, as Macrobius states, the ancients understood all
kinds of fruit which have their hard part or kernel in the middle, and
their esculent part without. (Saturnalia, iii, 19.) The malum cydonium
is undoubtedly the _Quince_. The _Struthia_ is a species of it. See
Dioscorides (i, 160); Pliny (H. N. xv, 10); Casiri (Bibl. Arab. Hisp.
i, 329.) These, namely, the _Struthia_, according to Harduin, are the
same as our _Pear-quince_; it is an astringent, stomachic fruit. There
is more difficulty in determining for certain what the Malum Persicum
was. Stackhouse makes it to be the _Citrus aurantium_, or _Orange_, but
we are disposed to think that the evidence preponderates in favour of
the opinion of Matthiolus, R. Stephens, and Harduin, who held that it
is the _Peach_ (_Amygdalus Persica_.) That species, or rather variety,
which Pliny calls _Duracina_, was probably the _Nectarine_, as Harduin
suggests. The Malum Armeniacum, or præcocia, was undoubtedly the
_Apricot_. See Harduin in Plin. H. N. (xv, 31); Casiri (Bibl. Arab.
Hisp. i, 330); and Gesner (Lex. Rust.) Contrary to the opinion of the
etymologists, we have long thought that the English name is a corruption
of the Latin _præcocia_. See, however, Loudon (Encyc. of Garden. 806.)
We have given their characters as articles of food in the First Book. As
to their medicinal powers, little need be added to our author’s account
of them, as it agrees entirely with that of the other authorities.
See in particular, Dioscorides (i, 160, 166); Galen (De Simpl. vii);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 562.) Galen makes mention of the quince and pear-quince
as being preserved with honey. He recommends the leaves, the juice,
and the rind of apple trees in general, as being possessed of acid
and austere qualities, and thus agglutinating wounds, restraining the
defluxions of incipient inflammations, and strengthening the stomach and
bowels when they have lost their tone. Dioscorides and, afterwards more
fully, Avicenna state that the immoderate use of fruit is flatulent, and
superinduces nervous debility. Dioscorides describes accurately the mode
of preparing a wine from quinces, which, he says, is possessed of the
same medicinal powers as the parts of the quince. He also makes mention
of an ointment prepared from it. Avicenna represents all the fragrant
kinds of apples as being cordial and alexipharmic, and strengtheners of
the stomach. One of Rhases’s authorities gives an interesting account of
the medicinal powers of apples as cordials, stomachics, and astringents.
(Cont. l. ult. i, 441.)


Μηλάια Περσικὴ,

Malum Persicum, _the Peach_; the shoots and leaves are manifestly bitter,
and therefore kill worms when triturated and applied to the navel. The
fruit of it, which forms the edible peach, is humid, and cold in the
second degree.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See under Μῆλα.


Μηλάια Ἀρμενιακὴ,

Malus Armeniaca, _Apricot_; the fruit, which some call Præcocia, is
possessed of the same powers as peaches.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See under Μῆλα.


Μῆον,

Meum, _Spignel_; its roots are hot in the third degree, but dry in the
second. It is therefore diuretic and emmenagogue, but occasions headache
when taken often.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Meum Athamanticum_, which is
the same as the _Ligusticum Meum_ of Hooker, Angl., Spignel, Meu, or
Bald-money. Our author and most of the other authorities copy closely
from Dioscorides, who describes the roots of the meum as being fragrant,
and heating the tongue. These, he says, being boiled in water or given in
powder without boiling, prove soothing in diseases of constriction about
the kidneys and bladder, relieve dysuria, flatulence of the stomach,
tormina, hysterical affections, and pains of the joints. When pulverized
and administered with honey, they are useful in pectoral defluxions as a
linctus, and in a hip-bath promote the flow of the menses. When applied
as a cataplasm to the region of the pubes in infants, they are said by
him to produce the discharge of the urine. But when taken immoderately,
the meum occasions headache. (i, 3.) In the above extract, by “diseases
of constriction” Dioscorides alludes to a well-known dogma of the
Methodists. It would appear, then, that he was imbued with the principles
of that sect. None of the other Greek authorities treat of it so fully as
Dioscorides. As far as we have discovered, it does not occur in the works
of Hippocrates, nor in those of Celsus. For the Arabians, see Avicenna
(ii, 2, 454); Serapion (De Simpl. 182); Rhases (Collig. l. ult. i, 477);
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) They do nothing but copy from Dioscorides.
In the works of all our old herbalists and authorities on the English
Dispensatory, down to the days of Quincy and Lewis, the meum retains a
place with all its ancient characters.


Μῖλαξ,

Milax or Smilax, _Bindweed_; both the smooth, and the rough species which
twines round trees, are possessed of acrid and heating powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The two species here noticed are most probably the _Smilax
aspera_ and _Convolvulus sepium_. Dioscorides commends the former
of these principally as being alexipharmic, and the latter as being
soporific. (iv, 142, 143.) Galen and the other Greek authorities, like
our author, merely give their general characters. The Arabians would seem
to confound it with the other climbing herbs. See Serapion (De Simpl.
41); Avicenna (ii, 2, 724.)


Μίσυ,

Misy, is one of the escharotic and caustic medicines, with a strong
astringency. It is less pungent than chalcitis, owing to the greater
tenuity of its parts. And Galen says that chalcitis and sori, in the
course of time, change to misy, the change beginning at the surface.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears strange that this mineral should now be so little
known, seeing it was well known as late as the days of Boerhaave, and
is still used medicinally in the East. Boerhaave says of it, “Misy, a
yellow mineral very much resembling the marcasite or mundick of our
mines, but lighter, and of a less compact nature.... It is a vitriolic
mineral, and is reduced by calcination to a colcothar.” (M. M. 184.) Dr.
Ainslie, treating of the preparations of copper employed in medicine by
the natives of India, says, “Misy is the name of an oxide of copper used
by the natives of India against the toothache, and to stain their teeth
black.” (Mat. Ind. i, 513.) Dr. Royle, treating of the _misy_ and _sory_
of Dioscorides, states that they had been supposed by Rossius to be
sulphurets of copper, “but it is remarkable that _mis_ is a Persian name
for copper, and that _missy_ is a name frequently applied in India to
sulphate of iron.” (Antiq. of Hindoo Med. 102.) From these descriptions
of it we find some difficulty in deciding what mineral substance it was;
but see under _Chalcitis_. The following is Dioscorides’s description of
the misy: “Of a golden appearance, hard, shining like gold when broken,
and glancing like stars.” (v, 116.) He says it has the same powers as
_chalcitis_. Galen gives an elaborate description of _misy_ and its
cognate fossils _sory_ and _chalcitis_, but says little more than our
author respecting its medicinal powers. (De Simpl. viii.) The other Greek
authorities supply nothing additional of any great interest under this
head. Serapion describes the three substances we have mentioned under the
general head “de vitreola,” calling the sory _Zeg rubeum_, the chalcitis
_colcothar_, and the misy _Zeg viride_. His account of them is taken
entirely from Dioscorides and Galen. (c. 386.) Avicenna confounds them
and other metallic preparations under the name of “Atramentum sutorium.”
He throws no light on the subject. (ii, 2, 47.) See Rhases (Cont l. ult.
747.) Averrhoes, under the head of _Alceg_, i. e. Vitriolum, gives a
translation of Galen’s description already noticed. (Collig. v, 43.) Misy
occurs in the works both of Hippocrates and Celsus. The latter uses it as
a caustic. (v, 8, 9.)


Μολύβδαινα,

Plumbago, has similar powers to litharge, but removed from the middle
temperament to the colder.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Several varieties of the Molybdæna are described by
Dioscorides, from which it would appear that the ancients applied the
term to more than one metallic substance; the variety resembling litharge
being most probably graphite or plumbago; and the one of a leaden
colour, being the molybdate of lead, or “yellow lead-spar” of Jameson.
It is named Galena by his translators, but whether it, that is to say,
the sulphuret of lead, was also comprehended under it we are unable to
determine. The molybdæna occurs in the works of Hippocrates. Dioscorides
recommends it as being incarnative and epulotic in plasters. Galen and
the other Greek authorities treat of its medicinal powers succinctly
like our author. None of the Arabians appear to have distinguished the
molybdæna properly from litharge.


Μόλυβδος,

Plumbum, _Lead_, is possessed of refrigerant powers, and has also a
considerably humid substance congealed by the cold. If wine, the oil
of unripe grapes, or any of the cooling juices be rubbed with it, it
will make an excellent application for ulcerous inflammations about
the pudenda and anus. A plate of lead worn upon the loins restrains
libidinous dreams; and a piece of lead put upon ganglia discusses them.
Burnt lead being more desiccative, is also somewhat acrid. If washed it
becomes desiccative without pungency, and makes a good application for
ill-conditioned ulcers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have already treated of this article as a poison. (Book
V, 62.) The ancients distinguished lead into two kinds, the black and
the white. Of these the latter is the same as the cassiteros, that is
to say, tin. The other comprehended several of our native ores of lead.
Both kinds are described in the works of Hippocrates and of Celsus. (v,
26, v, 18, &c.) See also particularly, Pliny (xxxiv, 47) and Isidorus
(Orig. xvi, 21), who have given accurate descriptions of the ancient
varieties of lead. Dioscorides, Galen, and Serapion agree in describing
it as a powerfully cooling or refrigerant medicine. Galen’s account
of it is lengthy but interesting. (De Simpl. ix.) Oribasius says that
it forms an excellent application to irritable and malignant sores.
Dioscorides recommends washed lead very much in rheums of the eye. He
gives a very circumstantial description of the process of preparing
washed lead. He further says of it, that it is a good styptic, and an
excellent application to fungated sores, hemorrhoids, condylomata, and
ulcers about the anus. Averrhoes treats of it in nearly the same terms as
our author. (Collig. v, 43.) The Arabians, in general, prescribe it, in
imitation of Galen, as an application to cancer. See Averrhoes (l. c.)
and Avicenna (ii, 2, 12.) The latter joins Dioscorides in praising lead
as an application to the eyes. Serapion gives a very full account of this
article in extracts from Dioscorides and Galen. (De Simpl. 419.) See also
Rhases (Contin. l. ult. i, 556); Ebn Baithar (ii, 128, et pluries.)


Μοράια,

Morus nigra, _the Mulberry-tree_; the fruit, when ripe, loosens the
belly, and is useful in all complaints of the mouth which require a
moderate degree of astringency. The unripe, when dried, becomes a very
styptic medicine. The bark of the root of the tree is also purgative,
with a certain degree of bitterness; hence it kills the broad intestinal
worm. The leaves and tender shoots hold an intermediate place between
purgatives and astringents.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt that it is the _Ficus Morus_, L., or
the _Black Mulberry-tree_. It is the συκάμινος of Theophrastus, which,
however, was sometimes applied by others to the sycamore. See Celsus
(iii, 18.) The mulberry is commended by Pliny as an antidote to poisons,
as it is in like manner by Dioscorides. The latter calls it laxative of
the bowels, but an article readily spoiled, and bad for the stomach.
He also ascribes astringent powers to its juice, which, he says, when
mixed with a little honey is useful in defluxious, spreading ulcers, and
inflamed tonsils. He also praises the leaves when pounded with oil, as a
good cataplasm to burns. He speaks of it also as being used for dyeing
the hair, and the decoction of its leaves as a gargle for toothache. (i,
180.) Galen’s account of it is the same as our author’s, by whom it is
abridged. Aëtius treats of it fully as an article of food, but briefly
as a medicine. He says, when taken upon a clean stomach, it proves an
excellent article of food; but the very reverse when the stomach is
loaded and contains any noxious humours. The Arabians, in treating of it,
follow Dioscorides and Galen. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 491); Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. i, 201); Serapion (De Simpl. 132.) The mulberry is described as a
medicine by all our old herbalists, and was retained in the Dispensatory
until after the time of Quincy. (94, 198.)


Μύαγρον,

Myagrum; the seed of it is fatty, and the oily part of it is possessed of
an emplastic power.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is generally held to be the _Camelina sativa_, Crantz., of
which we think there can be no doubt. Both Dioscorides and Pliny mention
it as producing an oil from its seed; and it is well known that the
Camelina, or Gold of Paradise, is still noted as one of the oil plants.
See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 353.) The two authors mentioned above recommend
this oil in ulcers of the mouth. Our author borrows from Galen. As far as
we can discover, it is not treated of by the Arabian authorities, with
the exception of Ebn Baithar, who merely quotes the description of it
given by Dioscorides and Galen.


Μύακες,

Musculi, _Muscles_, have the same power, when burnt, as the buccina. But
they have the property, when washed, of removing asperity of the eyebrows
and leucomata when applied with honey. Their flesh is applied with
advantage to persons bitten by dogs.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Called Μύες by Aristotle and Athenæus, Myaces by Pliny, and
Musculi by Celsus, are the _Mytili edules_, L., or Muscles. Celsus ranks
them with those things which open the bowels. (ii, 29.) He prescribes the
soup of muscles as a purgative in fevers. (iii, 6.) Dioscorides merely
recommends them externally as a stimulant and detergent application in
diseases of the eyes, and their flesh for the bites of mad dogs. (ii,
7.) The Arabians treat of them in general terms along with the other
crustacea. See particularly Avicenna (ii, 2, 529.)


Μύαρον,

Myaron (called also Melampycnon); it is a branchy and fatty herb. The oil
extracted from it would seem to smooth the asperities on the body.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This is clearly the same as the μύαγρον described above. See
Jani Cornarii dollabella in P. Æ. vii.


Μυελὸς,

Medulla, _Marrow_; it is possessed of the property of softening indurated
and scirrhous bodies. The best is that of stags, next to it, that of
calves. That of bulls and of buck-goats is more acrid and desiccative.
That from the limbs is more fatty and emollient; but that from the spine
is harder and drier.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. According to Aristotle, the _Marrow_ is a superfluity
concocted from the nutritive blood of the bones. He states that the
spinal marrow is considerably different from that of the other bones.
(De Partibus Animalium, ii, 7.) Pliny, copying from Dioscorides, thus
delivers the general characters of marrows: “Omnes molliunt, explent,
siccant, calefaciunt.” (H. N. xxviii, 39.) Dioscorides, Galen, and
Serapion concur in giving the preference to the marrow of stags.
Dioscorides gives minute directions for preparing it to keep. (ii, 95.)
He says that smearing the body with stag’s marrow drives away venomous
reptiles. (Ibid.) The Arabians recommend a suppository from marrows as
a remedy for scirrhus of the uterus. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 485), Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. i, 460.)


Μύκητες,

Fungi, _Mushrooms_, are of a decidedly cold and humid temperament. Some
of them prove fatal when eaten, more particularly those which have a
putrid quality mixed with their nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have already treated of mushrooms as articles of food (i,
77), and as poisons (v, 54); and shall, therefore, be excused saying
anything more of them in this place. In fact, we cannot see with what
propriety the ancient authorities assigned them a place in the Materia
Medica, since, as far as we can recollect, they never prescribe them
medicinally.


Μυοσώτη,

Is described under Alsine.


Μύξα,

Myxa, _the Sebesten-plum_; the fruit of this tree is smaller than the
bullace-plum, but of similar powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It would appear indisputably to be the _Sebesten-plum_,
or fruit of the _Cordia Myxa_. Whether or not this tree be also the
_Persea_ of Dioscorides (i, 187), has been much disputed. See Sprengel
(in Dioscor. l. c.) and Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 628.) We are inclined to
doubt their identity, and of this there can be no question, if the
authority of Pliny be held of any weight in this case, for he evidently
distinguishes between the _persea_ and _myxa_. (H. N. xv, 11, 12.)
Neither Celsus, Galen, Aëtius, nor Oribasius has noticed this article by
name. The sebesten-plum is described by the Arabian authorities without
their making any reference to the Greek authorities, as is their wont.
See Serapion (c. 8); Avicenna (ii, 2, 638); and Rhases (Contin. l. ult.
iii, 42.) The barbarous translation of Avicenna begins thus, under
the head of sebesten: “Sebesten et nominatur mukeita.” For mukeita we
suppose the proper reading would be _myxa_. The Arabians describe the
sebesten-plum as being a mild laxative fruit, which quenches thirst
and soothes the breast. It is praised by Serapion as a laxative and
cooling remedy in coughs; as a refrigerant medicine for ardor urinæ, and
an anthelminthic. The sebestens continued long to hold a place in our
English Dispensatory, and retained the character which the ancients had
given them. See Quincy (130.)


Μυρίκη,

Myrica, _the Tamarisk_, is possessed of incisive and detergent powers,
without being manifestly desiccative; it has also some astringency.
The decoction of it, therefore, when drunk, is useful in diseases of
the spleen; and it likewise cures the toothache. The fruit and bark of
it nearly approach to galls in powers. The ashes of the tree are more
desiccative.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We may briefly say that we agree with the authorities who
refer it to the _Tamarix Gallica_, L. Dioscorides, Galen, Averrhoes,
and Serapion, like our author, recommend it as a powerful astringent
which may be substituted for galls. Dioscorides accordingly enumerates
a variety of cases in which it is applicable, such as in remedies for
affections of the mouth and eyes, spitting of blood, cæliac disease,
fluor albus, jaundice, and the bites of venomous spiders, and to discuss
swellings in the form of a cataplasm. He further recommends its decoction
in wine for reducing the enlarged spleen; as a gargle in toothache;
a hip-bath in fluxes, and as a fit lotion for killing lice and nits:
the lixivial ashes of it, he adds, restrain a discharge from the womb:
some, he says, form goblets out of the trunk of it, which they use as
drinking-cups in diseases of the spleen, draughts taken with them being
found to be serviceable in such cases. (i, 116.) None of the other
authorities give by any means so satisfactory an account of this subject
as Dioscorides. Galen, Aëtius, and Oribasius evidently follow him. Celsus
ranks the “tamarix” among his articles which repress and soften. (ii,
33.) It occurs in the works of Hippocrates. (See Dierbach.) For the
Arabians, see Serapion (c. 31); Avicenna (ii, 2, 684); Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. i, 700); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) Serapion, after quoting the
sections of Dioscorides and Galen on the tamarix, says of it, on the
authority of Mesarugie, that it dries up all ulcers, especially those
from burns. He also relates, on the authority of Alchazi, the case of a
woman who was cured of a leprosy, by means of it. Avicenna and Rhases say
of it, that its fruit is beneficial in chronic coughs. Avicenna says it
cures the bite of the viper. The curious reader will find it interesting
to compare the medicinal characters of the tamariscus as given in our
English Dispensatory by Quincy, with those given it by the ancients, as
stated above. (134.)


Μυριόφυλλον,

Millefolium, _Millefoil_, is desiccative to such a degree as to
agglutinate wounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears to be the _Myriophyllum spicatum_, Angl., spiked
water millefoil. At least the description of it given by Dioscorides
evidently points to some species of _myriophyllum_. He recommends it as a
cataplasm with vinegar to recent ulcers; and says of it, that it is drunk
with water and salts in cases of falls. (iv, 113.) Galen and the other
Greek authorities, like our author, merely mention it as a vulnerary
herb. We have not found it in the works of Hippocrates or Celsus, nor in
those of the Arabians, with the exception of Ebn Baithar. (ii, 500.)


Μύρρα ἢ Μύρρις,

Myrrha, _Myrrh_, belongs to the second order of calefacients, and is also
distinguished for tenuity of parts to a certain degree. The root of it is
fragrant and sweet. It is emmenagogue, and promotes expectoration from
the chest and lungs.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The _Myrrhis odorata_, as Sprengel remarks, agrees very
well with Dioscorides’s description of this plant. Dioscorides says of
it, that when drunk with wine it relieves those who have been bitten by
phalangia; that it promotes the menstrual and lochial discharges; taken
in draughts is useful in phthisis; and that some say, that when taken in
a pestilential season it preserves persons free from the disease. (iv,
114.) None of the other Greek authorities supply anything of interest
under this head. We have not been able to find it either in the works of
Hippocrates or of Celsus. We are at some loss to account for its being
also overlooked, as far as we, upon a cursory examination of their works,
can discover, by the Arabian authorities. Was it that those _illiterate
scholars_ could not distinguish it from _myrrh_ and _myrtle_? Our old
English herbalists, in like manner, seem to have known little about it,
and it has long ceased to hold a place in our Dispensatory.


Μυρρίνη,

Myrtus, _the Myrtle_, is composed of opposite ingredients. But the cold
and terrene prevails in it, and hence it is powerfully desiccative. The
myrtis, which is a callous excrescence on the trunk and branches of
it, is strongly desiccative and astringent. The dried leaves are more
desiccative than the green. The fruit and juice are possessed of similar
powers, both when administered externally and internally.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Myrtus communis_. The _myrtis_ or _myrtas_ of
our author is the same as the _myrtidanum_ of Dioscorides, and most
probably was some morbid excrescence upon it. Dioscorides calls the
myrtle astringent, and recommends it in such a variety of cases that it
would occupy too much space to enumerate them all; such, for example,
as hæmoptysis, erosion of the bladder; as a stomachic and diuretic; an
alexipharmic in the case of persons stung by phalangia or scorpions; as
a soothing application in inflammations and extrasavated blood about the
eyes; for furfures, achores, exanthemata, and so forth. (i, 155.) The
excrescence already mentioned possesses, he says, stronger powers than
the fruit or leaves, and is mixed with cerate, pessaries, hip-baths,
and cataplasms requiring astringency. (i, 156.) Galen gives a somewhat
fuller, but not a materially different, account of the myrtle from
our author. He says it is a powerful astringent, both internally and
externally. Aëtius abridges him, as Oribasius does Dioscorides. Celsus
notices the berries and boiled leaves of myrtle frequently as astringent
and cooling articles. The Arabians treat of them very fully. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 446); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 475); Serapion (De Simpl. 92);
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar (i, 38.) Avicenna recommends the
decoction of its leaves as an astringent in profuse sweats, fetor of the
armpits, in hot apostemes, erysipelas, herpes, &c. He also prescribes it
in ulcers of the hands, and in burns. He says it cures ophthalmy, and
proves stomachic and cordial. All the Arabians give it the character
of being alexipharmic. It is useful, according to Avicenna, in heat of
urine, and immoderate flow of the menses. He says it is useful also in
cases of ununited fractures when poured upon the place; stops the flow
of blood from the nose, and cures furfures and other ulcers of the head.
Abenmesuai, one of Serapion’s authorities, says of the juice of myrtle,
that it is useful in the cure of pains of the breast and lungs, in cough,
and looseness of the bowels; that it is a cordial, and strengthens the
internal viscera. Myrtle-berries were used as astringents in fluxes down
to a late period. See Quincy (94.)


Μῶλυ,

Moly, Allium hirsutum, _Wild Garlic_ (some call it Ruta silvestris,
others Armalan, and the Syrians, Basanan); it belongs to the third order
of calefacients, and is composed of subtile particles. Hence it cuts
thick and viscid humours, is discutient and incarnant.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It was the species of garlic now called _Allium Moly_, Mönch.
Mention is made of this plant by Homer as a charm against incantation.
(Odyss. x, l. 302.) It is probably the same as the μώλυζα of Hippocrates.
(See Dierbach.) Dioscorides merely recommends _moly_ pounded with the
ointment of iris as a pessary to promote the menstrual discharge. (iii,
47.) On the _moly_, see Pliny (H. N. xxv, 8.) Galen and the other Greek
authorities mention it in nearly the same terms as our author. It does
not occur in the works of Celsus, nor have we been able to find it in
those of the Arabian authorities.


Νάσκαφθον,

(Called also Narcaphthon) is an Indian aromatic, and is used in
fumigations for constriction of the uterus.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of this substance is taken, with few
alterations, from Dioscorides. Galen and Serapion also copy from him. In
the Appendix to this section we shall have occasion to notice the opinion
that it was _mace_. All we need say of the Nascaphthon in this place
amounts to this, that it was an Indian aromatic, which the industry, even
of Royle, Ainslie, and Roxborough, has failed to determine.


Νάπυ,

Sinapi, _Mustard_, is heating and desiccative in the fourth degree.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We may pretty confidently refer it to the _Sinapi nigrum_.
No author, ancient or modern, has treated of its medicinal powers so
elaborately as Dioscorides. He says it has heating, attenuant, and
attractive powers, and when chewed, produces a discharge of phlegm;
when its juice is mixed with hydromel, it forms a suitable gargle
for enlarged tonsils, and for chronic and callous asperities of the
trachea; when applied to the nostrils in a fine powder it acts as a
sternutatory; benefits persons in epileptic fits, and rouses those who
are in hysterical fits; it is useful in lethargic patients when applied
as a cataplasm to the shaved scalp; when mixed up with figs and applied
until it reddens, it is fitting for ischiatic disease, and that of the
spleen, and in general for all chronic pains, by determining to the
surface; it cures alopecia in a cataplasm; clears the countenance, and,
with honey, suet, or cerate, removes the spots of extravasated blood;
with vinegar it is rubbed in upon places affected with leprosy, and
lichen agrius; it is taken in a draught as a powder, when sprinkled like
polenta on the drink, for periodical attacks of fevers; it is mixed with
advantage in epispastic plasters and those for scabies; when applied to
the ear in powder with figs, it relieves deafness and noises in the ears;
its juice with honey is suitable in dimness of vision and roughness of
the eyelids when rubbed in; the juice of its seed, while still green,
is expressed and dried in the sun. (ii, 183.) Celsus recommends it in
a variety of cases both externally and internally; as a rubefacient,
gargle, masticatory, &c. By the way, we have never been able to satisfy
ourselves that the late Dr. Milligan was right in setting down the sinapi
of Celsus as the _Sinapis alba_. (207.) We remark, however, that it is
this species which occurs in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia. Galen and his
followers dismiss this article with a very brief notice, like our author.
The Arabians do little more than copy from Dioscorides. See particularly
Avicenna (ii, 2, 674); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 644); Averrhoes (Collig. v,
42); Serapion (c. 373); Ebn Baithar (i, 355.) Mustard was much used by
the ancient physicians in cataplasms as a rubefacient. Ruffus, as quoted
by Rhases (Contin. xxxvii), recommends the seed of mustard as a laxative.
Macer directs, upon the authority of Menemachus, a sinapism to be formed
by pounding in a mortar mustard seed, with a third part of the crumb of
bread, dried figs, honey, and vinegar. He recommends an ointment made of
figs and mustard, for alopecia, i. e. _porrigo decalvans_.


Ναρδόσταχυς,

Spica Nardi, _Spikenard_; the root of it is heating in the first degree,
and desiccative in the second. It is also somewhat astringent, acrid, and
bitterish. It agrees with the liver and stomach both when administered
externally and internally. It is diuretic, and dries up internal
defluxions. The Indian is stronger than the Syrian, and blacker.

COMMENTARY. For this article, Dr. Royle informs us that he obtained,
in India, the hairy spike-like roots of _Nardostachys Jatamansi_.
(Antiq. Hindoo Med. 33.) Dr. Lindley says the Nardostachys Jatamansi,
or true spikenard of the ancients, is valued in India, not only for
a scent, but also as a remedy in hysteria and epilepsy. (Veg. Kingd.
698.) See further, Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 1, 318.) The Syrian kind was
unquestionably some species of valerian, probably the _V. Hardwickii_.
Our author, in the present instance, borrows from Galen, who in the
main draws all his information from Dioscorides. The latter holds the
spikenard to be diuretic, stomachic, hepatic, and carminative. (i, 6.)
The Arabians treat fully of it, copying freely from Dioscorides. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 640); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 669); Serapion (c. 52.)
Avicenna recommends it strongly in affections of the liver, and in
jaundice; and calls it stomachic and deobstruent. Averrhoes joins him in
giving it these characters. (Collig. v, 42.)


Νάρδος Κελτικὴ,

Nardus Celtica, _Celtic Nard_, is possessed of similar powers to the
above-mentioned, but weaker, except with regard to its action on the
urine; for it is hotter than the former and less astringent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Valeriana Celtica_, or French Spikenard.
Dioscorides gives an interesting description of it; and, with regard
to its medicinal powers, states of it, that it is more diuretic and
stomachic than the Syrian, and cures inflammations about the liver, and
jaundice and flatulence of the stomach when drunk with the decoction of
wormwood; in like manner, that it relieves the spleen, the bladder, and
kidneys, and is alexipharmic with wine; and finally, that it is mixed
with heating draughts and liniments. (i, 7.) It is the _Nardum Gallicum_
of Celsus, who assigns it a place with other aromatics in one of his
antidotes. (v, 23.) Galen and the other authorities treat of it in the
same general terms as our author. This species of spikenard long held a
place in our Dispensatory. See Quincy (161) and Lewis (Dispensatory, ii,
125.) In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia the _Nardus_ and the _Phu_ are
identified with the _Valeriana_.


Νάρδος ὀρεῖα,

Nardus Montana, _Mountain Nard_ (called also Thylacitis and Pyrites), is
weaker than the aforementioned.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It would seem to be the _Valeriana tuberosa_. Galen and the
other authorities state briefly of it, like our author, that it is weaker
than the other species already described.


Νάρθηξ,

Ferula, _Fennel-giant_; the seed is attenuant and calefacient. The inner
part, while still green, is astringent; and, therefore, agrees with
hæmoptysis and cæliac affections.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. All the authorities, including the older and the more recent,
are agreed that it is a species of _Ferula_; and we are inclined to think
that it was the _communis_, more especially as its medicinal powers
agree well with those assigned to the article in question by Dioscorides.
(Compare the latter, Mat. Med. iii, 81, with Gray’s Supplement to the
Pharmacop. 80.) Dioscorides says, the pith of it, while green, relieves
spitting of blood and cæliac affections, and is given with wine to
persons bitten by vipers, and restrains bleeding from the nose when
introduced as a tent; that the seed relieves tormina, and produces
sweating when rubbed in with oil, but that its stems induce headache, and
are prepared for pickles. (Ibid.) Our author borrows almost word for word
from Galen. We have not been able to discover it in the Materia Medica of
the Arabians, but can scarcely believe that it had been wholly overlooked
by them. Ebn Baithar, in fact, under the head of _Kana_, sets down the
descriptions of the _Narthex_ given by Dioscorides and Galen.


Νάρκη θαλασσίη,

Torpedo; when applied to the head, while still alive, in cases of
headache, it procures relief to the pain, probably by its peculiar
property of producing torpor; and the oil in which the living animal has
been boiled, when rubbed in, allays the most violent pains of the joints.
It is said to remedy prolapsus ani when applied.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Raia Torpedo_, L., or Cramp-fish.
See Artedi (Ichthy.) Frequent mention is made of this fish in the
works of the ancient writers on Natural History. See in particular the
poetical descriptions of Claudian (Idyll.) and Oppian (Halieut, ii.)
Galen repeatedly speculates on the nature of the singular power which it
possesses of stupefying every animal which touches it. He denies that it
has any narcotic effect as a medicine, unless when applied alive. (De
Simpl. vii.) Serapion copies his account of it. His translator renders
it _Piscis stupefaciens_. (c. 437.) See Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 49, 533.)
Averrhoes compares its narcotic powers to magnetism. (Collig. v.) We have
given some account of its application in this way elsewhere. See Book
III, 6.


Νάρκισσος,

Narcissus, _Daffodil_; its root is possessed of desiccative powers so as
to agglutinate large wounds, even to the division of tendons. It is also
somewhat detergent and epispastic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There seems no reason to doubt that it is the _Narcissus
poeticus_. Dioscorides says of it, that its root, when boiled and
eaten or drunk, proves emetic; that triturated with honey it is a good
application to burns; that in a cataplasm it agglutinates nerves that
have been cut asunder; that it relieves sprains and chronic pains about
the joints, in a cataplasm with honey; that it clears ephelis and alphos,
with nettle-seed and vinegar; that it cleanses foul ulcers, and breaks
apostemes which are difficult to ripen; and that in a cataplasm, with the
flour of darnel and honey, it extracts thorns. (iv, 158.) Galen and the
other Greek authorities give its virtues in brief terms, like our author.
The Arabians, as they are wont, copy freely from Dioscorides and Galen.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 503); Serapion (c. 188); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
489); Ebn Baithar (ii, 552.) Rhases and Avicenna ascribe to it strong
powers as an uterine medicine, stating of it that it produces delivery
of the fœtus either dead or alive; that it promotes the dilatation of
the mouth of the womb, and relieves pains of it. The narcissus occurs in
the lists of medicines used both by Hippocrates and by Celsus. Our old
herbalists, Gerard and Parkinson, repeat the characters of the narcissus
given by the ancient authorities; but it has long ceased to have a place
in our Dispensatory.


Νευρὰς,

Neuras (called also Poterium), is desiccative without pungency, so as
even to agglutinate divided tendons. The roots have the same effects both
when applied externally and when drunk.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There are few articles in the Materia Medica of the ancients
which it is more difficult to determine. Sprengel conjectures that it was
the _Astragalus Poterium_. Dioscorides says its roots exude tears like
gum, and that they are highly beneficial in wounds of the nerves. (iii,
18.) Galen, and all the other Greek authorities that treat of it, give
exactly the same account of it as Dioscorides. We have not been able to
find it in the works of the Arabians. Our old English herbalists give a
figure and description of it, as being a species of tragacantha. See
Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 996) and Gerard (History of Plants, 1328.)
It has long ceased, however, to hold a place in any Dispensatory with
which we are acquainted.


Νήριον ἢ Ροδοδάφνη,

Nerium, _Rosebay_ or _Oleander_, when applied externally is possessed of
discutient powers; but when taken internally it proves fatal.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Nerium Oleander_, L. We have treated of it as a
poison in another place. (T. ii, 242.) That the plant actually possesses
the poisonous properties ascribed to it by the ancients is now very well
ascertained. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 600.) Dioscorides assigns it a
place in his Materia Medica, and says of it that its flower and leaves
are destructive to dogs, asses, mules, and most quadrupeds, but are
preservative of men, when drunk with wine, from the bites of reptiles,
if mixed with rue; but that the weaker animals, such as goats and
sheep, when they drink the decoction of it, die. (iv, 82.) Galen, like
our author, in treating of this article, does little more than abridge
the fuller account of it given by Dioscorides. The Arabians extend the
use of this medicine to several cases in which it was not applied by
the Greeks. Thus, they say of it, that its leaves form an excellent
application to hard apostemes, and are good for prurigo, scabies, and
desquamations, more especially the juice of them; that in the form of a
plaster they are applied with advantage in chronic pains of the back and
knees, and that its flower forms a sternutatory. Rhases (Cont. l. ult.
iii, 31) and Avicenna (ii, 2, 522.) We have given the opinions of the
Arabians respecting it as a poison in the place referred to above. There
is no mention of the oleander, as far as we have been able to discover,
in the works either of Hippocrates or Celsus. The term _oleander_ is
derived from the Arabians. It is treated of by our recent authorities on
toxicology, but has long been unknown to our Pharmacopœia.


Νυμφάια,

Nymphæa, _the Water-lily_, is possessed of desiccative powers without
pungency. It, therefore, constipates the belly and its seed is
desiccative. But that species which has the white root is stronger, so
that when drunk with dark and austere wine, it cures the female flux. But
that which has a black root is also somewhat detergent, so as to cure
alphos with water, and alopecia, when rubbed in with liquid pitch.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is quite manifest that the plant here described
comprehends the two well-known species of the Water-lily, now named
_Nymphæa alba_ and _Nuphar luteum_. The two species, the one having
a white root and the other a black, are no doubt mere varieties. Our
author abridges his account of this article from Galen, who, in his
turn, borrows freely from Dioscorides. (iii, 138-9.) For the Arabians,
see Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 493); Serapion (De Simpl. c. 144); Avicenna
(ii, 2, 508); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) The Arabians administered it in
the same cases as the Greeks, and also recommend the syrup for coughs
and pleurisy, and say of the plant that it induces sleep and cures acute
vertigo, but is debilitating. They compare the nature of the nymphæa to
that of the mandragora. Though the two Water-lilies have long ceased to
hold a place in our Dispensatory, they are still used medicinally by the
oriental nations. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 411.)


Ξάνθιον ἢ φασγάνιον,

Xanthium, _Clutburr_, has fruit of discutient powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It would seem to be the _Xanthium strumarium_, a plant of
the natural order of _Ambrosieæ_. Our author takes his brief notice of
it from Galen. Dioscorides gives a minute description of it, but merely
mentions its being used for a dye and a cataplasm for swellings. (iv,
136.) It does not occur in the works of Hippocrates or Celsus, nor, as
far as we can discover, in those of the Arabians.


Χηρὶς ἢ ξυρὶς,

Xyris, _Wild Corn-flag_, is possessed of attenuating, discutient, and
attractive powers, and of truly desiccative, especially the seed, so that
it is diuretic, and cures scirrhus of the spleen.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Iris fœtidissima_. It is still used medicinally
in dropsy and scrofula. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 161) and Gray (Suppl.
to the Pharmacop. 25.) Dioscorides recommends it as a vulnerary, and
application to swellings and boils; and further prescribes it internally
in bruises, ruptures, sciatica, and diarrhœa. Its seed, he says, is very
diuretic, and reduces enlarged spleen when drunk in vinegar. (iv, 22.)
Galen notices it in the same brief terms as our author. We have reason to
believe that it is not wholly overlooked by the Arabians, but we cannot
find it, while writing this, in their authorities on the Materia Medica,
not even in the copious list of Ebn Baithar.


Ξίφιον,

Xiphium, _Bulbous Iris_; its root is possessed of attractive, discutient,
and desiccative powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides gives such a minute description of it as clearly
identifies it with the _Gladiolus communis_. He recommends it on his own
authority as forming an excellent cataplasm with wine and frankincense
for extracting stings and thorns, for discussing the tumour called
phygethlon, and as an emmenagogue in pessaries; and says it was reported
to be aphrodisiac, and a suitable draught in the intestinal hernia of
children. (iv, 20.) Galen, like our author, merely states its medicinal
virtues in general terms. The Arabians treat of it under the general head
of _Lilium_, along with Iris. See Serapion (c. 189.) His account of it
is made up entirely of extracts from Dioscorides and Galen. It is also
briefly noticed by Ebn Baithar. (i, 423.) His German translator sets it
down as the _Gladiolus Byzantinus_. We have not had time and patience
to hunt out any other notices of it in the writings of the Arabian
authorities on the Materia Medica. Its name in the barbarous translations
of their works is _Kasiflon_.


Ὄη,

Sorbus, _the Service Tree_ (the fruit of which is by some called ὄα, by
others οὖα, Sorba); it is possessed of astringent powers, but less than
the medlar.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Sorbus domestica_. All the ancient authorities
recommend the fruit as an excellent astringent. Dioscorides prescribes
it with this intention both in fruit and in decoction. (i, 173.) Our
author’s account of it is taken pretty closely from Galen. Avicenna
treats of it confusedly under the head of _Cornu vel Sorbas_. (ii, 2,
315.) Serapion treats of the _Sorba_, but does not seem to apply the name
to the article we are treating of. See De Simpl. (c. 109.)


Ὀθόννα,

Othonna; some say that it is the juice of a herb growing in Arabia, where
it borders with Egypt, and others that it is an Egyptian stone. It is
detergent and pungent, clearing away everything that obscures the pupil.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The _Tagetes Erecta_, African or French Marigold, seems
likely enough to be this herb. Regarding the stone of the same name,
nothing is known for certain. Our author borrows from Dioscorides.
Galen does not treat of this article at all in his work on Simples. The
Arabians appear to have been ignorant of it.


Ὀινάνθη,

Œnanthe, _the Wild Vine_; ample experience has shown that the flower of
the wild vine is considerably astringent, and that it acts as a tonic,
particularly in affections of the belly. Dioscorides describes another
having powers quite opposite to this; and hence, he says, that it expels
the secundines, and cures strangury and jaundice.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The former is evidently the flower of a wild species of
the _Vitis Vitifera_, L. It is still used for giving a flavour to
wine. Dioscorides gives an ample account of its medicinal virtues.
Its power, he says, is astringent, and hence it is stomachic and
diuretic, restraining fluxes of the belly and spitting of blood; it acts
beneficially when applied dry, as a cataplasm for loss of appetite and
acidity of the stomach; it forms an embrocation with vinegar and rose-oil
in headache; a cataplasm that restrains inflammation, when applied to
recent wounds; to incipient fistula lachrymalis, and ulcers in the
mouth, and spreading ulcers in the pudenda, when rubbed in with honey,
saffron, rose-oil, and myrrh: it is made an ingredient of pessaries for
restraining bleeding, and for defluxions of the eyes and burning of
the stomach it is applied as a cataplasm with the flour of wheat and
wine: when burnt upon heated coals in a shell it forms an ophthalmic
application, and cures whitlow, pterygia, loose and bloody gums, with
honey. (v, 5.) This account of it is copied literally by Serapion. (De
Simpl. c. 35.) See also Avicenna (ii, 2, 723) and Rhases (Cont. l. ult.
i, 745.) This would certainly appear to us to be the Œnanthe of Celsus,
who gives it a place among the diuretics. (iii, 21.)

With regard to the herb of the same name, which, as our author remarks,
is described by Dioscorides, various conjectures have been advanced. It
is certain that it cannot be the _Œnanthe crocata_, but may be the _O.
Pimpinelloides_. We have nothing to add to the account of its medicinal
powers given by our author from Dioscorides. In fact, with the exception
of Oribasius, whose description of the articles in the Materia Medica
is professedly taken from Dioscorides, we are not aware that any other
ancient authority has noticed it. We may mention, in conclusion, that
the _Œ. Pimpinelloides_, although it has no place in our Dispensatory,
is still not unknown to the collectors of drugs. See Gray (Suppl. to
the Pharm. 79.) It grows in abundance on a spot in Banchory Ternan, and
we have ascertained that it is not wholly innocuous even to cattle when
eaten by them.


Οἶνος,

Vinum, _Wine_, belongs to the second order of heating and desiccative
medicines. But that which is considerably old belongs to the third, and
the sweet wine to the first.

COMMENTARY. We have treated fully of the ancient _Wines_ in Book I.
For an ample enumeration of their medicinal properties, the reader
is particularly referred to Pliny (H. N. xxxiii, 19 et seq.), and to
Dioscorides (v, 1-16.) It being out of place for us to give a long
commentary under this head, we shall merely give a succinct exposition of
it from Aëtius. Wine, he says, is of the second class of calefacients;
but that which is moderately old, is of the third; as in like manner
the new and sweet is of the first. Their dryness is analogous to their
heat. Since we find many varieties in wine, we shall describe them as
briefly as we can. Of all wines, then, those which are at the same time
red and thick are the most suited for the formation of blood, requiring
but little change in order to be converted into blood. Next in order to
these are such as are dark, sweet, and thick at the same time; then
those which in colour are red and black, in consistency thick, and have
some acid quality at the same time. Less than these are the white, thick,
and austere, in regard to nutritive powers. But of all others the least
nutritious are those which are white in colour and thin in consistency,
being in so far like to water. But the sweet are sooner digested and
more readily diffused over the system than the austere, being of a more
heating nature, and they are more laxative of the bowels. But those which
are very thick are more slowly digested and more slowly distributed; but
when the stomach is strong so as to digest them properly, they furnish
more food to the body than any other; and it is clear that they bind
the bowels and are not of a diuretic nature, engendering a thick humour
in some. And some from them have obstructions of the liver, spleen, or
kidneys, and hence those become affected with dropsy or calculus who use
them much, and especially old men. But of all wines, the best, and best
fitted for persons in good health, and to those who are convalescent from
diseases, is that which is red in colour, thin in consistence, and gently
astringent. (i.)


Ὄισυπος,

Œsypum, _Unscoured Wool_, is treated of under wool.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The Œsypum was the sordes collected from wool. It was used
medicinally in the Hippocratic age (De Morb. Mulier. ii), and continued
to hold a place in the Materia Medica down to a late date. See Rutty’s
Mat. Med. (357.) It would appear, from Dioscorides’s description of the
mode of preparing it, that it was the scum collected on the surface of
water by boiling wool in it. (ii, 66.) See also Pliny (H. N. xxix, 2.)
The ancients used it frequently in the practice of medicine. See in
particular Dioscorides (l. c.) and Avicenna (ii, 2, 355.)


Ὄλυνθοι,

Grossi Ficulnei, _Green Figs_, are possessed of acrid and discutient
powers, owing to the juice which is in them. When boiled, therefore, they
discuss hard swellings; but when raw they remove myrmecia and thymi.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. They are the unripe fruit of the fig tree. Dioscorides and
most of the ancient authorities recommend them as a stimulant application
to various tumours. Our author’s account of them is abridged from
Dioscorides, who further recommends them in a cataplasm with salts and
vinegar for achores, furfures, and epinyctis, and as an application to
the bites of mad dogs. (i, 185.) They are the _Grossi Ficulnei_ of the
Arabians, who treat of them under the general head of figs. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 276.)


Ὁλόστιον,

Holostium, is possessed of desiccative powers with astringency. Hence
they use it for fractures.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There are few articles in the Materia Medica of the ancients
about which there is so much doubt. See Parkinson (Theatre of Plants),
and Sprengel in Dioscor. (iv, 11.) It has been set down as the _Holosteum
umbellatum_, but all upon mere conjecture. Our author here copies from
Galen, who in his turn borrows from Dioscorides. We are not aware of its
being described by any of the Arabian authorities, nor have we found it
in any modern Dispensatory.


Ὀμφάκιον,

Omphacium is _the Juice of the Unripe Grape_, being considerably
astringent and desiccative in the third degree. Hence it applies to
defluxions, and especially those of the stomach.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The juice of unripe grapes is called _Agresto_ in Italy,
where it is still used in affections of the throat. Dioscorides
recommends it in such cases. Pliny says of it, “Prodest dysentericis,
sanguinem excreantibus, anginis.” (H. N. xxiii, 4.) This is a literal
translation from Dioscorides, who recommends it in these cases, and also
for various others in which astringents are indicated, such as aphthæ,
loose gums, fistulæ, old ulcers, spreading sores, and as an application
to asperity and ulceration of the eyelids. (v, 6.) Celsus prescribes the
omphacium in a variety of cases, as a cleansing medicine, (v, 5), as one
that corrodes (v, 6), and as one that determines outwardly. (v, 12.) None
of the other Greek authorities nor the Arabians supply any additional
information of interest after Dioscorides.


Ὀνάγρα,

Onagra, _Tree Primrose_ (called also Œnothera and Œnothyris), is a
sort of plant resembling a tree, the root of which, when applied as a
cataplasm, proves soothing to the bites of venomous animals.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It would appear to be either the _Œnothera Onagra_,
Tournefort, or the _Epilobium angustifolium_ L., Narrow-leaved
Willow-herb, as Sprengel supposes. Dioscorides describes it minutely,
but, like our author, merely recommends it in malignant sores. (iv, 116.)
Galen strangely, as we would suppose, says of it, that its juice is of a
venous nature, and of the same power as wine. As far as we have been able
to discover, it is not to be found in the works of Hippocrates, Celsus,
or any of the Arabians. It is worthy of remark that the _Epilobium
angustifolium_, although it does not hold a place in our Mat. Med., is
still known to the vendors of medicines, and retains the characters which
it obtained from the ancients. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 84.) This
confirms the conjecture that the onagra is this plant. We would further
mention, as confirmatory of this opinion, that the _E. angust._ has been
cultivated about gardens in this country from time immemorial, so that
there is every reason to believe that it had been introduced by the
Romans, no doubt on account of its supposed efficacy in medicine.


Ὄνομα ἢ Ὀνομὶς,

Onosma, or Onomis, _Stone Bugloss_ (called also Phlomitis or Ononis), is
acrid and bitter, and hence the leaves of it when drunk with wine kill
and expel the fœtus.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That it was a species of _Anchusa_, or one of its congeners,
is obvious, from the description of it given by Dioscorides, who says,
the stalk, the fruit, and the flower, are very like to the anchusa. It
seems probable, then, that it was some species either of _Anchusa_ or
_Lithospermum_. The _Onosma_ of Linnæus, as Sprengel justly remarks (Ad
Dioscor. iii, 137), is altogether a plant of a different character.
Dioscorides, like our author, says it has great powers in procuring
abortion; nay, that it was alleged that if a pregnant woman walked upon
the plant she would miscarry. (l. c.) It is said that Aretæus recommends
it in nephritic complaints. Pseudo-Dioscor. (Euporist. ii, 112.) Galen
and the other authorities who notice it, do so in nearly the same
language as our author. We have not been able to discover any traces of
it in the works of the Arabians.


Ὀνόβρυχις,

Onobrychis, _Cockshead_, is possessed of aromatic and discutient powers.
It therefore discusses phymata, cures strangury, and proves sudorific.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes it as having leaves like the lentil, or
a little longer, a stalk a fathom long, a purple flower, and small root,
and grows in wet and uncultivated grounds. This description seems clearly
to point to the _Onobrychis sativa_, a plant of the tribe _Fabaceæ_.
Dioscorides holds it to be diuretic and sudorific, and discussive
of tumours. (iii, 160.) It appears to have been generally used as a
diuretic. Pseudo-Dioscor. (Euporist. ii, iii.) Galen gives exactly the
same account of it as our author; indeed, both borrow from Dioscorides.
The Arabians would appear to have rejected it from their Mat. Med.
Although it has long ceased to occupy a place in the Dispensatory, the
sainfoin, or cockshead, is still known to the vendors of medicines, and
retains its ancient characters of being “ripening, discussive, useful in
strangury.” Gray (Pharmacop. 96.) Our old herbalist, Culpeper, ascribes
to it the same virtues. (Complete Herbal, 52.)


Ὄνοι,

Aselli, Millepedes, _or Slaters_; those found under water-vessels, which
roll themselves into a ball when touched, are possessed of discutient and
desiccative powers. Therefore, when drunk with wine they cure dysuria and
jaundice, and in cases of cynanche they are rubbed in with honey: and for
earache they are triturated with rose oil, and being warmed in the shell
of a pomegranate are injected into the ear.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The _Millepedes_ are thus described by Marcellus Empiricus:
“In locis humidis et sordidis sub lapidibus inveniuntur bestioliæ
multipedes quæ contactæ contrahuntur et rotundantur.” (De Medicamentis,
c. xxxv.) They are the Porceliones of Cælius Aurelianus (i, 4), who calls
them “animalia quæ humectis et aquosis locis sæpe nascuntur, a Græcis
appellata onisci.” (Tard. Pass.) Almost all the ancient authorities
on the Materia Medica from Dioscorides downwards, recommend them in
the same cases as our author does. In fact, almost all the authorities
take the characters of the millepedes from Dioscorides. (ii, 37.) See
in particular Serapion (De Simpl. 4, 29), Avicenna (ii, 2, 718.) They
particularly commend the use of them in jaundice. In English they are
called _Slaters_ or _Cheslops_. They held a place in the Edinburgh
Dispensatory until after the edition of it in 1811. In fact, the highest
modern authorities testify to the medicinal virtues ascribed to them by
the ancient authorities. Moses Charras, who makes frequent mention of
them, says, that a volatile salt is obtained from them which is highly
diaphoretic. Dr. Hill calls them aperient, attenuant, and detergent. Dr.
Mead recommends them strongly for their diuretic property. He directs
us to put them into wine, and afterwards to strain off the liquor, and
sweeten it with honey or sugar. (_Monita et præcepta._) It would appear
that they are still used in France as diuretics. In Dr. Pemberton’s
edition of the London Dispensatory, 1746, it is directed to inclose
them in a thin canvass cloth, and suspend them within a covered vessel
over the steam of hot spirit of wine, by which they will be killed and
rendered friable. Lister calls them lithontriptic.


Ὂνυχες,

Onyches, are the covers of Indian shell-fishes. These, in a fumigation,
rouse those affected with uterine suffocation and epileptics. But when
drunk they disorder the belly.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides says of the Onyx, that it is the operculum of
a shell-fish, like that of the Purpura, being found in India in the
lakes that produce nard; and that it acquires an aromatic smell from
the shell-fishes feeding on the nard; it is gathered, he adds, when the
lakes are dried up by the drought; the kind brought from the Red Sea is
different, being whitish and fatty; the Babylonian is black and smaller,
but both form a fragrant fumigation, resembling castor somewhat in smell.
He concludes with stating, regarding their medicinal properties, that
both rouse persons in hysterical convulsions, and also in epileptical,
when applied in fumigations; that taken internally, they soften the
belly; and that the shell-fish itself, when burnt, has the same powers as
the purpura and murex. (ii, 10.) Avicenna gives a very accurate account
of this article under the name of _Blacte Byzantie_; but except that
he does not attribute the fragrancy of the shell to the nard it feeds
on, his description is nowise dissimilar to that by Dioscorides. The
medicinal virtues which he assigns to it are exactly the same. (ii, 2,
78.) Serapion gives a literal translation of the chapter of Dioscorides
on the _onyx_. (De Simpl. 443.) One of Rhases’s authorities says of
the _Blactiæ Byzantiæ_, that they are of a hot and dry temperament,
being possessed of astringency and subtilty of parts, and that they are
stomachic, hepatic, emmenagogue, and cordial. (Cont. l. ult. i, 127.)
From the above account of this article, it will readily be seen that it
is the cover of the _Strombus lentiginosus_.


Ὄνωνις,

Ononis, _Restharrow_, has a root which is desiccative in about the third
degree, but the bark of it is detergent and incisive; and hence it is
lithontriptic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See Ἄνωνις.


Ὄξος,

Acetum, _Vinegar_, is possessed of mixed powers, namely, cold and hot,
both arising from tenuity of parts; but the cold prevails over the hot.
It is a desiccant of the third rank.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is also called γλυκάδιον, as the Scholiast on Nicander
says, per euphemismum, from γλύκυς, sweet. But we are rather inclined
to think that it is the diminutive of γλεῦκος, must, vinegar being the
juice of the grape which has lost its strength. Hence Pliny calls it
“vitium vini.” All the ancient authorities maintained that vinegar is at
the same time refrigerant and discutient. Galen discusses the question
regarding the nature of it at great length and with much ingenuity.
(De Med. Simpl. i.) He, Pliny, and Celsus mention the fact that an
effervescence is produced when it is poured on earth, meaning, no doubt,
certain carbonates. Pliny and Celsus commend it in the strongest terms
as an antidote to the sting of the asp. Serapion and the other Arabians
copy Galen’s account of it. Symeon Seth gives an interesting abstract of
the ancient opinions on this subject. Dioscorides and Avicenna recommend
it as an application to ecchymosis of the face; but the latter remarks,
if too long continued it renders the part yellow and weakens the sight.
(ii, 2, 74.) See also Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 18.) These two Arabian
authorities say of it, that it congeals the womb; but that a clyster
of hot vinegar and salt proves soothing in the spreading ulcers of the
intestines. Both the Greek and Arabian authorities commend it as an
antidote in cases of poisoning with opium and cicuta. They also recommend
an embrocation with vinegar and olive oil or rose oil to the head in
affections of it. Dioscorides recommends vinegar for chronic coughs and
orthopnœa, and also for defluxions of the throat and quinseys. (v, 21.)
The Greek and Arabian authorities further agree in recommending it in
erysipelas, herpes, and whitlow.


Ὀξυάκανθος,

Oxyacantha, _Evergreen Thorn_; the tree is like the wild pear in
appearance and powers, having also some tenuity of parts. The fruit of it
resembles myrtles.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Matthiolus, Dodonæus, and Sprengel agree in referring it to
the _Mespilus Pyracantha_, or _Evergreen Thorn_. The commentators on
Mesue make it to be the Berberis, i. e. the _Berberry_. See the Appendix
to this section. Dioscorides, after giving a botanical description of
it, says, with regard to its medicinal powers, that when pulverised and
applied in a cataplasm it extracts thorns and prickles, and that its
root is said to possess the power of occasioning abortions, when the
abdomen is gently stroked or rubbed with it. (i, 122.) Galen says of it,
that its root is attenuant and incisive, resembling that of myrtles; and
that whether eaten or drunk it restrains all fluxes. (De Simpl. viii.)
Although the similarity of names might lead us to suppose that this must
be the _Spina acuta_ of the Arabians, this does not appear to be at all
the case. Sec Avicenna (ii, 2, 11.)


Ὄπιον,

_Opium_, is treated of under poppy.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Although we treated of the deleterious effects of opium
on the animal economy in the Fifth Book, and have given a general
description of the medicinal properties of the poppy in the proper
place, we shall avail ourselves of the present opportunity to supply
some important information regarding the ancient use of opium in the
practice of medicine. Though mention is made of “the juice of the poppy,”
and of “meconium” as soporifics in the works of the Hippocratists (De
Mulieribus, ii), it does not appear that these articles were much in
use until a later age. “The juice of the poppy” is noticed likewise by
Theophrastus (Fr. 20, 35), and the process of gathering this juice is
briefly alluded to by him (H. P. ix, 8, 2); but the nature of his work
did not lead him to say anything of its medicinal uses. There can be
no question, we presume, that the “papaveris lacryma” of Celsus was
opium, i. e. the concrete juice of the poppy. He prescribes it on many
occasions, both externally and internally. For example, as an ingredient
along with hyoscyamus, burnt lead, and other ingredients for an emollient
plaster to be applied in arthritic pains (v, 18, 29, 35), and as an
injection with alum, acacia, and henbane in earache (vi, 7); as an
ingredient in various collyria for complaints of the eyes (vi, 6); as an
injection in complaints about the anus (vi, 18), and in many other cases.
The famous Methodist, Cælius Aurelianus, is very guarded in his use of
opiates, and he appears to approve of the opinion of those who held that
poppy does not induce sleep, but oppression of the senses; “papavera
autem pressuram non somnum faciunt.” (i, 1.) See also Pass. Tard. (i,
5.) Dioscorides, then, is the first authority that gives a detailed
account of opium and its uses in medicine. Treating of the cultivated
poppy, he says, that its juice is very congealing, incrassative, and
desiccative, when taken in small quantity, to the size of a vetch, is
anodyne, soporific, concoctive, and is useful in coughs and cæliac
affections. Taken in greater quantity, it proves injurious, inducing
lethargy and death; it is beneficial in headache when rubbed in with rose
oil; and in earache when injected with almond oil, saffron, and myrrh; in
inflammations of the eyes with the roasted yelk of an egg and saffron;
and for erysipelas and wounds with vinegar; for gout with a woman’s
milk and saffron; and when applied as a suppository per anum it induces
sleep. The best kind is that which is dense, has a heavy stupefying
smell, is bitter to the taste, readily incorporating with water, smooth,
white, not rough, nor grumous, nor moulding like wax in the process of
straining; when laid in the sun softening, and when applied to a lamp
not burning with a smoky flame, and after being extinguished preserving
its powers in its smell. He then mentions several modes of adulterating
it which were practised in his time, and then adds, it is roasted for
ophthalmic medicines upon a recent shell until it becomes soft and of a
tawny colour. Erasistratus says that Diagoras condemned the use of it in
diseases of the ears and eyes, as inducing dimness of sight and coma.
And Andreas says, that if it had not been adulterated those that rubbed
it in would have been deprived of sight by it. But Mnesidemus says, that
the only proper use of it is by the smell, as thus disposing to sleep,
for that otherwise it proved injurious; but these statements are false,
as is proved by experience; for the operation of the medicine is attested
by its effects. He concludes by describing the modes by which opium and
meconium were prepared, but it will be sufficient for our purpose to
state that his description of the former of these is exactly the same
as the method now commonly practised. See Kæmpfer (Amæn. Exost. 643),
and Pereira (M. M. 1274.) The meconium was the expressed juice of the
leaves and head, and is not now in use. Dioscorides states that it is
much weaker than the other. (iv, 65.) Pliny’s description of the opium
and meconium is obviously taken from Dioscorides, or both these authors
must have copied from some preceding authority. He thus describes the
meconium: “cum capita ipsa et folia decoquuntur, succus meconium vocatur,
multum opio ignavior.” (H. N. xx, 76.) Opium it is certain was freely
used by the Empirics, and accordingly it will be found that it is a
very common ingredient in the prescriptions of Scribonius Largus, and
Marcellus the Empiric. The latter gives several formulæ for collyria, in
which opium occurs, and he is at pains to state that it is the concrete
and not the expressed juice which must be used. (De Medicamentis, viii.)
He also prescribes it internally for pains of the kidneys (xxvi), as an
enema in colic (xxix), and in many other cases. Galen would appear to
have had very sound opinions respecting the use of opium in the treatment
of diseases. He professes, indeed, never to have had recourse to it when
he could help it. (De Comp. med. sec. loc. iii); but yet he prescribes
it in cæliac and certain stomach affections (ibid, viii), and even in
intense pains of the eyes (Meth. Med. ii), although in general he
condemns the application of it in collyria. (Meth. Med. iii; and De Comp.
m. s. l. ii.) He often mentions that castor counteracts the prejudicial
effects of opium. (De med. sec. loc. iii, and viii.) Of all kinds of
opium he pronounces the Theban to be the best. (De Antid. i.) Avicenna,
besides treating of opium as a poison, and giving the general properties
of poppy, under that head, has a very interesting chapter on opium in his
Mat. Med. He defines opium to be the juice of the black Egyptian poppy
dried in the sun. He says it proves fatal if given in a larger dose than
two drachms; but the proper dose he states to be the size of a tare. He
states in parenthesis that opium is also formed from the juice of the
wild lettuce (lactucarium?). He calls it narcotic and sedative of all
pains, whether taken internally or rubbed in. It is useful, he says, in
apostemes, especially in those of an inflammatory nature. He says of it,
that it dries up ulcers; with the yelk of an egg forms a liniment for
gout; it proves soporific if a cloth smeared with it be placed below the
head; allays pain if injected into the ear affected, along with myrrh
and saffron; allays chronic pains of the head, and sometimes cures them;
soothes the pains of ophthalmy, and the apostemes of the eyes, with the
milk of a woman; but yet he adds, that many of the ancient authorities
had condemned the use of it in such cases as proving injurious to the
sight; it allays incessant coughs, and often cures that kind which is
noisy; improves the stomach in peculiar cases, when debilitated by
excess of heat and humidity, is braced by it; but in many constitutions,
opium, so administered, impairs digestion; it stops diarrhœa; is useful
in dysentery, and in ulcerations of the intestines. It proves fatal, he
says, by congealing the vital powers and extinguishing the innate heat;
and its antidote is castor. He concludes by saying, that three times the
amount of the seed of hyoscyamus, or double of the seed of mandragora,
may be given as a substitute for it. (ii, 2, 519.) Haly Abbas treats of
opium more briefly, stating in general terms that it is a soporific and
sedative medicine. He seems to say that from half a drachm to a drachm
will prove fatal. (Pract. ii, 40, 318.) Serapion’s account of opium
is mostly made up of extracts from Dioscorides and Galen, with a few
brief notices of the opinions held by Arabian authorities, which do
not contain anything of much interest. (c. 374.) Rhases’s chapter upon
the poppy contains many extracts from the Greek authorities on opium,
with a few from Arabian writers, which, however, contain nothing of
much interest after what we have given from Dioscorides and Avicenna.
Like Serapion, he says, from half a scruple to a scruple is a dose, and
that two drachms will prove fatal. His authority, Mesue, says it forms
semen. Another of them, Joannitius, seems to say that it binds the bowels
in general, but yet has some laxative power. (Cont. l. ult. i, 533.)
In the ‘Book of Experience,’ as quoted by Ebn Baithar, poppy-juice is
recommended in complaints of the eyes, and in pains of the head when
applied to the forehead. One of his Arabian authorities mentions its good
effects in diarrhœa; and it is also spoken favorably of as an application
to burns. Ebn Baithar’s account of this article is otherwise mostly made
up from Dioscorides.


Ὀπὸς,

Succus Cyrenaicus, Medicus, and Syriacus, are so named _per
excellentiam_, being considerably hot and flatulent. The Cyrenaic is
hotter and more attenuate than any of the others.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The high interest which attaches to these articles might
well dispose us to wake our classical recollections, in order to
illustrate the nature of them, if the narrow limits to which we feel
that we are restricted did not restrain us from such an undertaking.
We beg, however, to quote the words of one of our ablest authorities
in illustration of this subject. Dr. Lindley, treating of the plants
which yield assafœtida, says, “assafœtida is the milky juice of various
species of Ferula inhabiting Persia and neighbouring countries. Of
these, F. assafœtida is the plant described by Kæmpfer. (Amæn. Exot.
535); but F. Perscia and others, are no doubt also the origin of this
drug. The Asa dulcis or Laser Cyrenaicum was yielded by a Thapsia, and
probably _Thapsia Garganica_. This drug was in high reputation among the
ancients for its medicinal uses; it had miraculous powers assigned to
it—power to neutralize the effect of poison, to cure envenomed wounds,
to restore sight to the blind, and youth to the aged; these were only
a part of its reputed properties; it was also reckoned antispasmodic,
deobstruent, diuretic, &c., &c. So great was its reputation, that the
princes of Cyrene caused it to be struck on the reverse of their coins;
and the Cyrenean doctors were reckoned among the most eminent in the
world.” (Veg. King. 776.) See further Pereira (Mat. Med. 1041), and most
especially Sprengel in Dioscor. (iii, 85.) From what we have stated,
our readers will readily comprehend that the Median and Syrian juices
were varieties of the gum resin of Ferula assafœtida; while the Cyrenean
juice was the gum resin of a congener, namely (as stated above), the
_Thapsia Garganica_, called silphium by the ancients. That the Cyrenaic
juice was the product of the silphium, is positively stated by Strabo.
(Geogr. xvii, 3.) We shall reserve what we have to say on its medicinal
properties till we come to that article. It is the laser and laserpitium
of the Roman authors. It occurs in the Hippocratic collection. (De Morb.
iv.) By the Arabian authors it is generally treated of under the name of
_Assa_, and hence its modern appellation.


Ὀρίγανος,

Origanum, _Origany_, or _Wild Marjoram_; all the species of it are
possessed of incisive, attenuant, desiccative, and calefacient powers in
the third degree.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Apuleius enumerates three species and recommends them for
coughs. (c. 122.) Galen and Dioscorides also describe the same number of
species, which may be referred—the 1st, to the _Origanum Heracleoticum_,
L.; the 2d, to the _O. onitis_; and the 3d, to _O. sylvestre album_.
Dioscorides describes the particular uses of these plants so fully that
we cannot find room for his separate articles on each. Suffice it to
say, that he sets down the first as being laxative, emmenagogue, and
expectorant. (iii, 29, 30, 31.) Galen, like our author, merely states
the properties of the _Origana_ in general terms. The Arabians call the
origanum diuretic and vermifuge. They copy, as usual, from the Greeks.
See Serapion (c. 310), Avicenna (ii, 2, 526), and Rhases (Cont. l. ult.
i, 125.) The _Origanum Smyrnæum_ occurs in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia
(121.)


Ὁρεοσέλινον,

Apium montanum, _Mountain Parsley_, has powers like those of parsley, but
stronger.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides says of this article (_Selinum Oreoselinum_? or
_Athamanta Libanotis_?), that it is diuretic and emmenagogue, and an
ingredient in antidotes, and in diuretic and heating remedies. (iii,
69.) Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of it in general terms
along with its congeners; and the Arabians do the same under _Apium_.
See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 55); Serapion (De Simpl. 290); Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. i, 69.) Serapion’s Arabian authorities represent the Apium
montanum as being laxative, carminative, deobstruent, diuretic, and, in
some cases, emetic. The _Athamanta Libanotis_ is still to be found in the
shops of the apothecaries, where it retains its ancient characters. Gray
(Suppl. to the Pharmacop. 81.) Some of the commentators on Dioscorides
take it for the article we are treating of.


Ὀροβάκχη,

Orobanche, _Holly Rose_, belongs to the first order of the desiccative
and cooling temperament.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears unquestionably to be the _Orobanche Caryophyllea_.
See Sibthorp. (Fl. Græca. i, 440.) Dioscorides merely states of it, that
it was eaten as a potherb both raw and boiled. The other authorities
treat of it very succinctly. We have not been able to discover any traces
of it in the works of the Arabians.


Ὄροβος,

Ervum, _Bitter Vetch_, or _Tare_, is heating in the first degree, and
desiccative in the second. It is also bitter, and therefore is incisive,
detergent, and deobstruent. When taken in too great a dose it occasions
bloody urine.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Ervum Ervilia_, Bitter Vetch. Dioscorides
enumerates its medicinal virtues at considerable length, recommending it
as being good for the bowels, and diuretic, but in large doses inducing
bloody discharges from the belly and bladder; as being a cleansing
application in obstinate diseases of the skin, and in carcinoma and
gangrene; as being alexipharmic and forming a good fomentation for
chilblains and pruritus. (ii, 131.) Our author copies word for word from
Galen. The Arabians treat of it at much greater length, but add little to
what Dioscorides had delivered under this head. When drunk with vinegar,
they say it relieves difficulty of urine, tenesmus, and acute pain of
the bowels; promotes expectoration, and softens indurated mammæ. See in
particular Avicenna. (ii, 342.) Though this plant has long been omitted
from our Dispensatory, it is still not wholly unknown in the shops. See
Gray (Pharmacop. 96.)


Ὃρμινον,

Horminum, _Clary_, is like horehound in appearance, and hot, moderately
desiccative, and detergent. It therefore is a provocative to venery; and
along with honey clears any thickness of the coats of the eyes, dispels
œdema, and extracts sharp instruments. The wild is stronger than the
cultivated.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author borrows his account of this article (_Salvia
Horminum_) from Dioscorides. (ii, 135.) It is not treated of by Galen,
Aëtius, nor Celsus. It is fully treated of by the Arabians, who recommend
it as an application to cancerous and other sores, as a collyrium in
ulceration of the eyes, and as a plaster in cases of gout. They further
hold it to be aphrodisiac. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 692); Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. i, 727.) Even of late years, it has been reported as possessing the
virtues ascribed to it by the ancients. See Rutty (Mat. Med. 238.)


Ὄρυζα,

Oryza, _Rice_, is somewhat astringent, and therefore it binds the belly
in a moderate degree.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Oryza sativa_. Dioscorides, Galen, and the other
authorities state its virtues in the same brief terms. For the views
of the Arabians, see Serapion (c. 13); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 583);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 567.) The Arabians recommend it boiled in milk, which,
they say, takes away its astringency, and it becomes more nutritious and
forms semen.


Ὄρχις,

Orchis; the herb is also called _Dog’s Orchis_, or _Testicle_, having a
double bulbous-shaped root. The powers of the greater orchis are humid
and heating, and therefore it is a provocative to venery. But those of
the lesser are heating and desiccative, and therefore, on the contrary,
it restrains venery. That species which is called _Sarapias_, and
otherwise _Triorchis_, is more desiccative than the former. It therefore
discusses œdematous swellings, cleanses foul and putrid ulcers, and cures
herpes. When dried it is more desiccative. Owing to its sub-astringency,
it binds the belly when drunk with wine.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The modern botanists have described many species of it, and
it is difficult to determine from among them those which are applicable
to the two species described by Dioscorides and our author. Sprengel
is pretty confident that the former is the _Orchis papilionacea_. He
is undecided respecting the _Sarapias_, but we may venture to refer it
to the _Orchis Morio_. Regarding the medicinal virtues of the former
of these, Dioscorides merely relates the vulgar belief, namely, that
one of its bulbous roots had the virtue of rousing to venery, and the
other of blunting the venereal appetite, and that the one promoted the
generation of male children, and the other of female. However nonsensical
all this may appear, the same properties are ascribed to the orchis by
our herbalist Culpeper. (130.) The other orchis he represents as being
an ingredient in applications to fistulæ, mortifications, ulcers of the
mouth, and so forth. (iii, 31, 32.) Galen attempts to explain the reputed
aphrodisiacal virtues of the orchis upon its sensible qualities. Our
author copies from him. The Arabians describe these two plants under
the names of Testiculus Vulpis and Testiculus Canis, or _Chasi altaleb_
and _Chasi alchelb_. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 706); Rhases (Cont. l. ult.
i, 714); Serapion (De Simpl. 90, 91.) They ascribe the same real and
imaginary powers to the two species as the Greeks had done.


Ὄσιρις,

Osiris, _Toad-flax_, from which besoms are made, is bitter and removes
obstructions in the liver.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides briefly notices this plant (_Osyris alba?_), and
recommends it in jaundice. Our author copies literally from Galen, as
does also Aëtius. Oribasius borrows from Dioscorides. It does not appear
to be treated of by the Arabian authorities at all.


Ὀστὰ,

Ossa, _Bones_, when burnt are possessed of discutient and considerably
desiccative powers, especially, they say, those of men. The ankle-bone
of a sow when burnt, is said to cure flatulence and tormina. And some
cure epilepsy and arthritis by giving burnt bones to drink. The burnt
ankle-bone of an ox is said to fasten loose teeth; but if drunk with
honey, it removes round worms, and with oxymel it reduces the spleen,
and when rubbed in relieves leuce. It is also an aphrodisiac. The burnt
thigh-bones of an ox if taken in a draught, stop hemorrhages and fluxes
of the bowels.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The other authorities give nearly the same account of their
medicinal properties. See Galen (De Simpl. 11); Serapion (c. 464);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 528.) The Arabians borrow from Galen and our author.


Ὄστρακα,

Testæ, _Shells_, from furnaces, when triturated, are possessed of
desiccative and detergent powers. Hence they are used as a dentifrice,
and when rubbed in with vinegar cure itch, exanthemata, and gouty
complaints, and with cerate dispel enlarged scrofulous glands.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is now well ascertained that _burnt shells_ consist
principally of lime. They, may, therefore, be supposed to form a good
stimulant application to certain cutaneous diseases and tumours of an
indolent nature, as recommended by our author and Dioscorides. (v, 177.)
Oribasius says, that they are very efficacious in repressing fungous
flesh when sprinkled in the form of a fine powder.


Ὂστρεα,

Ostrea, _Oysters_; the burnt shell is possessed of similar powers to the
buccina, but is not of so gross a consistence. It is used, therefore, as
a detergent to the face, and whitens the teeth. When washed it is freed
from pungency, and is useful for incarnating and cicatrizing ulcers
attended with a copious discharge.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Galen gives the same account of the burnt shells of oysters
or snails. He says, that if a shell be washed and burnt it imparts an
empyreuma to the water, which renders it heating and attenuant; whereas,
what remains is devoid of pungency and terrene, and it is useful for
the filling up and cicatrization of ulcers. He recommends the ashes of
all burnt shells as a dentifrice, in which case they do not require to
be finely levigated as they should be when applied to sores. (De Simpl.
11.) This article is not treated of by Dioscorides, the reason of which
probably is, that in his time the word ὄστρεα was a term applied to the
whole class of the ὀστρακόδερμα. See Commentary (i, 91.) They are treated
of in the same terms by the Arabians as by the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii,
2, 529); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 224); Serapion (c. 443.)


Ὀῦρον,

Urina, _Urine_; all kinds of it are hot and acrid, but that of man is
weaker than the urine of other animals, with the exception of castrated
boars, but it is considerably detergent; and it is said that some who
have drunk it in the plague have recovered. It also cures leprosy, putrid
ulcers, achores, and furfures; and likewise sprains of the feet when not
inflamed. That of boys not come to puberty is stronger, and from it the
chrysocolla is formed. The urine of mules suits with arthritic remedies.
That of goats and of camels is laxative of the belly, and hence is given
in dropsical complaints.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The account given by our author of the medicinal properties
of _Urine_ is abridged from Dioscorides and Galen. Galen rejects, with
disgust, the internal use of it. Some, he says, have given the urine
of a boy for the cure of orthopnœa; but he justly remarks that there
is no want of other remedies for this affection, and that in fact the
article in question has no peculiar virtue in the complaint. Most of the
other authorities, however, sanction the use of it in this case, as for
example, Dioscorides, Avicenna, and Rhases. They also recommend urine to
be drunk for the cure of the bite of the viper, for deadly poisons, and
incipient dropsies. Dioscorides recommends the sediment of urine as an
application to erysipelas; upon which practice Galen remarks that when
the affection is still hot such an application must be quite unsuitable;
but that when cooled, it or any other discutient is indicated. Those who
desire to know more fully the views of the ancients on this subject,
are referred to Dioscorides (ii, 99); Galen (De Simpl. 10); Serapion
(c. 448); Avicenna (ii, 2, 716); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 749); Haly
Abbas (Pract. ii, 517); Ebn Baithar (i, 191.) The last of these is
particularly full under this head.


Πανγράτιον,

Pancratium, _Sea-daffodil_, in appearance and powers is like the squill,
but is weaker.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There are two varieties of the _Scilla maritima_, or Squill,
namely, the white and the red. The _pancration_ would appear to be the
red variety. See Alston (Mat. Med.); Pereira (Mat. Med. 651); and Lindley
(Veg. King. 203.) Dioscorides, like our author, states of it, that it
has the same powers as the squill, but in a weaker degree; and that it
is prepared in the same manner, and used in the same affections; for
example, in diseases of the spleen and dropsies. (ii, 203.) Galen and
Aëtius treat of it in nearly the same words as our author. We are in
doubt whether the pancration be treated of by the Arabian authorities,
with the exception of Ebn Baithar, who, it would appear, describes it
under the name of _Kebal_. He, however, merely gives extracts from
Dioscorides and Galen. (ii, 309.)


Παλίουρος,

Paliurus, _Christ’s-thorn_; the leaves and root of it are astringent,
and hence they stop fluxes of the belly, and discuss phymata when they
are not of a very hot nature. The fruit is of so incisive a nature as to
break down stones, and relieve expectorations.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It would seem to be the _Paliurus australis_, Gaertn.
Dioscorides ascribes to it nearly the same medicinal properties as
our author. Thus, he says, it is expectorant, lithontriptic, and
alexipharmic, its leaves and root being astringent, so as to stop
looseness of the bowels, and that it is diuretic and discutient
externally. (i, 121.) Galen and Aëtius treat of it in nearly the same
terms as our author. We have not been able to detect it in the Mat. Med.
of the Arabians.


Πάνακες,

Panaces, _All-heal_; it is from that species called Heraclium, from
which the substance named opoponax is produced, being heating in the
third degree, desiccative in the second, emollient and discutient. The
bark of the root being weaker than the juice, is somewhat detergent and
incarnative, but the fruit of it is emmenagogue. The species of Panaces
which are called Asclepium and Chironium, are more heating than the
former, and hence their leaves and fruit are used for ill-conditioned
ulcers and phymata.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides decides that the Heraclium is the tree which
produces the famous _opoponax_. It has now got the scientific name of
_Opoponax Chironium_, Koch. See Pereira (Mat. Med. 1040), and Lindley
(Veg. King. 776.) Dioscorides gives a most excellent account of the
process by which the opoponax is collected, and describes the marks
by which that which is genuine may be recognized. He ascribes to it
calefacient, attenuant, and emollient powers, and recommends it in a
great variety of cases, such as periodical fevers, rigors, convulsions,
bruises, pains of the sides, tormina, strangury, scabies vesicæ; as an
emmenagogue, and a medicine which destroys the fœtus; as a liniment in
sciatica; a good application to the holes of carious teeth; as forming a
good plaster to bites of mad dogs; as an incarnant when applied to ulcers
connected with exposure of the bone; and as being alexipharmic, and
remedial in hysterical convulsions, and in many other cases. (iii, 48.)
Galen also gives an interesting account of opoponax, which he represents
as being hot in the third degree, and drying in the second. He recommends
it particularly in ill-conditioned ulcers complicated with exposure of
the bone. He says the fruit of the tree is emmenagogue. Aëtius treats of
it in similar terms. The Arabians treat of this article at considerable
length, as usual following in the footsteps of Dioscorides. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 521); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 521); Serapion (De Simpl. 252);
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) They recommend it in hardness of the spleen,
in pleuritic pains, and chronic coughs. They say it softens hardness of
the uterus, and is useful in stillicidium urinæ. Both when taken by the
mouth and in a suppository, they say it occasions abortion. Avicenna says
that galbanum is used as a succedaneum for it, and that gum ammoniac is
nearly allied to it.

The authorities are much divided whether the Asclepium be _Cachrys
Libanotis_, or _Echinophora tenuifolia_. The former of these would
appear to be the _Libanotis_ of the ancient Mat. Med., and therefore
the latter would seem to have preferable claims. Dioscorides recommends
it externally as a discutient application to ulcers and tumours, and
internally with wine as being an antidote to reptiles. (iii, 49.)

Sprengel inclines to think that the Chironium is the _Hypericum
origanifolium_, Willd. Why modern botanists have applied the specific
term _Chironium_ to the first of these plants, we are at a loss to
explain. Dioscorides recommends it both internally and externally for the
bites of reptiles. Galen and the other authorities treat of it in general
terms, like our author. The Arabians in like manner give its medicinal
properties under the head of _Panaces_.


Πάπυρος,

Papyrus, when unburnt is only simply the vehicle of other substances.
But when burnt it is desiccative like burnt paper, but the ashes of the
papyrus are weaker.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is marked _Cyperus Papyrus_ by Linnæus. From burnt
papyrus and burnt paper prepared from it, the ancients procured an
impure carbonate of kali, which they used as a caustic. It is frequently
mentioned by Celsus. Pliny says of it, “Charta quæ fit ex Papyro, cremata
inter caustica est.” (H. N. xxiv, 51.) See also Dioscorides and Galen.
The papyrus was much used by the ancients for dilating fistulæ in the
same manner that prepared sponge now is. Avicenna recommends it for this
purpose, and also as a styptic to stop the flow of blood. Its ashes, he
says, stop the spitting of blood. (ii, 2, 536.) See also Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. i, 132), and Ebn Baithar (ii, 244.)


Παρωνυχία,

Paronychia, _Mountain Knotgrass_, is so named because it cures paronychia
(whitlow). Its powers are those of an attenuate and desiccative substance
without pungency.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The commentators are divided between the _Paronychia
Hispanica_, Cand., and the _Draba verna_, or Whitlow-grass. See Sprengel
(Ad Dioscorid. iv, 54); Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 105.) Dioscorides and
Galen join in commending it for the cure of whitlow. Galen argues that
it acts in this case by being possessed of discutient powers. We have not
been able to detect it in the works of the Arabians. Neither Hippocrates
nor Celsus has noticed it.


Πεντάφυλλος,

Quinquefolium, _Cinquefoil_, is desiccative in the third order, but by no
means acrid. It is therefore greatly in use.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Although this article be minutely described by Dioscorides
(iv, 42), Theophrastus (H. P. ix, 13), and by Democritus (Ad Geopon. ii,
6), there has been considerable difference of opinion respecting it.
See Parkinson, Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. l. c.), and Rutty (Mat. Med. 382.)
We think that the well-known plant _Potentilla reptans_, Angl. common
creeping Cinquefoil, answers well to the descriptions above referred
to. Dioscorides recommends it for a great many purposes: its decoction
for the cure of toothache, and mortifications in the mouth as a wash;
for roughness of the windpipe as a gargle; for diarrhœa and dysentery;
as a discutient application to many tumours and cutaneous eruptions; in
intermittent fevers, epilepsy, and, in short, as our author remarks,
it would appear to have been much used in ancient times. Galen, like
our author, merely states its general properties as a medicine, without
defining the particular cases in which it is applicable. It is the
cinquefolium of Celsus, who places it in his list of things which are
gently repressing and emollient. (ii, 33.) It occurs in the Hippocratic
treatises. It is recommended by Apuleius for pains of the bowels,
epistaxis, angina, &c. For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 545);
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 544); Ebn Baithar (i, 174.) They do little
more under this head than repeat the cases in which it is recommended
by Dioscorides. The cinquefoil is highly commended by all our old
herbalists, Parkinson, Gerard, and Culpeper, and it held a place in our
English Dispensatory down to the time of Quincy, who, treating of it,
says, “Schröder runs through most chronical distempers in commendation
of it, says that it is astringent and vulnerary, that it cures coughs,
&c.” (137.) Quincy here does not seem to have been aware that Schröder
was merely confirming the character of it as given by Dioscorides and Ebn
Baithar.


Πέπλος.

Peplus, called by some Papaver spumosum. And this shrub has a juice and
purges like the spurges.


Πέπλιον,

Peplium; this too has a juice, and grows by the sea-side; for the most
part, it is of no use, but the seed of it purges flatus like that of the
peplus.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt that they are two species of the
Euphorbia or _Spurge_; probably the _E. Peplus_ and _E. Peplis_, that is
to say, the petty spurge, and small purple sea spurge. These articles are
frequently mentioned as drastic purgatives in the Hippocratic collection.
(Epidem. vi., &c.) Ruffus Ephesius gives them the character of being safe
phlegmagogues and cholagogues. (De Med. Purgant.) Dioscorides gives them
the same characters. (iv, 65, 66.) They are also mentioned by Pliny (H.
N. xx, 20), but are not noticed by Celsus. Galen gives their seed the
character of purging, and at the same time of expelling flatulence. All
the Greek authorities on the Mat. Med. down to Actuarius (Mat. Med. v),
give them exactly the same character. The Arabians briefly say of them
that they purge like the Tithymallé. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 103, 104.) We
may be allowed to mention, that although the _E. Peplis_ and _Peplus_
be now excluded from our Dispensatory, they are still to be found in
the shops of the apothecaries. We concur in the opinion thus stated by
Boerhaave while treating of spurge root: “We have declined these rough
medicines too hastily.” (Mat. Med.) See further Rutty (Mat. Med. 520.)


Πέπερ,

Piper, _Pepper_; its root resembles the costus in power. But the fruit of
it, while yet germinating, forms the long pepper, being more humid and
hot. But that which is as it were the unripe fruit is the white pepper,
being more acrid than the black, because it is over-heated. Both are
heating and desiccative.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Solinus gives the following account of it: “Quod incorruptum
est Piper album. Quorum cutem rugosam et torridam calor fecerit, Piper
nigrum. Qui demum caducus torretur fervido sole, vocamen trahit de
colore. At quod ex ipsa arbore stringitur, ut est, album Piper dicitur.”
(Polyhist. 65.). This is not quite a correct account of the matter.
Black pepper is the fruit gathered before it is ripe, and dried in the
sun. White pepper is the fruit of the same plant, gathered after it
is fully ripe and freed of its external coat by maceration in water.
Isidorus says further, “quod immaturum est piper longum vocatur.” (Orig.
xviii, 8.) It is now ascertained that the _Piper longum_ is a distinct
species. Frequent mention of the peppers is made in the Hippocratic
treatises. (De Morb. Mul., &c.) Dioscorides gives an excellent account
of the pepper, and on the whole a very correct one, except that he does
not recognize the _P. longum_ as a distinct kind from the black and
white varieties. He says of it in general terms, that it is calefacient,
diuretic, digestive, and detergent of obscurities of the cornea, and
recommends it in a great variety of cases, beginning with its use as a
remedy in intermittent fevers. (ii, 188.) The use of peppers for the cure
of intermittents is strongly recommended by Stephanus in his commentary
on Galen. (Therap. ad Glauc.) Celsus prescribes pepper for a great many
purposes, as being calefacient, diuretic, opening the pores, &c. (v, 4,
&c.) Galen, in treating of the pepper in his work on Simples, merely says
of its medicinal powers, that it is strongly calefacient and desiccative.
Aëtius and the other Greek authorities copy from Galen. Avicenna treats
separately of the _Piper_ and the _Piper longum_, and although in one
place he quotes Galen as saying that the latter is a variety of the
former, he speaks of them as if he held them to be distinct plants. He
says of the former, that it increases the appetite, promotes digestion;
and of the other, that it is aphrodisiac. He says the white kind is the
most stomachic; but the long the most laxative. On the whole, he agrees
with Dioscorides and Galen as to its medicinal uses. (ii, 2, 549, 550.)
See further Serapion (c. 357), Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 556), Averrhoes
(Collig. v, 42.)


Πέπων,

Pepo, _Pompion_, is possessed of detergent powers. Hence that part which
is as it were the flesh of it, cleanses away freckles and the like. But
the seed of it removes obstructions of the kidneys.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears to be the _Cucurbita Pepo_, L. See Book First,
sect. 80. Alexander mentions that the seed of the pepo is possessed of an
emetic quality. (vii, 14.) Dioscorides and Avicenna agree in ascribing
the same property to its root. The Arabians treat of this article at
considerable length, recommending it externally as an application to
obstinate diseases of the skin; and internally as an excellent diuretic
and laxative medicine. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 89), Rhases (Cont. l. ult,
iii, 20), and Serapion (De Simpl. 251.) It is clear from Avicenna’s
section on the _Pepo_, that the term was also applied to the melon.
Indeed, as we have stated more than once before, it is difficult to
distinguish the summer fruits of the ancients from one another.


Περικλύμενον,

Periclymenon, _Woodbine_; the leaves and fruit are possessed at the same
time of incisive and heating powers, so as to occasion a discharge of
blood by urine when drunk for seven days. The seed is desiccative, and if
drunk for forty days, relieves affections of the spleen and dyspnœa.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt that it is either the _Lonicera
periclymenum_, or the _L. caprifolium_, that is to say, either the
Woodbine or the Honeysuckle. Sprengel decides in favour of the latter.
Dioscorides recommends it in nearly the same cases as our author, and
also says of it, that it accelerates delivery in labour. (iv, 14.) Our
author’s account of it is condensed from Galen. It is not found in the
works of Celsus. The Arabians give rather a confused account along with
other climbing plants. See Serapion (c. 41.)


Περιστερεὼν,

Verbenaca, _Vervain_, is so desiccative and astringent that it
agglutinates wounds, and therefore stops hemorrhage.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is undoubtedly the _Verbena officinalis_. According to
Apuleius, it is styptic, agglutinative, and abstergent. He recommends
it as an application to the bites of serpents, phalangia, and mad dogs.
Dioscorides, and most of the succeeding authorities down to Macer,
recommend it internally for the cure of jaundice, and externally for foul
ulcers. He describes two species, of which the second is the _Verbena
supina_. (iv, 60, 61.) Galen describes only one variety, and merely
recommends it as being a vulnerary herb. Ebn Baithar’s description of
this plant is entirely made up from Dioscorides and Galen. (i, 498.) We
are inclined to think that it is the plant described in the translation
of Avicenna under the names of _Pastus columbarum_, s. _palea_. He
recommends it as an application to erysipelas. (ii, 2, 551.) See also
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 530.) On its use by the Hindoos, see Ainslie
(Mat. Ind. ii, 314.)


Περσαία,

Persica (_the Peach?_), is an Egyptian tree, the leaves of which are
desiccative and astringent, and therefore stop hemorrhage.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It has been generally acknowledged as the _peach tree_, but,
as Alston and Woodville state, this supposition is attended with many
difficulties. Sprengel is by no means decided; but, upon the whole,
inclines to the _Cordia Myxa_. With this opinion we are not disposed
to agree, as we have stated in another place. See under _Myxa_. We
would hesitatingly, then, admit it as the _Persica vulgaris_, Miller.
Dioscorides merely recommends the dried powder of the leaves as a good
styptic in cases of hemorrhage. Galen and the other Greek authorities
give the same character of it. The Arabians, in like manner, follow
Dioscorides. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 22.)


Πετασίτης,

Petasites, _Butter-burr_, is of the third order of desiccants; hence it
is used for ill-conditioned and phagedænic ulcers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides’s description of this plant with its petasiform
leaf, leaves no doubt of its being the _Tussilago petasites_. He
recommends it only for malignant and phagedænic ulcers (iv, 106.) Galen
and the other Greek authorities say the same of it. We have not been able
to find it in the works of any of the Arabians except Ebn Baithar, who,
under this head, merely gives extracts from Dioscorides and Galen. It is
still used by the country people as an application to foul ulcers. It was
retained in the Dispensatory as late as the time of Quincy.


Πετροσέλινον,

Petroselinum, _Stone Parsley_; the seed is hot and desiccative in the
third degree, being incisive; and hence it occasions copious urinary and
menstrual discharges. It is also carminative.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the species of Parsley called the Macedonian, and
known by the different botanical names of _Petroselinum Macedonicum_,
_Bubon Macedonicum_, and _Athomanta Macedonicum_. As Miller remarks,
“the Macedonian parsley is a stranger to our country, and not to be
found except in curious botanical gardens.” (Gardener’s Dictionary.) It
is cultivated, however, on the continent, and its seeds are still to be
found in the shops of our apothecaries. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop.
79.) It had not wholly disappeared from our English Dispensatory in
the time of Quincy (145.) Our author borrows his characters of it from
Galen. Dioscorides says its seeds are fragrant, aromatic, diuretic, and
emmenagogue; that it is beneficial in flatulence of the stomach and
colon, and in tormina, for pains of the side, of the kidneys, and of the
bladder when taken in a drink; and that it is an ingredient in diuretic
antidotes. (iii, 70.) It occurs in the works of Celsus, who mentions it
as an ingredient in a confection for colic, and in other cases. (iv,
14, &c.) Galen has a curious passage on the places where this plant was
cultivated for the market in his time. (De Antidot. i.) The Arabians in
general treat of it along with other species of parsley under the head
of _Apium_. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 55); Serapion (c. 290); Rhases (Cont.
l. ult. i, 69); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar (ii, 388.) The
Arabians do little more than repeat the characters of it given by their
Grecian masters.


Πευκεδανὸν,

Peucedanum, _Hog’s-fennel_; we use the concrete juice and sap as being
considerably heating, discutient, and attenuant, both when smelled to and
in a potion for affections in the lungs and chest occasioned by thick
humours, and also for scirrhous spleen. When put into a tooth eaten
with caries it straightway allays the pain; and it agrees with nervous
affections. The root promotes the exfoliation of scales of bones, and
cures ill-conditioned ulcers, proving calefacient and desiccative in the
third degree.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears to be the _Peucedanum officinale_, Angl.
Hog’s-fennel, or Sulphur-wort. Dioscorides gives a very correct account
of this plant, and of the well-known gum, or rather resin, which
exudes from it. He says the gum is possessed of a strong smell, is of
a tawny colour, and heats the taste, and when rubbed in along with
vinegar and rose oil proves beneficial in cases of lethargy, phrenitis,
vertigo, epilepsy, chronic headaches, paralytic attacks, sciatica, and
convulsions, and in all nervous affections when rubbed in with oil and
vinegar; that when smelled to it rouses from hysteric convulsions, and
from catalepsy, &c. He speaks also of its being efficacious in coughs,
dyspnœa and tormina; says that it loosens the belly gently, reduces
swelling of the spleen, and greatly assists in cases of difficult labour;
that it is useful in pains of the kidneys and in those of the bladder,
and that its root is useful for the same purposes, but is less energetic.
(iii, 182.) Galen also has a very interesting section on this article in
his work ‘On Simples,’ explaining its action upon the principles of his
system. Aëtius, like our author, follows Galen. Celsus recommends it in
pains of the joints as an external application. (211, ed. Milligan.) The
Arabians give it the same characters as the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2,
86); Serapion (c. 286.) The root and gum resin of _peucedanum_, although
now rejected from our Dispensatory, are still to be found in the shops of
the apothecaries, where they retain their ancient characters. See Gray
(Suppl. to Pharmacop. 80.)


Πεύκη,

Picea, _the Pitch Tree_, has similar powers to the pine, but more
moderate.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We think there is no doubt that it is the _Pinus Cembro_, L.,
or Aphernousli pine. The fruit of it, namely, the Cembro nuts, are called
στρόβιλοι by the Greek authorities. Dioscorides says when drunk with must
or the seed of cucumber they are diuretic, and allay irritation of the
bladder, kidneys, and stomach. Taken fresh from the tree and bruised,
and boiled in must, he says, they suit old and consumptive coughs. (See
further under πίτυς.)


Πήγανον,

Ruta, _Rue_; the wild belongs to the fourth order of calefacients and
desiccants; but the cultivated to the third, dividing and discussing the
thick and viscid humours. It also promotes the urinary discharge, and is
composed of subtile parts and carminative; hence it restrains venereal
appetites.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The wild rue is the _Peganum Harmala_, L. The other species
is the _Ruta graveolens_. According to Florentinus, it kills the fœtus in
utero (Geopon. xii, 25.) Dioscorides’s two chapters on the Peganum are
so long that we can scarcely attempt an abstract of them. Both species,
he says, are caustic, calefacient, ulcerative, diuretic, emmenagogue,
astringent, and alexipharmical. (iii, 45, 46.) It occurs in the
Hippocratic treatises, and in the works of Celsus. Our author abridges
the interesting account of it given by Galen. The Arabians treat of the
two species very elaborately, but in the main follow Dioscorides. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 571); Serapion (c. 300); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) We
may just mention that the _Ruta graveolens_ still retains its place in
our Mat. Med., and that the seeds of the other, _Peganum Harmala_, are
still kept in the shops. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 116.) The Turks
use its seeds as a spice, in like manner as they were used in the time of
Pliny. (H. N. xx, 51.)


Πίσσα,

Pix, _Pitch_; dry pitch is desiccative in the second degree, but less
calefacient, while the liquid is contrariwise. They have some detergent
and digestive powers, and also discutient and acrid. They therefore
remove leprous nails, cleanse lichen, and digest swellings. But the
liquid is more powerful, so as to be serviceable in a linctus for asthma
and empyema. The dry is more agglutinative of wounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Pliny says of pitch, “Phthisicis etiam cyathi mensura quidam
dederunt, et contra veterem tussim.” (H. N. xxiv, 24.) Averrhoes also
recommends it in such cases. (Collig. ii, 42.) See, however, more fully
on the virtues of pitch, Dioscorides (i, 94), who recommends the liquid
pitch in phthisis, empyema, coughs, asthma, and cases of difficult
expectoration; also as an external application to leprous nails, hard
tumours of the uterus, fissures of hands and feet, &c. The liquid pitch
of the ancients was evidently tar; the dry was the same boiled until it
became hard. The latter is often called παλιμπίσσα. See Dioscorides (i,
94, 97) and Pliny (xxiii, 1.)


Πισσέλαιον,

Oleum picatum, _Pitched Oil_, is formed from liquid pitch consisting of a
more attenuate substance than it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. According to Sprengel, the π. of Dioscorides is the same as
_Tar-water_, so celebrated as the grand panacea by Dr. Berkley in his
ingenious work called ‘Siris.’ It is called ὀροπίσση by our author in
another place. (iii, 74.) The _Pissasphaltum_ of the ancients, according
to Dr. Hill, was the _Pix Mineralis_, or Earth Pitch of the moderns.


Πιστάκια,

Pistachia, _Pistachio Tree_; its fruit when eaten is moderately
stomachic, and removes obstructions of the liver, and more especially a
decoction of the light and aromatic parts of it in wine. It also relieves
those who have been bitten by reptiles.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of the _Pistachio nuts_ in the First Book.
They are the fruit of the _Pistachia vera_. It is hardly worth while to
give the opinions of the other authorities under this head, as none of
them supply any additional information to that given by our author. See
Dioscorides (i, 167.) We may just mention in this place, that the oil
of pistachio nuts was much used as an application to the cicatrices of
small-pox. See Rhases (Contin. xxxii, 2.)


Πιτυΐδεσ,

Pityides, _the Fruit of Pines_, being possessed of mixed powers, the
astringent and acrid, hence it assists expectoration from the chest.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Pliny restricts it to the fruit of the _Pinaster_ or Wild
Pine, but the Greeks apply it to the fruit of all the pine tribe. Pliny,
like our author, recommends it as a remedy for coughs. Here, however, as
is usual with him, he merely translates Dioscorides (i, 87.) Our author
is principally indebted to Galen. (De Simpl. viii.) Celsus places the
“nuclei pinei” in his list of things which are particularly good for
the stomach. (ii, 24.) The Arabians treat of these under the general
head of pinus. See in particular, Avicenna (ii, 2, 301) and Averrhoes
(Collig. v, 42.) The latter enlarges on the virtues of them beyond his
wont, ascribing to them powerful effects in disinfecting a pestilential
state of the air, in resisting putrefaction, preventing impregnation, and
procuring abortion. He also calls them vermifuge.


Πιτυοκάμπαι.

Erucæ pinorum, _the Canker-worms of Pines_, are possessed of the same
powers with cantharis and buprestis.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of the _Erucæ pinorum_ in the Fifth Book.
As they were seldom or never used in the practice of medicine, it is
difficult to see why they should have been allowed a place in the Mat.
Med.


Πίτυος φλοιὸς,

Pini cortex, _the Bark of Pine_; its prevailing power is astringency,
by which it proves a useful application for intertrigo and burns. In a
potion it restrains the belly. The leaves of it are also agglutinative of
wounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Pinus Pinea_, L., _Stone Pine_. Our author would
appear to have condensed and abridged the more lengthy account of this
article given by Dioscorides. He says it is a species of the same genus
as the _picea_, and that the bark of both being astringent, is a suitable
application to excoriations, to superficial ulcers and burns, with
litharge and the manna of frankincense; that it stops hepatic diseases
when pulverized with copperas; in a fumigation promotes the expulsion of
the fœtus and secundines, and in a draught binds the belly and proves
diuretic. The leaves he recommends externally as a soothing application
in cases of inflammation and toothache, and internally with hydromel in
diseases of the liver. (M. M. i, 86.) Of the fruit of pines, and of the
torch prepared from it (δᾴδιον), we have treated in their proper places.
Galen’s notice of this article is to the same effect as our author’s.
Frequent mention of the pine occurs in the works of Hippocrates and
Celsus. The latter recommends its flowers in diseases of the liver. (iv,
8.) The Arabians treat of the pine, and the virtues of the different
parts of it, at great length. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 280, 301, 555, 693);
Serapion (De Simpl. 63); Rhases (Contin. l. ult. i, 341); Averrhoes
(Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar (ii, 137.) They borrow freely from the
Greeks, and further recommend the different parts of the pine very much
in diseases of the kidneys and bladder, especially calculus and hæmaturia.


Πιτύουσα,

Pityusa; some say that this is a species of spurge, because it has a
juice and purges like them.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There can be no doubt of its being the _Euphorbia Pityusa_.
It is briefly noticed by all the other writers on the Mat. Med. as
possessing the same virtues as the spurges in general.


Πλάτανος,

Platanus, _the Plane Tree_, is possessed of a humectating and refrigerant
power. Hence the green leaves are of use in incipient inflammations. But
the bark and spherical balls are more desiccative, so that when one has
been boiled in vinegar it relieves toothache. They also cure burns by
fire along with fat. The burnt bark is more desiccative and detergent, so
as to cure leprosies and humid ulcers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Platanus orientalis_, L. The seed forms into
spherical balls, which are called _Pilulæ_ by Pliny. He recommends them
for the bites of serpents and for burns; also when pounded with acrid
vinegar, as a styptic for stopping bleeding. (H. N. xxiv, 29.) Pliny,
however, merely copies from Dioscorides, who further recommends the
leaves boiled in wine in defluxions of the eyes, and as an application to
swellings and inflammations; and its rind boiled in vinegar as a gargle
in toothache. (i, 107.) Our author is evidently much indebted to Galen,
who commends it for the same medicinal purposes, and warns his readers
to guard against the down which grows on its leaves, as it may prove
prejudicial to the windpipe, eye, or ear, if admitted into them. (De
Simpl. viii.) Aëtius, like our author, copies very closely from Galen.
Not much additional information can be drawn from the Arabians, who,
under this head, do little more than copy from Dioscorides and Galen. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 209); Serapion (c. 142); Ebn Baithar (ii, 422.)


Πνεύμων,

Pulmo, _Lungs_; those of lambs and swine are believed to cure the skin
which has been chafed by shoes. But the lungs of a fox when dried are
said to cure asthmatics. The Pulmo marinus, when fresh and pounded, cures
gout and chilblains.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides, Galen, and Serapion give nearly the same account
of the medicinal properties of _lungs_. The _Pulmo marinus_ is the
species of _Medusa_ which bears this scientific name. Our author and all
the others follow Dioscorides in defining its medicinal properties. (ii,
39.)


Πολεμώνιον,

Polemonium, _Greek Valerian_ (called by some Philetærium), is attenuate
and desiccative. Hence some give the root of it in wine for ischiatic
disease, dysentery, and scirrhus of the spleen.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Polemonium cæruleum_, Greek Valerian. It occurs in
the Hippocratic treatises (Hippiatr. 108, ed. Basil), but is not found in
the works of Celsus. Dioscorides recommends it to be given for the bites
of venomous reptiles, for dysentery, dysuria, sciatica, and diseases of
the spleen, and also as a masticatory for toothache. He further mentions
that it was used as an amulet for the sting of the scorpion. (iv, 8.) Our
author copies from Galen, as does also Aëtius. We have not been able to
trace it in the works of the Arabians, with the exception of Ebn Baithar,
whose account of it is made up entirely of extracts from Dioscorides
and Galen. (i, 186.) Though it disappeared from our Dispensatory long
ago, its root is still to be found in the shops of our apothecaries,
where it retains the character of being astringent, vulnerary, and
anti-dysenteric. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharm. 55.)


Πόλιον,

Polium, _Poley_; the smaller, which we use for antidotes, belongs to
the third order of calefacients and desiccants. It therefore removes
obstructions of all the viscera, and proves diuretic and emmenagogue.
While green it agglutinates large wounds, and when dried it cures
ill-conditioned ulcers if sprinkled upon them.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The species indicated by our author is evidently the first
species of Dioscorides, namely, the _Teucrium Polium_. The other is
the _Teucrium Creticum_. Both these plants retained a place in our
Dispensatory down to the days of Quincy (118), and both of them are
still to be found in the shops of the apothecaries. Gray (Pharmacop.
49.) See further Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 23), and Rutty (Mat. Med.
402.) Dioscorides says of both, that their decoction taken internally
is beneficial to the bites of venomous reptiles, in cases of dropsy,
jaundice, and diseases of the spleen along with vinegar; that it loosens
the belly and is emmenagogue, but induces headache and is bad for the
stomach; that in fumigations and placed below a couch, that they drive
away reptiles; and in a cataplasm are vulnerary. Galen, Aëtius, and
Oribasius, give them nearly the same characters. Celsus barely notices it
once as one of the ingredients in the celebrated theriac of Mithridates.
(v, 23.) The Arabians treat of the two species at greater length than
the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 537); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 558);
Serapion (c. 165); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) They agree with the Greeks
in considering it diuretic, emmenagogue, and a gentle purgative, and
recommend it further as being anthelminthic and a remedy in cases of
protracted fever. Serapion, by the way, quotes Dioscorides as calling the
polium aphrodisiacal, but there is nothing in the chapter of Dioscorides
on the poley to this effect.


Πολύγαλον,

Polygalon, _the Milkwort_, has leaves which are moderately austere. When
taken in a draught it seems to engender milk, being of a hot and humid
temperament.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That it is the _Polygala amara_ seems quite certain.
Dioscorides and Galen treat of it in nearly the same language as our
author. We have not been able to find it in the works of the Arabians
except Ebn Baithar, who merely copies Dioscorides and Galen. (i, 186.)


Πολυγόνατον,

Polygonaton, _Solomon’s Seal_, is a mixture of astringency, acrimony,
bitterness, and a certain indescribable nauseous principle, and therefore
it is not much used. Some sprinkle the root of it upon wounds, and clear
away spots on the face with it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It has been usually taken for the _Convallaria Polygonatum_,
which has obtained the same character as a medicine in modern works on
the Mat. Med. See Rutty (M. M. 403) and Gray (Suppl. to the Pharmacop.
23.) Our author copies almost word for word from Galen, who, in his turn,
borrows from Dioscorides. None of the Arabians have noticed it, as far as
we can discover, except Ebn Baithar, who merely gives the descriptions of
it by Dioscorides and Galen. It is not to be found in the works either of
Hippocrates or Celsus.


Πολύγονον,

Polygonon, _Knot-grass_, has some astringency, but a cold watery
principle of the second order is what prevails in it. When applied cold
externally, it therefore relieves ardor of the stomach, erysipelas, and
hot inflammations. Being of such a nature it repels defluxions, and
thereby appears to be desiccative. The male is stronger than the female.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Of the two species described by Dioscorides, the mas is
undoubtedly the _Polygonum aviculare_, and the feminine probably the
_P. maritimum_. How the latter could be the _Hippuris vulgaris_, as
several of the older commentators on Dioscorides had supposed, we are
at a loss to comprehend. Two plants so dissimilar as the knot-grass
and the mare’s-tail, could never have been classed by the ancients as
male and female. Dioscorides gives a most interesting exposition of the
medicinal powers of the former species, but as our author borrows from
him, we need not dwell upon the other. It is possessed of an astringent
and refrigerant power, and its juice (decoction) is suited to cases
of hæmoptysis, fluxes of the belly, chorea, strangury, and so forth.
(iv, 4, 5.) Galen taxes Dioscorides with not stating precisely what the
particular cases of strangury are in which it is applicable. Otherwise
his characters of this article agree exactly with those of Dioscorides
and our author. Celsus ranks “herba sanguinalis, quam Græci πολύγονον
vocant,” among things which are at the same time gently repressing
(astringent?) and emollient. (ii, 33.) The Arabians who treat of the
polygonum follow Dioscorides. See in particular, Avicenna (ii, 2, 725)
and Ebn Baithar (ii, 195.) Our quaint old herbalist Culpeper, under the
head of knot-grass, assigns to it exactly the same medicinal virtues
as Dioscorides does to the Polygonum Mas and although the _Polygonum
aviculare_ was ejected from our Dispensatory more than a hundred years
ago, it is still to be found in the shops of our apothecaries, where
it has the reputation of being “a vulnerary and astringent herb.” Gray
(Suppl. to the Pharmacop. 42.)


Πολύκνημον,

Polycnemon, is heating and desiccative in the second degree, so as to
agglutinate wounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It has been supposed to be the _Mentha arvensis_, but nothing
is known of it for certain. Nicander notices it in two places. (Alex. 57,
and Theriac. 359.) Dioscorides calls it a vulnerary herb, and a remedy
for strangury and inward bruises. (iii, 98.) Galen gives the same account
of it as our author. The Arabians do not appear to have treated of it.


Πολυπόδιον,

Polypodium, _Polypody_, is possessed of considerably desiccative powers
without pungency. When drunk it purges downwards.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides says of the root of the π. (_Polypodium
vulgare_), that it is purgative, and is given to evacuate phlegm and
bile; that it makes a good application to sprains and fissures in the
hands. (iv, 185.) Galen and the other Greek authorities merely state
its properties in general terms, like our author, with the exception of
Ruffus, who treats of it more elaborately. He says it evacuates phlegm,
bile, and water; that it should be taken in mulse or water before a
meal, when it will purge gently, and thus prove an excellent laxative,
especially to children; but that in disease it is not a purgative
possessed of much efficacy. (Opera, 14.) The Arabians, and especially
Mesue, seem to have attached more importance to it. See Mesue (De Simpl.
5); Serapion (c. 248); Avicenna (ii, 2, 535); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42);
Ebn Baithar (i, 227.) Mesue recommends it in joint diseases, colic,
hardness of the spleen, fevers connected with black bile, and fissures of
the hands. The polypody retained its place in the Dispensatory with its
ancient characters as late as the time of Quincy (137), and even in the
age of Lewis it had not been wholly rejected. (ii, 244.) There seems no
good ground for questioning its efficacy as a gentle laxative. See Gray
(Suppl. to Pharmacop. 13.)


Πομφόλυξ,

Pompholyx, is desiccative without pungency, so that it is useful for
carcinomatous and other ill-conditioned ulcers. It is also an ingredient
in ophthalmic remedies.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. What this substance was is well stated by a comparatively
recent writer on the Materia Medica. Dr. Lewis, treating of zinc, says,
“Moderately pure white flowers sublimed from it in the brass or other
furnaces, wherein zinc, or its ores are melted with other metals, were
formerly kept in the shops and distinguished by the names of pompholix
and nihil album.” (Mat. Med. ii, 485.) A still later authority on the
Pharmacopœia describes it thus: “_Pompholix Nihil album._ Collected
in the smelting furnaces wherein zinc ores or brass are melted; used
in ointments for tutty.” Gray (Suppl. &c. 234.) It is also distinctly
described by Geoffroy (Treatise on Fossil, &c. Subst. 185), and by
Quincy (201.) The latter writes as if he had been familiar with this
article; but it appears singular that the former says that in his time
(that is to say, about 150 years ago) it was unknown in the shops. For
the ancient authorities on it, see in particular Pliny (H. N. xxiv, 33),
and Dioscorides (v, 85.) The latter calls it styptic, cooling, and to
a certain extent escharotic. Galen recommends it in carcinomatous and
all ill-conditioned ulcers, for those about the parts of generation and
anus, and for ocular collyria. (De Simpl. ix.) The Arabians treat of it
under the head of Tutia. See in particular Serapion (c. 422); Avicenna
(ii, 2, 695); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 43); Ebn Baithar (i, 217.) Hardly
one of them does anything more than copy the description of it given by
Dioscorides and Galen, only comprehending under one name what the Greeks
had delivered regarding pompholyx and spodium separately.


Πορφύραι,

Purpuræ, when burnt are possessed of the same powers as shells. The part
which serves as a cover to them when boiled in oil, strengthens hairs
that are falling out. When drunk with vinegar, they cure swelling of the
spleen. As a fumigation, they rouse in cases of uterine suffocation, and
expel the secundines.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The shell-fishes which supply the purple dye. It is got
from various fishes, but more especially the _Helix ianthina_, _Murex
brandaris_ and _trunculus_. For an account of them, see particularly
Aristot. (Hist. Animal. v, 14), and Pliny (H. N. ix, 60.) Our author
borrows from Dioscorides (iii, 4), and Galen (De Simpl. xi.) We have not
been able to detect this article in the works of the Arabian authorities.


Ποταμογείτων,

Potamogiton, _Pondweed_, is cooling and astringent, like Polygonum, being
possessed of similar powers to it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Potamogiton natans_, L. Dioscorides says of
it, that it is cooling and astringent, and is applicable in cases of
pruritus, and in spreading and inveterate ulcers. (iv, 99.) In some of
the editions of his works, another species is described and recommended
in dysentery, colic, and the red fluor of females. It cannot be so
decidedly determined. Galen and the other authorities treat of it in
general terms, like our author. Such of the Arabians as treat of it
borrow from Dioscorides. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 352.)


Ποτέρριον,

Poterrhium, (called by some Phrœnium); its roots when cut into slices
agglutinate divided tendons and wounds; and the decoction of it when
drunk relieves affections of the nerves.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Matthiolus confesses his ignorance of it. Sprengel is
inclined to think that it is the _Astragalus Poterium_, Pall. But
Dr. Lindley holds it to be _Astragalus Creticus_. (Veg. King. 548.)
Dioscorides says it has stalks like those of tragacanth, and accordingly
Linnæus holds this plant to be a species of tragacanth. He recommends
it in exactly the same cases as our author. Galen describes it by the
name of _Neuras_. We have not been able to detect it in the works of the
Arabians.


Πράσιον,

Marrabium, _Horehound_, is calefacient in the second degree; but more
desiccative. It removes obstructions about the liver and spleen, and
those of the chest and lungs. It also promotes menstruation. In a
cataplasm it is detergent and discutient, and otherwise it is detergent
and incisive.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The _Marrubium vulgare_. Dioscorides has an elaborate section
on the virtues of this article, which he recommends particularly in
phthisical, asthmatic, and catarrhal complaints, as being an excellent
expectorant, for promoting the menstrual and lochial discharges, as an
alexipharmic, &c. He adds, however, that it is unsuitable in affections
of the kidneys and bladder. (iii, 109.) Galen writes thus of it:
“Horehound, as it is bitter in taste, so, by general admission, it has
the virtue corresponding to that taste, being a deobstruent of the
liver and spleen, clearing away matters about the chest and lungs, and
promoting menstruation.” He also mentions its use in a cataplasm and in
other cases, as stated by Dioscorides. Aëtius and Oribasius state its
virtues in nearly the same terms. It is the “Marrubium” of Celsus, who
prescribes the juice of it in phthisis (iii, 22), in paralysis (iii,
27), in ulcers of the throat (iv, 4), and for other purposes. For the
Arabians, see in particular Serapion (c. 198); Avicenna (ii, 2, 553);
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) Avicenna recommends it as deobstruent,
emmenagogue, and an application to the eyes. Serapion also praises it as
a deobstruent, and recommends it particularly in ulcers of the lungs,
asthma, and such like complaints. It would seem to deserve the characters
which the ancient authorities give it from Hippocrates down to Macer
Floridus and Serapion. See Rutty (Mat. Med. 309.) Even yet it holds a
place in the Dispensatory.


Πράσον,

Porrum, _Leek_, consists of unwholesome juice and is acrid; but
Dioscorides says, that it induces disagreeable dreams, agrees well with
the bowels, is diuretic and attenuant. It is also detergent, for it
proves expectorant when boiled in ptisan. The seed of it is mixed with
nephritic remedies. But the leaves have some astringency, and therefore
the juice of it proves styptic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Allium Porrum_, L. Diphilus, as
quoted by Athenæus says, “it is attenuant, nutritious, and flatulent.”
(Deipnos, ix, 3.) Dioscorides recommends it in the cases enumerated by
our author, and also in several others. (ii, 178.) Galen does not treat
of it at all in his work on Simples. The Arabians attach more importance
to it, recommending it as being emmenagogue, diuretic, aphrodisiac, and
so forth. They say of it that it hurts the eyes, the gums, and the teeth.
See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 540); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 562);
Serapion (c. 361); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar (ii, 339.)


Πρίνος,

Ilex, _the Holm Oak_, has powers resembling those of the oak, but it is
much stronger.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Quercus Ilex_, or _Evergreen Oak_. All the
authorities speak of it as being a powerful astringent. The _Kermes_, or
Scarlet Grain is produced upon the ilex by a certain class of insects. It
is described by Theophrastus and Pliny, as stated under that head.


Πρόπολις,

Propolis, _Virgin-wax_, or _Bee-glue_, is calefacient in the second
degree and moderately detergent. It is also possessed of attenuant and
deobstruent powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Scribonius Largus calls it, “Propolis quam quidam sacram
ceram vocant.” Dioscorides and Galen give nearly the same account of
_Bee-glue_ as our author. It is the glutinous substance with which the
working bees block up the holes in their hive. They gather it from
poplars and other resinous plants. It occurs frequently in the works of
the ancient writers on Pharmacy.


Πταρμικὴ,

Ptarmica, _Sneezewort_; the leaves are sternutatory; but the whole part,
when green, removes hypopion and other kinds of ecchymosis, for it is hot
and desiccative. The green belong to the second order, and the dried to
the third.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides’s description of it agrees well with the
_Achillea Ptarmica_, except that (as is remarked by Sprengel) its
favorite locality is meadows, and not mountainous and rocky situations
as indicated by Dioscorides. All the Greek authorities, from Dioscorides
downwards, give it exactly the same characters as our author. We have not
been able to discover any traces of it in the works of the Arabians. Its
leaves are still kept in the shops of apothecaries, and are held to be
sternutatory. Gray (Suppl. to Pharm. 80.)


Πτελάια,

Ulmus, _the Elm_, is possessed of desiccative and detergent powers, so
as to agglutinate wounds; but the bark of it still more, if, when in
a fresh state, it be wrapped like a bandage about the wounds. It also
cures leprosy with vinegar, and the roots of it are possessed of the same
powers, so that fractures which will not unite are to be bathed with the
decoction of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Most probably the _Ulmus campestris_. Our author’s statement
of its medicinal virtues is closely copied from Dioscorides (i, 112.)
Galen and most of the authorities represent it to be an agglutinative
medicine. Pliny, like the others, recommends it as an application to
leprosy. No mention of it occurs in the works of Celsus. The Arabians
treat of it fully, but in the main follow Dioscorides. See Avicenna (ii,
2, 71, 96, 212); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 250.) They recommend it in all
cases requiring astringents and abstergents.


Πτερὶς,

Filix, _Fern_, is desiccative in its powers, and bitter. Hence it
destroys the fœtus, and kills the broad intestinal worm when taken to
the amount of four drachms in honeyed water. Because it is moderately
astringent, it dries up ulcers without pungency.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Apuleius says, “Græci pterin, Latini filicem nominant.” (De
Herbis.) We need not hesitate to refer it to the _Aspidium Filix Mas_,
which has been long celebrated as a vermifuge medicine. See Book IV,
67, of this work, and Rutty (Mat. Med. 201.) Dioscorides recommends it
merely as an anthelminthic medicine, and as one which is calculated to
promote convalescence in diseases of the spleen. For the former purpose
he directs it to be given with scammony or white hellebore, along with a
diet consisting principally of garlic. (iv, 183.) Galen acutely remarks,
that there is no wonder that it should be anthelminthic, seeing it is
possessed of a bitter taste with some astringency. None of the other
Greek or Arabian authorities supply any additional information respecting
it. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 620); Serapion (De Simpl. 56.) The
“filicula” of Celsus (ii, 12) would appear to us to have been rather the
Polypodium than the Filix Mas. In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia it is
marked as being the _Aspidium Filix Mas_.


Πυκνόκομον,

Pycnocomon, is possessed of discutient, attractive, and acrid powers.
The leaves of it, therefore, discuss phyma and furunculus. The fruit, in
addition to these properties, also extracts sharp-pointed weapons. Its
root purges yellow bile.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Although Dioscorides has given a pretty minute description
of it, there are few articles in the ancient Mat. Med. about which there
is so much uncertainty. See the Index Latinus to Parkinson’s ‘Theatre
of Plants,’ and Sprengel (in Dioscor. iv, 173.) The latter decides that
it is neither the _Leonurus Marrubiastrum_ nor the _Succisa pratensis_
as had been supposed. Whether it may be the _Cephalaria Pycnocomon_ we
are unable to determine, as we have no acquaintance with this plant. Our
author borrows his medicinal characters of it from Dioscorides (l. c.)
Galen does the same. The Arabians have not noticed it, as far as we can
discover.


Πύρεθρον,

Pyrethrum, _Pellitory_; the root has caustic powers, and allays the pain
of teeth affected with cold; and before the occurrence of periodical
rigors it is rubbed in with oil, and relieves those who are affected with
torpor and paralysis.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It seems to be the _Anthemis Pyrethrum_, although Sprengel
is not quite satisfied. It was much used in stimulant embrocations.
Dioscorides, Galen, Macer, and Serapion, and, in a word, all the
authorities, recommend it strongly as a phlegmagogue for toothache.
Dioscorides says further of it, that when rubbed in with oil, it is
sudorific, being serviceable in chronic rigors, for parts which have lost
their natural heat and are paralysed. (iii, 37.) Celsus also mentions
it in a list of stimulants, to be applied externally for toothache (vi,
9), and ranks it among his caustics. (v, 8.) The Arabians treat of it at
considerable length, but borrow much from Dioscorides. See in particular
Avicenna (ii, 2, 547); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 553); Averrhoes (Collig.
v, 42.) They all in particular recommend it as a sialogogue in cases
of toothache. We need scarcely remark that the pellitory (now called
_Anacyclos Pyrethrum_) still holds its place in the Dispensatory as
a sialogogue and masticatory. We see no good reason, therefore, for
questioning its identity with the pyrethrum of the ancients, more
especially as it still retains a place in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Πυρὸς,

Triticum, _Wheat_, is heating in the first degree, but is intermediate
between dry and humid substances. It is also somewhat glutinous and
emplastic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Triticum æstivum_. We have treated
largely of it among the dietetical articles in the First Book, and have
also treated of the farina, leaven, and pollen of wheat separately. We
need not, then, enlarge further upon this article at present.


Πιτύα,

Coagulum, _Rennet_; all sorts of it are possessed of acrid, attenuating,
discutient, and decidedly desiccant powers. But that of hares is
represented as curing epilepsy if drunk with vinegar, and as curing the
female discharge, and proving a solvent of coagulated milk in the bowels,
and of blood in like manner. Some say that it restrains spitting of blood
from the chest. The rennet of a horse is described as proving serviceable
in cæliac and dysenteric affections. That of the seal is said to have the
properties of castor.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of the medicinal properties of _Rennet_
is taken from Dioscorides and Galen. Indeed he has copied from the latter
almost word for word. The Arabians treat of the rennets very fully and
with much judgment. See in particular Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 221);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 115); Serapion (De Simpl. 444); Ebn Baithar (ii, 604.)
They follow Dioscorides very closely, among other things recommending
rennet to be applied on a pessary for promoting the menstrual discharge,
and for the hysterical convulsion. All rennets, they say, are
alexipharmic, and especially those of the kid, of the antelope, and of
the camel. As stated by us in the Fifth Book, the ancients administered
rennet in cases of poisoning with curdled milk. It appears remarkable
that an article unquestionably capable of being applied to so many
medicinal purposes as rennet, should have been entirely excluded from our
modern Dispensatories.


Ῥακὸς,

Panniculus, _Rags_; when those from wool are burnt they have similar
powers to burnt wool. Linen, when burning, sends forth a subtile smoke,
so as to prove deobstruent in catarrhs, and agree with risings of the
womb. When burnt, its powers are nearly the same as those of wool.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. These things are so well known as not to require further
illustration.


Ῥάμνος,

Rhamnus, _Buckthorn_, is desiccative in the second degree, but cooling in
the first. Hence it cures herpes and erysipelas when not very hot. Its
tender leaves are to be used.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This appears to be the first species of Dioscorides, which
we may decide to be the _Lycium Europæum_. The second is the _Lycium
Afrum_. The third is not well ascertained, but probably is a species of
_paliurus_. See Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 1006), and Sprengel (Ad
Dioscor. i, 119.) Dioscorides recommends the leaves of all the three
kinds for herpes and erysipelas, and also mentions that the twigs of
them were placed in doors and windows to avert sorcery. (i, 119.) Galen
and the other Greek authorities treat of this article in nearly the same
terms as our author. Pliny recommends it as a cooling and refrigerant
application. (H. N. xxiv, 76.) The Arabians borrow their account of it
entirely from Dioscorides and Galen. See in particular Serapion (De
Simpl. 236); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 591); Avicenna (ii, 2, 345); Ebn
Baithar (ii, 223.)


Ῥάφανος,

Rhaphanus, _Radish_, is heating in the third degree, and desiccative in
the second. The wild is more powerful. The seeds of both are stronger,
and therefore they discuss hypopion and other lividities.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides, like our author, describes two species, of
which the former is certainly the _Rhaphanus sativus_, and the other
probably the _R. maritimus_. Dioscorides gives so long a catalogue of
the medicinal properties of the former or common radish, that we can
scarcely venture upon an exposition of it. He says of it, that its seed
is emetic, diuretic, and a cleanser of the spleen, when drunk with
vinegar; that it is beneficial in cynanche, and alexipharmic both when
taken internally and applied externally. Florentinus (Geopon. xii, 22)
and Pliny (H. N. xx, 13) praise the radish as an antidote to poisonous
substances and venomous animals. It was much used by the ancients as an
emetic, and for this purpose it was taken before a meal as described by
Celsus. (i, 3.) See also Dioscorides (l. c.) and Pliny (l. c.) Hence
it is frequently prescribed by Nicander, as a remedy in the case of
poisoning, as in that by henbane, and in that by mushrooms. It is also
recommended in these and similar cases by Scribonius Largus (Compos.
198.) The radish we are confident is the “radicula” of Celsus, who
prescribes it for various purposes, as being laxative, diuretic, and, as
we formerly stated, emetic. (See Vol. II, 31, &c.) The Arabians attach
much importance to this article, but do not supply much information
regarding it but what they acknowledge to be derived from the Greeks. See
Serapion (c. 307); Avicenna (ii, 2, 574); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 571);
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar (ii, 246.) They agree in stating
of it, that taken before other food it renders vomiting easy; and after
food that it loosens the bowels. All recommend it in cases of poisoning.
They also prescribe it as a deobstruent in obstructions of the liver and
in jaundice. The radishes, the garden and the wild, retain their ancient
characters in the works of our old herbalists, and even in the time of
Quincy they still held a place in our Dispensatory, although, as he says,
“little used in medicine.” (i, 5, 409.)


Ῥῆον,

Rheum (called by some Rhâ), is composed of a terrene, cold, and subtile
substance, and of a vaporous, hot, and slightly acrid one. Hence it
relieves sprains and ruptures, and orthopnœa, and also lividities, by its
discutient powers; and by its astringency, spitting of blood, cæliac and
dysenteric affections. By both it cures hepatic complaints.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author manifestly copies from Galen; and whoever will
carefully compare his account of it with Dioscorides’s chapter on Rhâ,
cannot fail to come to the conclusion that both apply to the same
substance, namely, the _Rheum Rhaponticum_. We therefore shall confine
our attention in this place to it, reserving to the Appendix what we
have got to say on the knowledge possessed by the ancients of the
purgative rhubarb. Dioscorides says of it, that its prevailing power
is astringency, with a certain degree of heat; and he recommends it to
be taken in a draught for flatulence of the stomach, atony, all kinds
of pain, spasms, diseases of the spleen, liver, and kidneys, tormina,
affections of the chest and bladder, distension of the hypochondria,
diseases of the uterus, sciatica, hæmoptysis, asthma, hiccough,
dysentery, cæliac affections, intermittents, and the bites of venomous
animals; also for lividity and leprosy when rubbed in with vinegar,
and for discussing all chronic inflammations in a fomentation. (iii,
2.) Galen’s account of it, as already stated, is exactly the same as
our author’s. Oribasius evidently takes his description of it from
Dioscorides; and Aëtius, like our author, as clearly abridges Galen.
There is no mention of the _Rhâ_ in the works either of Hippocrates or of
Celsus. Pliny’s description of it (he calls it _Rhacoma_) is manifestly
imitated from Dioscorides. (H. N. xxvii, 105.) As already stated, we
shall reserve our exposition of the views of the Arabians to the Appendix.


Ῥητίναι,

Resinæ, _Resins_, are all calefacient and desiccative; but the turpentine
holds the first place, being discutient, emollient, and attenuating, and
also detergent, whereby it cures itch; and that of larch is like to it.
The resin of the pitch-tree, and still more that of the wild pine, are
more acrid, but neither more discutient nor attractive. Those of the pine
and fir hold an intermediate place.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. On the formation of _Resins_ see in particular Theophrastus
(H. P. ix, 2) and Pliny (H. N. xxiv, 22.) Pliny thus sums up his account
of them: “Summæ species duæ; sicca et liquida. Sicca e pinu et picca;
liquida e terebintho, larice, lentisco, cupresso.” The Resina sicca pini
is the _Pix arida_ of the Old London Pharmacopœia, or the _Pix Abietina_
of the New. The Resina liquida laricis is now generally called by the
name of _Venice Turpentine_. The Resina lentisci is well known by the
name of _Mastich_. The _Colophonian rosin_, which is often mentioned in
this work, is the same as the black fiddler’s rosin. The Cypress rosin
does not appear to be much known now. Pliny correctly observes that all
these resins act on the bowels and the urine. The mode of burning or
roasting resin is described by Dioscorides. (i, 93.) He gives a very
interesting account of the _resinæ_ in general, which he represents to
be emollient, calefacient, dissolvent, cleansing, suited for coughs and
consumptions, in electuaries by themselves or with honey, clearing away
matters from the chest; and as being diuretic, digestive, laxative of
the bowels; adapted for the operation on trichiasis (see Book VI, 8),
and for leprosy, with verdigris, copperas, and natron; for purulent ears
with honey and oil, and for itching of the pudendum. They are mixed,
he adds, with plasters, liniments, and acopa, and relieve pleuritic
pains either when rubbed in or applied by themselves. (i, 91.) All the
other authorities prescribe the resins freely, but none give so full a
description of them as Dioscorides. See, however, Celsus (pluries), who
appears to have been particularly fond of them. He recommends turpentine
rosin with butter and honey in phthisis (iii, 22), in dyspnœa (iv, 4,
2), and in various other cases. Our author’s account of them would seem
to be principally taken from Galen. The Arabians, as usual, copy from
the Greeks, and supply little additional of their own. See Avicenna (ii,
2, 242); Serapion (De Simpl. 325); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. i, 580, &c.); Ebn Baithar (pluries.) All the resinæ here
described occur in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia (160, 161.)


Ῥόδα,

Rosæ, _Roses_, are naturally composed of a watery substance, which is
heating, astringent, and bitter. The flowers are still more astringent,
and hence are desiccative.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It comprehended the _R. lutea_, Derlech, _R. arvensis_, and
probably other species of the _Rosa_, L. Dioscorides gives a careful
exposition of the particular uses of Roses in medicine. He says they are
cooling and astringent. In preparing the flowers for use, he directs the
nails or white portions to be clipped off with a pair of scissors, and
the remainder compressed and pounded in a shade in a mortar, until they
form into a ball. He recommends them in diseases of the eyes, headache,
affections of the ears, gums, anus, and womb, &c., also when sprinkled
in powder on intertrigo, and as an ingredient in the ointments called
_calliblephara_. (i, 130.) We need not devote time to the exposition
of what the other authorities have written on this subject. See Celsus
(pluries); Galen (De Simpl. viii, et alibi); Avicenna (ii, 2, 568);
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 585); Serapion (De Simpl. 108). The Arabians say
of rose-water that it is stomachic and hepatic; and of rose-oil, that it
relieves inflammation of the stomach and loss of its tone. They recommend
rose-water further both in syncope and in hæmoptysis. Like the Greeks,
they make it an ingredient in their collyria to the eyes and eyelids.
Rhases and Avicenna give particular directions for preparing an ablution
with roses to remove fetid perspiration.


Ῥοδία ῥίζα,

Rosea radix, is heating in the second degree, and is attenuating and
discutient.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The older commentators and herbalists are by no means
satisfied that it was the _Rhodiola Rosea_, or rosewood; but the later
authorities are pretty much agreed upon this point. See Sprengel (in
Dioscor. iv, 45) and Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 631). Dioscorides merely
recommends it along with valerian as an application to the forehead and
temple in cephalalgia. The other authorities, like Paulus, are content
with barely stating its general characters.


Ῥοιὰι,

Mala Punica, _Pomegranates_; the prevailing quality of all the species
of them is an astringent power, by which they act as refrigerants and
desiccants. But the sweet have this property in a less degree than the
others. The austere are more refrigerant, but are of a drier nature and
stomachic. Those which are acid are cooling in a greater degree, but have
also something incisive in their nature. The kernels are more astringent
and desiccative than the juice, but still more so the outer membrane or
rind called _Malicorium_. The flowers called _Cytini_ have similar powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is evidently the _Punica granatum_ L. Woodville says,
“Hippocrati arbor audit σίδη unde cortex fructus σίδιον.” They frequently
occur in the Hippocratic treatises. (De Diæta, ii, &c.) Cytini is
generally put for the flowers of the cultivated pomegranate, and
balaustia for those of the wild. The bark of the root called malicorium
by Celsus was much used. Pliny, like the medical authorities, speaks of
them all as being excellent astringents. He recommends them particularly
in cæliac affections and hæmoptysis. (H. N. xxiii, 57.) The most
interesting of the ancient authorities on this head is Dioscorides, who
says of the sweet pomegranate that it engenders heat and flatulence in
the stomach, and hence is unsuitable in fevers; and of the acid, that
it relieves ardor of the stomach, and is more astringent and diuretic,
being unsavoury and styptic; that the vinous has an intermediate
nature; that the kernel of the acid pomegranate, when dried in the
sun and sprinkled on food and boiled with it, restrains fluxes of the
stomach and bowels; that when macerated in rain-water and drunk, it is
beneficial in hæmoptysis, and in a hip-bath is suitable in dysentery
and other fluxes; and that the expressed juice of the kernels, when
boiled and mixed with honey, is suitable to ulcers in the mouth, on the
pudendum and anus; for pterygia on the fingers, spreading ulcers, fungus,
earache, and complaints in the nose, and more especially those of the
acid pomegranate. (i, 141.) He also treats separately of the flowers and
the bark, recommending the latter as an anthelminthic medicine. Galen
and the other Greek authorities treat of the pomegranate in nearly the
same words as Paulus. It would exceed our limits to give a notice of the
various cases in which Celsus prescribes this medicine. Suffice it to
say, that he calls it stomachic, cooling, and styptic, and recommends the
flowers, the bark, and the root for these and various other purposes. For
the Arabians see Avicenna (ii, 2, 109, 313); Serapion (De Simpl. 129);
Rhases (Contin. l. ult. i, 443); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar
(i, 499). One of Serapion’s authorities, Ruffus, recommends the acid
pomegranate in cardiac disease, and another, Aben Mesue, in cholera and
syncope, which attends it. All praise it as a stomachic, more especially
in the loss of appetite attending pregnancy, and in vomiting. Rhases and
Avicenna say that pomegranate wine relieves intoxication. Both the sweet
and the acid are held to be diuretic, but especially the latter. The
flesh of the sweet purges yellow bile and strengthens the stomach. They
all represent the rind as being anthelminthic. On this use of it, see
Book IV, 58, and Pereira (Mat. Med. 1101). It has been a question, by the
way, whether the malicorium _or_ σίδιον of the Greeks, was the rind of
the fruit or the bark of the root. We used to think it the former, but
the examination of a passage in Avicenna (l. c.) has satisfied us that
the latter was also sometimes included. In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia
both the bark of the root and the rind of the fruit are described, the
term σίδιον being restricted to the latter.


Ῥοῦς βυρσοδεψικὴ,

Rhus Coriaria, _Sumach_; the fruit and juice of it come principally to be
used by physicians, being considerably astringent and desiccative of the
third order, but detergent of the second.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Rhus Coriaria_, or _Elm-leaved Sumach_. This
also was much used as an astringent. Pliny briefly says of it, “vim
habet astringendi refrigerandique.” The Arabian writers on husbandry
mention that in times of famine bread was sometimes made from sumach.
Dioscorides says of it that its leaves are astringent, being applicable
in the same cases as acacia. He recommends it in dysentery when given
by the mouth, in a lavement and hip-bath, as an injection in cases of
purulent discharges from the ears, and for many other practical purposes.
He concludes with mentioning that it bears a gum which is put into the
holes of carious teeth to relieve pain. (i, 147.) Celsus notices it but
once, and then as an application to aphthous ulcerations of the mouth.
(vi, 11.) It is mentioned as an astringent medicine and condiment in the
Hippocratic treatises. (De Mulieb. and de Liquid. usu.) Galen, and the
other Greek authorities after him, merely state its general properties as
a medicine. The Arabians treat of it under the name of sumach, which it
still retains. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 635); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i. 695);
Serapion (De Simpl. 225); Ebn Baithar (ii, 46, 163.)


Ῥύπος,

The Sordes, from copper statues or vessels, in which a considerable
quantity of oil has been kept, having also some verdigris, is discutient,
moderately desiccative and emollient. It therefore discusses unconcocted
phymata. But the sordes in the palestra (which some call paton), has been
described under the head of sweat. The sordes in the ears is said to cure
whitlows.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sprengel gives a long dissertation on the sordes palestræ.
(Ad Dioscor. i, 36.) Suffice it to say in this place that it was
collected from the bodies of the wrestlers in the palestra, and consisted
of oil, sweat, dust, and any powder used for cleansing the skin.
Sprengel, from a passage in the works of Theophrastus (H. P. v, 9),
infers that the sordes gymnasiorum were collected from statues made of
cedar, but he appears to have overlooked the account of it given by our
author, from which it must be obvious that it was collected from statues
of copper, or rather of bronze. The sordes balneorum, which is treated of
by Dioscorides (i, 34), will be readily understood from the description
which we have given in another place (Vol. I, 68), of the preparatory
process which the bathers went through before going into the bath. It
must have consisted then of human sweat and other impurities extracted
from the skin, mixed up with soda, flour of beans, or any other substance
used in cleansing the skin by means of the comb (strigil.) Dioscorides
says it is heating, emollient, and discutient, and is used as a liniment
to fissures and condylomata. These articles are treated of by most of
the other authorities. On the sordes palestræ, see in particular Galen.
(T. ii, 136, ed. Basil.) For the Arabians see Avicenna (ii, 2, 648), and
Serapion (De Simpl. 169).


Σαγαπηνὸν,

Sagapenum, _Sagapen_, is the juice of a sort of ferula, being hot and
attenuate. It is also somewhat detergent, so as to agree with cicatrices
in the eyes and suffusions.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It has never been disputed, as far as we are aware, that the
ancient sagapenum was the same substance as the modern. However, it is
not even yet well ascertained by what tree it is furnished, but it is
generally supposed to be either the _Ferula Persica_ or _F. Szowitsiana_.
See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 776). We know no more about it, then, at the
present day than what was known of it by Dioscorides, who describes it
as being the juice of a plant resembling the ferula, having a smell
intermediate between the juice of silphium (assafœtida) and galbanum.
He recommends it for various medicinal purposes; for affections of the
chest, epilepsy, hysterical convulsions, for promoting menstruation, and
destroying the fœtus in utero; as an alexipharmic, and for discussing
films on the eyes, cataracts, &c. (iii, 85.) Galen, Aëtius, and Oribasius
give much the same account of it as our author. Galen says it is the
juice of a certain ferula resembling panax. (De Antid. i.) It occurs
in the works of Celsus as an ingredient in the famous antidote of
Mithridates, and also as an ingredient in one of his collyria. (vi, 6,
24.) For the Arabians see Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Avicenna (ii, 2,
629); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 631); Serapion (192); Ebn Baithar (ii,
37.) They recommend it in a good many more cases than the Greeks do. For
example, they all say that it is a gentle laxative. Modern authorities,
however, have denied that it is possessed of this property. See Hill
(Mat. Med.) Rutty, notwithstanding, seems to agree with the ancients.
(Mat. Med. 447.)


Σαλαμάνδρα,

Salamandra, _Salamander_; when burnt its ashes are by some mixed with
corrosive medicines and remedies for lepra and scabies.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Salamandra terrestris_. The story of the
salamander’s being proof against the operation of fire is mentioned by
Nicander, Aristotle, and Theophrastus; but the truth of it is questioned
by Dioscorides. Sprengel remarks that the real fact is, that the
salamander is a black ugly lizard, from whose body a cold viscid fluid is
secreted, which may be capable of extinguishing a small coal. Agricola
says, its body is as cold as ice, and therefore capable of extinguishing
a coal. M. l’Abbé Bonnaterre likewise states that the humour which it
secretes from its body prevents the operation of coals from affecting
it for a short time. (Encycl. Méthod.) Our author borrows his medicinal
character of the salamander from Dioscorides, who says it is possessed of
septic, ulcerative, and calefacient powers, like cantharides. (ii. 67.)
None of the other authorities give any additional information of much
interest under this head. The Arabians would appear not to have included
it in their Materia Medica.


Σάμψυχον,

Sampsuchum (a species of marjoram), is calefacient and desiccative in the
third degree. It also consists of subtile parts, and is discutient.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Although Galen and our author distinguish the _Amaracus_
from the _Sampsuchus_, there seems no reason to doubt their identity.
See Needham (Ad Geopon. xi, 27); the Synonymes of Dioscor. (iii, 41);
and Sprengel (ibid.) Dioscorides describes it (_Origanum marjorana_)
minutely, and says its decoction is drunk with advantage in cases of
dropsy, dysuria, and tormina; that its dried leaves, in a cataplasm with
honey, remove suggillations; and that in a pessary it is emmenagogue.
He also recommends it as an external application to the stings of
scorpions, sprains, œdematous swellings, inflammations of the eyes, and
as a calefacient ingredient in acopa and malagmata. (Ibid.) Galen and the
other Greek authorities treat of it in general terms. For the Arabians,
see Avicenna (ii, 2, 466); Serapion (c. 286); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
439). They recommend it in the same cases as the Greeks; and also in
hemicrania, vertigo, earache, in embrocations and injections. They also
speak well of the oil of it as an application in cases of paralysis.
The “Thymus Cyprius” of Celsus is set down by C. Bauhin as being the
_Thymus mastichius_; but whether it be any other than the marjoram seems
doubtful, although Celsus certainly mentions them as distinct substances.
(v, 11.) Compare our account of this article with what Quincy says of the
marjoram in the ‘Complete English Dispensatory’ (60.)


Σανδαράχη,

Sandaracha, _Red Arsenic_, is possessed of caustic powers like orpiment.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That it was the sub-species of sulphuret of arsenic, called
realgar, namely, “the red orpiment” of Jameson, can admit of no question.
In our Appendix to this section, we shall have something to say relative
to the sandaracha of the Arabians. Dioscorides says it has the same
general powers as arsenic (yellow orpiment), and recommends it externally
in alopecia, leprosy, phthiriasis, hard boils, ulcers in the nose and
mouth, other exanthemata and condylomata; and also internally in cases
of empyema with mulse; in fumigations with resin in chronic cough, when
its steam is inhaled into the mouth by means of a syphon. He concludes
by saying of it, that in a linctus with honey it clears the voice, and
along with dry pitch makes an excellent pill for asthmatics. (v, 121.)
Galen, Aëtius, and Oribasius give but a very brief and general account of
it. Celsus places it in his lists of cleansing and corroding substances
(v, 5, 6), and often prescribes it as a septic and caustic application.
Avicenna treats of the white, the yellow, and the red arsenic in the same
chapter. What he says of the last, or realgar, is taken from Dioscorides.
(ii, 2, 48.) Serapion also treats of the yellow and red arsenic in the
same chapter, and merely gives extracts under this head from Dioscorides
and Galen. See further Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 610); Averrhoes (Collig.
v, 43); Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 48, 503); Ebn Baithar (i, 527.) The last
of these gives an interesting description of three kinds of arsenic,
namely, the yellow, the red, and the white. The red of course is the
article now under consideration. He says of the yellow and red, that when
calcined they become white, and when melted with a certain red ore lose
their disagreeable smell. The white is said to be a mortal poison. The
yellow and the red he recommends in phagedænic sores of the mouth and
nose and elsewhere, and as an inhalation in asthma and orthopnœa.


Σάνδυξ,

Sandyx, or Siricon, consists of subtile parts, and has desiccative
powers, but not heating.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Galen says that when ceruse is burnt, that is to say,
calcined, it becomes sandyx. (De Simpl. ix.) See also Pliny (H. N.
xxxv, 23.) He calls it burnt ceruse mixed with an equal proportion of
rubrica. See also Alston and Sprengel. Dioscorides treats of it under the
same head as ceruse, and describes the process by which the latter is
converted into sandyx. The Arabian authorities, in like manner, treat of
it along with ceruse. See Serapion (c. 378); Avicenna (ii, 2, 117.) From
what has been said, then, it will be readily seen that it was merely a
peculiar preparation of ceruse.


Σαπρότης ξύλων,

Caries lignorum, _Carious Wood_, and especially that of the elm, cleanses
and fills humid ulcers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of the _Caries_ or _Rot_ of wood is
taken from Dioscorides, who recommends it in the same cases as Carbo
ligni is now applied, namely, to ulcers, but more especially spreading
ulcers. (i, 143.) It is the Lignorum marcor of the Arabians, who
recommend it in the same cases as the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 617);
Serapion (c. 48.)


Σάπων,

Sapo, _Soap_, is possessed of detergent powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The first author, we believe, who makes mention of _Soap_ is
Pliny. He calls it an invention of the Gauls. It is made, he says, of
suet and ashes. (H. N. xxviii, 51.) Aretæus likewise calls it a Gallic
composition, prepared from soda, and used for cleansing clothes. He
recommends it as an application to the skin in elephantiasis. (De Curat.
Morb. Chron. ii, 13.) Serapion praises it as an application to abscesses.
The only Greek authority which he quotes under this head is Paulus.
(De Simpl. 368.) See also Avicenna (ii, 2, 650); Rhases (Cont. l. ult.
i, 609, ii, 628); and Ebn Baithar (ii, 119.) One of Baithar’s Arabian
authorities commends soap in leprosy and scabies; also in favus and the
cutaneous diseases of the scalp. Ebn Baithar further gives a very curious
account of the process of dyeing the beard by means of a mixture of
soap and sandyx. This was a very ancient use of soap, and is frequently
alluded to by the classical authors. (Ovid. Ars. Amand. iii, 163.) This
subject is treated of very ingeniously by Beckmann in his ‘History of
Inventions.’ The author, however, is mistaken in supposing that there
is no mention of soap in the works of Galen, with the exception of that
work ‘De Simplicibus,’ universally admitted to be spurious, whereas Galen
frequently makes mention of it in works about the authenticity of which
there has never been any question. As for example, (Meth. Med. viii); (De
Comp. med. sec. loc. T. ii, 225.) In the latter passage he makes distinct
mention of Gallic soap.


Σαρκοκόλλα,

Sarcocolla, is the tear of a Persian tree, being emplastic and
desiccative without pungency, and therefore it agglutinates wounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There is not, we presume, the slightest reason to doubt
that the ancient Sarcocol was the same as the modern, namely, the gum
of the _Penæa Sarcocolla_. Dioscorides mentions only its external use
in agglutinating wounds and restraining defluxions on the eyes. (iii,
89.) The Greeks confined the use of it to external applications; but
the Arabians sometimes administered it internally as a purge. Thus
Serapion, Rhases, and Avicenna say that it purges crude humours and gross
phlegm, especially from the joints. They recommend it with honey as an
application in diseases of the ear. They say it corrodes putrid flesh,
and heals recent wounds, and restores parts that are distorted. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 592); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 617); Serapion (c. 15.)
Even as late as the time of Dr. Lewis the sarcocol was still retained in
our English Dispensatory with the characters assigned to it by the Greeks
and Arabians. Of late years it has been entirely omitted.


Σαρξιφαγὲς,

Saxifraga, _Saxifrage_, is diuretic and lithontriptic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There has been great diversity of opinion respecting it,
as Sprengel has shown in a very learned dissertation. (Ad Dioscor. iv,
15.) It is, therefore, by no means certain that it is the _Pimpinella
Saxifraga_, but we incline to this opinion. Apuleius says that it is
lithontriptic, and indeed it appears to have derived its name from
this real or supposed property. The chapter of Dioscorides on it is of
doubtful authenticity. It is not contained in Galen’s work on Simples. We
doubt also if it is to be found in the works of the Arabians. Not many
years ago the Burnet saxifrage held a place in the Dispensatory with
the character of possessing the virtues ascribed to this article by the
ancients. See Quincy (147.)


Σατύριον,

Satyrion, or Trifolium, is of a humid and hot temperament, and flatulent;
hence it is a provocative to venery. Some say that it cures opisthotonos
when drunk with austere wine; but Galen, in his treatise ‘De Theriaca,’
says, that the trifolium, which is like the hyacinth, when it becomes
pregnant with the spring, has a seed like the wild cnicus, and that when
the decoction of it is poured upon the bite of the phalangium or viper
it cures the same; but when applied to a sound part, he says, that it
induces an affection similar to that of those who have been bitten by one
of those creatures.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is very difficult to determine; and it would be useless
to mention the variety of conjectures which have been advanced
respecting it. Sprengel inclines to think that it was a species of
tulip, and suggests that it probably was the _Tulipa Gesneriana_. This
is the species which Dioscorides further distinguishes by the name
of _Trifolium_. The other named by him _Erythronium_ is probably the
_Erythronium Dens Canis_. What confirms this conjecture very much is, the
circumstance that the _Dens Canis_ is still reputed to be aphrodisiac,
as the _Erythronium_ is reported to be by Dioscorides. (iii, 134.) See
Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 204.) Galen gives nearly the same account of it as
our author. The Arabians scarcely appear to distinguish it properly from
the orchis, but otherwise they give the same characters of these plants
as the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 706, 707); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
7, 14.)


Σάυρα,

Lacerta, _the Lizard_; the liver and head have been treated of in their
proper places. When an entire one has been cut in pieces and applied, it
cures persons bitten by scorpions.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It seems not unlikely that it may have been the _Lacerta
Gecko_. See the translation of Ebn Baithar by Sontheimer (ii, 3), where
the chapter of Dioscorides on the Saura, is arranged under this head,
along with another to the same effect from Avicenna. Dioscorides, and
indeed all the authorities who treat of it, recommend it for the bites of
scorpions. Pliny recommends it in complaints of the eyes. (H. N. xxix,
38.) The Arabians recommend it in the same cases as the Greeks, and also
say of it, that its liver soothes the pains of toothache, and that its
urine and blood are useful in the ruptures of children. See Avicenna (ii,
2, 639.) In the East it is still used medicinally. Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii,
276.)


Σέλινον,

Apium, _Parsley_, is hot to such a degree that it promotes the urinary
and menstrual discharges. It is also carminative and especially the seed
of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There seems little or no doubt that it is the Common
Parsley, namely, _Apium petroselinum_, which long held a place in our
Dispensatory, and retained in it its ancient characters. Dioscorides
recommends it in a great many cases; for inflammations of the eyes in
cataplasms; for heat of the stomach; as a diuretic and antidote to
venomous animals; and for various other medicinal purposes. (iii, 77.)
Galen and the other Greek authorities merely state its virtues in general
terms. The Arabians treat of it under Apium, not distinguishing it very
accurately from its congeners. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 55); Serapion (c.
290); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 69.)


Σερὶς,

Seris, _Endive_, is a bitterish potherb, being considerably refrigerant
and diluent. It has also some astringency.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It comprehends the _Cichorium Intybus_ and the _C. Endivia_.
It is now known by the names of the Endive, or Garden Succory. We have
treated of it as an article of food in the First Book, and as a medicine
it is not deserving of much notice, after what we have said of its
congener under the head of _Cichorium_. It was generally held to be a
good hepatic medicine. See Dioscorides (ii, 125); Galen (De Simpl.);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 229); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i. 266.)


Σέριφον,

Seriphon, is heating in the second degree, but desiccative in the first,
being like wormwood, only it is less astringent and more calefacient than
it. It is also anthelminthic, and to a considerable degree bad for the
stomach.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. From Dioscorides’s description we may confidently refer it
to the _Artemisia maritima_, Angl., _Drooping-flowered Sea Wormwood_.
Dioscorides gives it exactly the same characters as our author, namely,
that of being bitterish, astringent, and a good vermifuge. (iii, 24.)
Galen says of it, that it is more powerfully anthelminthic than the
absinthium. The Arabians treat of it along with the absinthium. It is
not to be found in the works of Hippocrates and Celsus.


Σέσελι,

Seseli, _Hard Meadow Saxifrage_ (?) or _Hartwort_; the root, and more
especially the fruit, is considerably heating with tenuity of parts, and
is also diuretic. It agrees with epilepsy and orthopnœa.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author, it will be remarked, gives only one species of
Seseli, which there can be no doubt is the same as the Seseli Massiliense
of Dioscorides (iii, 53), about which, notwithstanding its being long
held to be an important article in the Mat. Med., there is considerable
difference of opinion. We, for reasons which we have not room to state,
were inclined to refer it to the Laserpitium Siler; but the authority of
Clusius, Lewis, and Sprengel has determined us to recognise it as the
_Seseli tortuosum_. The other two species we are quite satisfied are the
_Bupleurum fruticosum_ and _Ligusticum Peloponnesiacum_. Compare Sprengel
ad Dioscor. (l. c.) with Gray (Suppl. to the Pharm. 80.) Dioscorides
represents the first species as being a diuretic, expectorant, and
uterine medicine. He says it was given not only to women, but to goats
and other animals to assist parturition. Of the other two species, he
merely says that they are possessed of the same virtues. Galen, Aëtius,
and Oribasius merely give the general characters of the first species, in
nearly the same terms as our author. This, beyond dispute, is the “Sil”
of Apicius (c. 34), and of Celsus (v, 23.) The latter merely mentions it
as an ingredient in the celebrated antidote of Mithridates. (Ibid.) We
can find little or no additional information respecting it in the works
of the Arabians. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 626); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
654); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Serapion (De Simpl. 190.) Aben Mesuai,
one of Serapion’s authorities, thus sums up its characters: it is hot
and dry in the end of the second degree; cuts and dissolves viscid and
congealed phlegm, and therefore opens all the pores and passages which
are shut up; provokes urine and the menstrua; and is beneficial in asthma
and all cold pituitous ailments. The seeds of seseli held a place in our
Dispensatory as late as the times of Quincy (158), and of Lewis (ii,
366.)


Σηπία,

Sepia, _the Cuttlefish_; its shell has powers like those of an oyster,
but is attenuant and more detergent; hence, if burnt, it attenuates
pterygium along with fossil salts. When unburnt it clears away sycosis
when rubbed upon the part, and proves detergent to the skin.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Sepia Loligo_, L. We need scarcely mention that
the shells of fishes consist principally of lime. As represented by the
ancients, therefore, they form a detergent application to the skin. All
the authorities recommend it in nearly the same cases, namely, as an
ingredient in stimulant collyria, and in obstinate cutaneous diseases,
and as a dentifrice. See Dioscorides (ii, 23); Galen (De Simpl.); Celsus
(v, 29); Aëtius (ii, 190.) Aëtius gives the fullest account of this
article. (l. c.)


Σησαμοειδὲς,

Sesamoides; the seed of the white species heats, is detergent, and
procures the rupture of abscesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This article, which occurs in the Hippocratic treatises,
and of which two species, the great and the small, are described by
Dioscorides, has been the subject of much controversy. See Parkinson,
Sprengel, and Dierbach. We are willing to acquiesce in Sprengel’s
decision regarding them, namely, that they are the _Reseda Mediterranea_
and _canescens_. It appears that they were used principally in
combination with hellebore, and that the one evacuated upwards, and the
other downwards. (Dioscor. iv, 150, 151.) Ruffus treats only of the
small, which he represents to be cholagogue and phlegmagogue, when its
seed is taken to the amount of an acetabulum. (De Med. Purg.) It does
not occur in the works of Celsus, and does not seem to have been much
in repute. Galen gives nearly the same account of it as Dioscorides. We
have not found it in the works of the Arabians, with the exception of Ebn
Baithar, one of whose Arabian authorities speaks of its being used in
paralysis. (i, 252.)


Σήσαμον,

Sesamum, _Oily-grain_, is glutinous and fatty in no small degree; hence
it is emplastic, emollient, and moderately calefacient.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. All the authorities acknowledge it as the _Sesamum
orientale_. Pliny ranks it among the summer corn of India. He says,
that an oil is procured from it, and that it forms a good application
to burns. (H. N. xviii, 22; xxii, 64.) This account of it in fact is
condensed from Dioscorides, who recommends both the plant and the oil
in various external complaints, including burns, inflammations of the
eyes, the bites of venomous animals, &c. (i, 41, ii, 121); Celsus ranks
it among his emollients, and recommends it as an hepatic. (iv, 8.)
Galen and Aëtius give nearly the same account of it as our author. The
Arabians treat of it at great length, both as an article of food and of
medicine. See Serapion (De Simpl. 86); Avicenna (ii, 2, 642); Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. i, 650); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar (i, 254.)
They all recommend it for the same purposes as the Greeks, and as a good
application to fissures and suggillations.


Σῆψ,

Seps (which some have called the _Chalcidic Lizard_), when drunk in wine
cures those who have been bitten by it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is called ζύγνις by Aristotle. (H. A. viii, 23), and hence
it has got the name of _Zygnis tridactyla_. Solinus says of it, “Ictus
sepium putredo sequitur.” (Polyhistor. c. 40.) Our author’s account of
it is taken literally from Dioscorides. (ii, 72.) It is briefly noticed
by Aëtius, but we have not found it treated of by any of the Arabian
authorities on the Mat. Med. except Ebn Baithar, who merely gives an
extract from Dioscorides under this head. (ii, 199.)


Σίαλον,

Saliva; that of men in a fasting state is particularly discutient and
detergent; it therefore clears away the lichen of children when the parts
are anointed with it. It also concocts furunculus when applied along with
wheat that has been masticated in it. It removes hypopion. It is likewise
most destructive to those venomous animals which prove fatal to men.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of the medicinal properties of _Saliva_
is abridged from Galen, who gives a very elaborate disquisition on
the virtues of it. Pliny’s statement is fuller, but contains many
superstitious notions. (H. N. xxviii, 71.) Serapion copies from Galen.
(c. 447.) It was principally as an application to cutaneous eruptions
and sores that the ancient physicians made use of saliva, and it would
appear to be not ill adapted to that purpose. Dr. Thomson, in his work on
Chemistry, has the following remarks on it: “Saliva has a great affinity
for oxygen, absorbs it readily from the air, and gives it out again to
other bodies; hence, in all probability, the reason that saliva is a
useful application to sores of the skin. Dogs and several other animals
have recourse to this remedy, and with much advantage.” (Book v, c. ii,
sect. 13.) Galen contends strongly that human saliva is destructive
to animals, and appeals to Nicander in confirmation of this venomous
opinion. He further mentions having seen an instance of a scorpion being
killed by human saliva alone. All the Arabian authorities ascribe this
virtue to it. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 599, 613); Rhases (Cont.
l. ult. i, 602); Ebn Baithar (i, 144.) These all, in fact, do little more
than copy from Galen. Redi, in opposition to all the ancient authorities,
denies that human saliva is destructive to the viper. “Non nostrum inter
eos tantam componere litem!”


Σιδηρίτις,

Sideritis, _Ironwort_, the Heraclean, called also Helxine, has been
treated of. The Achillean Sideritis is like to it, but more astringent.
Hence it agrees with fluxes.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This is one of the articles in the ancient Materia Medica
which has never been satisfactorily determined. See Parkinson (Theatre
of Plants, pluries) and Sprengel (Ad Dioscor.) The first species of
Dioscorides, namely, the Herculia, is the same as the Helxine of
our author, and has been already treated of. The other two we would
hesitatingly set down as the _Sanguisorba officinalis_ and _Geranium
Robertianum_. The reputation which the latter has enjoyed in modern
times, as a vulnerary, appears to us strongly confirmatory of the opinion
that it was one of the siderites of the ancients. See Hill (Mat. Med.
407) and Lewis (Mat. Med. i, 464.) So striking and important an article
as the Robertianum is not likely to have escaped the observation of the
Greek and Arabian Rhizotomi. Apuleius says that the Latins call it
Ferraria. Dioscorides commends it as a vulnerary medicine. Galen does the
same, and further praises it as an astringent application in cases of
hemorrhage, dysentery, and female flux. We find difficulty in discovering
traces of it in the works of the Arabians, although we incline to the
belief that they have not entirely overlooked it. The burnet is still
cultivated in gardens. See Loudon (Encycl. of Garden. 744.)


Σίδηρος,

Ferrum, _Iron_; when frequently extinguished in water it imparts a
considerably desiccative power to it. When drunk, therefore, it agrees
with affections of the spleen. But, if extinguished in wine, it is useful
in cæliac and dysenteric affections, cholera, and resolution of the
stomach.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of _Iron_ is mostly taken from
Dioscorides. He says the ærugo ferri astringes, and hence it stops the
female flux in pessaries, and when drunk prevents impregnation; when
rubbed in along with vinegar it cures erysipelas and exanthema; it
is very useful for whitlow, pterygia, asperities of the eyelids, and
condylomata; it strengthens the gums, is a useful liniment in gout, and
thickens the hairs in alopecia; and he concludes with what our author
says of the virtues of water in which heated iron has been extinguished.
(v, 93.) Pliny, in like manner, says of it: “Calefit ferro candente
aqua, in multis vitiis, privatim vero dysentericis.” (H. N. xxxiv, 44.)
Celsus commends chalybeate water in enlargement of the spleen. (iv, 9.)
Cælius Aurelianus mentions it among the remedies for epilepsy. (Chron.
i, 4.) Scribonius Largus calls it a wonderful remedy for diseases of the
bladder. (Comp. 146.) The Arabians borrow their account of the ærugo
ferri almost entirely from Dioscorides. See Serapion (De Simpl. 403);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 247); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 295.) They give nothing
original under the present head. The στόμωμα, according to Pollux, is
hard iron, that is to say, steel. The scales or rust of the edges of
weapons made of steel were much used by the ancient physicians, both
internally and externally, as astringents and styptics. See a full
account of their medicinal properties in Pliny. (H. N. xxxiv, 66.)


Σικύος,

Cucumis, _the Cucumber_; the esculent, when green, is cooling and diluent
in the second degree; and the flesh of it soothes hot inflammations. The
seed is detergent and incisive, promotes the discharge of urine, and
clears the body. But when dried, both the seed and root prove desiccative
in the first order, and more detergent. The juice of the fruit of the
wild cucumber is called _Elaterium_. That of the root and leaves is
like to elaterium, but weaker. The root is detergent, discutient, and
emollient, but the juice is desiccative.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have already stated more than once that the Σ. of the
Greeks or _Cucumis_ of the Latins was applied to several species of the
summer fruits. Our author, we presume, applies it here to the _Cucumis
sativus_. His account of its medicinal qualities is abridged from Galen.
Dioscorides calls the seed of the Cucumis sativus moderately diuretic,
along with must answering well in ulcerations of the bladder, and says
that its leaves, in a cataplasm with wine, are useful in the bites of
dogs. The Arabians give the same account of it, but evidently mix it up
with the characters of the gourd, as given by their Grecian masters; it
is, therefore, almost impossible to discover when they are treating of
the one and when of the other. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 89); Serapion (De
Simpl. 143); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar (ii, 260.) The seeds
of the cucumber long held a place in our modern Dispensatories, and were
ranked as one of the greater cold seeds. See Quincy (107) and Lewis (Mat.
Med. i, 380.) _Elaterium_, or the fruit of the wild cucumber, was much
used by the ancient physicians from Hippocrates downwards. Theophrastus
and Pliny affirm that it is the most durable of all medicines, and that
it had actually been known to retain its virtues for two hundred years.
It was given internally as a hydragogue, and applied externally in cases
of lichen, scabies, impetigo, and the like. Of it, however, we have
treated fully under _elaterium_, as a medicine in this section, and as
a poison in Book V (64.) Dioscorides gives an account of the virtues of
its leaves and roots, the juice of which he recommends as an external
application in leprosy and other cutaneous diseases, and as an hydragogue
and cholagogue in dropsy. Galen treats of them in more general terms,
like our author. Ruffus says its root is suitable to dropsical cases. It
is the Cucumis sylvestris, _seu_ asininus, of the Arabians, who treat of
all parts of it at great length. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 177); Serapion (c.
204); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 143); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 54, 567); Ebn Baithar (ii, 210.) One of Rhases’s authorities
says, that in a pessary the wild cucumber kills the fœtus. Another of
them says an external application of it to the head is of great use in
headaches. Haly Abbas recommends it as a purge in paralysis and colic.
One of Serapion’s authorities is an Arabian, named by him Habix, who
gives a very interesting account of the wild cucumber, which he describes
as being more sharp and bitter than the wild gourd.


Σίλλυβον,

Sillybum, is a thorny shrub, like the white chamæleon, but edible. The
juice of the root of it, when drunk with honeyed water to the amount of a
drachm, is emetic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Matthiolus admits that it was totally unknown to him. Is it
not the Carduus Mariæ, or _Common Milk-thistle_? See Alston (Lectures)
and Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 976.) Sprengel joins Lobelius in
acknowledging it as the _Sillybum marianum_, Gaertn. Harduin makes it to
be the _Cardo Marie_ of the Italians. (Ad Plin. xxxvi, 25.) Pliny says
of it, that its concrete juice evacuates bile. (H. N. xxvi, 25.) Our
author’s character of it is taken from Dioscorides (iv, 156.) None of the
other authorities give any more distinct description either of the plant
itself or of its virtues. Galen has omitted it altogether, and we have
not been able to find it in the works of the Arabians, unless it be the
plant treated of by Serapion. (c. 305.) Though this article (supposing it
actually to be the _Carduus Marianus_) has long ceased to hold a place in
our Dispensatory, it would appear that it is not wholly unknown to the
shops of the apothecaries. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 64.) An eminent
authority of his day, Crantz, describes the Carduus Mariæ as being
sudorific, diuretic, and deobstruent, and a remedy to ill-conditioned
sores. (Mat. Med. ii, 157.) It must be admitted that this character does
not well agree with that of the _Sillybum_ as given by Dioscorides.


Σίλουρος,

Silurus, _the Shad-fish_, pickled and eaten, clears the trachea when in a
humid state. In a cataplasm it extracts sharp weapons of wood.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Artedi calls it, Silurus cirris quatuor in mento,—γλανὶς
(Aristot.); glanus et glanis (Plin.); Angl. “_the Sheat-fish_” (Descr.
spec. pisc.) In the Linnæan arrangement it is called _Silurus glanis_.
We have treated of it as an article of food in Book I. Dioscorides
recommends it as a medicine in the same cases as our author, and also
says of it that its brine is useful in dysenteric affections as a
hip-bath, by determining the defluxion to the surface, and that in
clysters it cures sciatica. (ii, 29.) We have not been able to find
any account of it in the works of the Arabians, with the exception of
Ebn Baithar, who gives a pretty full account of it from both Greek and
Arabian authorities. (i, 245.)


Σιλφὴ,

Blatta Pistrina, or the moth found in bakers’ shops, the entrails of
which, when boiled and pounded, cure earache.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is evidently the _Blatta orientalis_. Pliny and
Dioscorides also recommend it in cases of earache. (ii, 38.) None of the
other authorities make much account of it.


Σίλφιον,

Silphium or Laserpitium, _Laserwort_, is an excellent calefacient
medicine; but it is also flatulent and indigestible. When applied
externally to the body it is more active, and especially its juice, being
possessed of attractive powers. It has also some purgative property.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It has long appeared to us that one passage in the works
of Dioscorides is of itself quite decisive of the question as to the
identity of the ancient silphium and our assafœtida. Treating of the
gum-resin, sagapenum, he says, “in smell it is intermediate between
galbanum and the juice of silphium.” (iii, 85.) Now, in Duncan’s
Edinburgh Materia Medica, it is said of sagapenum, that “it holds a
kind of middle place between assafœtida and galbanum.” (Sixth edition,
387.) Its juice, that is to say, its concrete juice, or gum-resin, was
assafœtida, of which the Cyrenaic and Median juices, already treated
of by us, were varieties. The stalk, the leaves, and the juice are all
treated of by Dioscorides, in his chapter on Silphium, wherein he has
given so full an account of them that we dare scarcely venture upon
an abstract of it. He says of the varieties of the juice, that the
Cyrenean is the most fragrant, so that when tasted it scarcely affects
the breath, whereas, the Median and Syrian are weaker, and have a
more offensive smell. He says of it, that of the different parts of
it, the most efficacious is the juice, then the leaves, and then the
stalk. He recommends it, both externally and internally, for a great
variety of medicinal purposes, in diseases of the eyes, in toothache,
as an application to the bites of venomous animals, as an application
to gangrene, corns, and callus; in affections of the bronchi, and of
the tonsils, in cynanche, catarrhs, pleurisy, jaundice, and dropsy; in
rigors, along with pepper, frankincense, and wine, in cæliac affections,
and in short, in a great many other complaints. (iii, 84.) But long
before his time the silphium had been introduced into the practice of
medicine, and used in procidentia and other complaints. See Hippocrates
(De Fistulis; de ratione vict. in acut., &c.) It is indisputably the
laser and laserpitium of the Latin authors. See in particular Celsus (iv,
2); Pliny (H. N. xxii, 49.) The latter passes an elaborate encomium upon
it, founded, however, for the most part on the contents of Dioscorides’s
chapter on the Silphium. From it the identity of the Greek silphion
and the Roman laser is clearly made out. Passing by Galen, Aëtius, and
Oribasius, who supply nothing very interesting on this head, we now
turn to the Arabians. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 9, 52, 474); Rhases (Cont..
ult. i, 50); Serapion (De Simpl. 251); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn
Baithar (i, 84.) Avicenna describes two varieties of the _Assa_ seu
_Laser_, namely, the _fœtida_ and the _odorifera_, the virtues of which
he gives in nearly the same terms as Dioscorides. He says distinctly
that the fetid or black kind is not used in the cooking of food. He
praises them as procuring eructations and acting as carminatives, and as
proving stomachic. There appears to be a disagreement among the Arabian
authorities of Serapion regarding the virtues of the assa, some of them
representing it as good for the stomach and liver, and others as bad.
One of them, Habix, mentions that it was used as an application to the
wounds of poisoned arrows, and to preserve meat from putrefaction. Ebn
Baithar’s Arabian authorities describe very accurately the two varieties
of the assa, namely, the fragrant and the fetid, and commend both very
highly as medicines, more especially as carminatives, and as acting
very beneficially on the stomach, liver, and uterus. Some of them say
that assa promotes menstruation, and even procures the expulsion of
the fœtus. The assafœtida still retains the name of _silphion_ in the
Greek Pharmacopœia. (Athens, 1837.) M. Pacho says that the Arabs call it
_derias_, and he proposes to class it as a species of laserwort, under
the name of _Laserpitium derias_.


Σίσων,

Sison, _Bastard Stone-parsley_, is heating, diuretic, and digestive. It
likewise promotes menstruation and removes obstructions of the viscera.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears to be the _Sison Amomum_, called by Miller _the
Stone-parsley_ or _German Amomum_. Our author copies from Dioscorides,
who further mentions of it that the natives of Syria, where it grows,
use it as a condiment. Galen commends it as being bitterish, and hence
proving diuretic, digestive, emmenagogue, and deobstruent. We do not find
it in the works of the Arabians.


Σίον,

Sium, _Water Parsnip_ or _Celery_ (?), is hot, diuretic, and discutient.
It breaks down renal calculi and promotes menstruation.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears to us highly probable that it is the _Sium
latifolium_, or Upright Water-parsnip, which once held a place in modern
Dispensatories, and not the _S. nodiflorum_, as Dierbach decides the σ.
of Hippocrates to be. It is the laver of the Romans, and is recommended
by Pliny as a cure for tormina. (H. N. xxvi, 32.) See Harduin (Annot.
l. c.) Dioscorides says it is useful in dysentery, and is diuretic,
emmenagogue, and lithontriptic. (ii, 153.) Galen gives the same account
of it as our author. It does not occur in the works of Celsus. The
Arabians, in treating of it, borrow almost everything from Dioscorides.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 556, 633); Serapion (De Simpl. 290.) The latter
describes it as a species of apium which grows in water.


Σίσαρον,

Sisarum, _Garden Parsnip_; the root, when boiled, is stomachic and
diuretic, being heating in the third order. The seed consists of subtile
particles, and is powerfully discutient. It is, therefore, given to
persons affected with hiccough and tormina, in wine.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Pastinaca sativa_ or _Garden Parsnip_, according
to Sprengel. In the translation of Rhases it is said to be the same
as _nigella_, but this would seem to be a mistake. (Contin. xxxvii.)
Dioscorides briefly says of it, that it is palatable, stomachic,
diuretic, and a whetter of the appetite. (ii, 139.) Galen says it is
calefacient, with a certain degree of bitterness and astringency. It
appears certainly to be the siser of Pliny and Celsus, the latter of whom
places it in his list of diuretics. (ii, 31.) The Arabians, in treating
of it, copy from Dioscorides and Galen. See in particular Avicenna (ii,
2, 652.) From the account we have given of this article it will be seen
that recent authorities hold that it is _not_ the same as the _Sium
Sisarum_, Skerret, as has been generally held, but the Parsnip. It would
follow from this that it is identical with the ἐλαφόβοσκος of Dioscorides
(iii, 73), which we must say that we are scarcely prepared to join
Sprengel in admitting. After mature deliberation, then, we fear we must
rank this with the undetermined articles in the ancient Materia Medica.


Σισύμβριον,

Sisymbrium, _Wild Mint_, called also Cardamine, because it is like the
Cardamus. When dried, it belongs to the first order of calefacients and
discutients; but when in a humid state, to the second.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides says of his first species that it resembles the
garden mint, and Pliny states that it degenerates into calamintha or
wild mint. It would appear, then, to be a species of mint. Stackhouse
inclines to this opinion. (Index to Theophrastus.) The other, called also
cardamine and sium, can be no other than the _Nasturtium officinale_.
Dioscorides says of the former species, that it is useful in strangury,
calculus, tormina, and singultus; and that in a cataplasm it relieves
headache, is useful in the stings of wasps and bees, and stops vomiting.
His other species he recommends as an application to certain diseases of
the skin. (ii, 155.) Galen, in like manner, treats of the two species
in nearly the same terms as our author, whose description of the former
species, by the carelessness of transcribers, is given under the head of
the preceding article, Sisarum. The Arabians treat both of the sisymbrium
and the nasturtium, but it is not clear that they apply these terms to
the same substances as Dioscorides does.


Σκαμμωνία,

Scammonia, _Scammony_, has the properties of heating, discussing, and
clearing away bilious matters, more especially the juice of it, which
discusses phymata, kills the fœtus when applied in a pessary, and removes
leprosy. As an embrocation with vinegar and rose-oil, it cures chronic
headaches; and the root, when drunk, acts as a purgative both by itself
and in decoction. Boiled with vinegar and barley-flour, it is applied to
diseased hip-joints.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Convolvulus Scammonia_. Dioscorides
likewise describes another species, which Sprengel supposes to be the
_C. farinosus_, L. The scammony is called δάκρυ κάμωνος by Nicander,
and δακρύδιον by Alexander. (i, 10.) All the Greek, Latin, and Arabian
authorities who make mention of it, state that it is a powerful
purgative, which evacuates phlegm and bile. Marcellus Empiricus correctly
remarks, that it does not answer when the stomach is weak. Celsus
prescribes it for the broad intestinal worm, and in other cases. (iv,
17.) It also occurs in the Hippocratic collection. This is an article
which the Arabians treat of very fully. See Serapion (De Simpl. 303);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 628); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 612); Haly Abbas (Pract.
ii, 54, 554); Mesne (De Simpl. i); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar
(ii, 27.) The last of these writes of it at very great length. Haly Abbas
says scammony purges bile, attracts humours from the distant parts of the
body, but is injurious to the stomach and liver. Avicenna and Serapion
agree that it hurts the stomach, liver, and heart. They also state that
it is a purgative, but one not in general to be depended upon, as
different preparations of it act with different degrees of activity. They
recommend it as an external application in cases of leprosy, scabies,
and other cutaneous diseases. One of Serapion’s Arabian authorities
gives a very minute description of the different varieties of it. He
says the dose of it is from 6 to 20 grs. In large doses, one of Rhases’s
authorities states that it brings off bilious and bloody discharges, but
in small doses, it is said to be diuretic without acting upon the bowels
at all. An overdose, Avicenna remarks, may prove fatal. Mesue treats of
it at great length and with much judgment, giving very minute directions
about the choice of the different kinds of it, and the correction of any
bad qualities they may possess.


Σκάνδιξ,

Scandix, _Shepherd’s-needle_, is a wild potherb, heating and desiccative
in the second order. It is diuretic, and removes visceral obstructions.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of this potherb in Book I. It is the
_Scandix australis_. Our author takes his character of this plant from
Dioscorides. (ii, 167.) Galen infers from its being slightly acrid and
bitter, that it is diuretic and deobstruent. None of the Arabians, we
believe, treat of it, with the exception of Ebn Baithar. (ii, 23.)


Σκίγκος,

Scincus, _Skink_; the parts about the kidneys are drunk to occasion
erection of the privy member. The seed of lettuce, when drunk with water,
is supposed to counteract them; and likewise the decoction of lentils
with honey.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The Skink is a small animal, like a lizard, of the shape of
a crocodile, and from ten to twelve inches in length. It was described
by Ray and Gesner under the name of _Crocodilus terrestris_. Its Linnæan
name is _Scincus officinalis_ or _algeriensis_. Dioscorides calls it a
land crocodile, and recommends it in the same complaints as our author.
He concludes by saying of it that it is an ingredient in antidotes;
and, in fact, its principal use was in the composition of the famous
Theriaca. Such of the Arabians as notice it give it the same medicinal
character as the Greeks, that is to say, they represent it to be
strongly aphrodisiac. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 596) and Ebn
Baithar (ii, 32.) The latter gives a lengthy and interesting account of
it. Rhases briefly notices it without saying anything of its medicinal
uses. (Contin. l. ult. ii, 681.) In the East the skink is still eaten as
a restorative and aphrodisiac. See Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 278.)


Σκίλλα,

Squilla, _the Squill_, is possessed of incisive powers, and is
calefacient and desiccative in the second order. It is better to take it
roasted or boiled.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Scilla maritima_. It is mentioned by Hippocrates,
and was a favorite medicine of the ancient physicians. Dioscorides’s
chapter on the Squill contains much valuable matter. His description
of the process of baking squills is so like that given in Pemberton’s
edition of the ‘London Dispensatory,’ that one may take the latter as a
translation of it: “_Scillæ coctio_, the baking of squills. Inclose the
squill in paste of wheat flour, having first separated the outer skin and
the hard part, from which the fibrous roots grow; then bake the squill in
an oven till the paste is dry, and the squill is rendered soft and tender
throughout.” He recommends it in cases requiring a copious evacuation of
urine, such as dropsies, diseases of the stomach, those cases in which
the food floats on the stomach, in jaundice, chronic coughs, asthma,
&c. He also says of it that it is alexipharmic. (ii, 202.) Celsus
frequently prescribes “scilla cocta,” as in tympanites and in anasarca.
(iii.) It is frequently recommended and described, in a word, by all the
authorities, Greek, Roman, and Arabian, in the same class of cases. See
Galen (De Simpl. viii); Aëtius (i); Oribasius (Med. Coll. 12); Apuleius
(De Herbis); Columella (De R. Rust. xii, 33); Serapion (De Simpl. 304);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 590); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 680); Mesue (De Simpl.
vi); Ebn Baithar (ii, 216, 309); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 43). Serapion’s account of its medicinal properties is
particularly full. It is given, he says, as a laxative in fevers, and
in dropsy as a diuretic; as a remedy for indigestion, for jaundice and
tormina of the bowels; for an old cough, asthma, and spitting of blood;
and for cleansing the breast of gross humours. It is to be avoided, he
says, when there is an ulcer in any internal part. Apuleius recommends
it along with vinegar and honey in dropsy. He adds, that it evacuates
by urine. Columella gives a receipt for making a vinum scilliticum,
which is useful, he says, “ad concoquendum, ad corpus reficiendum,
itemque ad veterem tussim et ad stomachum.” (l. c.) Mesue particularly
commends it as an expectorant, and recommends the vinegar, the oxymel,
and the syrup for this and other medicinal purposes. Avicenna treats of
it with his wonted accuracy, recommending it in complaints of the gums,
teeth, and mouth; for asthma, and all inveterate coughs; in epilepsy,
and in melancholy. He moreover particularly commends it in diseases of
the spleen, and in dropsy and jaundice. He forbids it to be used in
ulceration of the viscera. Ebn Baithar gives very copious extracts from
preceding authorities, both Greek and Arabian. He treats separately of
the scilla and pancratium. See under the latter.


Σκολοπένδρα,

Scolopendra; the sea scolopendra, when boiled in oil and rubbed upon a
part, acts as a depilatory. When burnt it occasions pruritus.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See Book V. The sea scolopendra is the _Aphrodite aculeata_.
All the authorities who notice it recommend it for the same purposes as
our author. See Dioscorides (ii, 16.)


Σκολοπένδριον,

Scolopendrium, the same as asplenium.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Asplenium Ceterach_. See under Asplenium.


Σκόλυμος,

Scolymus, _Golden Thistle_, is a calefacient and desiccative medicine of
the second order. The root of it, when boiled with wine, brings off a
quantity of fetid urine, and cures the fetid smell of the armpits and of
the whole body.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. From the descriptions of it given by Theophrastus (H. P.
vi, 4), and Dioscorides (iii, 14), one can scarcely entertain a doubt
that it was the _Scolymus Hispanicus_, or Spanish Cardoons, an esculent
root, well known in the southern parts of Europe. Compare Sprengel (Ad
Dioscor. iii, 14) with Lindley (Veg. King. 709), and see Beckmann (Hist.
of Invent. under Artichoke). Dioscorides gives exactly the same account
of its medicinal virtues as our author. (l. c.) Galen writes elaborately
of it, but his conclusions, as to its properties, are the same as those
of Dioscorides. We have not been able to trace it out in the works of
the Arabians, unless it be their _harsef_. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 332);
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 168). The truth is, that the term _scolymus_ was
a puzzle to the ancient authorities and to their modern commentators,
being sometimes, as is supposed, applied also to the _Cynara Scolymus_,
or artichoke. See Parkinson (pluries). We have treated of the scolymus
as a potherb in the First Volume, p. 114. We have hinted our belief that
the _harsef_ or _harxaf_ of the Arabians was identical with the Σ. of the
Greeks. We are confirmed in this opinion by a comparison of Dioscorides
with Avicenna (l. c.), although we find that Salmasius referred it to the
artichoke.


Σκόρδιον,

Scordium, _Water Germander_, is composed of varied powers, being bitter,
sour, and acrid. It therefore at the same time purges and heats the
viscera; promotes the urinary and menstrual discharges, warms parts which
had been affected with cold, agglutinates and cleanses wounds, and proves
incarnative when sprinkled dry.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is clearly the _Teucrium Scordium_, or Water Germander.
Dioscorides commends it for its diuretic, emmenagogue, and expectorant
powers, when given internally; and for cleansing foul ulcers. Compare
his account of it with its characters as stated by Dr. Hill. Our author
condenses Galen’s statement of its medicinal properties. Galen remarks
that it would appear to have got its name from its resemblance in
qualities to the scorodon or garlic. The Arabians would seem to have
confounded the scordium with the scorodon. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 622), and
Serapion (De Simpl. 331).


Σκόρδον,

Allium, _Garlic_, is healing and desiccative in the fourth degree. But
the ophioscordon, or wild garlic, is stronger than the cultivated.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We are inclined to set down the two varieties of this
substance as being _Allium sativum_ and _arenarium_. See Parkinson (vii,
29), and Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. ii, 181). Dioscorides gives a lengthy
statement of the medicinal virtues of the garlic, which, as Galen
somewhere says, was the great theriac of rustics. Dioscorides says it
is the best of all medicines in the bites of vipers when taken along
with wine, and that it forms an excellent cataplasm for the bites of
mad dogs. He also recommends it as an application to various cutaneous
complaints, such as leprosy and furfures; as an emmenagogue, both in the
form of a hip-bath and fumigation; as a diuretic and remedy in dropsical
diseases. (ii, 81.) Galen, like our author, merely states the general
characters of the two species. It is frequently mentioned in the works
of Hippocrates and in those of Celsus. The latter ranks it among the
things “mali succi,” and calls it acrid, flatulent, heating, laxative
of the bowels, &c. (ii, 21, 26, et alibi.) The Arabians treat of it at
great length. See Serapion (De Simpl. 331); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 72); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i. 36.) They recommend it in
eructations, in dropsy as a laxative and diuretic, and as an emmenagogue.
They say a clyster of it relieves sciatica, and a gargle of it is useful
in toothache, and clears the voice. Avicenna affirms, from personal
experience, that it is an excellent medicine in the case of persons stung
by venomous reptiles. Ruffus, as quoted by Serapion, says it is hurtful
to the ears, the liver, the lungs, and the kidneys. Fresh garlic, he
says, is diuretic, loosens the bowels, and is vermifuge. Another of his
authorities says, raw garlic is vermifuge, and useful in strangury.


Σκορδόπρασον,

Scordoprason, _Garlic-leek_, in taste and powers is compounded of the
garlic and leek.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We are disposed to set it down as being _Allium
Scorodoprason_. None of the authorities supply any interesting
information under this head.


Σκορπιοειδὲς,

Scorpioides, _Caterpillar_, is heating in the third order, and
desiccative in the second.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We suppose it to be the _Scorpiurus sulcatus_, L., which
is synonymous with the _Scorpioides_, Tournefort. Dioscorides merely
recommends it as an application to the bites of scorpions. (iv, 192.)


Σκόρπιος,

Scorpius, _the Scorpion_; the land one, when applied raw, is a remedy for
its own bite, and in like manner, when eaten roasted. The sea scorpion’s
bile is useful in suffusions.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See Book V. Avicenna recommends the oil of _scorpions_
in diseases of the ear. (ii, 2, 64.) The sea-scorpion is the _Cottus
scorpius_. Dioscorides recommends its gall in cataracts, albugo, and
dimness of sight. (ii, 14.)


Σκωρία,

Recrementum, _Dross_; all kinds are considerably desiccative, but that of
iron more than the others. This, when pulverized and boiled in vinegar,
cures purulent discharges from the ears in a wonderful manner; and when
taken with oxymel, proves a remedy to those who have drunk aconite. That
of lead is similar to lead itself, but more astringent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is called recrementum by Celsus. (v, 15.) It is the dross
of a metal which is collected on the outside of the furnace while the
metal is purified by heat. See Pliny (H. N. xxxiv, 27) and Matthiolus
(Ad Dioscor. v, 54.) Dioscorides says of the recrementum plumbi that it
has the same powers as burnt lead (v, 97), and of the recrementum ferri,
that it is a remedy in cases of poisoning with aconite. (v, 94.) Celsus
ranks the recrementum plumbi among the emollients. (Ibid.) Avicenna
recommends the recrementum ferri as an astringent in cases of hemorrhoids
and other fluxes. Like Dioscorides and our author, he says that it is an
antidote to aconitum. One of Serapion’s authorities, Adamasti, says of
the recrementum argenti, that it is cooling and desiccative, and useful
in cardiac disease, and another, Alcanzi, says it is good for scabies and
prurigo. His other extracts are from Dioscorides, Galen, and Paulus. Ebn
Baithar gives an interesting exposition of this subject, but it is mostly
made up from the authorities already quoted by us. (i, 348.) Rhases
treats of it in like manner. (Cont. l. ult. i, 234.)


Σμίλαξ,

Smilax or Taxus, _the Yew_, is a tree of deleterious properties.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Taxus baccata_, L. See Book V. (48.) It appears
remarkable that Dioscorides should have allowed this article a place
in the Materia Medica, seeing that he himself says that he had noticed
it merely to guard against it. He says that in Narbonia (Languedoc or
Savoy), the yew-tree was possessed of such a power as to prove fatal
to persons sitting or sleeping in its shade. (ii, 80.) We have stated,
however, elsewhere (v, 48) that great difference of opinion has prevailed
regarding this reputed noxious power of the yew.


Σμύρνα,

Myrrha, _Myrrh_, is of the second order of calefacients and desiccants.
It, therefore, agglutinates wounds of the head when sprinkled upon them.
It has also some bitterness; and hence it kills worms and the fœtus; and
it is detergent, and, therefore, is mixed with ophthalmic remedies. It is
likewise expectorant without roughening the trachea. Bœotian myrrh has
calefacient, emollient, and solvent powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That this is the same as our myrrh is indisputable, and
the best botanical authorities are now pretty well agreed that it is
the product of a dwarf shrub, to which they have given the name of
_Balsamodendron Myrrha_. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 460); Pereira (Mat.
Med. 1187.) It is mentioned in what is perhaps the oldest literary
production in existence (Genesis xxxvii, 25), and is frequently noticed
as a medicine in the works which bear the name of Hippocrates. (De
Superfœt.; de Muliebr.) See further ‘Œconom. Hippocrat.’ (347) and
Dierbach (Arsn. des Hipp. 224.) In short, this gum-resin was much used
in the ancient practice of medicine. According to Dioscorides it is
calefacient, soporific, agglutinative, desiccative, and astringent. He
recommends it in chronic coughs and asperities of the trachea. He also
states that it was used in ulcers of the eye and other complaints of a
like nature. He further says of it that it is anthelminthic; that it
cures fetor of the mouth, and likewise of the armpits when used as an
ointment with liquid alum; that in a gargle with oil it strengthens
the gums and teeth. He describes two kinds of liquid myrrh, which he
calls _Stacte_; the finest was that which runs fluid from the tree
without cutting. The other was a fluid myrrh, taken out of the midst of
the larger pieces of the solid kind. See Hill (Mat. Med.) The account
which Pliny gives of myrrh is highly interesting, but does not contain
much that would answer our present purpose. (See H. N. xii, 33-6.)
Celsus makes mention of the _stacte_ (v, 23), and prescribes the myrrh
frequently as a concocting and agglutinating substance. Galen describes
it in two of his works. (De Simpl. 109, and De Antidot. T. ii, 433,
ed. Basil.) Our author’s account of this substance is condensed from
the former of these works. Aëtius in like manner borrows from him, as
Oribasius does from Dioscorides. For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2,
468); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 474); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Serapion
(De Simpl. 292); Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 41); Ebn Baithar (ii, 496.) Our
limits prevent us from venturing upon an exposition of what these authors
have written upon this subject, but this is the less to be regretted,
as we do not find that they add anything of much practical importance
to the information supplied by their Grecian masters. They confirm,
however, by their authority, all that the Greeks had stated regarding the
virtues of myrrh as an emmenagogue and a medicine capable of accelerating
delivery. They are also agreed that it is diuretic and expectorant. One
of Serapion’s authorities says it evacuates fluids from the belly when
applied as a plaster. Another of them says that in a masticatory it
evacuates the brain.

It would appear that the Bœotian myrrh mentioned by Dioscorides, Galen,
and our author, was the Alexanders or _Smyrnium Olusatrum_.


Σμύρνιον,

Smyrnium, _Alsander_ (called also Hipposelinum and Apium silvestre) is
heating and desiccative of the third order, being stronger than parsley,
but weaker than stone-parsley. It is, therefore, emmenagogue and diuretic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This, it would appear, is not the _Smyrnium Olusatrum_, but
either the _Smyrnium Dioscoridis_, or, as supposed by Dodonæus, the
_perfoliatum_. In another place we have set it down as the latter, and
treated of it as an article of food. (Vol. I, 114.) All the authorities
give it nearly the same character as our author. See Dioscorides (iii,
72); Galen (De Simpl.); Avicenna (ii, 2, 55.) All agree that it is an
excellent diuretic and emmenagogue. It is the _olusatrum_ of Scribonius
Largus.


Σόγχος,

Sonchus, _Sow-thistle_, is astringent and sensibly cooling both
when applied externally and eaten. But when dried, it is moderately
calefacient.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It would appear to be the _Sonchus oleraceus_, but this
is not quite certain. Dioscorides describes three species, of which
the first two are, perhaps, but varieties of the _Sonchus oleraceus_,
although some of the authorities would refer the first to some distinct
species, not well determined. Galen and our author describe only one
species, which would certainly appear to have been the _S. oleraceus_, a
well-known plant, which held a place in our Dispensatories until a late
date. See Quincy (i, 11, 510.) Dioscorides calls it sub-astringent, and
recommends it in a cataplasm for heat of the stomach and inflammations,
and its juice for stomach-ache and to attract milk; when applied on wool,
he says it relieves inflammations of the anus and uterus; and that its
root and stem are useful to persons bitten by scorpions. (ii, 158.) Galen
merely states its temperament and qualities in general terms. We are not
aware that it is described by any of the Arabians, with the exception of
Ebn Baithar, who merely gives the descriptions of it from Dioscorides and
Galen. (i, 211.)


Σπαργάνιον,

Sparganium; this also is possessed of desiccative powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Sparganium simplex_. Pliny recommends it as an
antidote to the sting of serpents. (H. N. xxv, 63.) He, as usual, borrows
from Dioscorides. (iv, 21.) Galen treats of it as briefly as our author.
Few, if any of the other authorities, notice it. Its congener, the _S.
ramosum_, is still kept in the shops with the reputation of curing the
bite of the viper. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 15.)


Σπαρτὸς,

Genista, _Broom_, by which they bind vines; the fruit and flower of
it, when drunk with honeyed water to the amount of five oboli, purge
upwards, like white hellebore, without danger. But the fruit also purges
downwards. The twigs remedy ischiatic diseases.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Spartium junceum_. It is the genista
of the Latins, as Silvius states in his commentary on Mesue. He says that
it is a powerful diuretic, and its seeds are still sometimes used with
this intention. Mesue further commends it as an emetic in gout and other
arthritic diseases. Dioscorides and Pliny give nearly the same account
of its medicinal properties as our author. Dioscorides further commends
it in sciatica and cynanche, and when given as a clyster in the former
complaint. (iv, 155.) It is not easy to trace it in the works of the
other authorities, except Ebn Baithar, who copies principally from Galen
or Dioscorides. (i. 489.)


Σπεκλάριον ἢ σφεκλάριον,

Lapis specularis, which some use instead of specula in their windows, and
hence it has been called diaphanous. Being of the nature of gypsum, it
has powers like burnt shells or oysters.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the Gypsum speculare or Selenite, as is evident from
our author’s description of it. Seneca says that in his time it had come
to be used in windows from its transparency. (Ep. 60.) See further, Pliny
(H. N. xxxvi, 45.) See Book V, 58. The Arabians praise its virtues in
the cure of all fluxes; and Agricola mentions that in his time it was
frequently given for the cure of dysenteries.


Σπόγγος,

Spongia, _Sponge_; the recent, which still preserves the smell of the
sea, when applied with water, wine, or oxycrate, agglutinates wounds; but
if burnt, it has acrid and discutient powers. When burnt with asphaltos
or liquid pitch, and applied hot, it stops hemorrhages.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Aristotle, Pliny, Philoponus, Phile, and Avicenna acknowledge
the animal nature of sponges, and yet we find it stated in most of our
modern treatises on natural history that the ancients supposed them to
be vegetables. Ebn Baithar, we believe, stands alone among the ancient
authorities in maintaining that there is no truth in the opinion that
the sponge is an animal, but that, on the contrary, it is decidedly a
vegetable which grows from the rocks. (i, 45.) Avicenna recommends the
use of sponge in the same cases as our author does. Serapion gives nearly
the same account of it. He says that the stones found in sponges are
lithontriptic. Of the two species described by Dioscorides, the hard
is the _S. fasciculata_, Pall., and the soft the _S. officinalis_. He
recommends sponge tent for dilating fistulous ulcers. He says they may be
applied like tents to sores; that with vinegar they restrain hemorrhages;
and that burnt sponges are useful in dry ophthalmy, and whenever you
want to deterge or astringe; but that when washed, they apply better in
ophthalmic remedies; and that, when burnt with pitch, they are suitable
in hemorrhages. (v, 137.) In the Hippocratic treatises this term is
generally applied to the tonsils or glands of the neck, as at ‘Epidem.’
(iv.) But in one passage of a work, certainly not genuine, it appears
to be used for the sponge. (De Morbis, ii.) Celsus prescribes a sponge
squeezed out of oil, vinegar, or cold water as an application to relieve
the swelling and heat of the gout (iv), and for other medicinal purposes.
Galen gives an interesting article under this head, and describes an
ingenious process by which, he says, that he had known a hemorrhage
stopped. A sponge dipped in asphaltus, or, in the absence of it, in tar,
having been laid on the bleeding place, it was set fire to until it
formed an eschar on the surface, while the remainder of it was left as a
farther cover to the vessels. (De Simpl. xi.) The Arabians treat fully
of the “Spongia maris,” and quote what Dioscorides and Galen had written
respecting it. Avicenna decidedly says that sponge was supposed to be an
animal possessed of motion. He and Rhases recommend it principally for
cleansing sores and stopping bleeding. (ii, 2, 595, and Cont. l. ult.
676.)


Σπόδιον,

Spodium has similar powers to the pompholyx.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is nearly the same as the Pompholyx. Pliny thus states
the difference between them: “Etiamnum in ærariis reperiuntur, quæ
vocant pompholygem et spodon. Differentia quod pompholyx loturâ paratur,
spodos illota est.” (H. N. xxxiv, 33.) The name, in modern times, has
been applied to burnt ivory. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharm. 260), and
Platearius (De Simp. Med. 250.) The ancient spodium was an impure oxyd
of zinc. The term, however, was sometimes applied to other recrements,
as we are informed by Pliny (l. c.), and Dioscorides (v, 85.) He gives a
more minute description of the preparation of it and of pompholyx. The
Arabians treat of both under the general name of _Tucia_ or Tutty, which
was long retained in modern times. They used it very freely in diseases
of the eyes, and also in those about the genital organs. See Serapion (c.
422); Avicenna (ii, 2, 695); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 730); Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 45, 474.) The spodium occurs frequently as an ingredient
in the collyria and ointments described by Celsus (v, 6), &c. We need
scarcely remind the reader that tutty ointment has continued to be used
as an ophthalmic even to our own times. The _spodos_ of the Hippocratic
writers would appear to have been applied in a more general sense to
various recrements of the metals. (De Ulceribus.) The spodium of the
Arabians would seem to have been the ashes of the privet. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 609); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 675.)


Σταφυλῖνος,

Staphylinus, _Carrot_, is diuretic and promotes menstruation,
particularly the seed and root. But the leaves being possessed of
detergent powers agree with phagedænic affections when applied green
along with honey. The wild is for all purposes stronger than the
cultivated.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. As Sprengel states, it is undoubtedly a variety of the
_Daucus Carota_, L., or _Wild Carrot_. Diphilus, as quoted by Athenæus,
says that it is acrid, nutritive, moderately stomachic, laxative,
flatulent, indigestible, diuretic, and aphrodisiacal. (Deipnos. ix, 2.)
Pliny mentions that it proves useful in strangury, dropsy, and several
other complaints. (H. N. xx, 15.) Plinius Valerianus says of it that it
had been given in diseases of the liver, spleen, loins, and kidneys, in
hydromel. (iv, 32.) Our author’s account of its medicinal properties
is mostly condensed from Dioscorides. He recommends it strongly as a
diuretic, emmenagogue, and aphrodisiac, and says of it, that applied
_per vaginam_ it procures the expulsion of the fœtus. (iii, 52.) Galen
and Aëtius give nearly the same account of it as our author. The Arabian
authorities speak of it in the same terms. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 287);
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. iii, 18); Serapion (c. 265.) The commentator
Eustathius mentions its aphrodisiacal properties. (Ad Iliad. xviii, 560.)
According to Dierbach, the σ. of Hippocrates comprehends both the _Daucus
Carota_ and _guttatus_. It would appear to us that this is the “Pastinaca
agrestis” of Celsus (ii, 31), although his editor, Dr. Milligan, decides
otherwise with regard to it. In confirmation of our opinion we refer to
Pliny (l. c.), and to Beckmann’s ingenious disquisition on our kitchen
vegetables in his ‘Hist. of Invent.’ He seems clearly to make out that
the daucus, staphylinus, carota, and pastinaca were all merely varieties
of the _Daucus Carota_. He is in some doubts, however, whether the
“pastinaca” was not also sometimes applied to the parsnip. See, however,
under _Daucus_.


Στάχυς,

Stachys, _Base Horehound_, is a shrub resembling horehound, and is
calefacient in the third degree. It therefore promotes menstruation,
kills the fœtus, and expels the secundines.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Stachys Palestina_, or _Base Horehound_. Our
author gives exactly the same account of its medicinal properties as
Dioscorides and Galen, the latter remarking of it that it not only
promotes menstruation, but is a drug used for procuring abortion.
Pliny, by confounding πράσον and πράσιον, says of it that it resembles
the _porrum_ instead of the marrubium; so that his celebrated editor,
Harduin, holds that the stachys of Pliny is different from that of
Dioscorides. (Ad H. N. xxiv, 86.) It is quite clear, however, that the
plants are identical, and accordingly Pliny, like the other, says of his
stachys, that it is emmenagogue. The Arabians do not seem to treat of it.


Στέατα,

Adipes, _Fats_, or _Grease_; all kinds dilute and warm the human body,
but their powers vary according to the different temperaments of animals.
That of swine, then, is the most humid of all, its powers being like
those of oil. Hence it blunts sharp pains. That of goats is drier
and sooner coagulated, and therefore is used as an injection to those
who have sharp pains in the rectum. That of geese is hotter and more
attenuate; that of domestic cocks and hens being intermediate. That of
lions is the hottest of all and the most attenuate, hence it is most
discutient. That of oxen has an intermediate temperament between swine
and lions. That of bears cures alopecia, that of foxes, earache; as that
of vipers is said to remove hairs and prevent suffusions from forming.
Upon the whole, that of males is the hotter and more desiccative, and of
them those which have their testicles more than those which have been
cut, and of those which are full-grown than that of the others. All sorts
of grease when long kept become hotter.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. _Fats._ Our author’s account of their medicinal properties
is sufficiently ample. For further information, however, the reader may
consult Dioscorides and Galen. The former gives very minute and seemingly
important directions for the preparations of all these animal fats. We
may just mention here a little piece of criticism which Galen bestows
in this case upon his much admired predecessor. Dioscorides says of the
grease _or_ lard of goats, that it is more styptic (στυπτικώτερον) than
that of swine. Upon which Galen remarks that although Dioscorides had
written much and well on the Materia Medica, he often uses words in a
wrong signification, as he does in the present instance, for that the
above-mentioned term, which properly signifies astringent, must here be
understood to mean acrid or pungent. Now we think that Galen is here
correct, and that Sprengel’s attempt to bring his author, Dioscorides,
clear off in the present case is not successful. Indeed, as we firmly
believe that a greater master of the Greek language than Galen never
existed, we may always feel secure that where the exact meaning of Greek
terms is concerned, one may safely trust to him. The Arabians under this
head merely give extracts from Dioscorides and Galen. See in particular
Serapion (De Simpl. 461) and Avicenna (ii, 2, 70.)


Στίμμι,

Antimonium, _Antimony_, in addition to its desiccative powers, has also
astringency. Hence it is mixed with collyria for the eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This is evidently the sulphuret of antimony. The native
antimony is so rare a mineral that it is not likely the ancients had any
acquaintance with it, and the factitious antimony is not described by any
ancient author. For an account of the ancient antimony, see in particular
Dioscorides (v, 99) and Pliny (H. N. xxxiii, 33.) It was much used by the
ancients in the composition of the medicines called calliblephara. “Vis
ejus astringere et refrigerare principalis autem circa oculos.” Pliny
(l. c.) In the Old Testament the Jewish women are censured for this use
of it. None of the Greek or Latin authors speak of giving it internally
except Serapion, who quotes Badigorus (Pythagoras?) as stating that it
proves a remedy for epilepsy and gross superfluities. (c. 249.) In its
calcined state it was made into pastils of a square form, and hence the
metal itself is called τετράγωνον by Hippocrates, as has been supposed
by his expositors. See Galen (Exeg.) and Föes (Œcon. Hippocrat. 371.)
Hippocrates recommends it as a medicine for purging the head (De Intern.
Affect.), that is to say, as an ingredient in _caputpurgia_, or errhines,
to the use of which he was partial. (See Vol. I, pp. 59, 60 of this
work.) But with the authorities subsequent to him its principal use would
seem to have been confined to collyria. See in particular Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 48); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 43.) Celsus frequently uses it for
this and other purposes.


Στοιβὴ,

Stœbe, _Knapweed_; the fruit and leaves are desiccative in the third
degree, being possessed of astringent powers. Hence they agglutinate
large wounds; and the decoction of them relieves dysentery, hemorrhages,
and discharges of pus from the ear; and in a cataplasm it is of use in
suggillations of the eye from a blow.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There has been considerable difference of opinion among
modern authorities on this head, as is fully stated by Parkinson (Theatre
of Plants, 998), and by Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. iv, 12.) We acquiesce in
the judgment of those who hold it to be the _Poterium spinosum_. See
Galen (De Antidot. 426, T. ii, ed. Basil.) Our author’s notice of it
is manifestly taken from Galen, who, in his turn, is much indebted to
Dioscorides. (iv, 12.) None of the others add anything of interest
respecting it. It does not occur in the works of Hippocrates nor of
Celsus, nor have we been able to detect it in those of the Arabians,
except Ebn Baithar, who quotes only Dioscorides and Galen under this
head. (ii, 19.)

       *       *       *       *       *

Στρούθιον. It appears singular that our author should have omitted the
Struthium, which is noticed in this place by Dioscorides and Galen. This
is the celebrated soap-plant used by the fullones or cleansers of cloth
in ancient times. The reader will find a very interesting disquisition
on it in Beckmann’s ‘History of Inventions.’ We think there is every
probability that it was the _Saponaria officinalis_. Dioscorides
represents it to be diuretic, emmenagogue, and lithontriptic, a remedy
for diseases of the chest, the liver, the spleen, and for jaundice;
a discutient application to indolent tumours, a sternutatory, and a
masticatory. (ii, 192.) By the way, the famous writer Lucian mentions
an amusing example of its use as a masticatory. (De Alexandro.) Galen
states its virtues in general terms; he says it is acrid and detergent,
and hence it acts as a sialogogue. We have not been able to find it in
the works of Hippocrates. See Pliny (T. ii, 341, 161, 410, ed. Harduin)
and Celsus (v, 18.) The Arabians treat of it very fully. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 133); Serapion (De Simpl. 362); Rhases (Contin. l. ult. iii,
38.) They all hold it to be emetic, and when it cannot be procured they
recommend in its place nux vomica. They also recommend it for all the
medicinal purposes enumerated by Dioscorides. The soap-wort has been used
medicinally in modern times. See Culpeper (172), Lewis (M. M. 339), and
Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 115.) Quincy gives a very confused account of
it. (138.) In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia it is still retained. (144.)


Στοιχάς,

Stœchas, _Cassidony_, or _French Lavender_; it is deobstruent, attenuant,
detergent, and strengthens all the viscera and the whole habit of the
animal.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears to be the _Lavandula Stœchas_, or French Lavender.
See Tournefort (M. M.) Pliny says that it is an odoriferous herb of a
bitter taste. He adds that it promotes menstruation and relieves pains of
the breast. (H. N. xxvii, 107.) Dioscorides recommends it for diseases
of the chest and for antidotes. (ii, 28.) Galen has some very sensible
remarks on its qualities as perceived by the taste, and recommends it
in the same cases as our author. See also ‘De Antidot.’ (i.) Avicenna
and Rhases recommend it for epilepsy and melancholy. According to the
Arabians it is purgative and alexipharmic, but Dr. Hill denies that it
possesses these powers in any considerable degree. It still held a place
in our Mat. Med. when Lewis wrote. (ii, 389.) It is retained in the
modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Στρατιώτης,

Achillea, _Yarrow_; that which grows in water is possessed of cold
powers, but the land has astringency; hence it agglutinates ulcers. Some
use it for hemorrhages and fistulæ.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The land is decidedly the _Achillea Millefolium_, the
river the _Pistia Stratiotes_. The millefoil got the name of Achillea
from being supposed the herb used by Achilles in dressing wounds. V.
Eustathius (ad Iliad, xi, ad finem.) Our author copies almost word for
word from Galen, who, however, is equally indebted to Dioscorides for the
characters of the yarrow. Regarding the water plant, Dioscorides says
that it preserves wounds free from inflammation, and cures erysipelas
and œdema in a cataplasm with vinegar. (iv, 100, 101.) These plants are
not to be found in the works of Hippocrates, Celsus, nor of the Arabian
authorities, as far as we can discover, with the exception of Ebn
Baithar, who merely gives extracts under this head from Dioscorides and
Galen (ii, 30), and of Rhases, who merely quotes Galen. (Cont. l. ult.
637.) The _Pistia Stratiotes_ is still used by the Hindoo physicians as
a demulcent in dysuria, and as a cataplasm for hemorrhoids. See Lindley
(Veg. King. 125.) The yarrow held a place in our Dispensatory with its
ancient character down to a late date. See Quincy (92) and Lewis (M. M.
108.) It still holds a place in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia (109.)


Στρύχνος,

Strychnos, Solanum (?), _Nightshade_ (?), or _Alkekengi_, i. e. _Winter
Cherry_; the garden and esculent sort is astringent and cooling in the
second degree. The halicacabum is like the garden, having a diuretic
fruit like the grape of a vine. The bark of the root of the Strychnos
somnifera when drunk with wine to the amount of a dram is soporific. And
it has a diuretic seed, being of the third order of refrigerants; hence
when drunk in greater quantity than twelve clusters it occasions madness.
The fourth species is not used internally, but when applied externally it
cures spreading ulcers, belonging to the second order of refrigerants and
desiccants.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We must not venture upon the discussion of disputed points
respecting the _Strychni_ of the ancients, for which we beg to refer
our readers to the Appendix to Dunbar’s Greek Lexicon, and we shall
merely state our conclusions so far as they are interesting to the
professional reader. Of the four species described by Dioscorides, the
1st, or Strychnus hortensis, is the _Solanum nigrum_, or its variety _S.
miniatum_; the 2d, or Halicacabum, is the _Physalis alkekengi_; the 3d,
or S. somniferum, is the _Physalis somnifera_; and the 4th, or Furialis,
is the _Solanum Sodomæum_. Several learned authorities, however, have
taken the last for the _Atropa Belladonna_. Our author in the main
follows Dioscorides, who treats of the virtues of the _Strychni_ at
so great length that we dare not attempt to follow him in the present
instance. The first he does not administer internally, but recommends
it very largely as an external application for erysipelas, herpes,
headache, heat of the stomach, affections of the eye, the siriasis of
children, earache, the fluor albus, &c. The second, he says, resembles
the first in virtue. The third, he says, has the same powers as the
juice of the poppy. The fourth brings on phantasies and delirium, and in
large doses proves fatal. The best counter-agent to it is undiluted wine
drunk and afterwards vomited. (iv, 72-5.) Celsus frequently prescribes
“solanum quam στρύχνον Græci vocant,” and ranks it among those things
which repress and soothe. (ii, 33.) He recommends it as an application
in phrenitis and various other diseases. (iii, 18.) Galen and Aëtius
give nearly the same account of it as our author. Oribasius confessedly
borrows his description from Dioscorides. The Arabians treat fully of the
solanum, of which Avicenna mentions that there are five species. (ii,
2, 646.) See Serapion (De Simpl. 138); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 662);
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar (ii, 212.) The characters which
they give of these plants agree in the main so well with those given to
them by the Greeks, that we need not stop to note slight differences. The
Latin writers of the middle ages call solanum by the name of maurella.
See Macer Floridus. He says of the strychnos that it is possessed of
powerfully narcotic properties. The Solanum nigrum held a place in our
Dispensatories, and retained the characters transmitted down with it from
antiquity as late as the end of the last century. See Lewis (M. M.) All
our old herbalists, Gerard, Parkinson, and Culpeper, speak of its virtues
in the same terms as Dioscorides. Our toxicologists have decided that it
is a powerful narcotic. See Orfila. The _Physalis somnifera_ is still
used in India as an application to inflammatory tumours. See Lindley
(Veg. King. 621.) The _alkekengi_ is still admitted to be possessed of
a diuretic power, as stated by Dioscorides. (Ibid.) We are not aware
of the Solanum Sodomæum having ever been used medicinally in modern
times, but we need scarcely say that of late years the Atropa Belladonna
has occupied no undistinguished place in our Dispensatories. On the
_Strychnos furiosa_ as a poison, see Vol. II, p. 224.


Στυπτηρία,

Alumen, _Alum_; all kinds of it are very sour, and consist of gross
particles. But the alumen scissile, or _Stone Alum_, consists of more
subtile parts than the others. After it is the Alumen rotundum, or _Round
Alum_, and the astragolotum. The Alumen liquidum, or _Liquid Alum_,
consists of gross parts; and so also the varieties called placitis and
plinthitis.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. After having read much that has been written by the best
authorities both ancient and modern upon this subject, we still approach
the discussion of it with very great diffidence. Having deliberately
considered what Beckmann has written regarding the ancient alum, we
cannot agree with him in setting it down as being copperas or the green
sulphate of iron. The ancients, indeed, may not always distinguish
accurately the latter from “the sulphate of alum and potash,” but
considering how common this mineral is in the countries bordering upon
the Mediterranean, we cannot conceive how the ancients could possibly
have remained ignorant of it, and we need scarcely add that it has never
been pretended that _it_ has been described by them under any other
name. But its varieties differed much from one another. The Alumen
plumosum, called τριχῖτις by the Greeks, was no doubt the _Hair salt_ of
Werner, which, according to the analysis of Klaproth, contains a large
mixture of the sulphates of magnesia and iron. Geoffroy remarks that “of
liquid alum two kinds are taken notice of by the ancients; the one pure
and the other impure. The solid or concreted kind was by the ancients
distinguished, according to the figure of its parts, into fissile and
round. The fissile natural alum was either in form of a compact, uniform
globe, or appeared divided into small hairs or filaments. The round
kind was of a more rare texture.” The Alumen Jameni of the Arabians
was the plumose alum. Pliny and Octavius Horatianus recommend alum as
an application to burns when pounded with oil. Alum was used in the
practice of medicine from the earliest times. Hippocrates prescribes
it in ulcers of the womb, diseases of the gums, and for various other
purposes. (Epid. vii, De Mulieb., De Ulcer., &c.) Our author borrows from
Galen. Dioscorides gives a most elaborate description of the different
kinds and of their uses in medicine. They are all possessed, he says,
of a heating power, and also of an astringent, and hence they clear
the obscurities of the cornea, melt down fungous flesh on the eyelids
and elsewhere, the schistose being more powerful than the round; they
stop mortifications and hemorrhages, repress flaccid gums, strengthen
loose teeth with vinegar or honey; are beneficial in aphthæ; and, in
short, he states most minutely the various purposes to which alum may be
applied. On the alumen see also Pliny (H. N. xxxv, 52) and Celsus (iv,
18), with the note of Milligan. For the Arabians consult Avicenna (ii,
2, 68); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 43); Serapion (De Simpl. 420); Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 44); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. 38); Ebn Baithar (ii, 83.) All of
these authors, even including the last, do little more than copy from
Dioscorides and Galen under this head. Geber, however, treats of the
subject with some appearance of originality, and describes the kinds of
alum with considerable accuracy. (Invention of Verity, c. 4.) The process
of burning alum for medicinal purposes, which is barely alluded to by
Dioscorides, is described by Geber and by Servitor. (i.)


Στυραξ,

Storax, is calefacient, emollient, and digestive. It therefore is useful
in coughs, catarrhs, and defluxions; and promotes menstruation both when
drunk and applied on a pessary.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is clearly our officinal storax, or _Styrax officinale_.
Dr. Pereira has given the ancient history of this substance so correctly,
as to leave us little further to add under the present head. (Mat.
Med. 931.) As he states, the storax has been described by Hippocrates,
Theophrastus, Pliny, and Dioscorides. The several varieties described by
the last of these, Dr. Pereira ingeniously refers to kinds of storax,
with which we are still acquainted. The _Styrax Calamita_ is mentioned
by our author in the eleventh Section; according to him it is but a
variety of the amygdaloid storax, which was formerly imported enveloped
in a monocotyledonous leaf. Dioscorides’s description of its medicinal
properties agrees well with our author’s, but is considerably fuller. (i,
79.) Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of it like our author.
Celsus prescribes it frequently as an emollient, discutient, concoctive,
and suppurative medicine. (v, 18, 22, c. &c.) The Arabians treat of it
at considerable length, but do not add much of any practical importance
to what had been written on it by Dioscorides and Galen. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 423); Serapion (c. 46); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Rhases (Cont.
l. ult. i, 687); Ebn Baithar (ii, 428.) Upon the whole, Serapion’s
account appears to us most interesting. His Arabian authority, Isaac Eben
Amram, mentions that it was used by the Christians in their churches for
fumigations. Avicenna, according to Dr. Hill, is the only one among the
Arabians who distinguishes the solid storax, which we have been treating
of from the liquid, or _Styrax liquidus_. It is quite a different
substance, being procured from the _Liquid amber orientale_, according to
Dr. Lindley. (Veg. King. 253.)


Σύκα,

Ficus, _Figs_; those which are dried possess heating powers in about the
second degree. But those which are fatty rather digest hard tumours;
those which are more acrid prove detergent and discutient. The decoction
of them, when made of the consistence of honey (which some call siræon),
is similar in powers to honey. The powers of the green are weaker, but
both loosen the belly. The figs of the wild tree are possessed of acrid
and discutient powers like those of the cultivated.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See Book I (s. 81.) Pliny enumerates the medicinal properties
of _figs_ at great length. Ripe figs are said to be diuretic, laxative,
and diaphoretic. Externally they were used as an application to boils
and scrofulous swellings. (H. N. xxiii, 63.) See also Dioscorides and
Serapion, both of whom give the characters of figs in nearly the same
terms as Pliny. No ancient author, however, has treated so elaborately of
figs as Avicenna (ii, 2, 276.) His account of them is so lengthy that we
dare not venture upon an analysis of it.


Σνκὴ,

Ficus, _the Fig-tree_, is of a heating and attenuating temperament, so
that the juice of it and the sap of the leaves are not only pungent and
strongly detergent, but also occasion ulceration, open the mouths of
vessels, and remove myrmecia. It is also cathartic. The wild-fig, called
caprificus, is in every respect more powerful than the cultivated.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See the authorities referred to in the preceding article.
Pliny recommends the juice of the caprificus or wild fig-tree (_Ficus
Carica_), as an application to leprosy, psora, and lichen. All the
authorities, Greek, Latin, and Arabian, praise it as an application
to the wounds of venomous animals. The wild fig-tree is the Ἐρίνεος
of Homer. V. Eustath. ‘Comment. in Iliad.’ (vi, 433.) The commentator
describes accurately the process of caprification.


Συκόμορος,

Sycomorus, _the Sycomore_; the fruit is innutritive, and bad for
the stomach. The juice of the tree has powers which are emollient,
agglutinative of wounds, and discutient of tumours. It is taken in a
draught and rubbed in for the bites of reptiles, for scirrhous spleens,
pains of the stomach, and rigors.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Of course there can be no doubt of its being the _Ficus
Sycomorus_. Galen, Dioscorides, and Serapion detail its medicinal
properties in nearly the same terms as our author. Nothing else of any
interest can be gathered from the others under this head.


Σύμφυτον,

Symphytum, _Comfrey_; the rock comfrey is composed of opposite powers.
For it has some incisive powers by which it cleanses the pus in the chest
and the kidneys; and it has also some constringency which renders it a
suitable remedy for hæmoptysis, sprained and ruptured parts, the red flux
in women, and intestinal hernia. It contains also some hot humidity, by
which it quenches thirst and cures asperities in the trachea. The other
species, called the _Great Comfrey_, is glutinous and prurient like
squills. It is used for the same purposes as the rock.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The second species is indisputably the _Symphytum
officinale_, a plant which the Romans, no doubt, naturalized in this
country. The other has been the subject of more controversy. See
Parkinson (526) and Matthiolus and Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. iv, 9.) We are
satisfied that it was the _Coris monspeliensis_. Our author manifestly
abridges Galen, who borrows from Dioscorides, but improves what he
takes. They all agree in commending both as being possessed of great
virtues as expectorant and vulnerary medicines. Dioscorides particularly
commends the latter as an application to inflammations about the anus
in a cataplasm, with the leaves of senecio. Neither of these plants is
mentioned by Celsus, nor, we believe, by Hippocrates. Avicenna writes
hesitatingly about them, but in the main agrees with Dioscorides with
regard to their medicinal virtues, more especially in hæmoptysis, ulcers
of the intestines, menorrhagia, and as an application to external
injuries. (ii, 2, 634.) The Arabians in general seem not to have attached
much importance to the symphytum, for, after a cursory examination while
writing this article, we have not been able to find it in any of the
others except Ebn Baithar, who merely gives extracts from Dioscorides
and Galen, under the present head. Apuleius mentions that the Latin name
of the symphytum is consolida. Dr. Hill calls it a famous vulnerary both
internally and externally, and as such it is highly commended by all our
older herbalists. See Parkinson, Culpeper, and Gerard. It would appear
also that the other species, the Coris monspeliensis, was employed in the
medicine of the Spanish monastic orders as an efficacious vulnerary. See
Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 645.)


Σφονδύλιον,

Spondylium, _Cow-parsnip_; the fruit and root are possessed of acrid and
cutting powers, so as to cure asthma, epilepsy, and jaundice. The root,
when stripped of its bark and put into a fistula, removes its callus. The
juice of the flowers of it are injected into the ears as agreeing with
chronic ulcers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There seems no reason to doubt of its being the _Heracleum
Sphondylium_. Dioscorides and Pliny recommend it as an application to
fistulous ulcers, and in the other cases mentioned by our author. Galen
and Oribasius give it the same characters as our author. We have not
met with it in the works of Hippocrates, Celsus, and Aëtius. Avicenna
draws the characters which he gives it entirely from Dioscorides. (ii,
2, 643.) Ebn Baithar, in describing it, merely gives extracts from
Dioscorides and Galen. (ii, 24.) Rhases does the same. (Cont. l. ult. i,
636.) The sphondylium is described as a medicinal herb, possessed of the
virtues ascribed to it by the ancients, in the works of our old English
herbalists, but it has long ceased to occupy a place in our Dispensatory.
Neither is it to be found in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Σχῖνος,

Lentiscus, _the Lentisk_, in all its parts, belongs to the full second
order of desiccants. As to heating and cooling, it holds an intermediate
place. It is astringent to such a degree as to approach nearly, in this
respect, to the juice of the hypocistis.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Pistacia Lentiscus_, L., according to the
admission of all the commentators. We need scarcely mention that it is
the tree from which mastich is procured. Hippocrates was well acquainted
with the medical use of it. Pliny says that it acts as a diuretic, but
occasions constipation of the bowels. He also mentions that it was used
in toothache, and that a decoction of its leaves in a gargle fastened
loose teeth. (xxiv, 28.) The same is stated of it by Plinius Valerianus
(i, 36), and by Dioscorides (i, 89.) Nay, it would appear, from the
following epigram of Martial, that peculiar virtues were ascribed to a
toothpick made of the mastich tree:

                “Dentiscalpium
    Lentiscum melius: sed si tibi frondea cuspis
      Defuerit, dentes penna levare potest.”—(xiv, 22.)

Dioscorides is the author who has written most elaborately on this
article, which he recommends in hæmoptysis, diarrhœa, dysentery,
menorrhagia, prolapsus uteri and ani, in affections of the mouth, as
already stated, and, in a word, he concludes by saying of its oil, that
it is beneficial in all cases requiring astringency. (l. c.) Galen also
gives a very sensible account of this tree, which he represents to be
an astringent of the same class as hypocistis. Celsus prescribes it on
various occasions, as, for example, a decoction of its leaves to suppress
immoderate suppuration. (vi, 18.) He ranks it among the astringent and
emollient substances. (ii, 33.) All the Arabians treat largely of it,
but copy most of their information from Dioscorides and Galen. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 453); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 457); Serapion (De Simpl.
159); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar (ii, 518.) In particular
all recommend it as a dentifrice and odontalgic, and we need scarcely
mention that it still is used in the East for these purposes. See Paris
(Pharm. t. ii, 323) and Pereira (1184.) It is stated in the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia that it is cultivated in Chios.


Σχοῖνος,

Juncus, _the Rush_; its flower is moderately calefacient, but astringent
in a less degree, and is not removed from the nature of attenuating
substances. Hence it is diuretic, emmenagogue, and deobstruent in
fomentations, potions, and cataplasms. The root of it is more astringent,
but the flower hotter. The marsh-rush consists of two varieties. The
fruit of the oxyschœnus or _Hard-rush_, as it is called, is soporific,
but that of the holoschœnus less so, and it also occasions headache. Both
varieties, if toasted and drunk with wine, dry up fluxes of the belly and
restrain the female discharge.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It requires some attention not to confound the _Schœni_
with one another. The _Schœnanthus_, then, is decidedly the _Andropogon
Schœnanthus_, or Lemon-grass. See Dr. Royle (Antiq. of Hindoo Med. 82)
and Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 113.) The σ. ἐλεῖα is the _Schœnus Holoschœnus_;
the ὁλοσχοῖνος, the _Schœnus mariscus_; and the ὀξυσχοῖνος, the _Juncus
acutus_. The first of these is the species most celebrated as a medicine.
Thus it is the schœnus of Dioscorides, who represents it as being
useful in vomiting of blood, pains of the stomach, lungs, liver, and
kidneys, and as being possessed of diuretic, emmenagogue, carminative,
subastringent, and other powers. Its decoction, he says, is useful as a
hip-bath in inflammations of the womb. (i, 16.) Galen gives a similar
account of its virtues. (De Simpl. viii, and De Antidot. i.) The other
Greek authorities treat of it very succinctly. Is not this the “flos
junci rotundi” of Celsus? (v, 24.) According to Dierbach and, indeed, all
the best authorities, it is the σ. ἔυοσμος of Hippocrates (De Mulieb.
i, 111), who recommends it along with other aromatics in diseases of
the uterus. The Arabians display an intimate acquaintance with the
schœnanths. See Avicenna (ii, 2); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 681); Serapion
(De Simpl. 103); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar (i, 19.) The
last of these gives a particularly full account of it, mostly from
Arabian authorities. They all agree in representing it as being diuretic,
emmenagogue, and alexipharmic, and in recommending it particularly in
apostemes of the anus, and in scabies. Its oil, they say, is efficacious
in removing lassitude. The schœnanth held a place in our Dispensatory
as late as the times of Quincy (i, 1, 12) and Lewis (ii, 20.) Upon
consulting the modern authors quoted above, it will be seen that it is
still well known in the East.


Σῶρι,

Sori, resembles misy in its powers, consisting of much grosser particles.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We feel that we must still add something to what we have said
of this substance under the head of _Misy_. The following description of
it, by a great modern authority, who appears to have been well acquainted
with it, deserves not to be overlooked: “Rusma _or_ Sory. A mixt mineral,
blackish, hard, heavy, and of a cavernous or spongy structure, of a
disagreeable smell, and nauseous, vitriolic taste; and often covered with
dusty efflorescences on the surface. It is composed of vitriol, sulphur,
and an earthy matter. The ancients called it _sory_. We have it in our
Derbyshire mines, but it is not regarded. It was used as a depilatory
by the Greeks, and is so by the Turks at this time. Taken inwardly it
vomits instantaneously and very roughly; it contains a cupreous vitriol,
and hence its emetic quality.”—Boerhaave’s Materia Medica, translated
by Goade (227.) See under _Chalcitis_. Dioscorides calls it blackish,
fetid, and nauseating, and possessed of caustic powers: he recommends
it in toothache, as an application to vari, as an injection with wine
in sciatica, &c. (v, 118.) Galen says it is not soluble like misy and
chalcitis, but does not materially differ from them in medicinal powers.
Celsus prescribes it along with opium, pepper, and galbanum as a stuffing
to carious teeth. (vi, 9.) Avicenna, like Galen, says it is insoluble in
water, and, like Dioscorides, he prescribes it in sciatica and diseases
of the teeth. (ii, 2, 47.) We have stated above that Serapion describes
the sory along with the other two under the general head of _vitriolum_,
and the specific name of _Zeg rubeum_; and that he merely translates
Dioscorides and Galen. (c. 386.) Rhases, in like manner, gives from
Dioscorides and Galen a description of misy, sory, and chalcitis under
the general head of _vitriolum_. He calls the sory, vitriolum ruffum,
and, like Dioscorides, recommends it in carious teeth and in sciatica.
His only Arabian authority, Bimasui, says of the vitriolum that it dries
the lungs strongly, and in this way may prove fatal. (Cont l. ult. i,
747.) It is the vitriolum rubeum of Averrhoes. (Collig. v, 43.) In the
most barbarous translation of Haly Abbas it is scarcely possible to
extract any proper meaning from his description of the three vitriols.
(Pract. ii, 48.) The lengthy account which Ebn Baithar gives of them
is mostly made up of extracts from Dioscorides, Galen, and Avicenna.
(ii, 510.) Some have thought the sory of Pliny different from that of
the others, but, as far as we can see, without any good reason. Like
Dioscorides, he recommends it in diseases of the teeth and spreading
ulcers of the mouth. He says it is a thing so offensive to the stomach,
that the very smell of it will sometimes excite vomiting. (H. N. xxxiv,
30.)


Τάριχοι,

Salsamenta, _Pickles_; their flesh is possessed of acrid and desiccative
powers. They are given, therefore, to persons bitten by the viper
prester, that they may eat as much as possible, and drink of wine freely,
and vomit. They also are suitable to the regimen of acrid food; and are
applied with advantage to persons bitten by dogs and other reptiles.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. _Pickled Fish._ It appears from Dioscorides and Xenocrates
that the tunny (_Scomber Thynnus_) was accounted the best pickle, and it
was accordingly most used in medical practice. Galen recommends the brine
of pickled fish as an injection in dysentery, and a stimulant lotion to
sores on all parts of the body. Serapion gives the same account of it
as Dioscorides and Galen. Symeon Seth forbids us to eat pickles after
venesection, as they are apt to occasion alphos and scabies. It seems
highly probable that indigestible substances, if taken into the stomach
when the veins are empty, may be rapidly absorbed, and give rise to the
formation of humours, of which nature may endeavour to free the system by
casting them forth by the skin.


Ταυροκόλλα,

Taurocolla (called by some Xylocolla), is a glutinous substance made from
the hides of oxen, and is of considerably detergent powers. Hence, when
dissolved in vinegar, it removes lichen and superficial leprosies; and it
prevents burns from getting inflamed when dissolved in hot water. It is
also a suitable application for wounds when triturated with oxymel.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Pliny says of it, “Glutinum præstantissimum fit ex auribus
taurorum et genitalibus. Nec quidquam efficacius prodest ambustis.”
(H. N. xxviii, 72.) Dioscorides and Avicenna recommend it in the cases
mentioned by our author. It will readily be perceived that it was a
species of gelatin. See Κόλλα.


Τελλῖναι,

Tellinæ, _Limpets_; when pickled and burnt, their ashes are caustic; when
mixed with cedar rosin and applied to the parts from which the hairs
of the eyebrows have been torn out by the roots, it prevents them from
growing again.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. According to Matthiolus, they are a species of mussels. They
are different, however, from the _Mytili edules_, L. Our author’s account
of them is taken from Dioscorides, and is repeated by Avicenna.


Τέρμινθος,

Terebinthus, _Turpentine_, is heating in the second degree, and
desiccative, when green, in the first, but when dried, in the second.
The fruit, when dried, belongs to the third order of desiccants. It is,
therefore, diuretic and useful for the spleen.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Pistacia Terebinthus_ L. Dioscorides states
that its fruit is hot, diuretic, and aphrodisiacal. He recommends it
internally for the bites of the phalangia. Of the turpentine resin we
have treated under the head of the Resinæ. The ancients, as we have
stated, were very familiar with the _brown_ or _black_ rosin, called
_colophony_. (i, 91.) According to Dr. Hill, the Chian turpentine rosin
was the turpentine of the ancients. Pliny likewise recommends it in
retention of urine, and as a gentle laxative. He adds, “venerem excitat.”
(H. N. xxiv, 18.) Our author’s account of it is condensed from Galen. The
turpentines, and more especially the resin, are frequently prescribed
by Celsus. They occur also in the Hippocratic treatises. Turpentine
was much used in applications to cutaneous diseases and ulcers. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 303) and Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 342.) Serapion treats
of this article under the same head with the lentiscus. He copies from
Dioscorides. (De Simpl. 153.) See Ebn Baithar (ii, 144.)


Τέττιγες,

Cicadæ; some, having dried them raw, give them to drink in colic
affections to the number of three, five, or seven, with an equal number
of grains of pepper. Others roast them and give them to drink to those
who have affections of the bladder.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The τέττιξ of the Greeks and the cicada of the Romans was
not the grasshopper, as has been often represented, but the insect which
has been more properly called the tree-hopper in English, namely the
_cicale_ of the Italians. The species here noticed was most probably the
_Cicada orni_. Dioscorides merely recommends them in diseases of the
bladder. (ii, 56.) Pliny gives a very interesting description of them,
but it contains nothing which, in a medical point of view, would suit our
present purpose. (H. N. xi, 32.) Our author follows Galen. (De Simpl.
xi.) They do not occur in the works of Celsus, nor have we been able
to discover traces of them in any of the Arabians, with the exception
of Ebn Baithar, who, in treating of them, merely gives extracts from
Dioscorides and Galen. (i, 555.)


Τεῦτλον,

Beta, _Beet_, is of a nitrous nature. Hence it is detergent and
discutient, and purges by the nose; but especially the white species.
When boiled it becomes anti-inflammatory and slightly discutient.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It evidently is the _Beta vulgaris_ L. The white and black
kinds were, we presume, merely varieties; but this does not seem
sufficiently clear. See Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 752) and Lewis
(Mat. Med.) Dioscorides recommends the beet for various medicinal
purposes, for clearing the head by occasioning a discharge from the nose,
as a remedy for earache; a decoction of its leaves for eruptive diseases
and chilblains; and also as an application to exanthemata, burns, and
erysipelas. (ii, 49.) Galen gives the same account of it as our author.
Aëtius is fuller; he further recommends it particularly as a deobstruent
in diseases of the liver and spleen. The beet is mentioned as an edible
plant by Hippocrates. (De Vict. Acut.) See also Celsus (ii, 18.) Serapion
(c. 148) and Avicenna recommend the leaves of beet as an application to
burns and impetigo, (ii, 2, 636.) See also Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 127.)
All the authorities say that the beet is possessed of nitrous properties,
by which they probably mean saline, the ancient _nitrum_ being a species
of native soda, resembling salt. It is now well known that beetroot by
boiling yields a saccharine salt in considerable abundance. The beet held
a place in our Dispensatory as late as the time of Lewis. We have treated
of it as an article of food in Book I.


Τεύκριος,

Teucrium, _Tree Germander_, is a calefacient of the second order, and a
desiccant of the third. Its powers are also incisive and subtile, and
hence it cures the spleen.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is not well decided whether it be the _Teucrium Marum_
or the _Teucrium flavum_. Pliny’s account of it is very confused, and
Harduin thinks that his T. is the hemionitis of Dioscorides. (Ad H. N.
xxv, 20.) Apuleius, in like manner, identifies the hemionon and the
teucrium. (De Herbis, 56.) Dioscorides, like our author, recommends it
for reducing the spleen, both when given internally and when applied
externally in a cataplasm, and also as an application to the bites of
venomous animals. (iii, 110.) Our author borrows from Galen. We have not
been able to discover it in the works either of Hippocrates or of Celsus.
Neither have we found it in the works of the Arabians. Dr. Sontheimer,
the German translator of Ebn Baithar, identifies the _Teucrium Marum_
with the _Chamædrys_ of Dioscorides, and the _T. flavum_ with his
_Teucrium_. (ii, 466.) It is long since the _Teucrium Marum_ disappeared
from our Dispensatory, but it is still not wholly unknown in the shops
of the apothecaries, where it is reputed to be emmenagogue. The _T.
flavum_ is also to be found in the shops, and has still the reputation
of being useful in diseases of the liver and spleen. See Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 49.)


Τέφρα,

Cinis, _Ashes_; all kinds have not exactly the same temperament, but they
vary according to the difference of the wood that has been burnt. The
ashes, then, of sour things, such as the oak and the ilex, have no small
degree of astringency, so that they will restrain hemorrhage when no
other remedy is at hand. That from acrid substances, such as the ashes of
the fig and the spurge, become more acrid and detergent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. These _Cineres_ were pearlashes, consisting of the carbonate
of potass mixed with various impurities. Galen remarks, that they are the
residue of vegetable substances which have been burnt, being composed
of contrary qualities, for that they have something terrene in them,
and also something of a fuliginous nature. When, then, they have been
dissolved in water and strained, what remains is terrene and devoid of
pungency. Our author borrows from him his particular characters of the
different cineres. They were much used by the ancient physicians as
caustic and stimulant applications. Rhases says that they possess an
igneous nature, and are useful in dissolving soft tumours. (Ad Mansor.
iii, 47.) See also (Cont. l. ult. i, 214.) In the latter work he borrows
principally from Galen and our author. Avicenna recommends the ashes of
mezereon in quinsy, and as a stimulant to the sight. The aqua cineris,
he says, is one of the septic medicines. (ii, 2, 188.) The burnt lees of
wine belong to this class. See Κονία and Τρῦξ ὄινου.


Τηλέφιον,

Telephium, _Orpine_, is a calefacient of the first order, but a desiccant
of the second. It is also detergent; and hence it is a suitable
application to putrid ulcers, and cures leuce and alphos with vinegar.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We think with Sibthorp and Sprengel, that it is _not_ the
_Sedum Telephium_, but the _Cerinthe minor_. See also Parkinson (520.)
Dioscorides recommends it principally in the forms of leprosy. (ii, 217.)
Galen’s characters of it agree with those of our author. It does not
occur in the works either of Hippocrates or of Celsus, neither have we
been able to observe any distinct traces of it in those of the Arabians,
unless, which seems highly probable, it be the _thelopium_ of Ebn
Baithar, as his German translator conjectures. (ii. 164.)


Τῆλις,

Fœnum Græcum, _Fenugreek_, is heating in the second order, but
desiccative in the first; hence it expedites the progress of all hot
phlegmons; and those which are less hot, and such as are scirrhous, it
cures by discussing them.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Trigonella Fœnum Græcum_. It occurs
in the works of Hippocrates. (De Mulieb. i, 617.) It is, unquestionably,
the “Fœnum Græcum” of Celsus, who enumerates it as an ingredient in an
emollient pessary (v, 21), and in a soothing cataplasm. (ii, 33.) It
is prescribed repeatedly by Aretæus, both internally and externally.
Dioscorides recommends the powder of it in the form of a cataplasm to
various inflammations, both internal and external; as an ingredient in
a medicated bath for diseases of the female organs, and as a pessary in
the same, an injection of its decoction for tenesmus and fetid discharges
from the bowels, and for other purposes. (ii, 125.) Pliny gives a full
account of its medicinal virtues, in which a considerable portion but
not the whole is derived from Dioscorides. He says that Damon gave its
seeds in a draught to promote menstruation. He also mentions its being
taken in ulceration of the chest and chronic coughs. (xxiv, 120.) Galen,
Aëtius, and Oribasius give its characters in nearly the same terms as
our author. For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 246); Serapion (De
Simpl.); Rhases (Cont l. ult. i, 294); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn
Baithar (i, 333.) Though these authors, and especially Avicenna, treat
at great length of this article, it does not appear that they applied
it in many more cases than as they had been taught by the Greeks. They
recommend it, however, with oil of roses, as an application to burns,
and as an ingredient in collyria. They say the oil of it cures fetor of
the breath and the perspiration, and of the alvine discharges. They all
commend it as being diuretic, emmenagogue, and promoting impregnation.
They further represent it as being an excellent expectorant in diseases
of the chest. Upon reference to Quincy (i, 4, 219), it will be seen that
in his time the fenugreek still maintained the characters assigned to it
by the ancient authorities. It has now disappeared from our Dispensatory,
but is still retained in the Greek Pharmacopœia. (Athens, 1837.)


Τιθύμαλλοι,

Tithymalli, _Spurges_; all the species of it are of the fourth order of
calefacients, with acrimony and strong bitterness; but the root being
weaker, when boiled with vinegar, allays the pains of carious teeth.
The juices being stronger are applied to the hollow of teeth; but if
they touch the rest of the body they burn it; and therefore they remove
the hairs if rubbed in for a short time. They also remove myrmecia,
acrochordones, and the like, and clear away affections of the skin, and
cure ill-conditioned and phagedænic ulcers. There being seven species
of this plant, the strongest are the Characias (_Wood Spurge_), and
the Myrsinitis (_Myrtle-leaved Spurge_), and that growing upon rocks,
Arboreus (_Tree Spurge_); but next in order are, that species which
resembles Pettymullein (_Broad-leaved Spurge_), and the Cyparissias
(_Cypress Spurge_), and then the Maritimus (_Sea Spurge_), and the
Helioscopius (_Sun Spurge_ or _Wartwort_.)

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That the Tithymalli of the ancients are all referable to the
genus _Euphorbia_ or _Spurge_, cannot admit of any doubt. Dioscorides,
Pliny, Apuleius, and, in a word, most of the ancient authorities, like
our Paulus, describe seven medicinal species, to which we may venture to
give the following names in the botanical nomenclature of the present
time. 1. _Euphorbia characias._ 2. _E. myrsinites._ 3. _E. paralias._
4. _E. helioscopia._ 5. _E. cyparissias._ 6. _E. dendroides._ 7. _E.
platyphyllos._ See Sprengel (Ad Dioscor.); Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 277);
German Translation of Ebn Baithar (ii, 525); Miller (Gard. Dict.) Besides
these, the medical authors treat of several other species of spurge by
particular names, as lathyris, peplis, thymelæa, &c. The tithymallus was
called “lactuca marina” by the Romans (Celsus v, 7), and also “lactaria”
and “lactuca caprina.” See Pliny, who gives a full account of the
spurges. (H. N. xxvi, 39, 46.) These plants are treated of at so great a
length by Dioscorides and the other authorities, that we cannot possibly
find space for an exposition of their particular views. All, however,
agree in giving them nearly the same characters as our author, who, in
the present instance, is indebted in part to Dioscorides, and in part to
Galen. Several of them are noticed by Hippocrates. For the Arabians, see
Serapion (De Simpl. 360); Avicenna (ii, 2, 421); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
718); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar (l. c.) They recommend them
in the same cases as the Greeks, without supplying any new views of much
importance. They prescribe a few drops of the juice of spurge poured upon
a fig as a phlegmagogue. They further recommend them in malignant ulcers
and those attended with caries of the bones. And here, by the way, we may
be allowed to mention that a modern authority confirms what the ancients
say of the efficacy of the spurges in this case. Sec Hildanus (x, c. ii,
2.) In the present age, we have discarded such purgatives as the spurges,
whether wisely or not we will not take upon ourselves to say.


Τίτανος,

Calx, Lime; the Calx viva (_Quicklime_) burns strongly so as to form
eschars; when slacked, it forms eschars at first, but not so after some
days. It contracts, however, and wastes the flesh. When washed it loses
it pungency, if this is often done with water; but if in sea-water, it
becomes decidedly detergent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears from Dioscorides that the _Lime_ used by the
ancient physicians, was prepared by calcination from shells, pebbles, or
marble, which last is the best of all. Pliny, Vitruvius, and Palladius
say, that the best lime is got from hard, white stone. Lime was much used
as a caustic and stimulant application. The Ἄσβεστος of the Greek Mat.
Med. invariably, we believe, signifies quicklime, and is never applied
to the mineral which now bears that name. Dioscorides says, all kinds
of quicklime have a fiery, biting, caustic, and escharotic power; when
mixed with other things as suet or oil, it becomes digestive, emollient,
depilatory, and epulotic; and that which is recent and free from water
is more efficacious. (v, 132.) Pliny recommends it in the same cases,
and also as an application to luxations and strumæ. (H. N. xxxvi, 57.)
See also Plinius Valerianus (iii, 20.) Celsus places it in his list of
corrosive and caustic substances. (v, 6, 8.) Our author’s account of
this article is condensed from Galen. Aëtius and Oribasius give nearly
the same account of it as Dioscorides and Galen. Quicklime was used as
a medicine in the Hippocratic age. (See Erotianus.) For the Arabians,
consult Avicenna (ii, 2, 144); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. iii, 20, i, 445);
Serapion (De Simpl. 412); Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 44); Averrhoes (Collig.
v, 43); Ebn Baithar (ii, 387.) All these authorities, including even the
last, who is by far the most original of their writers on the Mat. Med.,
borrow under this head almost all their information from Dioscorides and
Galen. Avicenna praises it as an application to burns.


Τραγακάνθα,

Tragacantha, _Tragacanth_, has similar powers to gum.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The ancient Tragacanth was identical with the modern, which
is yielded by _Astragalus verus_, and similar spiny species. See Lindley
(Veg. King. 548.) According to Sibthorp, the _Astragalus aristatus_ is
the one which most commonly grows in the Peleponnesus, and he holds that
it produces the T. of Dioscorides. (Prod. Fl. Græc. ii, 90.) Dioscorides,
like our author, states, that in virtue it resembles gum, and recommends
it in ophthalmic remedies, for roughness of the windpipe, loss of speech,
and epistaxis, in a linctus with honey. He also recommends it when
allowed to melt below the tongue, for pain of the kidneys and bladder,
when mixed with hartshorn burnt and washed, and a little fissile alum.
(iii, 20.) Galen and the other Greek authorities state its virtues in
very general terms. It is an ingredient in more than one of the collyria
of Celsus (vi, 6), and is prescribed by him for various other purposes.
Of the Arabians, Ebn Baithar is the one who gives the fullest account
of it. (ii, 350.) See also Avicenna (ii, 2, 220.) In the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia the _Astragalus aristatus_ is described as producing the
tragacanth. It is there said to be common in the Peleponnesus.


Τράγιον,

Tragium, _Stinking St. John’s Wort_, is a plant in Crete resembling the
lentisk, being hot in the third degree, and possessed of attractive,
discutient, and attenuant powers. It extracts sharp-pointed weapons of
wood, and proves lithontriptic and emmenagogue when drunk to the amount
of a drachm. Another species, which is bitterer than this, resembling the
ceterach, grows everywhere. It is sufficiently astringent so as to agree
with fluxes.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. From the description which Dioscorides gives of the former
species, we need have little hesitation in setting it down for the
_Hypericum hircinum_. In the other, the name _Tragium Columnæ_ has been
assigned from the name of a celebrated botanist. Dioscorides and Galen
ascribe to it very nearly the same virtues as our author. Neither of
these plants occurs in the works of Hippocrates or Celsus. Neither have
we been successful in searching for it in the works of the Arabians, with
the exception of those of Ebn Baithar, who merely gives extracts from
Dioscorides and Galen under this head. (ii, 155.)


Τραγορίγανος,

Tragoriganon, has powers resembling marjoram, with the addition of some
astringency.

COMMENTARY. The two species described by Dioscorides probably are the
_Thymus Tragoriganum_ L., and the _Stachys glutinosa_. According to him,
they are heating, diuretic, and wholesome when the decoction is drunk;
they occasion bilious dejections; are useful in diseases of the spleen
when taken with vinegar, and also to persons who have swallowed ixia.
They are emmenagogue, and are given in coughs and pneumonia in a linctus
with honey. It makes an agreeable potion, and hence is given to persons
affected with nausea, indigestion, and acid eructations, and who are
subject to anxiety, nausea, and heat of the hypochondria. In a cataplasm
with polenta they also discuss tumours. (iii, 32.) Galen and the other
Greek authorities treat of it very briefly. Celsus calls it diuretic and
discutient. (iii, 21, &c.) We have not been able to find these plants in
the works of the Arabians.


Τρίβολος,

Tribolus, _the Caltrop_, is moderately refrigerant; the land species is
strongly desiccative, but the water slightly so, and it is moistening.
Both are befitting remedies in incipient inflammations and other
influxes. The fruit of the land caltrop, consisting of subtile parts,
breaks renal calculi.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It seems to be clearly made out that the one is the _Tribulus
terrestris_, and the other the _Trapa natans_. According to Pliny,
their juices are anti-inflammatory, and form a proper application to
phlegmons and ulcers; an ingredient in collyria; discuss strumæ, and
prove lithontriptic. (H. N. xxii, 12.) He borrows this account of them,
however, mostly from Dioscorides. (iv, 15.) Our author manifestly copies
from Galen, and both Aëtius and Oribasius do the same. We have not found
them in the works of Hippocrates and Celsus. The Arabians treat of
them at more length than the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 382); Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. i, 721); Serapion (c. 112); Ebn Baithar (i, 307.) They
recommend both species as being aphrodisiac, lithontriptic, and diuretic.
Both the species here described, that is to say, the _Trapa natans_ and
_Tribulus terrestris_, although they have been long excluded from our
Dispensatories, are still not wholly unknown in the shops. See Gray
(Suppl. to Pharm. 81, 117.)


Τράγος,

Tragus, a species of Frumentacea, is like far (spelt), but more
indigestible and laxative.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The method of preparing it is thus described in the
Geoponica. Spelt is to be steeped and stripped of its hull, and dried
in the warm sun; then the same thing is to be done until the skin and
fibrous part of the grain drop off. (Geop. iii, 8.) Pliny, however,
seems to make it a peculiar species of grain. “Far sine arista est:
item siligo. Adjiciuntur his genera, bromos, siligo excepta, et tragos,
externa omnia ab Oriente invecta, oryzæ similia.” (H. N. xviii, 20.)
Galen and Oribasius call it spelt deprived of the hull. Dioscorides
also describes a shrub of this name, which there can be no doubt is the
_Ephedra distachya_. He describes it as being very styptic to the taste,
and recommends it in cæliac affections and in fluor albus. (iv, 51.) It
appears singular that none of the other authorities, as far as we can
discover, has noticed it, with the exception of Ebn Baithar, who merely
gives a translation of the chapter of Dioscorides on it. (ii, 156.) The
Asiatic _Ephedras_ were formerly kept in the shops as styptics. See
Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 234.)


Τρίγλα,

Trigla, the fish _Surmullet_, when frequently eaten, occasions dimness
of vision. When cut in pieces and applied raw, it cures the bite of the
sea-dragon, of the scorpion, and of the spider.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Mullus barbatus_ L. According to Coray (Ad
Xenocrat.), it is the _Surmullet_. R. Stephens likewise calls it by
this name. It is the “Barbatulus mullus” of Cicero. (Paradox, v,
2.) We have treated of it as an article of food in the First Book.
Dioscorides, Galen, and all the authorities that notice it, give it the
same characters in a medicine as our author. It does not appear that the
Arabians describe it.


Τριπόλιον,

Tripolium; the root is hot in the third degree and acrid.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We shall have an opportunity in our Appendix to discuss the
question, whether or not this be the Turpeth of the Arabians, as has
been often stated. We may just mention in this place, that Sprengel is
inclined to refer it to the _Plumbago Europæa_, a plant which seems to
agree very well with the characters of the present article, inasmuch as
its root is peculiarly acrid. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 641.) Dioscorides
says of it, that its root is hot to the taste, and that when drunk with
wine it discharges water and urine from the belly, and that it is used
as an alexipharmic. (iv, 133.) Galen and the other Greek authorities call
it acrid to the taste and hot in the third degree. For the reason already
stated we shall not enter upon an exposition of the views of the Arabians
in this place.


Τρίχες,

Pili, _Hairs_, when burnt have similar powers to burnt wool.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author follows Galen. The Arabians recommend burnt hairs
as an application to foul ulcers, and the bite of a mad dog. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 191), and Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 52, 552.)


Τρυγων θαλασσίη,

Pastinaca marina; its sting when pressed upon a weak tooth breaks it, and
makes it fall out.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of the _Pastinaca marina_ in Book V.
Scarifications of the gums with the sting of this fish in cases of
difficult dentition are recommended by Marcellus Sideta and Pliny (H. N.
xxxii, 26.)


Τρὺχ ὄινου,

Fæx Vini, _the Lees of Wine_, when unburnt is compounded, being decidedly
desiccative and discutient. But astringency is superadded according to
the species of wine from which it is formed. It is, therefore, to be
used in complaints of a humid nature and fluxes. It discusses phygethla,
and extinguishes the milk in over-distended breasts. The burnt lees
become caustic, so as often to be mixed with caustic applications. It,
therefore, removes leprous nails with rosin, and dyes the hair yellow,
when rubbed for a whole night with oil of lentisk. When washed it is used
as an ingredient in the detergent remedies of the eyes; that of vinegar
is stronger in every respect than the lees of wine, and more astringent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The lees of wine and of vinegar are strong preparations of
potass, and were among the most powerful caustics with which the ancients
were acquainted. Hence Celsus ranks “fæx combusta” among the “adurentia.”
(v, 8.) Dioscorides is the ancient author who gives the fullest
description of this article. He says the best is that procured from old
Italian wine, or, failing it, from any similar wine; and that the fæx
aceti is possessed of intense powers. Some, he says, burn it upon fresh
shells, and some upon heated coals. He says it is possessed of strongly
caustic, detergent, escharotic, styptic, very septic and desiccative
powers. The fæx, must be used when recent, for it soon evaporates, and
hence it must not be left uncovered, nor without its vessel. It is washed
like pompholyx. The unburnt, he adds, discusses tumours by itself, and
with myrtle; when applied as a cataplasm it represses defluxions of the
belly and stomach; and when applied in like manner to the lower part of
the abdomen and genitals, it mitigates the female fluor; it dissipates
hard tumours which are not ulcerated; when rubbed in with vinegar, it
represses swelled breasts; the burnt with rosin, removes leprous nails;
rubbed in with oil of privet for a whole night, it makes the hairs
yellow; when washed, it is applicable in diseases of the eyes, like
spodos, and thus clears away cicatrices and clouds on the eye. (v, 131.)
Pliny recommends it likewise as an application to various cutaneous
diseases, and complaints of the eyes. He commends it as an antidote
to mushrooms. The lees of vinegar, he says, are more escharotic. Its
strength, he says, is increased by being burnt. When applied on a tent
it cleans the genital organ of females. (H. N. xxiii, 32.) See in like
manner Plinius Valer. (iii, 51.) Avicenna directs us to keep the lees
in a close vessel, and not expose them to the air. He says that the fæx
aceti is a medicine of great powers, and stronger than any of the others.
In short, his account of the lees of wine and vinegar is almost entirely
borrowed from Dioscorides (ii, 2, 241.) Rhases, in like manner, copies
from Dioscorides and our author. (Cont. l. ult. i, 296.) See Serapion (De
Simpl. 36); Ebn Baithar (i, 419.)


Τρωγλοδυτης,

Troglodyta, is _a Sparrow_, the smallest of all birds, with the exception
of the one called regulus; and living principally in hedges. This animal
when pickled, and eaten either roasted or raw, breaks down stones in the
kidneys; and its ashes when burnt, if taken in a draught, do the same
thing.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have mentioned in Book III, that this small species
of sparrow was supposed to possess great powers as a lithontriptic.
Drelincurtius calls it the wren. (Mangeti Bibl. Chirurg. i, 254.) We,
however, are inclined to think that it was the _Accentor modularis_ or
hedge-sparrow. Our author, as far as we have been able to discover, is
the only one of the authorities who has included this animal in the
Materia Medica; but he borrows his description of it from Aëtius, (iii,
3, 11.)


Τυρος,

Caseus, _Cheese_; that which is new made, and soft, has repellent powers,
cooling gently, so as when applied to agglutinate wounds. That called
oxygalactinus acquires slightly discutient powers in addition, and is
more agglutinative of wounds. Old cheese, especially such as is fatty,
becomes discutient, so as to be a fit application to tophi in arthritic
complaints, particularly along with the decoction of swines’ flesh
pickled and fat.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of the medicinal properties of _Cheese_
is mostly abridged from Galen. The kind called oxygalactinus is the same,
we suppose, as the “Caseus acidus cum oxymelite” of Pliny. (H. N. xxviii,
34.) Galen says that it was used about Pergamus; see also Dioscorides
(ii, 79.) According to Avicenna, fresh cheese is a good application to
recent ulcers, and old cheese to ill-conditioned ulcers. He recommends
cheese with the brine of bacon as a discutient application to arthritic
chalk-stones. He speaks favorably of fresh cheese as an application in
ophthalmia. (ii, 2, 123.) He treats more fully of this article than any
other writer on the Mat. Med., with the exception of Ebn Baithar, who
gives a long dissertation on the properties of cheese, both as an article
of food and as a medicine. (i, 239.) Serapion merely gives extracts from
Dioscorides and Galen. (De Simpl. 157.)


Ὑάκινθος,

Hyacinthus, _Hyacinth_; its root being bulbous-shaped belongs to the
first order of desiccants and the second of refrigerants. If applied in a
cataplasm with wine, it is believed to keep children long from coming to
puberty. The fruit is gently detergent and astringent. It is, therefore,
given in cases of jaundice with wine, being more desiccative but less
refrigerant.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt, as Sprengel and Matthiolus state, it is the
_Hyacinthus orientalis_ L. Pliny, Dioscorides, and Avicenna enumerate its
medicinal properties nearly in the same terms as our author. They further
recommend it as a theriac and alexipharmic. It has long been unknown to
British Pharmacy.


Ὕαλος,

Vitrum, _Glass_, when pounded and drunk with a thin white wine is said to
break down stones in the bladder.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Aristophanes, we believe, is the first writer who makes
mention of glass, since the Orphic remains, in which it is noticed, are
now generally supposed of a later date. In his comedy of “Acharnenses,”
an ambassador from the court of Persia is made to say that he had drunk
undiluted wine out of vessels of glass and gold. (Acharn. l. 74.) In his
“Nubes” he mentions burning mirrors of glass. It is also mentioned in
the Timæus of Plato. Pliny gives an interesting account of the invention
of glass. (H. N. xxxvi, 65.) Glass appears to have been in common use
about his time and afterwards, for we find Dioscorides directing to keep
certain medicines in vessels of glass; and Actuarius recommends to have
_pots-de-chambre_ made of glass in order to facilitate the observations
upon the urine. From a passage in Pliny it would appear that imitations
of the precious stones were commonly made in glass in his time with foil
or the like placed under it. (H. N. xxvii.) On the glass cups of the
ancients, see Strabo (xvi); Athen. (xviii, 28, ed. Schw.); and Salmasius.
(Ad Solin. 769.) From the following passage in the works of Lactantius it
appears that glass was used by the ancients in windows: “Manifestius est,
mentem esse, quæ per oculos ea quæ sunt opposita transpiciat quasi per
fenestras perlucente vitro aut speculari lapide obductas.” (De Opificio
Dei, 8.) We need scarcely say that glass has been found in the ruins of
Pompeii of late much more plenteous than was expected from the ideas
which were formerly entertained of its scarcity in ancient times. The
hyalus _or_ vitrum, however, was a term applied to crystal as well as to
glass. By the medical authors, we suppose, it is generally applied to the
former; for Avicenna says quaintly of vitrum, that it is _among stones_
what a fool is among men, that is to say, it is easily made to assume any
colour, and is easily broken into pieces. This article does not occur in
the Mat. Med. of Dioscorides. Galen prescribes it medicinally on various
occasions: thus like our author, he says of burnt crystal or glass, that
it is lithontriptic (De Renum Affect.), and recommends the same for
drying ulcers (De Comp. Med. sec. gen. iv), and also calls it a good
diuretic (De Simpl. v.) Our author borrows his paragraph on this subject
from Aëtius. (ii, 31.) It is never prescribed medicinally by any more of
the Greek or Roman authorities. It is regularly treated of, however, by
the Arabians in their systems of the Mat. Med. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 720);
Serapion (De Simpl. 382); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 748); Ebn Baithar (i,
723); Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 47.) (?) Of these Serapion is the authority
that treats most fully of this article. He quotes Galen as saying of
it, that it is hot in the fourth degree. He says there are two kinds,
the sandy and the stony; that when vitrum is set fire to, and a magnet
is mixed up with it, it becomes coagulated owing to its ductility. He
says of it that it has various colours, as white, like crystal, which
is the colour of the best kind, red, yellow, green, and azure. He then
says, like Avicenna, that glass is among stones what a fool is among
men, and so forth. He adds that crystal is a species of glass (vitrum)
which is found in a mineral state. As to its medicinal properties, he
says it is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second; that it
removes furfures of the head, and is applied to the head and beard as a
depilatory. When pounded and drunk with wine, it is lithontriptic. One of
his Arabian authorities, Aben Mesuai, says glass is good for the lungs
and for baldness. Avicenna further recommends it as a dentifrice, and as
an application to remove albugo of the eye, in which case, he adds, the
burnt is most efficacious. There is nothing of any interest further on
what is written of it by Rhases, Haly Abbas, and Ebn Baithar (l. c.) We
may mention in conclusion that although glass has long been excluded from
the practice of the regular physician, we have often heard of powdered
glass having been used by empirics, and certainly in some cases with
good effect, to remove opacities of the cornea. See also Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 260.)


Ὕδνα,

Tuber Terræ, _Truffle_, is composed of a very terrene substance, with a
slight degree of attenuating power.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of _Truffles_ in the 77th section of Book I.
It is the _Tuber Cibarium_ L.


Ὑδράργυρος,

Hydrargyrum, _Mercury_, is scarcely used for medical purposes, being
deleterious. But some having burnt it, so as to reduce it to ashes, and
mixed it with other articles, have given it to drink in cases of colic
and ileus.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have given some account of the ancient opinions on this
subject in Book V. From the statement of our author it will be perceived
that the Greek physicians made little use of this important article in
the practice of medicine. Rhases, Avicenna, Haly Abbas, and Serapion
recommend it as an application for scabies, lice, and malignant ulcers.
Avicenna says the vapour of it induces paralysis, tremblings, spasms, and
contractions of the limbs. He adds that the vapour of it is destructive
of sight, and brings on fetor of the breath (ii, 2, 46.) Serapion gives
exactly the same account of it. (De Simpl. 385.) See also Rhases (Cont.
l. ult. i, 75); Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 48, 501); Ebn Baithar (i, 553.)
Galen admits that he had no experience of it as proving destructive,
either internally or externally. (De Simpl. ix.) It is remarked by Dutens
that Dioscorides’s description of the method of preparing mercury from
cinnabar is the first account of the process of _distillation_ which we
possess. (v, 70.) Pliny copies the same. (H. N. xxxiii, 8.)


Ὑδροπέπερι,

Hydropiper, _Water-pepper_, is a hot herb, but not so much so as pepper.
When applied green along with its fruit it discusses hypopia and
scirrhous tumours.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Polygonum Hydropiper_, known by the vulgar name
of _Arse-smart_. The other authorities recommend it as a stimulant
application to discuss tumours and suggillations. See in particular
Dioscorides (ii, 190), and Galen (De Simpl. viii.) The Arabians treat of
it succinctly in much the same terms. See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 551);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 551.)


Ὕδωρ,

Aqua, _Water_; the best, and that which is unmixed with other matters,
is cooling and diluent by its own proper substance. Having got acquired
heat, as long as it preserves this it heats, but when it becomes cold, it
cools. That which has a certain admixture, such as of natron or bitumen,
acquires the property of the substance which is mixed with it. Rain water
has some astringency, for which it is mixed with ophthalmic remedies. The
qualities of the best water have been enumerated in Book I.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is fully treated of by us in Book I. See in particular
Pliny (H. N. xxxi, 21); Avicenna (ii, 2, 58); and Rhases (Contin. l. ult.
i, 706.)


Ὑοσκύαμος,

Hyoscyamus, _Henbane_; that species which has black seed, and that which
has yellow, are deleterious. The fittest for medicine is that species,
the seed and flower of which are white, being of the third order of
refrigerants.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides describes with considerable precision three
species of hyoscyamus, deriving their specific differences from the
colour of the seed, the first being black, the second yellow, and
the third white. The first two he rejects as being highly dangerous,
by inducing delirium and sleep. The first of these we are inclined
to think must be _Hyoscyamus niger_, a well-known plant, which was
most probably naturalized in this country by the Romans for medicinal
purposes. The second was probably a variety of it, or _H. aureus_; and
the third the _H. albus_. He gives minute directions for preparing the
juice of it, which he recommends as an ingredient in anodyne collyria,
for hot and acrid rheums, earache, and complaints about the uterus;
and with flour for inflammations of the eyes, feet, &c. Its seed, he
says, is applicable for coughs, catarrhs, defluxions, and pains of the
eyes; for menorrhagia, and other hemorrhages, when taken in a draught
with poppy-seed and hydromel. He recommends it as forming an anodyne
cataplasm, for gout, swelling of the testicles, or swelled mammæ after
parturition. He speaks highly of the leaves in all these cases, and for
every kind of pain. Three or four leaves, he says, cure the remittent
fever called hepialus. He states that the leaves, if taken internally,
and as had been said, when applied as a clyster, induce mental
alienation. He concludes with stating that the root with vinegar forms
a gargle in toothache. (iv, 69.) The hyoscyamus of Hippocrates was no
doubt the _albus_. See Sprengel and Dierbach. The leaves, the root, the
seed, and the juice of the henbane are all used by Celsus in the practice
of medicine. He gives a formula for a pill consisting of mandragora,
parsley-seed, and seed of henbane, which he says is soporific (v, 25.)
Pliny describes confusedly four or five species or varieties of henbane.
He says not much in favour of any of them as medicines. (H. N. xxxv,
17.) See also Scribonius Largus (c. 181), and Apuleius (c. 4.) Galen
and Aëtius treat of it in nearly the same terms as our author. For the
Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 348); Serapion (c. 340); Rhases (Cont.
l. ult. i, 377, ii, 380); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Haly Abbas (Pract.
ii.) Of these Avicenna is the fullest on this head, and yet he borrows
almost everything from Dioscorides. Of the three species which they
all describe, he represents the white as being the only one fit to be
used as a medicine. Serapion copies closely from Dioscorides and Galen.
The ancient characters of the several species of henbane are given to
them by Platearius, and by our old herbalists Parkinson and Gerard. It
is singular that the black henbane has supplanted the white, which was
in common use 200 years ago. See Franciscus de le Boe (xx, 34.) It it
also worthy of remark, that about 100 years ago the henbane had wholly
disappeared from the Dispensatory. Thus Quincy does not treat of it at
all, and Lewis represents it as a medicine which had been deservedly
expelled from practice. In Greece at the present day the white species
is much more common than the black. Both have a place in the Greek
Pharmacopœia, published at Athens in 1837 (p. 81.)


Ὑπέρικον,

Hypericum, _St. John’s Wort_, consists of two species, the first of
which, called Androsæmum or Ascyron, has been treated of. The other is
heating and desiccative, consisting of a subtile substance. Hence the
whole fruit of it is diuretic and emmenagogue. When applied green along
with its leaves it cicatrizes wounds. It cures sores when sprinkled dry
upon them. It is also given to drink in ischiatic complaints.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There is some difficulty in determining the species. Sibthorp
decides in favour of the _Hypericum crispum_. The other authorities,
namely, Dioscorides, Galen, and Aëtius, give it the same characters as
our author. Celsus recommends it in calculus. (v, 21.) The Arabians in
like manner commend it as being emmenagogue and diuretic. See Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. i, 371); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Avicenna (ii, 2, 354);
Serapion (c. 267.) Rhases says it is called “herba sancti Joannis,” and
hence the modern term St. John’s wort.


Ὑπήκοον,

Hypecoon, is cooling in the third degree, being nearly like poppy.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The _Hypecoum procumbens_ would seem to answer very well with
the characters of it given by Dioscorides and the other authorities. It
is a genus closely allied to the poppies. The other writers on the Mat.
Med. treat of it in the same brief terms as our author. See Dioscorides
(iv, 68); Ebn Baithar (i, 63.)


Ὑπόγλωσσον,

Hypoglosson, is a shrub; the root and juice of it are possessed of
emollient powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Ruscus Hypoglossum_. It appears to have been
little used. We are not sure that it is mentioned at all by the Arabians,
except Ebn Baithar, who copies literally from Dioscorides and Galen (i,
98); and the Greeks all treat of it briefly like our author. Dioscorides
mentions its being used as an amulet in headache; and that its root and
juice formed ingredients in softening plasters. (iv, 130.) It is not even
yet wholly unknown to the shops. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 24.)


Ὑποκιστὶς,

Hypocistis, is the juice of certain substances like pomegranate-flowers,
growing under the roots of the cistus, otherwise called cistharus, being
an active remedy for all cases of defluxions by drying and strengthening
the parts.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. _The Undergrowth of the Cistus._ The term is applied both to
the parasitic plant, which grows on the roots of the _Cistus Ladanifera_,
and also, as is evident from the words of our author, to the inspissated
juice of the same. The plant is the _Cytinus Hypocistis_. Dioscorides
describes it accurately, and also the process for preparing the juice
of it. He says it is possessed of the same medicinal powers as acacia;
but is still more astringent and desiccant, being efficacious in cæliac
affections, dysenteries, hæmoptysis, and the female flux, both when taken
by the mouth, and in clysters. (i, 127.) Galen Aëtius, and the other
Greek authorities state its properties in general terms, like our author.
It occurs in one of the Hippocratic treatises (De Nat. Mulieb.), and is
set down by Celsus as an ingredient of several of his antidotes, but more
especially of that most famous one ascribed to Mithridates. (v, 23.)
The Arabians assign it exactly the same characters as the Greeks. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 111); Serapion (c. 115); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. ii, 754,
i, 108, ii, 119); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) All concur in giving it the
character of being an astringent and tonic medicine, both internally and
externally. As late as the time of Quincy, the hypocistis continued to
occupy a place in our Dispensatory, and it was retained as an ingredient
in the Theriac of Andromachus _or_ Venice Treacle (as it was latterly
called), as long as that once-celebrated composition held a place in
the Pharmacopœia. See Moses Charras (R. Phar. 114.) It still retains in
the shops the same character for astringency as it received from the
ancients. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 38.)


Ὑπόφαιστον,

Hypophæstum, is a species of thorn used by the fullers, like the
hippophaes. The juice of the head, leaves, and roots of it when dried,
and taken to the extent of three oboli with honeyed water, evacuates
water and phlegm. It agrees principally with orthopnœa, epilepsy, and
affections of the nerves.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the ἱππόφαιστον of Dioscorides and Pliny. They
recommend it in epilepsy. Like the whole tribe of carduinæ it is
difficult to define. Sprengel determines it to be the _Cirsium
stellatum_, Allion. Our author copies its characters from Dioscorides.
(iv, 160.) Few of the other ancient authorities have noticed it and it
has been completely lost sight of in modern pharmacy.


Ὕσσωπον,

Hyssopum, _Hyssop_, is calefacient and desiccative in the third degree.
It also consists of subtile particles.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Into the much controverted question regarding the hyssopus
of the ancients, it is not our present purpose to enter, and we shall
content ourselves in a great measure with giving a brief exposition
of its characters and medicinal virtues as delivered by the Greek,
Roman, and Arabian authorities. It occurs repeatedly in the Hippocratic
treatises, as, for example, at ‘De Diæta’ (ii, 26), where it is said of
it that it is hot and purges pituitous matters. Celsus mentions it in
various passages; thus he calls it bad for the stomach (p. 83), says
it is diuretic (p. 86, 172), rouses the senses (86), is hepatic (86),
and useful in coughs (160, ed. Milligan.) The following is an abstract
of Dioscorides’s important chapter on the Hyssop. It is a well-known
herb, of two kinds, for one is the mountain, and the other the garden;
the best is the Cilician. It has an attenuant and heating power; when
boiled with figs and water and drunk along with honey and rue, it is
useful in pneumonia, asthma, chronic cough, catarrh, and orthopnœa; it is
anthelminthic, in a linctus with honey; its decoction brings off thick
humours from the bowels when drunk with oxymel; it is eaten along with
green figs pounded for moving the bowels; but it purges more strongly
when cress, iris, or hedge-mustard is mixed with it; it improves the
colour of the skin; it is applied as a cataplasm with figs and natron for
affections of the spleen and dropsy, and with wine for inflammations;
it discusses suggillations when applied with boiling water; it is a
most excellent gargle in cases of quinsy with the decoction of figs; it
soothes the pains of toothache when the mouth is rinsed with a decoction
of it, and it dissolves flatus about the ears in the form of steam.
(iii, 27.) Pliny recommends it in angina, asthma, as an application to
sores, and, in a word, he gives it the same characters as Dioscorides
does. (H. N. xxvi, 11, et alibi.) Our author and Aëtius copy word for
word from Galen. Galen, however, in other of his works prescribes it for
various complaints, as a medicine which purges the head and nose (De
Cathars.), is useful in the decline of inflammation of the liver (Meth.
Med. xiii), for discussing tumours (De Arte Cur. ad Glauc. ii), and for
other purposes (Meth. Med. viii.) The Arabians treat of it very fully.
See Serapion (c. 270); Avicenna (ii, 2, 256); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
758); Mesue (De Simpl. 16); Ebn Baithar (i, 545); Averrhoes (Collig. v,
42.) Avicenna evidently derives his characters of it from Dioscorides; he
recommends it as a phlegmagogue, vermifuge, a remedy for asthma, chronic
coughs, &c. One of Serapion’s Arabian authorities, Isaac ebn Amram, calls
it a herb growing in the mountains, having branches in length a cubit
or less, and leaves like marjoram. Another of them recommends it in
hardness and frigidity of the womb, kidneys, bladder, and liver, and as a
purgative which evacuates crude humours. He also copies from Dioscorides
and Galen. Rhases and Ebn Baithar follow nearly or altogether the same
authorities as Serapion. Averrhoes states its characters in general
terms. Mesue, upon the whole, is the most interesting and original of
the Arabian authorities on the hyssop. He says there are two kinds, the
garden and the mountain; that the former rises above the ground about
half a cubit, and that its leaves are larger than those of thyme, and
its flower is purple; the latter has much smaller leaves, and its stem
is not so round. He states its medicinal virtues with much precision,
recommending it as a phlegmagogue, in asthma, and other affections of the
chest, and in nearly all the cases mentioned by Dioscorides; and also, he
adds, from personal experience, in epilepsy. Two questions now come to
be solved: 1st, Is the hyssop of Mesue the same as that of Dioscorides?
We answer this question, with little hesitation, by saying, we think it
is; Mesue merely defines his plant better, but the agreement of these
authors as to its medicinal virtues convinces us that both treated of the
same plant. 2d, Was the hyssop of the ancients, then, the same as our
_Hyssopus officinalis_? With much deference to the many eminent scholars
who deny this, we hesitatingly answer this question in the affirmative,
for the two following reasons: first, the medicinal characters of the
ancient hyssop, as given by Dioscorides, Mesue, and the other Greek and
Arabian authorities, agree with those of the _Hyssopus officinalis_, as
given by modern writers on the Materia Medica. See Platearius (de Simpl.
Med.); Tournefort (Mat. Med. 223); Boerhaave (Mat. Med. 148); Alston
(Mat. Med. ii, 152); Hill (Mat. Med. 364); Culpeper (Compl. Herbal.
95); Ainslie (Mat. Ind. i, 177); Rutty (Mat. Med. 145); Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 47.) But, secondly, it is incumbent upon those who deny the
identity of the ancient and modern hyssop to show when and how the _H.
officinalis_ came to be substituted for a plant, the characters of which
it now bears. But, further, no competent judge, we believe, will dispute
that the hyssop must have been brought to Britain, and naturalized here
by the Romans. Is it likely, then, that they would have brought a plant
not described by their learned men at home, and not the one which had
the character of being possessed of so many virtues? If, as Sprengel and
others have maintained, the _Origanum Ægyptiacum_ be the true hyssopus of
the ancients, why was not _it_ introduced into this country and not the
_Hyssopus officinalis_? Since then the _H. officinalis_ is what our Roman
conquerors brought us for their hyssop, we may be pretty confident that
it truly is the ancient plant, the name of which it bears.


Φακόι,

Lentes, Lentils, (?) are desiccants of the second order, being
intermediate as to cooling and heating qualities. They have also some
astringency. They therefore dry the body and bind the belly; but the
decoction loosens it. The first water, therefore, is thrown away when
it is taken to restrain the bowels. The _Lens palustris_, _Duck-meat_,
moistens and refrigerates in the second order.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See Book I, 79. It is, undoubtedly, the _Cicer Lens_. The
Lens palustris is the _Lemna minor_, Angl. Duck-meat. Our author borrows
from Dioscorides, who treats of the virtues of the lentil more fully than
it would seem to deserve. It is simply a vegetable astringent. (ii, 129.)
The other authorities treat of both in the same terms as our author. See
in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 711); Serapion (c. 9.)


Φαλαρὶς,

Phalaris; the juice, leaves, and seed, when drunk, relieve pains of the
bladder. They are also remarkable for some tenuity of parts, and are of a
heating nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sibthorp refers it to the _Phalaris Canariensis_. Our author
borrows its medicinal character from Dioscorides (iii, 149), and the same
is repeated by Galen and all the authorities who treat of it. None of the
Arabians, as far as we can discover, have noticed it, except Ebn Baithar,
who, in describing it, merely gives extracts from Dioscorides and Galen.
It would appear, that in the shops of the apothecaries, it still is kept,
and is reputed to be useful in pains of the bladder. See Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 18.)


Φαλαγγίτις,

Phalangitis, _Spiderwort_, is so named because it is a remedy for the
bites of the venomous spiders called phalangia. It also consists of
subtile parts, and hence is supposed to prove a remedy in cases of
tormina.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. According to Sibthorp, it is the _Anthericum Græcum_. Our
author, like Galen and the other authorities that treat of it, copies
almost word for word from Dioscorides. (iii, 112.) Ebn Baithar, in
describing it, merely gives extracts from Dioscorides and Galen. It does
not appear to be noticed by the Arabians. It has been scarcely known in
modern practice, and yet the _Anthericum Liliastrum_ is still kept in the
shops and retains the name of spiderwort, with the reputation of being
useful against the bites of scorpions. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 22.)


Φελλὸς.

Suber, _Cork_, and particularly that from wine-vessels, when burnt has
very desiccative ashes. This is mixed up especially with dysenteric
remedies.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Theophrastus gives an accurate description of the _Quercus
Suber_. (H. P. iii, 16.) Cork, as Pliny states, is formed from its bark.
He recommends its ashes or charcoal in hemorrhages. (H. N. xxiv, 8.) Q.
Serenus recommends it in the same cases. (c. 22.) Dioscorides does not
describe this article. Galen also omits it in his list of simples, but
briefly notices it in a preliminary book (v), and recommends the burnt
cork of a wine-cask as an astringent. (De Comp. med. sec. loc. v.) We
have not been able to trace it in the works of the Arabians.


Φιλλυρέα,

Phillyrea, _Mock Privet_; the leaves of the tree are astringent like
those of the wild olive. They relieve ulcers in the mouth when chewed,
and when the mouth is rinsed with a decoction of them. When drunk they
prove diuretic and emmenagogue.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Stackhouse and Sprengel agree that it is the _Phillyrea
latifolia_ L. Our author copies its medicinal characters literally from
Dioscorides. (i, 125.) None of the other Greek authorities on the Mat.
Med. have described it. Neither can we find traces of it in the works of
any of the Arabians, except Ebn Baithar, who gives nothing of any moment
under this head but a translation of the chapter of Dioscorides referred
to above. It certainly is not the _Mahaleb_ of the Arabians, as we shall
show in the Appendix.


Φλόμος,

Verbascum, _Petty Mullein_; there are many species, among which is that
called Thryalis. The leaves of all the kinds are possessed of desiccative
and moderately detergent powers, and especially that with the golden
flower. Being sour they suit with all sorts of fluxes. Some also rinse
the teeth with them.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It cannot be doubted that the genus is referable to the
_Verbascum_, but the species cannot be well determined. See Sibthorp
(Flora Græca), and Sprengel (ad Dioscor. iv, 102.) The white female
Phlomos would appear to be the _Verbascum Thapsus_, and the black
is indisputably the _Verbascum nigrum_. The _Phlomis Lychnitis_ of
Dioscorides is probably the _V. Lychnitis_. The other species cannot
be determined with any degree of certainty. Our author abridges the
medicinal characters given to them by Dioscorides. (l. c.) Galen also,
as well as Aëtius and Oribasius, borrow freely from Dioscorides. The
mullein occurs in the Hippocratic treatises (Morb. Mulier.), but we do
not find it in the works of Celsus. Pliny describes the verbascum in
nearly the same terms as Dioscorides. (H. N. xxv, 74.) See also Apuleius
(De Herbis, 71.) The Arabians follow Dioscorides in delivering its
medicinal properties. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 98); Ebn Baithar (i, 184.) The
verbascum held a place in the Dispensatory as late as the time of Lewis.
(ii, 417.) The _V. Thapsus_, _nigrum_, and _Lychnitis_, although now
rejected from our Dispensatory, are still retained in the shops. See Gray
(Suppl. to Pharmacop. 91.) It is said that the juice of their leaves,
which is acrid and bitterish, is used to poison mice and fish. Lindley
(Veg. King. 683.) In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia, both the _Verbascum
Thapsus_ and _thapsiforme_ stand for the female phlomos. (166.)


Φοῖνιξ,

(Called by some Rhus), is a herb like the _Darnel_. It has astringent
powers, and when drunk with austere wine stops all fluxes.

Palma, _the Palm-tree_, has a fruit which, when ripe, is moderately hot,
stomachic, and tonic, when taken internally or applied externally. The
rest of the palm-tree is sufficiently astringent, and hence is mixed up
as an ingredient with stomach and liver remedies. But the most astringent
part is the involucrum or cover, as it were, of the fruit while growing.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The herb is undoubtedly the _Lolium perenne_. The tree is the
_Phœnix Dactylifera_. We would refer to the ‘Hierobotanicon’ of Olaus
Celsius and our own article on this head, in the Appendix to Dunbar’s
Greek Lexicon, for the general literature of this interesting subject.
We need not dwell particularly on the medicinal virtues of the herb,
as all the authorities are agreed that it is applicable in such cases
as astringents are indicated. See in particular Dioscorides (iv, 43.)
A decoction of different parts of the palm-tree was much used by the
ancient physicians as an astringent. Pliny recommends it particularly in
discharges from the uterus and bowels. (H. N. xxiii, 53.) He borrows,
however, from Dioscorides, who recommends it as an astringent in these
and various other cases, such as hemorrhoids and wounds; he adds,
however, that they induce headaches, and when eaten in great quantity
intoxicate and that the dried dates when eaten are useful in hæmoptysis,
stomachic and dysenteric diseases, and complaints of the bladder, when
applied in a powder as a cataplasm with the quince and cerate of wild
vine-flowers. (i, 148.) Celsus recommends a decoction of dates as an
astringent gargle. (v, 22, 9.) Galen has a most interesting article
on the palm, which he recommends in general as being possessed of an
astringent quality, in hepatic and stomachic affections, both internally
and externally. Serapion, Mesue, and Rhases likewise recommend it in such
cases. Rhases gives a most copious account of this subject borrowed from
various sources. One of his authorities says, dates spoil the teeth and
create obstructions in the liver and spleen. Another says they create
semen, and are useful in phthisis. (Cont. l. ult. i, 531.) Avicenna
recommends them generally as astringents, and particularly in fluxes of
the womb and in hemorrhoids. (ii, 2, 87.) Ebn Baithar copies mostly from
Rhases under this head. (i, 211, 496.) The composition of palm-oil is
described by Dioscorides. (i, 54.) It is the only preparation from the
palm which is now retained in the Pharmacopœia.


Φόρμιον,

Phormium, is possessed of attenuating, detergent, and attractive powers.
Its seed, therefore, attenuates leucoma, and extracts sharp-pointed
weapons of wood.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of it is taken from Galen. It would
appear to be a variety of the ὅρμινον, i. e. _Salvia Horminum_ L.,
Purple-top Clary, as is stated by Sprengel. (Notæ in Dioscor. iii, 135.)
We can find nothing interesting regarding it in the other authorities.


Φοῦ,

Valeriana, _Valerian_, has a root which resembles the nard, but is weaker
for most purposes, only it is more diuretic like Celtic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Valeriana officinalis_, or perhaps the _V.
Dioscoridis_. We have mentioned already that the ancient nards were
various species of valerian. All the ancient authorities describe it
as being diuretic and emmenagogue. See in particular Dioscorides (i,
10.) Galen ascribes to it diuretic powers (De Simpl. viii), and Pliny
emmenagogue (H. N. xxi, 80.) The Arabians give it the same characters.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 255); Serapion (De Simpl. 62); Ebn Baithar
(ii, 265.) Bergius in like manner states its virtues thus: “Virtus:
emmenagoga, abortiens, diuretica, sanguinem amovens.” See also Rutty
(Mat. Med.) Recent authorities, however, are not so lavish in its
praises. See Pereira (971.)


Φύλλον,

Folium, _Leaf_, the leaf of the Malabathrum, which has been already
treated of.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Apicius, in like manner, uniformly calls the leaf of the
Malabathrum by the name of _Folium_. We still incline to the opinion
which we deliberately formed and expressed some years ago, that it was
the leaf of the cassia or wild cinnamon tree. We refer to a learned
disquisition on it by Olaus Celsius, in his ‘Hierobotanicon,’ and to
Geoffroy (Treatise on Fossil, Veg., and Anim. Subst. 318.) The φ. of
Dioscorides is quite a different substance, being the same as the
λινόζωστις, which see.


Φῦκος,

Fucus marinus, _Seaweed_, cools and dries in the second order, having
also a moderate degree of astringency.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Various species of _Fuci_ are described by Theophrastus and
Dioscorides, but so briefly, that it is scarcely possible to determine
them exactly. It is deserving of remark, however, that Galen, Aëtius, and
Oribasius describe a species of Fucus, under the head of Ceruse, which
is therefore supposed to have been a preparation of lead. The article,
however, which our author here treats of is unquestionably the vegetable,
as is evident from Aëtius. (p. 24, ed. Ald.) Dioscorides says it is
possessed of an astringent power, which is efficacious in cataplasms
for the cure of gouty affections and inflammations. These plants are to
be used in a moist state before they are dried. He adds, that Nicander
says the purple fucus is theriacal, and that some persons took its root
to be the fucus which women use for painting their face., (iv, 98.)
Pliny gives a very similar description of the “Phycos thalassion, id
est, Fucus marinus.” (H. N. xxvi, 66.) Galen treats of it in nearly
the same language as our author. It would appear to be the Muscus
marinus of Avicenna, who borrows the description which he gives of it
from Dioscorides, (ii, 2, 452, and 711.) Our old English herbalists,
Parkinson and Gerard, repeat the characters given to the fuci by the
ancients, but these articles were long omitted from our Dispensatories,
until of late some of them were readmitted, when it was ascertained that
they contained iodine. We have known old practitioners, who used the
_Fucus vesiculosus_, or Sea Wrack, very extensively as an application
to scrofulous sores. See further Pereira (562), and Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 7.) Beckmann gives a very ingenious disquisition on the
_Phycos thalassion_ of the ancients, which he makes out to have been our
Archil or _Lichen roccella_, a sea-weed which has been extensively used,
both in ancient and in modern times for the dyeing of wool. (History of
Inventions.) It must be to it that Horace alludes when he speaks of “lana
medicata fuco,” in his famous ode on Regulus.


Φυλλιτὴς,

Phyllites, _Hart’s Tongue_, is somewhat sour, and from this quality it
naturally proves a remedy for diarrhœa when drunk.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. There seems little reason to doubt that it is the
_Scolopendrium officinale_, or Spleenwort. It is the _Lingua Cervina_ of
Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 1047.) Both Galen and Dioscorides, like
our author, recommend it in fluxes of the bowels, as being possessed of
astringent powers. It is not met with in the works either of Hippocrates
or Celsus. It was retained in the Dispensatory in the time of Quincy (88,
123), and even at the present day it is not an entire stranger to the
shops. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 12.)


Χαλβάνη,

Galbanum, is heating almost in the third degree, and is desiccative
almost in the second, being possessed of emollient and discutient powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides says of Galbanum, that it is the juice of a
Ferula growing in Syria, by some called metopium. Pliny describes it
thus: “Quod maxime laudant, cartilaginosum, purum, ad similitudinem
Hammoniaci.” Now, in Dr. Duncan’s edition of the Edinburgh Dispensatory
(1811), it is said in like manner that “Galbanum agrees in virtue with
gum ammoniac;” and from this casual coincidence in the descriptions of
the ancient and modern galbanums, we infer their identity. It would
appear to be now settled, that galbanum is the product of different
umbellifers, the most common of which is the _Opoidia galbanifera_.
See the late publications of Royle, Lindley, and Pereira. Dioscorides
describes it as being possessed of a heating, fiery, epispastic, and
discutient power, in pessaries and fumigations as promoting menstruation
and the expulsion of the fœtus; he recommends it externally, for
furunculi and other complaints of the skin, and internally for chronic
coughs, dyspnœa, asthma, ruptured and sprained parts; its vapour rouses
in cases of epilepsy, hysteria, and vertigo, and drives away venomous
animals. It is used in toothache for filling the hollow of the teeth.
(iii, 87.) Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of it in general
terms, like our author. It occurs in the works of Hippocrates, and
in those of Celsus, who recommends it in nearly the same cases as
Dioscorides, as in furunculus, difficulty of breathing, and so forth.
(See v, 18, et pluries.) For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 312);
Serapion (c. 320.) They borrow their account of its medicinal virtues
from Dioscorides, recommending it as an alexipharmic, an application
to tumours, and a remedy in certain diseases of the chest. Avicenna
says it is less powerful than sagapenum. The Arabian authorities of Ebn
Baithar do not supply anything of much importance in addition to what is
furnished by Dioscorides and Galen.


Χαλκίτις,

Chalcitis, is possessed of astringent, acrid, caustic, and escharotic
powers. In subtility of particles it is intermediate between misy and
sori; but when burnt its parts become still finer.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We will first give an abstract of the information furnished
by the ancient authorities themselves regarding this much-disputed
article in their Materia Medica, and reserve what we have to say as to
the substance itself to the conclusion. Galen is the author who has given
the fullest account of the nature and formation of the misy, sori, and
chalcitis (see Opera, ed. Basil, T. ii, 127); but as his description of
them is lengthy, we prefer giving the abstract of the same furnished
by Aëtius. It is to be borne in mind then that what follows is upon
the authority of Galen, who visited the copper-mines of Cyprus for
the express purpose of ascertaining the nature of the misy, sori, and
chalcitis. “At the mine in Cyprus, in the mountains of the Soli, there
was a great cave dug in the mountain, at the right side of which, that
is to say, on our left hand as we entered, there was a passage into the
mine in which I saw certain specimens of the three substances stretched
upon one another like zones, the lowest being that of _sori_, upon it
_chalcitis_, and then that of _misy_. In process of time the chalcitis
changes into misy by degrees, and the sori can change into chalcitis, but
requires a much longer space of time. So that it is no wonder that these
three substances should be possessed of homogeneous (similar) powers, as
differing from one another only in tenuity and density of their parts,
the grossest being the sori, and the finest the misy, whereas chalcitis
possesses an intermediate power. When burnt they become more attenuant,
but less styptic.” (p. 30, ed. Aldi.) Galen (l. c.) states distinctly
that the misy is an efflorescence which forms upon the chalcitis, similar
to the verdigris which forms upon copper (or bronze), and that the three
substances in question are convertible into one another. He also states
that a specimen of chalcanthos, when long kept, turns to chalcitis.
Pliny gives a very confused account of the misy, sori, and chalcitis,
which betrays evident marks of a very imperfect acquaintance with the
subject; but it is quite obvious that he meant to describe the very same
substances as those which Dioscorides and Galen describe under these
names, as is obvious from his ascribing the same medicinal powers as
they do to each of these articles. (See H. N. xxxiv, 29, 30, 31, with
the notes of Harduin.) Dioscorides gives but a very brief description of
these substances, with the origin of which he most probably was not so
well acquainted as Galen. He describes the best kind as being like bronze
or copper (χαλκοειδῆ), friable, free of stones, not old, and having long
and glancing fibres. He says of it that it has styptic, heating, and
escharotic powers, and that it clears away impurities about the canthi
and eyes; that it is one of the mild septics; is useful in erysipelas,
herpes, hemorrhages of the uterus and nose, with the juice of leeks;
that when dried it is useful in epulis, spreading sores, and diseases of
the tonsils; that when burnt it is more useful in ophthalmic remedies in
the form of a powder with honey; that it melts down and cleanses callus
and asperity of the eyelids; and removes fistulæ when introduced in
the form of a collyrium. (v, 115.) It occurs in one of the Hippocratic
treatises (De Ulceribus), but its meaning there is not well defined.
By _blue chalcitis_ is probably meant chalcanthos, or blue vitriol.
Celsus prescribes it frequently as a caustic and escharotic application.
(v. 9, et pluries.) As stated already (see _Misy_), Avicenna gives an
account of these substances under the head of “Atramentum sutorium,”
the chalcitis being further distinguished by the name of _colcotar_. He
refers to Galen’s description of them already given, but either he or
his translator evidently misinterprets the original, for he represents
Galen as saying that the _atramentum rubeum_ (sori) is formed from the
_colcotar_. He says of all the three substances that they are caustic,
escharotic, and styptic; and he recommends them in the same instances
as Dioscorides and Galen do. (ii, 2, 47.) Serapion, as already stated,
describes them under the name of _vitreolum_ or _zeg_, including also the
chalcanthos in the same chapter. It may be interesting to our readers to
see his version of the passage of Galen given above from Aëtius. “Vidi in
mineris tres venas extensas unam super aliam per longum spacium, et vena
inferior erat zeg rubeum (_sori?_), et secunda quæ erat super eam erat
colcotar (_chalcitis?_), et tertia superior erat zeg viride (_misy?_), et
hoc est quod zeg rubeum convertitur et fit colcotar et colcotar fit zeg
viride.” He afterwards gives Galen’s account of the medicinal powers of
chalcitis, which does not differ materially from our author’s. (De Simpl.
386.) Rhases, under the head of vitreolum, gives, in abridged extracts
from Dioscorides and Galen, their descriptions of _sori_, _chalcitis_,
and _misy_, which he calls _vitreolum ruffum_, _colcotor_, and _vitreolum
viride_. (Contin. l. ult. 747.) Averrhoes quotes Galen’s account of the
origin of the three vitriols which he calls _vitreolum rubeum_ (sori?),
_v. viride_ (misy?), and _cholcotar_ (chalcitis?). (Collig. v, 43.) And
now, respecting the nature of the three metallic substances _misy_,
_sori_, and _chalcitis_, we have to state it as our deliberate opinion,
that, provided the authority of Galen be held decisive of the question,
there can be no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that they were
merely varieties of the chalcanthum, arising principally from age or
differences in the proportion of the ingredients entering into its
composition. (See below.) Probably then the chalcitis was a specimen of
pure sulphate of copper which had contracted an efflorescence from age.
The misy _or_ zeg viride of the Arabians no doubt owed its colour to a
predominance of the sulphate of iron; while in the sori we may suppose
that zinc or other impurities gave it its peculiar characters.


Χάλκανθος,

Atramentum Sutorium, _Copperas_ or _Vitriol_, is water concreted in
the metal mines of Cyprus, having a very strong astringency with no
contemptible degree of heat; and of all substances it is the most
effectual for pickling and drying humid flesh. In process of time it
changes to chalcitis.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. No person who reads the account of this substance given by
Dioscorides and Pliny can doubt of its being blue vitriol, or an impure
sulphate of copper procured by the evaporation of water found in mines
of copper. Pliny’s description of it is quite characteristic: “Color
est cœruleus, perquam spectabili nitore vitrumque esse creditur.” He
also states that it is the same as the “atramentum sutorium.” (H. N.
xxxiv, 32.) Celsus says the same of it, and ranks it with styptics (v,
1); with corrosive substances (v, 6); with caustics (v, 7, 8); with
escharotics (vi, 11); and recommends it when strongly heated or roasted
to remove callus (v, 28, 12), and for other purposes. Whether the _blue
chalcitis_ of Hippocrates (De Ulcer. 13), alluded to in the preceding
article, be blue vitriol as some have supposed (Pereira, Mat. Med. 494),
we cannot pretend positively to determine, but we think it probable.
Galen describes most graphically his visit to the copper mines of Cyprus,
where, among other strange sights, he witnessed the process of procuring
chalcanthum. He mentions that a specimen of it which he carried with
him in the course of twenty years was converted into chalcitis on its
surface, while its centre remained chalcanthum, and that he meant to
keep it until its centre should change likewise, and until the chalcitis
should be converted into misy. Dioscorides describes several varieties
of the chalcanthum, one of which is called _pectum_, being procured
by natural evaporation; and another _ephthon_ or _coctum_, as being
procured by boiling. The best kind, he says, is blue, heavy, compact, and
translucent. He says it is astringent, heating, and escharotic; kills the
lumbricus latus when taken to the amount of a drachm; that it is emetic,
cures those who have swallowed mushrooms when drunk with water, and that
it purges the head when a piece of wool smeared with it is introduced
into the nostrils. (v, 114.) Oribasius gives a minute description of the
chalcanthum, but it is confessedly taken from Dioscorides. (Med. Coll.
13.) Aëtius says distinctly that the water running from the copper mines
of Cyprus concretes into chalcanthum, and that it changes into chalcitis.
He, in fact, evidently borrows from Galen. Avicenna, as formerly stated
by us, gives a description of this substance along with misy, sori, and
chalcitis, under the general head of “atramentum sutorium.” (ii, 2, 47.)
He also treats of it separately under its proper name, but his account
of it is entirely made up from Dioscorides. (166.) Serapion’s, in like
manner, is copied from Dioscorides. (c. 386.) Haly Abbas’s chapter on the
vitriols is so barbarously translated, that we cannot pretend to unfold
his account of this substance. (Pract. ii, 47.) Though, as we have stated
above, we think there can be no doubt that the chalcanthos of Dioscorides
and Pliny was an impure sulphate of copper procured from the “waters of
cementation” issuing from copper mines, it is proper to mention that
after mature consideration of the subject, with the assistance of an
esteemed authority on the Materia Medica in London, we have arrived at
the conclusion that either the term must have been applied loosely to
other metallic sulphates, or the ancient sulphate of copper must have
contained a very large admixture of the sulphates of iron and of zinc.
Probably, then, the term chalcanthos was used anciently in as loose a
manner as the terms vitriol and copperas have been in modern times.
(See Tournefort’s Mat. Med.) It is further deserving of remark under
this head, that the description of the impure sulphate of copper, which
is given in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia, corresponds exactly with
Dioscorides’s description of the chalcanthos. In the Pharmacopœia it is
directed that the sulphate of copper should not contain _much_ of the
sulphates of zinc and iron. And now, in conclusion, as this is one of the
most important subjects connected with ancient pharmacy, we shall briefly
state our reasons for holding, contrary to the opinion of many recent
authorities of high reputation, that the chalcanthum either consisted
principally of copper, or at least contained a large proportion of that
metal in its composition. 1st. The name implies that the Greeks thought
it a cupreous substance, and Pliny seems to say that the name had been
properly given. (l. c.) 2d. Pliny’s description of it applies exactly
to blue vitriol. (l. c.) 3d. Dioscorides’s description of it tallies
with the description of the sulphate of copper given in the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia. 4th. The chalcanthos was indisputably formed from the
evaporation of waters issuing from mines of copper, that is to say, from
“waters of cementation.” Compare Galen (l. c.) with Pereira (Mat. Med.
495.) 5th. It was administered as an emetic. See Dioscorides (l. c.) 6th.
It was used externally as a powerful escharotic. See Dioscorides, Celsus,
and Galen (pluries.) 7th. It was ranked among the poisons. See Cicero (ad
Familiares, ix,) and the Arabian authorities on Toxicology.


Χαλκὸς κεκαυμένος,

Æs ustum, _Burnt Copper_, is acrid, with a share of astringency. It
therefore is the best of remedies for the cicatrization of ulcers upon
dry bodies; but if washed it agrees better with tender bodies.


Χαλκοῦ ἄνθος,

Æris flos, _the Flower of Copper_, is possessed of more subtile powers
than burnt copper, or than the squama æris. Wherefore, when added to
collyria, it clears away asperities and sycoses of the eyelids.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Though there can be no doubt that this term is generally used
by the Greek classical authors to signify _bronze_, or a combination of
copper and tin in the proportion of from 2 to 14 per cent. of the latter,
it is also certain that it was frequently applied to native copper, as it
is in general by the authorities on the Materia Medica. The ancients,
it may be proper to remark cursorily in this place, were acquainted with
the formation of _brass_, which they made by compounding together copper
and cadmia. See Watson’s ‘Chemical Essays,’ and Beckmann’s ‘History
of Inventions.’ Brass was their aurichalcum _or_ orichalcum. The _Æs
ustum_, according to Geoffroy, “is copper reduced to a calx or crocus,
either by itself or mixed with sulphur or salt, by a long calcination in
a reverberatory furnace.” “The _Squama æris_, or flake of copper,” he
adds, “is little different from the Æs ustum, being only the particles
of burnt copper which fly off when it is hammered.” He says of the _Flos
æris_, “it is nothing but copper reduced to small grains like millet
seed, which is done by pouring cold water upon melting copper, which
thereupon immediately flies every way into grains.” In short it was
fine granulated copper. These preparations of copper are described by
all the ancient authorities. See in particular Dioscorides (v, 87, 88),
who describes the process of making the flos æris very minutely. He
recommends it as a detergent and caustic medicine for various purposes,
such as removing dimness of the cornea, wasting polypi in the nostrils,
and protuberances about the anus; and also for the cure of deafness
when blown into the ear with a syringe in the form of a powder, and
in complaints of the gums and tonsils. He also says that given to the
amount of three oboli it evacuates thick humours. He also describes
several processes for burning the copper, and recommends the æs ustum as
a cleansing and detergent medicine for various ulcers, especially those
of the eye, and also as an emetic when taken in a draught with hydromel,
or in a linctus with honey. None of the other Greek authorities treat
so fully of these preparations as Dioscorides. Celsus prescribes them
frequently as caustic and corrosive substances. (v, 6, 7, et pluries.)
The Arabians used these articles not only as external applications, but
as emetics and purgatives. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 231); Serapion (c. 414);
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. iii, 48); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 43); Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 48); Ebn Baithar (ii, 551.) The flowers of copper, and burnt
or calcined copper, are noticed in the works of all our earlier writers
on medicine, and recommended to be administered both internally and
externally. See Platearius (De Simpl. Med.) The process of preparing
calcined copper is minutely described by Moses Charras in his ‘Royal
Pharmacopœia,’ published at Paris in 1676. They are briefly described by
Dr. Hill, who says of the æs ustum that “it was much used externally by
the ancients.” (Mat. Med. 32.) Neither of these preparations of copper
occurs in the Complete English Dispensatory of Quincy, published in 1763.
They are omitted also in Pemberton’s London Dispensatory, published in
1746. They would appear, however, to have been longer retained in use by
the Continental physicians, since a formula for preparing the _Calx æris_
is given in Crantz’s Mat. Med. (ii, 91. Vienna, 1765.) He says that the
_Flos æris_, and _Squama æris_, were preparations not in use. Rutty ranks
them among the obsolete medicines of the ancients. A formula for _Æs
ustum_ is given in Gray’s Suppl. to Pharmacop. (p. 242.) It is the same
as that of Dioscorides. (v, 37.)


Χαμάιδρυς,

Chamædrys, _Germander_, is heating and drying in the third degree. It
therefore melts down enlarged spleens, proves diuretic and emmenagogue,
and removes visceral obstructions.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It clearly is the _Teucrium Chamædrys_ L. Theophrastus
says that its fruit purges bile. (H. P. ix, 10.) Dioscorides commends
it in spasms, scirrhous spleen, dysuria, and incipient dropsy; and as
an emmenagogue; and, by the way, Dr. Hill confirms this account of it.
Galen and all the other authorities treat of it in nearly the same terms.
We have not been able to find it in the works of Hippocrates. For the
Arabians, see particularly Serapion (c. 180); Avicenna (ii, 2, 132);
Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 152.) One of Serapion’s Arabian authorities
recommends the syrup in chronic coughs, dyspepsia, and incipient
dropsies, and the decoction in black jaundice. Avicenna joins both
Dioscorides and Serapion in regard to the virtues which they ascribe to
it. Whether or not this be the “trixago” of Celsus (iv, 6) has never
been satisfactorily determined. The Arabian translators adopt this name.
It has still the reputation of being a pectoral medicine. Lindley (Veg.
Kingd. 661.)


Χαμαίκισσος,

Hedera, _Ground Ivy_; the flower being considerably bitter, removes
obstructions of the liver. It is also given in ischiatic diseases.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We see no good reason for disputing its identity with
_Glechoma hederaceum_, or Ground Ivy, which we believe to have been
introduced into this country by the Romans for the _Chamæcissos_.
Dioscorides gives it nearly the same characters as our author, that is
to say, he recommends it in sciatica and jaundice. (iv, 124.) Galen and
the other Greek authorities treat of it in nearly the same terms as our
author. The Arabians notice it under the same head with the other species
of ivy. See Serapion (De Simpl. 41); Avicenna (ii, 2, 169); Rhases
(Contin. 190.) The ground-ivy maintained a place in the Dispensatory
with a high reputation as a hepatic, splenitic, diuretic, and nephritic
medicine in the days of Quincy. (117.) In the modern Greek Pharmacopœia
the glechoma hederaceum stands for the χαμαίκισσος. (75.)

       *       *       *       *       *

Χαμαικέρασος. This occurs in the “Euporiston” generally ascribed to
Dioscorides. It is referred by Sprengel to the _Convallaria majalis_, or
Lily of the valley.


Χαμαιλέυκη,

Chamæleuce, _Ground Poplar_, is calefacient in the third order and
desiccative in the first.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sprengel maintains that we should read χαμαιπέυκη, and refers
it to _Stachelina Chamæpeuce_ L. In Dioscor. (iv, 125.) Dioscorides
merely recommends it in lumbago. All the other authorities assign it the
same general characters.


Χαμαιλέων,

Chamæleon; the root of the black chamæleon is calefacient and desiccative
in nearly the third order. It is also a detergent application to the
skin, and a discutient and emollient one to indurated tumours. When
applied in a cataplasm it cures phagedænic ulcers. But when taken
internally it is poisonous. The root of the white chamæleon is like that
of the black, but more bitter. When drunk with austere wine to the
amount of an acetabulum, it kills the broad intestinal worms. It is also
useful in dropsical complaints.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We stated in the Fifth Book, Sections 37, 46, that we were
inclined to refer the black chamæleon to the _Carthamus corymbosus_,
and the white to the _Carlina acaulis_, and we see no good reason for
changing this opinion. Some good authorities, however, prefer the _C.
gummifera_. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 708.) The virtues, however, which
Dr. Lindley ascribes to the _C. acaulis_, agree very well with those
of the ixia, or white chamæleon, as stated by the ancient authorities;
whether, however, it produces the gum resembling mastich, as the white
chamæleon is described by Dioscorides as doing, we are not so sure.
Parkinson says it produces such a gum “sometimes, and in some places.”
(Theatre of Plants, 968.) See also Gerard (1157.) Dioscorides recommends
its root as a vermifuge; in dropsy and dysuria when taken in wine. (iii,
8.) The root of the black chamæleon he recommends with other articles for
the cure of lichen, for toothache, and various other purposes. (9.) Our
author borrows mostly from Galen under this head. Aëtius remarks that
the root of the black species is poisonous, and hence is to be applied
only externally in scabies, lichen, leprosy, and the like. This species
is noticed in the Hippocratic works. (De Ulcer.) The other occurs in the
works of Celsus, who prescribes it as an ingredient in a malagma for
gout. (v, 18, 33.) The Arabians treat elaborately of both species. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 197, 455); Serapion (c. 274, 275); Rhases (Cont. l. ult.
ii, 208); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) Upon the whole their characters of
them agree with those by Dioscorides and Galen.


Χαμάιμηλον ἢ Ἄνθεμις,

Chamæmelum, or Anthemis, _Chamomile_, heats and dries in the first order.
It is also attenuant, discutient, relaxant, and aromatic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It certainly applies to the _Anthemis nobilis_, but probably
is not restricted to it. It appears to be the ἄνθεμον of Theophrastus.
(H. P. vii, 8, 14.) It is the ἄνθεμις of Dioscorides, who describes
three species, which it has been found very difficult to distinguish and
identify. He says the roots, the flowers, and the stem are calefacient
and attenuant, that both when drunk and in a hip-bath they promote
the evacuation of the menses, fœtus, calculi, and urine; that they
are drunk for tympanitis and ileus; cure jaundice and diseases of the
liver; and that the decoction is used in a fomentation for complaints
about the bladder. He says the chamomiles cure fistula lachrymalis in
a cataplasm, and aphthæ as a masticatory, and that the oil prepared
in a manner described by him, is useful in intermittent fevers when
the body is rubbed with it. (iii, 143.) Aëtius strongly recommends the
whole body to be rubbed with oil of chamomile in such cases to promote
perspiration. According to Galen this is the ἐυάνθεμον of Hippocrates.
(Morb. Mulier., i, 625.) We cannot find it in Celsus. Galen, in the
preliminary dissertation to his ‘Mat. Med.,’ strongly eulogises the oil
of chamomile as being calculated to soothe pain, relieve contracted
parts, soften hardened, and to dispel fevers not accompanied with
visceral inflammation. (iii, 133, ed. Basil.) The Arabians appear to have
been very partial to this plant, of which they treat at great length. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 118); Serapion (De Simpl. 22); Rhases (Contin. l. ult.
ii, 154, i, 156); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 34.)
In a word, they entirely concur in the characters given to the chamomiles
by Dioscorides and Galen.


Χαμαιπίτυς,

Chamæpitys, _Ground Pine_, heats in the second order, but dries in
the third. It is therefore a cathartic and detergent of the viscera,
especially of the liver. It is diuretic and emmenagogue, agglutinates
large wounds, and cures putrid ulcers. It also discusses scirrhous
swellings, and the decoction of it is useful in ischiatic diseases.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It appears probable that our author’s plant is _Ajuga
chamæpitys_, but here commentators are by no means agreed. It is briefly
mentioned by Nicander (Alex. 65), and by Celsus as a medicine which
opens the pores or mouths of vessels (v, 4), but it does not occur, we
believe, in the Hippocratic treatises. Of the three species described by
Dioscorides, the first is probably this plant, the second is a species
of _teucrium_, and the third _ajuga iva_. His characters of the first
agree in the main with those given to it by our author, who, as well
as Galen, Aëtius, and Oribasius, evidently copy from him. The other
two species, he says, are possessed of similar powers. All the Arabians
concur in representing it as being diuretic, emmenagogue, a medicine that
expels the fœtus, and a laxative. See Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 153);
Avicenna (ii, 2,131); Serapion (c. 179); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 32.)
Avicenna in particular recommends it for the cure of sciatica and gout,
and for this virtue it was celebrated as long as it retained a place in
our Dispensatory. See Quincy (116.) It was an ingredient in the famous
Portland powder. It is still to be found in the shops, where it bears the
names of _Iva arthritica_ and _Teucrium chamæpitys_. See Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 49.)


Χαμάιδρωψ,

Chamædrops; some call this plant Chamædrys, and some Teucrium, being
possessed of similar powers to the Chamædrys.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. According to Dioscorides it is the same as the Χαμάιδρυς.


Χαμαισύκη,

Chamæsyce, _Ground Fig_, has detergent and acrid powers, so that the
twigs and juice of it remove myrmecia and acrochordones. They therefore
clear away thick cicatrices in the eyes with honey, and cure dimness of
vision and incipient suffusions.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. From the place assigned to it by Dioscorides it was evidently
a spurge. It is acknowledged to be the _Euphorbia chamæcyce_. Our
author appears to have borrowed the characters which he gives it from
Dioscorides. (iv, 167.) Galen and the others do the same. It does not
occur in the works either of Hippocrates or Celsus, nor have we been able
to find it in those of the Arabians. We are not aware of its having been
used by modern authorities.


Χαμέλαια,

Chamelæa, _Mezereon_, or _Spurge Olive_, is possessed of detergent
powers. It therefore cleanses foul ulcers and eschars with honey.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Notwithstanding the difference of opinion which has prevailed
among the commentators regarding this plant, we see no good grounds
for doubting that it was the _Daphne Mezereon_, which we believe to
have been naturalized in this country by the Romans for its medicinal
uses. Dioscorides says of its leaves that they are like to those of the
olive, but more slender and thick, biting to the taste and scarifying
the trachea. Its leaves, he adds, purge phlegm and bile downwards,
especially if taken in a pill with double the quantity of southernwood
mixed with one part of the chamelæa; let it be taken in water or honey
as a pill; but it is insoluble, for it is evacuated as it was taken; the
powdered leaves mixed up with honey cleanse foul ulcers, and such as are
covered with eschars. (iv, 169.) We do not meet with it in the works of
Hippocrates nor of Celsus. Galen and the other Greek authorities treat
of it in very general terms like our author. Beyond all doubt is this
the _mezereon_ of Serapion, who commences his chapter on it by giving
extracts from the descriptions of the _chamelæa_ given by Dioscorides,
Galen, and our author. He then gives a very lengthy account of it from
Arabian authorities, first from Alcanzi and next from Aben Mesuai,
which we regret that our necessary limits prevent us from giving a
proper abstract of. He says that persons of a gross constitution, and
more especially old men, bear this medicine best, and he recommends us
to administer it with myrobalans, or tamarinds, or prunes. He further
directs it to be given in water that has been boiled. Altogether there is
not a more important chapter in Serapion than the one on Mezereon. (c.
373.) Mesue also gives a very interesting account of the mezereon, which
he illustrates with extracts from Dioscorides and Galen on the chamelæa.
He assigns to it powers to purge yellow and black bile, and says that
its greatest use is in dropsy. It is also, he says, anthelminthic.
He recommends tents smeared with it for fistulæ and sinuous ulcers.
(De Simpl. 22.) Haly Abbas also gives an excellent account of it,
representing it as a medicine which purges phlegm, yellow and black
bile. (Pract. 2, 54, 564.) Rhases describes the two chamæleons and the
chamelæa together under the head of _Laureola_. He quotes “the Book of
Poisons” as stating that in the dose of two drachms it proves fatal.
He gives quotations from Dioscorides, Galen, and our author. (Cont. l.
ult. i, 413.) Avicenna, in like manner, describes the two chamæleons and
the chamelæa under the head of mezereon, but evidently recognised the
distinction between the last and the first two. He commends the mezereon
particularly in dropsy. (ii, 2, 455.) The above sketch, it will be
remarked, clearly proves the identity of the χαμέλαια of the Greeks, and
the Mezereon of the Arabians. We admit, however, that it does not prove
their identity with the _Daphne Mezereon_. To us it appears, however,
that the physiological effects of the mezereon, as described by our best
authorities of the present day, correspond very well with the effects of
the chamelæa or mezereon as described by Dioscorides and Serapion. In
particular compare Pereira (805) with Serapion (l. c.) It is proper to
mention, however, that Sibthorp held the χ. to be _Daphne oleoides_. Both
the _Daphne Mezereon_, and _D. Gnidium_ are retained in the modern Greek
Pharmacopœia. (108.)


Χελιδόνιον,

Chelidonium, _Columbine_ or _Celandine_; the great is calefacient in
the third order, and powerfully detergent. The juice of it contributes
to acuteness of sight. The root when drunk with anise removes icteric
obstructions, and also when taken with wine. When masticated it cures
toothache. The smaller species, which belongs to the fourth order of
calefacients, is more acrid, so as to ulcerate the skin in a cataplasm.
It also removes leprous nails. The juice of it purges by the nose.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. That the first species is the _Chelidonium majus_ L. admits
of no dispute. The other would seem to be the _Ranunculus Ficaria_, or
Fig-wort. Pliny praises it as an application to strumous tumours, and
a remedy for impairment of sight. From the experiments of Orfila, it
appears that the _C. magus_ acts as a very acrid poison. Dioscorides
describes the great celandine very minutely, and recommends it in
jaundice and toothache. (ii, 201.) He gives the same character of the
less as our author. (ii, 212.) Galen and Aëtius treat of them like our
author. Neither of them is to be found in the works of Hippocrates.
Celsus prescribes the juice of the “chelidonia” as an application to
enlarged tonsils. (vi, 14.) Both species are distinctly treated of by
the Arabians. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 295, 727); Serapion (c. 196); Rhases
(Cont. l. ult. i, 200.) They all recommend the juice of the greater
celandine in jaundice, in toothache, and in affections of the eyes. It
long held a place in our Dispensatory, retaining its character for curing
jaundice and removing films from the eyes. See Quincy (117.) Even at the
present day rustic farriers use the acrid juice of the celandine for
removing films from the eyes of cattle. The chelidonium majus occurs in
the modern Greek Pharmacopœia. (46.)


Χελιδόνες,

Hirundines, _Swallows_; when burnt their ashes, if rubbed in with honey,
cure inflammatory cynanche. They also contribute to acuteness of sight.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is the _Hirundo rustica_. Celsus also recommends the ashes
of swallows in cases of cynanche and diseases of the eyes. (iv, 4.)
Dioscorides speaks of their use in these and in other cases. (ii, 6.)
Galen gives the same account of them as our author. The Arabians repeat
the descriptions given by Dioscorides and Galen. See Serapion (c. 443);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 347); Rhases (Contin. l. ult. i, 741); Ebn Baithar (i,
375.)


Χολὴ,

Fel, _Bile_, or _Gall_, is the hottest of all animal juices, but differs
according to the colour, for the yellow is hotter than the pale, and the
violet-coloured than the yellow; and also according to the difference of
the animals which produce it; forasmuch as that of swine is the weakest
of all, so that it agrees with ulcers in the ears, and does not prove
pungent; but that of sheep is more acrid, and still more that of goats,
to which the galls of bears and oxen are allied. But the gall of bulls
is stronger, and still more so that of the hyæna, next that of the fish
called callionymus, and that of the scorpion which answers in suffusions,
dimness of vision, and leucomata, and likewise that of the sea-tortoise.
The gall of the wild goat is believed to cure nyctolopia. The gall of
all fowls is more acrid and desiccative than the gall of quadrupeds. But
of them the best is the gall of cocks and partridges. Those of hawks and
eagles are in so far more acrid and corrosive, and of a violet colour,
but sometimes black.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Our author’s account of the medicinal properties of _bile_
is abridged from Galen. Bile is an article which, although now excluded
from the British Pharmacopœias, still holds its place in the Continental.
Scarpa recommends the gall of certain animals for the removal of albugo.
Pliny thus states its virtues as a medicine: “Vis ejus excalfacere,
mordere, scindere, extrahere, discutere. Minorum animalium subtilius
intelligitur, et ideo ad oculorum medicamenta utilius existimatur.”
(H. N. xxviii, 40.) See Dioscorides (ii, 96.) Avicenna calls it a hot,
abstergent medicine. Of quadrupeds, he says, the strongest is that of a
calf, and the weakest that of a sheep. He treats largely of the subject,
but draws liberally from Dioscorides and Galen (ii, 2, 250.) See also
Serapion (De Simpl. 459); Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 50); Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. i, 291); Ebn Baithar (ii, 510.) The gall of a bull is retained in
the modern Greek Pharmacopœia.


Χονδρίλη,

Chondrile, _Gum Succory_, being a _species of Endive_, is bitterish, and
is therefore so far more desiccative than it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Without doubt it is the _Chondrilla juncea_, or _Gum
Succory_. It produces a gum similar to _Lactucarium_, for which it is
still cultivated in Lemnos. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 708.) Dioscorides
describes another species which is supposed to be _Apargia tuberosa_.
Dioscorides describes accurately the gum of the former species which he
compares to mastich, and says of it that when applied on a linen cloth
with myrrha to the size of an olive it is emmenagogue; that along with
natron it cleanses mild leprosy; that the gum is used for glueing the
hairs of the eyelashes; that the fresh root does the same when a needle
is dipped into it and applied to the hairs; that it is beneficial in the
bites of the viper; and that its juice is an astringent of the bowels.
He describes the second species as being also glutinous. (ii, 160.)
Galen and the other Greek authorities treat only of the former species,
and that in very brief terms. Neither of them are described either by
Hippocrates or Celsus. We find difficulty in discovering traces of it
in any of the works of the Arabians, except Ebn Baithar (i, 395.) The
_Chondrilla juncea_ is still not wholly unknown in the shops. See Gray
(Suppl. to Pharmacop. 63.)


Χόνδρος,

Chondrus, is like wheat, but more glutinous than it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. In the First Book we have explained its nature. (Vol. I,
123.) It would appear to have been the article now called _Farro_, being
prepared from the spelt wheat, exactly as pearled barley is from barley.
See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 16.)


Χρυσοκόλλα,

Chrysocolla; one kind of it is found in metal mines, and another is
prepared in a mortar of red copper with a pestle of the same, it being
triturated with the urine of a boy not come to puberty during the heat
of the dog days. It therefore is detergent, having discutient and
desiccative powers greater than those of the kind found in metal mines,
so that it consumes flesh without being pungent. It therefore agrees with
ill-conditioned ulcers. By burning it you may render it less pungent.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. In order to understand this very complicated subject, it
will be necessary in the first place to give an exposition of what the
ancients themselves have written upon it. Dioscorides writes thus of
the Chrysocolla: “The best is the Armenian, which is of an intense leek
colour; the second in quality is the Macedonian; and then the Cyprian, of
which the kind that is pure must be selected; but that which is full of
earth and stones must be rejected. The aforesaid article is to be worked
thus: Having pounded it, throw it into a mortar, and having poured in
water, rub strongly with the flattened hand to the mortar; then allowing
it to settle, strain; and pouring in more water, again rub, and do this
alternately until it becomes clean and pure; then having dried it in
the sun, lay past for use. But if you wish to burn (calcine?) it, do so
in the following manner: Having triturated it sufficiently, put it into
a pan, place upon the coals, and do otherwise as we previously said in
the former cases. The chrysocolla has the power of deterging ulcers,
repressing and cleansing fungous flesh; is styptic, calefacient, mildly
septic, with a certain amount of pungency. It belongs to the class of
medicines which excite vomiting, and which may prove fatal to life.” (v,
104.) This chrysocolla is evidently the same as that which Theophrastus
has described as “being found in great quantity in gold mines and the
parts around them.” (De Lapid. 47.) Now we may here say at once that
every person conversant with mineralogy, must recognise the chrysocolla,
described above, as being the mineral called “common copper-green” by
Jameson, being an impure carbonate of copper. For a clear description of
it, see Cleaveland (Mineralogy, p. 570.) This, it will be remarked, is
the only substance to which Dioscorides applies the name of Chrysocolla;
but in a preceding chapter, treating of the varieties of verdigris, he
says, “There is a certain kind of verdigris made by the goldsmiths, by
means of a mortar and pestle, of Cyprian copper and the urine of a young
person, _with which they solder gold_.” (v, 92.) Now to this variety of
the verdigris, as we shall soon see, the name Chrysocolla (from its being
used in soldering gold) was also applied by the writers subsequent to
Dioscorides. Thus Pliny (H. N. xxxiii, 26, 27, 28) first gives a very
elaborate description of the true chrysocolla; and then in the following
chapter he briefly notices the other kind, which he says was also called
“santerna,” and was prepared from Cyprian verdigris, the urine of a boy,
with the addition of nitrum (soda?) pounded in a Cyprian mortar with
Cyprian copper _or_ bronze. This, he adds, forms a solder to gold. This,
however, he does not say was ever used in medicine. The former kind
or true chrysocolla of Dioscorides, he says was used in medicine for
cleansing wounds along with wax and oil, and also in a dry powder; that
it was given in a linctus with honey for orthopnœa and angina; that it
was used as an emetic; was added as an ingredient to collyria for specks
on the eyes, and to green plasters for relieving pain and contracting
cicatrices. This chrysocolla, he says, in conclusion, the physicians
call _acesis_ (a term, by the way, synonymous with medicinal), and was
different from the _orobitis_ which he had previously described as being
artificially tinged with a herb called by him “lutum,” meaning thereby,
we suppose, woad, or the _Isatis tinctoria_. (l. c.) Galen describes the
two kinds together, and treats of their medicinal powers as follows:
This medicine, chrysocolla, is one of those that consume the flesh, and
is not strongly pungent; but it is moderately discutient and desiccant.
Wherefore some call only the fossil by this name, but some also the
substance which is prepared in a bronze (copper?) mortar with a copper
pestle by means of the urine of a boy, which some value according to
the differences of the verdigris. But it is better to prepare it in
summer, or at least in hot weather, pounding the urine in the mortar.
And it answers more excellently if the bronze, of which you make the
mortar, be red, and the pestle too, for more is thus rubbed off by the
turning round of the pestle when the bronze is of a softer nature. This
medicine is most suited to malignant sores, both by itself and mixed
with other substances. He concludes by saying of the fossil chrysocolla,
that the more desiccative the less stimulant it is, as being so much
the more attenuated; and that when burnt (calcined), it becomes still
more attenuated. (De Simpl. ix.) It is clear from this statement that
Galen included under his list of Simples both the fossil chrysocolla and
the kind prepared from verdigris. Aëtius merely abridges the account of
the chrysocolla given by Galen. (ii, 81.) And as Oribasius professedly
copies his descriptions of the fossils used in medicine from Dioscorides,
we need not say anything further of his account of chrysocolla, than
that it coincides entirely with that of Dioscorides. (Med. Coll. xiii.)
Celsus ranks it with the corrosive (v, 6) and the caustic substances. (v,
8.) We now turn to the Arabians. Avicenna, in the first place, treats
of this substance under the name of chrysocolla, of which he describes
two species; the one, the artificial, made with the urine of a boy in
a bronze mortar, as already explained; the other the fossil, of which
he says he will now treat. He describes its general characters, namely,
that it is abstergent, caustic, septic, and so forth. Referring to
Dioscorides and Galen, he calls it an emetic and astringent medicine,
and good for malignant sores. (ii, 2, 358.) He there refers to sect.
696, where he treats of tincar, of which he says that it consists of two
kinds, the fossil and the factitious, the latter of which is called the
gold-solder (capistrum auri). It is useful, he says, in toothache and
carious teeth. Averrhoes describes it under the names of Laçacolaap, i.
e. Consolidatura auri; in Arabic, _Cumbar_. He gives exactly the same
account of the two species as Galen. He says the factitious kind is best
prepared in a mortar of red bronze with the urine of a young person;
which species is more efficacious than the other. (Collig. v, 43.)
Serapion in the portion of his work devoted to minerals, writes thus of
_Tincar_, i. e. _Borax_. “Ebn Amram says of it, it is of the species
of salts, and is found with the taste of _baurach_ (nitrum?), and has
some bitterness; and it is either fossil or factitious. And the fossil
is in the banks of the sea; it is hot, dry, and subtile; is useful in
toothache, and kills the worm in them, and in stopping the throbbing in
them it has wonderful powers.” Rhases and Aben Mesuai say of it, that the
basis (radix) of it is the urine of a boy, we mean of the factitious,
and it is the solder of gold (chrysocolla.) It would appear to be the
chrysocolla which is described by Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 48, 495), but
we must admit ourselves incapable of interpreting correctly his meaning
as expressed in the _barbarous_ translation of his works. Ebn Baithar
first treats of chrysocolla under the name of Tankâr in an extract from
the works of Ebn Amram which we have given above as quoted by Serapion.
(i, 214.) And again in the 2d volume (434), he first gives descriptions
of the chrysocolla in extracts from Dioscorides and Galen, and concludes
with the remark that some people called it the tankar chrysocolla, but
that the chrysocolla of Dioscorides and Galen was a totally different
article from the tankar. Rhases gives merely extracts from Dioscorides
and Galen. (Cont. l. ult. i, 25.) He calls it adhesio auri. From what
has been stated above, we now draw the following conclusions regarding
the matters treated of under this head: 1. That the mineral known by the
names of “copper green,” “mountain green,” “native carbonate of copper,”
was the true chrysocolla of Dioscorides, the said term signifying _Gold
solder_. 2. That Dioscorides further describes a preparation of verdigris
which was also used for soldering gold, to which the name chrysocolla
was likewise applied by Pliny, Galen, and others. 3. That under the
names of _Tincal_, _Tankâr_, and _Borax_, the Arabians described a
species of salt, which most probably was our _Sodæ Biboras_, to which
they sometimes applied the name chrysocolla from its being used in the
soldering of gold, but their best authorities (as for example, Avicenna,
and Ebn Baithar) were well aware that this borax was a totally different
substance from the chrysocolla of Dioscorides. The name borax is probably
a corruption of _Baurach_, which is the term applied by the Arabians to
the nitrum of the Greeks and Romans, that is to say, _natron_, or soda.
If the reader will take the trouble to read what has been written on the
chrysocolla of the ancients by many learned men in modern times, as, for
example, Alston, Hill, Geoffroy, Quincy, Sprengel, and Kidd, he will be
the better able to judge whether or not we have succeeded in illustrating
what has always been considered a very obscure subject.


Χρυσοκόμη ἢ Χρυσῖτις,

Chrysocome or Chrysitis; its root has at the same time acrid and
astringent powers, and therefore is not much used. Only in peripneumonia
and hepatic affections it is given boiled in honeyed water. It also
promotes menstruation.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Pliny complains that it had no name in the Latin language;
and Anguillara and Matthiolus were unable to make out what it is. It
now holds a place in the Linnæan system by the name of _Chrysocoma
Linosyris_. Our author borrows his characters of this article from
Dioscorides (iv. 55.) Galen describes it in almost the same words. It is
not to be found in the works of Dioscorides or Celsus, nor, as far as we
can discover, in those of the Arabians.


Ψευδοβούνιον,

Pseudo-Bunion, _Bastard Rape_; its properties being like those of rape,
it is heating, discutient, and detergent. It, therefore, removes tormina,
stranguries, and pains of the sides. It also discusses scrofulous
swellings when applied along with salts and wine.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It would appear that it is the _Pimpinella tenuis_ or
_Slender Burnet_. Our author copies from Dioscorides. Galen treats very
lightly of this article. It does not appear that it is treated of by the
Arabians.


Ψευδοδίκταμνον,

Pseudo-Dictamnum, _Bastard Dittany_, has the powers of weak dittany.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We are inclined to join those who refer it to the _Marrubium
Pseudodictamnum_. Galen and Dioscorides join in representing it as an
article of little consequence.


Ψιμύθιον,

Cerussa, _White Lead_, is refrigerant and emplastic.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We have treated of it as a poison in Book V. § 59. Alston
says: “Our white lead is certainly the Ψιμύθιον of Dioscorides and the
Cerussa Plinii” (xviii.) The ancient ceruse consisted of the carbonate
of lead which had been exposed to the vapours of vinegar, and was,
therefore, little or nothing different from the modern ceruse. Geoffroy’s
description of the process is taken, in fact, from Dioscorides. It
would appear to have been sometimes administered internally, if, as Dr.
Hill remarks, it is an ingredient in the _Trochisci albi_ of Rhases.
We have not been able to find, however, this trochisc in Rhases, nor
in any of the ancient authorities. Perhaps Dr. Hill confounded it with
the Emplastrum album, of which ceruse is an ingredient. (See Galen, De
Comp. Med. sec. gen. vi, and Celsus, 222 ad Milligan.) Galen in fact
expressly says that ceruse ought not to be administered internally
(Meth. Med. iv.) He recommends it as an anodyne collyrium in pains of
the eyes (Comment. in App. vi, 31), and as an astringent and soothing
application in general. (De Simpl. Med. ix.) Dioscorides describes
minutely the preparation of ceruse, and the different kinds of it, but
gives its medicinal properties in brief terms like our author. (v. 103.)
Celsus recommends it in burns and ulcers (vi, 7), but internally taken
he treats of it as a poison (v, 27, 15.) All the other Greek and the
Arabian authorities after Galen give ceruse exactly the same characters
as we have stated them above. See in particular Serapion (De Simpl.
378); Avicenna (ii, 2, 117); Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 48); Ebn Baithar (i,
63.) The last of these says of it, that it is useful in the same class
of cases as Minium; that dissolved in vinegar, and more especially when
mixed up with rose-oil, it is a good application in cephalalgia; that it
forms a proper ingredient in collyria for inflammations of the eyes,—and
dissolved in a woman’s milk or mixed up with the white of an egg,—that it
is dropped into the eye with advantage in such cases.


Ψύλλιον,

Psyllium, _Fleawort_; the seed belongs to the second order of
refrigerants. With regard to heating and moistening powers it holds an
intermediate place.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Sprengel remarks, that there can be no difficulty about it;
it is the _Plantago Psyllium_ L. Dioscorides and Pliny recommend it
pounded with hog’s lard as an application to malignant ulcers; Pliny
also says that its seed is a good application to the bites of serpents.
(H. N. xxvi, 66.) Dioscorides says it cures tumours, arthritic diseases,
intestinal hernia, and other complaints, with rose-oil, vinegar or water.
It is, he says, a powerful refrigerant. (iv, 70.) Galen and the other
Greek authorities give its characters succinctly like our author. Celsus
puts it in his list of agglutinative substances (v, 2.) The Arabians
recommend it for the same purposes as the Greeks, and also for allaying
the inflammation of acute fevers. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 533); Serapion
(De Simpl. 230); Ebn Baithar (i, 132); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 567);
Mesue (De Simpl. 20.) We have treated of it as a poison in Book V. §
40. According to Crantz its poisonous qualities have been exaggerated
by Dioscorides. (Mat. Med. iii, 117.) Accordingly we do not find it
treated of by the late writers on toxicology. Although it has long
ceased to occupy a place in our dispensatory, it has been celebrated in
modern times for its medicinal virtues. Platearius commends it highly
as a cooling and astringent medicine, in acute fevers, dysenteries,
hemorrhages, &c. (De Simpl. Med.) Prosper Alpinus mentions that the
modern Egyptians make frequent use of its mucilage as a medicine, and
hence he finds fault with Dioscorides and Mesue for setting it down as
a poison. (De Med. Ægypt.); and Rutty (Mat. Med. 415.) Its seeds form
with boiling water a rich mucilage, which it appears is still much used
in India, in catarrh, gonorrhœa, and nephritic affections. Lindley (Veg.
Kingd. 643.) A recent authority on pharmacy says of it that its seeds are
mucilaginous and purgative. Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 44.)


Ψωρικὸν,

Psoricum, is formed by mixing two parts of chalcitis with one of
litharge, triturating them in vinegar, and, having put them into a new
pot, by burying them in dung for forty days. It becomes more desiccative,
more subtile, and less pungent than chalcitis.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Dioscorides and Pliny call it a mixture of cadmia and
chalcitis; Galen, Aëtius, and our author say of litharge and chalcitis.
Avicenna follows Dioscorides. (ii, 2, 273.) Celsus also directs it to be
made of chalcitis and cadmia. (vi, 6, 31.) It derives its name from its
being used as an application to parts affected with scabies (psora.) The
psoricum has been long unknown in the practice of medicine.


Ὠὸν,

Ovum, _An Egg_; the white and thin part is free from all pungency,
being moderately cooling. It is to be used for the eyes, ulcers in the
pudendum, and all ill-conditioned ulcers. It is also mixed up with the
medicines which form styptic plasters. And the yelk of an egg being
possessed of similar powers, is mixed up with anti-inflammatory remedies.
When roasted it becomes more desiccative but less soothing. If a whole
egg be boiled in vinegar, and eaten, it dries up alvine fluxes. But if,
having received the addition of some sour substances, such as galls,
sumach, or the flowers of the wild pomegranate, it be fried, it becomes
considerably more drastic. A whole egg applied raw immediately relieves
burns. When taken in a supping state, it concocts and soothes affections
in the chest, and proves demulcent for asperities of the trachea. New
eggs are to be preferred to old, and those of hens to the eggs of all
other animals.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Galen gives, in his usual copious and elegant style, a
somewhat lengthy dissertation on the medicinal properties of eggs, but
the narrow limits to which we are necessarily restricted, prevent us
from transferring the substance of it to our pages, although it contains
much that is highly interesting. (De Simpl. xi.) Galen recommends eggs
for various medicinal purposes; and in particular he says that wool
dipped in the white of an egg proves a serviceable application to burns.
Dioscorides states their virtues more briefly, and to him our author is
more particularly indebted. (ii, 54, 55.) He recommends the white of an
egg in a tepid state for severe pains of the bladder and ulceration of
the kidneys, roughness of the windpipe, vomiting of blood, catarrhs,
and defluxions of the chest. Pliny, Dioscorides, and Sextus Platonicus
say that eggs pounded with oil form an excellent application in cases
of erysipelas, the leaves of beet being laid on the place. Pliny
and Dioscorides recommend them for affections of the eyes. Avicenna
recommends the white of an egg with melilot in ulcers of the intestines.
He says eggs boiled in vinegar are useful in diarrhœa and dysentery. He
recommends a suppository of the albumen of an egg in prolapsus ani, and
other affections of the fundament. Like the preceding authorities he
speaks favorably of it as an application to the eyes. (ii, 2, 520.) See
also Ebn Baithar (i, 193); Serapion (c. 446); Rhases (Ad Mansor.; Antid.
iv.)


Ὤκιμον,

Ocimum, _Basil_, belongs to the second order of calefacients, and has
also some recrementitious humidity, hence it is of no use when taken
internally; but when applied externally, it is discutient and digestive.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It most probably is the _Ocimum Basilicum_. Dioscorides not
only recommends it for many medicinal purposes externally, but also
says of it that it loosens the bowels, is carminative, diuretic, and
creates milk, but is of difficult digestion; the seed, he adds, when
taken in a draught, is beneficial in melancholy, dysuria, and flatulence,
and it is also sternutatory. (ii, 170.) Our author follows Galen very
closely. Aëtius also condemns the internal administration of basil,
but praises highly a decoction of it as a fomentation to the eyes, and
particularly those of children. Oribasius as usual follows Dioscorides,
and, therefore, like him approves of the internal use of it. It occurs
in the works both of Hippocrates and Celsus, the latter of whom says of
it that it moves the bowels, and is diuretic. (ii, 29, 31.) The Arabians
treat of it still more fully than the Greeks. Avicenna says it is a
cordial medicine, that it generally binds the bowels, but also moves
them, if there be humours in them, that it is useful in hæmoptysis and in
difficulty of breathing. (ii, 2, 101.) See also Serapion (c. 167); Ebn
Baithar (i, 110); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. ii, 121.) The basil held a place
in our English dispensatory down to the times of Quincy and Lewis. It
holds a place in the modern Greek Pharmacopœia, where it is stated that
it is indigenous in Persia, and only cultivated in gardens in Greece. (p.
27.)


Ὠκιμοειδὲς,

_Ocimoides_, which some call Philetærium. Its root is useless, but the
seed is composed of subtile matter, and is desiccative without pungency.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Matthiolus held it to be a species of lychnis, but this
opinion is rejected by Dodonæus. Sprengel agrees with Lobelius and
Dalecampius in referring it to the _Saponaria ocimoides_. This is one of
the most disputed articles of the ancient Mat. Med. Of the conjectures
which have been made respecting it, the most probable then is that it
was either a species of _Lychnis_ or _Saponaria_. See Parkinson (Theatre
of Plants, 630, 760.) We are disposed to acquiesce in opinion with those
who hold it to be the _Saponaria ocimoides_. Dioscorides says of it, that
its seed when drunk in wine is calculated to benefit those who have been
stung by scorpions, and is useful for the bites of all other kinds of
reptiles, and that it is given in sciatica with myrrh and pepper. (iv,
28.) Galen states its character in nearly the same terms as our author.
It is not described by Aëtius, by Hippocrates or Celsus, nor, as far
as we can discover, by any of the Arabians, with the exception of Ebn
Baithar, whose notice of it is entirely made up from Dioscorides and
Galen. (i, 93.) It has been long unknown to our Dispensatory, and does
not occur in the Pharmacopœia of the modern Greeks.


APPENDIX TO THE THIRD SECTION.

_On the Substances introduced into the Materia Medica by the Arabians._

Having thus given a brief account of all the Simple Substances described
by the Greek and Roman writers on the Materia Medica, we are now called
upon to supply what information we can procure regarding the additions
made to their list by the Arabians. This, we need scarcely say, is a
field of research, which, having been hitherto but little cultivated,
is attended with difficulties of a particularly formidable nature; for,
although we have been enabled to avail ourselves of the learned labours
of Professor Sprengel, Dr. Royle, Dr. Ainslie, and of certain other
oriental scholars who have touched cursorily upon these matters, we have
been more thrown upon our own resources on the present occasion than
at any other stage of our progress in executing this work. We trust,
then, that our readers will receive with peculiar indulgence our present
essay, which, however imperfect, will be found, if we mistake not, to
have opened up a mine of valuable knowledge from which some more skilful
labourer in the same line will yet draw additional stores of information
to the profession. Of course it will be readily seen, that we do not
pretend to give an account of all the articles introduced into the
practice of medicine by the Arabians; that, even if we were possessed of
the requisite knowledge of the oriental languages, would evidently be
out of the question within our narrow limits. For Ebn Baithar alone, if
his laborious work were properly explored, would furnish a large volume
of new matters added by his own individual exertions to the accumulated
treasures of his predecessors; but, of the articles first treated of
by him there are unfortunately many which are but very doubtfully
determined, and not a few which are left wholly undetermined by his
translator Dr. Sontheimer. And here it is but right that we should
acknowledge that the translation itself would have been to us “a sealed
book” if our learned friend, Professor Blackie, of Aberdeen, had not
come to our assistance, and in so far made up for our own very imperfect
acquaintance with the German language. But, besides the stores of Ebn
Baithar, there is much in those of Avicenna, Serapion, Rhases, and Haly
Abbas, which still remain to be unfolded by some fortunate _savant_ who
is acquainted both with the languages of the East and the sciences of the
West.

It may be proper to mention, that the articles which are here described
are set down in the same order as the notices of them were composed,
because we could not satisfy ourselves with regard to any methodical
arrangement which would conveniently apply to them and be in unison with
the general plan of this work.


_Ambra grisea._

A recent writer on the Materia Medica gives the following description of
Ambergris: “The substance called _Ambergris_ (ambra grisea) is procured
from the Cachalot or spermwhale. In this country it is used as a perfume
only; on the continent it is employed in medicine. It appears to be the
indurated fæces (perhaps somewhat altered by disease) of the animal.
Mr. Beale collected some of the semi-fluid fæces, and found that the
dried mass had all the properties of ambergris. It is a solid, opaque,
grayish, striated substance, having a pleasant musk-like odour, and which
is derived from the squid (_sæpia moschata_) on which the animal feeds.”
Pereira (Mat. Med. 1392.) No one who compares this account of ambergris
with what is said of it in the extracts we have given from Serapion and
Avicenna under _Electrum_, can entertain a doubt that these authors were
well informed as to the nature of this substance. Ebn Baithar gives a
similar account of the origin of ambergris. He says, it is furnished by
sea monsters which swallow it and vomit it up again. It swims on the
surface of water, and the blackish kind is of little value. He calls it
the most excellent of all aromatics, and praises it for strengthening the
heart and brain, and for curing cramp and similar complaints. Among other
powers which it possesses, it is said to be intoxicating. (i, 210, 405.)
See also Haly Abbas (Theor. v, 33.) The Greeks and Romans would appear to
have been unacquainted with this species of Amber until after the Arabian
period. It is accurately described by Symeon Seth, as we have already
stated above in the commentary on _Electrum_. He holds it to be a good
cordial and stomachic medicine.


_Bezoar._

As this article is now but little known in this country, it may be proper
to prefix some account of it from recent authorities. Lewis writes of
it thus: “_Lapis Bezoar orientalis_, oriental Bezoar stone, supposed to
be produced in the pylorus or in a cavity at the bottom of the fourth
stomach of an animal of the goat kind, which inhabits the mountains in
different parts of Persia.” (Mat. Med. 217.) But Bontius is, perhaps we
may say, the most accurate of the modern authorities who have described
the oriental bezoars. He describes them as being alvine concretions which
form in goats or gazelles, and have generally a little piece of chaff as
a nucleus. He had also seen them taken from the bodies of monkeys. (Med.
Ind. c. 45.) See further Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 179, 136.) Now, it
is certain that these Bezoars were much used in medicine by the Arabians
as they are in the East at the present day; and yet, as far as we have
been able to discover, they are not described in any of the Arabian works
on the Mat. Med., with the exception of Ebn Baithar, and his account
of them is very indistinct and unsatisfactory. We may gather from his
description, however, that the term was applied to more substances than
these alvine concretions. One of his authorities speaks of the best
kind being found in the heart of the stag. Like all his countrymen, he
recommends the bezoar as an amulet and an antidote to poisons. (119.)
Indeed the term Bezoar would appear to have been used as signifying
alexipharmical. See Avicenna (ii, 2), and Serapion (c. 441.) Frequent
mention of it occurs in the works of the Arabians. See Haly Abbas
(pluries); Rhases (Cont. l. ult., and xxxv, 6, 8, 1); Avicenna (iv, 6, 1,
4.)


_Camphora._

This article is so important, that we shall be excused if we dwell upon
it at some length. It is well known to be a secretion procured from
several trees of the genus Laurus in the East; but more particularly
from the tree which has been named _Camphora officinarum_. Serapion is
the ancient authority who gives the fullest account of Camphor. In the
first place, owing no doubt to his using some interpolated translation
of Dioscorides into Syriac, he quotes him as stating that it is procured
from India and China and is produced in most abundance during seasons
when there is much thunder. One of his Arabian authorities, Isaac
Ebn Amram, gives a distinct account of the origin of camphor and a
description of the qualities of the different kinds of it, with a brief
notice of the mode of clarifying it by sublimation, which is the process
by which it is still produced. As to its medicinal virtues, he holds it
to be cold and dry in the second degree, and says it is applicable in
cases of inflammations, vertigo, and cholera; in fumigations with myrrh,
rose-oil, and sandal-wood; that it is anaphrodisiac, induces premature
hoariness of the hair; that in a masticatory with lettuce, it cures the
hot intemperament of the brain and induces sleep; removes vertigo; stops
hemorrhages from the nose and all fluxes in general; and, in short, that
it is a common ingredient in all fumigations and ointments. Rhases, as
quoted by him, pronounces camphor to be cold and attenuate (volatile?);
says it is calculated to remove hot intemperaments in the head and the
whole body; when too much used that it induces insomnolency; that it
brings on coldness of the kidneys and bladder; coagulates the semen, and
engenders coldness, and principally in the colder members of the body.
Another Arabian authority, Meseab, calls it cold and dry in the third
degree, and recommends it in epistaxis as a masticatory with raisins.
Mesarugie, another authority, says, in large doses it induces indigestion
and stops the formation of semen. Another of his Arabian authorities,
Aben Mesuai (Mesue the elder?) says, it is astringent of the bowels,
induces premature hoariness of the hair, and is useful in hot apostemes.
Aben Amram, as quoted by him, says, Camphor is cold in the third degree,
and is useful when applied to inflamed parts with rose-water, and
comforts the members of the body and the senses; and is useful in cholera
along with other astringents. He gives a quotation from the ‘Medicina
Antiqua’ to this effect, that camphor is an astringent of the bowels,
and that its use induces hoariness of the hairs. (De Simplicibus, 344.)
Avicenna’s account of it is much more succinct; he describes several
species of it; says it is procured from a very large tree capable of
giving shelter to a multitude of animals; that he had often seen the wood
of it, and that it was white, brittle, light, and contained in its pores
some vestiges of camphor. He holds that its nature is cold and dry in the
second degree. He recommends it in exactly the same cases as Serapion
does, namely, in inflammatory complaints, epistaxis, hot vertigo, and
acute ophthalmy. He also, like Serapion’s authorities, holds that it is
anaphrodisiac and represses fluxes. (ii, 2, 130.) Rhases gives a brief
account of camphor upon the authority of Misib, Mesarguil, and Bimasui;
the first of whom merely recommends it in fluxes; the next relates of
it that an acquaintance of his took six drachms of camphor at one dose,
which impaired his digestion and brought on impotence without inducing
any other complaint; the third, like some of Serapion’s authorities,
represents it to be cold and dry in the third degree, and recommends it
for fluxes, and further says that it induces premature hoariness of the
hair. (Contin. l. ult. i, 147.) In another work he calls it cold, humid,
and subtile (volatile?), and gives it the same characters as the other
authorities. (Ad Mansor. iii, 22.) Mesue gives a formula for troches
of camphor, which he recommends in ardent fevers, heat of the bile and
of the blood, hot intemperaments of the stomach and of the liver, for
intense thirst, jaundice, phthisis, and hectic. (De Trochiscis. i.) Haly
Abbas frequently recommends camphor in the course of his works, but we
have not been able to discover any distinct account of it in the very
barbarous translation of his Materia Medica. Ebn Baithar gives a very
circumstantial account of the formation of camphor on the tree which
produces it, and describes its characters very accurately. He says it is
cold and dry in the second degree, and is useful in hot intemperaments
and bilious headaches. Like some of the others quoted above, he says
it is produced most abundantly in times of thunder. In an over-dose,
he says, it is anaphrodisiac, and induces sleeplessness, and relates
a case in which it destroyed the tone of the stomach, and occasioned
impotence. He says it is used in collyria, and as a sternutatory, and
to stop the hole in a carious tooth. Symeon Seth is the only one of the
Greek authorities that treats fully of camphor (_caphura_.) He says it is
cold and dry in the third degree; that it is the gum or tear of a tree
growing in India; that the tree which produces it is said to be very
large, so that a hundred men could be sheltered by its shade; that it is
produced on the mountains near the sea; and that the wood of the tree is
light and fistulous. He recommends camphor as being most useful in acute
diseases, in headaches from heat, and in inflammations, especially those
of the liver; says that it induces coldness of the kidneys and spermatic
vessels, and coagulates the blood. He mentions a test of its purity. (De
Alimentis.) Myrepsus in one place mentions the herb camphor, but it is
doubtful whether he means the substance we are treating of;—most probably
not. (De Unguent, iii, 46.)


_Cassia Fistula._

Serapion, in the first place, gives a pretty accurate description of
it, and states the localities from which it is procured, namely, India,
Babylonia, and Arabia. Upon the authority of Aben Mesuai he states it to
be of a sweet taste, and laxative of the bowels, and says it has virtues
to extinguish the sharpness of the blood, that it relieves apostemes and
boils in the mouth, and is useful in jaundice and pains of the liver. In
a dose of three to ten drachms he says it is cholagogue and laxative.
Abengnefit, as quoted by him, says it purifies the nerves. Rhases,
as quoted by him, says it is laxative and efficacious in apostemes,
especially those of the throat. (De Simpl. xii.) Avicenna’s account of
it is but little different from that of Serapion. Having described it,
he says it is of an equal temperament as to heat and cold, but is of a
moistening nature, and that in action it is resolvent and laxative. It is
useful, he says, in hot apostemes of the bowels, and especially of the
throat when a gargle of it is prepared with a decoction of nightshade. He
praises it in a liniment for gout and arthritic pains. He speaks well of
it in dyspnœa. He says it cleanses the liver, and is of use in jaundice
and pain of the liver. He says it is a gentle laxative, bringing away
heated bile and phlegm, and opens the bowels safely without griping. (ii,
2, 192.) Badagorius, as quoted by Rhases, says of cassia fistula, that
it is alterative, an evacuant of bile, and a cleanser of the blood. The
son of Mesue, as quoted by the same, recommends it, like Serapion, in
jaundice, pain of the liver, of the throat, &c. Priscianus, as quoted
by Rhases, says it is a safe purgative to pregnant women, brings away
bile, clears away jaundice, and is efficacious in pain of the liver and
throat. Marsenuce (?) recommends it in the same affections of the throat
as the others. (Contin. l. ult. i, 187.) Of all the ancient authorities,
Mesue the younger gives the fullest account of it, but it is in nearly
the same terms as Serapion’s. His description of it is full and accurate.
Any injurious action which it has, he says, may be removed by the mixture
of myrobalans, rhubarb, the water of mastich, and spikenard; and in
dryness of the bowels by mixing almond oil with it. Diuretics also are
said to determine it to the urinary passages. He says it is useful to add
some laxative to it. As to its virtues, he says it cleanses the blood,
allays all sharpness in it, assuages thirst, with the juice of endive,
&c., clears the stomach, brings away yellow bile and phlegm, and that
safely, also purges the breast and throat, and is useful in heat of the
kidneys, when taken with diuretics and the infusion of liquorice, that
it prevents the formation of stones, and is useful in ardent fevers. (De
Simpl. vi.) Ebn Baithar also gives a very elaborate and correct account
of this article, but as it is nearly the same as that of Mesue, we need
not say much about it. He calls it a well-known tree growing in Egypt;
says in moderate doses it is a safe purgative, even to pregnant women,
but in large doses occasions hypercatharsis. If the root is not sound, it
is apt to produce disturbance of the bowels. He says it purges hot bile,
softens the breast, and cleanses the nerves, &c. (i, 401.) Actuarius
describes it by the name of the Black Cassia, and recommends it as a
gentle purgative both alone and with other medicines. (Meth. Med. v,
2.) It occurs among the ingredients in the antidotes of Myrepsus. See
Antidot. (i, xi.) Of course the article we have been treating of will be
recognised as being the _Cassia fistula_ L., the pudding-pipe tree, or
purging cassia. The pulp of the pods is still sometimes used in medicine
as a gentle purgative. See Paris (Pharmacol. i, 271); Pereira (M. M.
1172); Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 150); Royle (M. M. 355.)


_Senna._

If the work of Serapion (De Simplicibus) which we possess, be the
production of the elder Serapion (and after being long familiarly
acquainted with it we are inclined to think so), he is undoubtedly
the first author who has described senna as an article of the Materia
Medica. First on his own authority he describes very accurately the pods,
stalks, and seeds of the plant. On the authority of Isaac Ebn Amram he
recommends it for removing the inquietude accompanying melancholy, for
aches and disturbances of the nerves, for alopecia, phthiriasis, chronic
headache, scabies, pustulæ parvæ, pruritus, and epilepsy. Abix, another
authority, declares it to have great power of purging black and yellow
bile, and of acting as a cordial when mixed with suitable medicines such
as violets. His last authority under this head is Rhases, who says that
senna and fumitory purge adust humours, and prove useful in scabies and
pruritus. (De Simpl. 58.) Under the head of _sahane_ Avicenna briefly
notices an article which he recommends as being abstergent and desiccant
in pruritus and scabies, in pain of the neck, fetid breath, and watery
stomach (waterbrash?). This account we are inclined to think must refer
to senna. (ii, 2, 651.) Rhases gives almost exactly the same description
of the _sahane_. (Contin. l. ult. i, 596.) In his work ‘Ad Mansor.’
(viii, 54), he gives the account of _Sene_ quoted above from Serapion,
and again at ‘Divis.’ (i, 144.) Haly Abbas describes it accurately
in his chapter on Purgatives. (Pract. ii, 54.) He recommends it as a
medicine which purges both yellow and black bile, and is useful in gout
and rheumatism, and in colics when mixed with raisins, oil of almonds,
&c. Mesue describes senna as the folliculus of a plant resembling the
tare. The best part of the plant, he says, is the folliculus (legume?),
and next the leaves; and both these parts are said to be best when of
a green colour. As senna has a tendency to weaken the stomach by its
operation, he recommends it to be mixed with ginger, sal gem, Indian
salt (sugar?), and cordials. He quotes Galen (through some mistake, as
is generally supposed) as recommending it boiled in the soup of fowls.
He also speaks of giving it in whey, or in milk, or in must, that is to
say, the fresh juice of the grape. The last of these preparations he
praises as cleansing the brain and senses, and creating joy. He also
speaks favorably of a decoction of it with prunes and spikenard. As to
its virtues, he says it readily purges black and adust bile, cleanses the
brain, heart, liver, spleen, the senses, and lungs, proves deobstruent
and dispels sorrow. He also speaks favorably of the leaves when applied
to the head in the bath as improving the senses of sight and hearing, and
as proving a remedy to fevers arising from black bile, and to chronic
fevers. (De Simpl. xv.) Ebn Baithar gives an interesting description
of it. He says in Arabia it is used as a dye, and that its leaves are
mixed with those of the plant now called _Lawsonia inermis_. He calls it
cholagogue and melanogogue, says it penetrates the inferior extremities,
and purges them in cases of gout. He also praises it in scabies,
epilepsy, and a great many other diseases. By some mistake he quotes
Paulus. He says it is better in decoction than in powder. The dose of the
latter is from two to three drachms, of the former from four to seven
drachms. (i, 57.) Actuarius says of _sene_, that it purges moderately in
doses of one drachm. (Meth. Med. v, 8.) _Sene_ occurs as an ingredient in
several of the antidotes of Myrepsus, as c. 112, 465, 472. Under this
head we would beg, before concluding, to refer the reader to Ainslie’s
Mat. Ind. (i, 205). It will be there seen that in Æthiopia senna is still
used as a dye.


_Berberis._

Rhases gives extracts from Badigorius, Oribasius, Mesue, and others
on the virtues of this substance, which he represents as being
lithontriptic, styptic, and alexipharmic. He says it is called _calmuris_
in Greek. (Contin. l. ult. i, 121.) Serapion gives extracts from
Dioscorides and Galen under this head, but there seems no reason to
suppose that they were at all acquainted with this article. He recommends
it as being cooling and incisive, and a strengthener of the stomach and
liver. He also praises it in all fluxes. (De Simpl. 229.) Ebn Baithar
calls it astringent, stomachic, and hepatic, and says it binds the bowels
and quenches thirst. He recommends it in diarrhœa connected with weakness
of the liver, and in diseases of the stomach and uterus. See also
Avicenna (vi, 9.) The berberry (_Berberis vulgaris_) is recommended by
Gerard, Parkinson, and all our old herbalists as an astringent medicine
in diseases of the stomach and liver. Even at the present day it is
admitted to possess these virtues. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 102)
and Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 438.) The former of these seems to acknowledge
it as the _Oxyacantha_ of the Greeks, but we think incorrectly. Dr. Royle
supposes the _Lycium Indicum_ of Dioscorides to be the berberry. It seems
to us more probable, however, that the berberry was but the succedaneum
of the lycium. See Schröder (Chemical Dispensatory, 475.)


_Galanga._

Rhases calls it stomachic. (Antid. iii.) Serapion having described it,
upon the authority of Isaac ebn Amram says of it, that it is hot and dry
in the third degree, is useful to phlegmatic persons, and in humidity
of the stomach (waterbrash?); promotes digestion by its heat and the
solution which it occasions in the stomach, and thus relieves colic,
gives fragrance to the breath, and warms the kidneys; it sets the semen
in commotion, and when a piece of it is held in the mouth, it occasions
erections of the _membrum virile_. The same virtues in the same cases are
assigned to it by Aben Mesuai, and also Aben Mesabah, who recommends it
in flatulent colic and eructations. (De Simpl. 332.) Avicenna, having
described it, delivers the same account of its medicinal powers as
Serapion, that is to say, he holds it to be hot and dry in the second
degree, of subtile parts and carminative, says that it renders the breath
fragrant, is good for the stomach, promotes digestion, is useful in colic
and pains of the kidneys, and is aphrodisiacal. (ii, 2, 314; v, 2, 6.)
The same account of it is given by “the Son of Mesue,” in the ‘Continens’
of Rhases (l. ult. i, 323.) In the pharmaceutical work of Myrepsus there
is an “antidotus a Galanga,” which is said to be beneficial in affections
of the stomach and spleen, and in indigestion; also for singultus,
acidity of the food in the stomach, cachexia, dropsy, and coldness of
the whole body: it contains cloves, ginger, cinnamon, galangal, &c. (i,
63; also, 222.) Ebn Baithar ascribes the same virtues to it as Serapion;
thus he says it is a wonderful aphrodisiac, promotes digestion, cures
colic, is carminative, and so forth. Although now little used, galangal
root is not yet wholly unknown to the writers on the Materia Medica. Dr.
Pereira says of “_radix galangæ officinalis_; its odour is agreeably
aromatic, its taste peppery and aromatic. It is the rhizome of the
_Alpinia Galanga_ Roxb.” (Mat. Med. 698.) See also Lewis (Mat. Med. 452);
Hill (Mat. Med. i, 447); Quincy (72); Gray (Suppl. to the Pharmacop. 26);
Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 166.) There are two species of galangal, which Dr.
Lindley refers to the _alpinia racemosa_ and _galanga_. He says of them,
“the warm and pungent roots of the greater and lesser galangals are not
only used by the Indian doctors, but are considered useful in coughs,
given in infusion.” (Ibid.) On the Galangal see further Ainslie (Mat.
Ind., i, 140.)


_Zeduaria_ and _Zerumbeth_.

In order to understand this subject it will be necessary in the first
place to see the descriptions of these substances given by modern
authorities. Dr. Pereira says of the former of these: “The Zeduary root
(_Radix Zeduariæ officinalis_) of English druggists appears to me to
agree with Professor Guibourt’s description of _round Zeduary_ (Zeduaria
rotunda). It is the sliced tuber of _Curcuma Zeduaria_ Rox. It has
a warm, aromatic, bitter taste, and an aromatic odour.” (Mat. Med.
698.) And of the Zerumbet the same author says: “_Cassamunar root_ is
considered by English druggests to be identical with _Zerumbet root_.
(Private information; also, Gray, Pharmacop.) It appears to me to be
the _Turmeric-coloured Zeduary_ of Ainslie (Mat. Ind. i, 490.) Is it
the product of _Zinziber Cassamuniar_ Roxb.? The Zerumbet root which I
received from my friend Dr. Royle is very similar in shape to a curved
and arched piece of long turmeric.” (Mat. Med. 698.) Dr. Ainslie gives
an interesting disquisition on the Zeduary of which he describes three
species: 1. Zeduary Kæmpferian (_Kæmpferia rotunda_.) 2. Zeduary Zerumbet
(_Curcuma Zerumbet_.) 3. Zeduary turmeric-coloured (_Curcuma_ and _Amomum
Zeduaria_.) We shall now be better able to ascertain the meaning of the
ancient descriptions of these substances. Serapion describes separately
the _Zerumbet Zeduaria_ and _Zerumbet_, but in such terms that one is
at a loss to see any real distinction between them. (De Simpl. 172,
271.) He calls Zeduary an odoriferous tree for which cinnamon is often
substituted. He refers to Galen and Paulus, but what passages in their
works he alludes to it is not easy to discover. He describes it as
being a great tree which grows on Mount Lebanon, and produces no fruit,
but has the odour of citron, and is hot and dry in its nature, and is
astringent so as both to open and astringe the bowels. Mesarugie, one
of his authorities, compares its virtues to those of nutmeg; praises it
as being sternutatory, and also stomachic and hepatic. This, without
doubt, is the Zeduary, and the _Zarnabum_ of Avicenna, who describes it
separately from the Zerumbet, but mentions that the latter is much the
same as the Zeduary. (ii, 2, 736, 738.) Rhases, in like manner, compares
the Zerumbet to the Zeduary as being possessed of similar powers. He
treats most fully of the former, recommending it as being alexipharmic, a
good application to apostemes, &c. (Contin. l. ult. ii, 765.) Ebn Baithar
treats fully of the Zerumbeth, which he describes minutely, and compares
it to the great Cyperus. He says it is called camphor-root in the West.
He calls it alexipharmical, cordial, intoxicating; an excellent medicine
in inflation of the uterus, and possessed of emmenagogue and diuretic
powers. He says it is good in affections of the liver and surrounding
parts. It is said to determine downwards when applied to the soles of
the feet in complaints of the head, to prove useful in leprosy when
rubbed into the part affected, and to remove impotence. He also treats
separately, and at considerable length, of the _Zeduaria nigra_. (ii,
95.) From the above account it will be seen that these two substances
were nearly allied to one another, and in fact there is no doubt that
the one was often taken for the other. See further Moses Charras (Royal
Pharmacop. 68); Gray (Pharmacop. 26.) The Zeduary was often used as
a succedaneum for the costus (Pemberton, Dispensatory, 340) in the
composition of the Mithridate, and hence these two substances have been
sometimes erroneously taken for the same. See also Manardus ad Mesue (De
Trochiscis, 154); and Quincy (English Dispensatory, 483.)


_Amomum Grana Paradisi._

There seems to be no doubt that this is the article which Ebn Baithar
means to describe (i, 272). He calls it a spicy plant which comes out
of Yemen and India. He describes two kinds, and says of them that
they are hot, fragrant, and astringent, and hence prove stomachic and
promote digestion. He says they are useful in epilepsy and faintings,
and cure headaches in a sternutatory. He describes the smaller kind as
being weaker but more attenuant than the larger. We are not aware of
the grains of paradise, or Guinea grains, as they are sometimes called,
being described by any other of the ancient authorities. We need scarcely
remark that they are now well known, and occasionally used in the
practice of medicine. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharm. 27); Pereira (Mat. Med.
697); Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 167.)


_Macis_ and _Nux moschata_.

We have shown in the proper place that the _Macer_ of the Greeks and
Romans was not mace. The Arabian authorities, it is true, in describing
_Mace_ quote what the Greeks had written on _Macer_, but this does not
prove their identity, for many such instances of confused reference occur
in their works. Avicenna says, upon the authority of Mesue, that mace
is the cortex (meaning, of course, the involucre) of nux moschata. He
recommends it as a good stomachic, hepatic, and uterine medicine, and
says it proves an astringent in fluxes of the bowels and in dysentery
(ii, 2, 448.) The nutmeg, or nucleus of the _myristica officinalis_, he
says, is of the size of a gall, brittle, having a fine rind (involucre),
and a sharp smell. He recommends it as a styptic in complaints of the
liver, spleen, and stomach, and in difficulty of urine. In oils he says
it is a sedative of pain, and also in pessaries, and it stops vomiting.
(ii, 2, 495.) He quotes no Greek authorities under this head. Rhases,
in his ‘Continens,’ says briefly of the nux moschata, that it resembles
cloves, and is good for the stomach and liver. (l. ult. 507.) In his
other work (Ad Mansor. iii, 30,) he calls it hot and dry, and recommends
it as an astringent in coldness of the stomach and liver. Mesue, in his
electuary of lignum aloes, which he recommends for affections of the
heart, stomach, and coldness of the liver, mentions nutmeg and mace as
two of its ingredients. (De Electariis, i.) The ancient writer, however,
who gives the fullest account of these articles is Serapion, who under
this head quotes only from Arabian authorities, namely, Aaron, Isaac ebn
Amram, Aben Mesuai, Miseaben, Albasari, and Rhases. They all agree in
representing them to be aromatic and astringent, useful in flatulence
and other complaints of the stomach, in fetid breath, indigestion, and
enlargements of the spleen and liver. (De Simpl. 161.) Ebn Baithar’s
extracts under this head are principally from Rhases and Avicenna. He
evidently disapproves of the opinion of those that held _Macer_ and
_Mace_ to be identical. On the nutmeg and mace we would beg to refer to
Ainslie (Mat. Ind. 202, 249.) It will be there seen that the Hindoos
still use these articles as cardiac, hepatic, and stomachic medicines.
It appears doubtful to us whether the Greeks and Romans were at all
acquainted with the nutmeg. For we have always suspected the genuineness
of the last chapter but one of Aëtius, which contains a number of
Indian aromatics not to be found elsewhere in the works of the Greek
authorities. Our suspicions, which are of old date, have been much
strengthened by the discovery that many of the formulæ contained in that
chapter as given in the Latin translation are wanting in the two MSS.
of Aëtius in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. This we have positively
ascertained through the kindness of Dr. Greenhill, who examined this
part of these MSS. at our request to ascertain the fact. It may be well
to take this opportunity of stating that with the original of the last
eight books of Aëtius we have no personal acquaintance further than from
a cursory examination of these MSS. during a very brief visit to Oxford
in 1845. In the MS. named ‘Canon. Gr.’ (109), the nuces Indicæ are called
κάρυα Ινδικά. From what we have stated above, it must now be obvious that
we have arrived at the positive conclusion that the νάσκαφθον of the
Greek Mat. Med. was not mace. (See the Commentary on this article.)


_Nux Indica._

According to Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 268) the first mention of the _Cocos
nucifera_, or cocoa-nut, occurs in the Itinerary of Abuzeid and Wahab.
No mention of it is made in the works of the Greek writers on medicine.
The Arabians describe it minutely as an article of food, so that it ought
to have been noticed by us in our Commentary on the 81st sect. of Book
I. Rhases treats of it very fully as a dietetical article, and also as
a medicine, saying of it that it purges away the tapeworm, that the oil
of it is useful both internally and externally in pains and flatulence
of the back, loins, knees, and in hemorrhoids; and he further quotes
Bemasuy in confirmation of this character of it. All his authorities held
it to be a hot and dry medicine. (Cont. l. ult. i, 506.) Avicenna gives,
almost word for word, the same account of it. The flesh of the cocoa-nut,
he says, is intensely white, and its juice sweet; and when there is not
much juice in it, we are to understand that it is old. The inner bark,
he says, is to be taken off, as being wholly indigestible. He recommends
it in exactly the same complaints as Rhases does, only as a vermifuge he
does not say that its oil brings away the tapeworm, but ascarides and
lumbrici. (ii, 2, 498.) Serapion gives a somewhat fuller description
of the cocoa-nut, which he knew to be the fruit of a palm-tree, but
otherwise his account of it is the same as that of the two authorities
already quoted. Of his Arabian authorities, one says that it is laxative,
and another that it is astringent. (De Simpl. 228.) Haly Abbas recommends
the Nux Indica as a comforter of the nerves in hemicrania, paralysis,
and epilepsy. (Pract. ii, 38, 248.) Mesue notices the “oleum ex nuce
Indica,” which, he says, is useful in nervous pains, purges the lungs
and chest, clears the voice, fattens, and engenders semen. (De Oleis,
i.) Ebn Baithar gives an interesting account of the cocoa-palm both
as a medicine and an article of food. He says its milk is at times
intoxicating and aphrodisiac, and that it is useful in certain complaints
of the urine, in tænia and other intestinal worms. The reader will
find it interesting to compare the above account of the cocoa from the
ancient authorities with what Ainslie says of it in his work, ‘Materia
Indica,’ i, 451; and Dr. Lindley in his late admirable publication on the
‘Vegetable Kingdom,’ (136.)


_Bdellium._

It has been supposed that under this head Avicenna (ii, 2, 112), and
other oriental writers, have included either that species of Palm called
_Borassus flabelliformis_; or another congener, _Hyphæne Thebaica_. See
Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 272); Ainslie (Mat. Ind. i, 452); Royle (Antiq.
of Hindoo Med. 90); Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 136.) The term, however, was
applied to other substances, as we have stated under the proper head.


_Tamarindi._

There is no doubt that we are indebted to the Arabians for our first
knowledge of this important medicine. Serapion, in describing this
article, quotes only from Arabian authorities, which implies that he
held the Greeks to have been unacquainted with it. Its leaves are said
to resemble those of the willow. His first authority, Abohanifa, says it
grows in Cæsaria; and his next, Aben Mesuai, says its fruit, which is of
a ruddy colour, and has much pulp, is brought from India. In temperament
it is said to be cold in the third degree, and has the power of purging
yellow bile gently, and of repressing its pungency; of stopping vomiting,
and removing pruritus. His other authorities, Abugerig, Mesebab, and
Mesarugie, give a similar account of it. (De Simpl. 348.) Rhases writes
of it in nearly the same terms: thus, he says, it extinguishes yellow
bile, opens the bowels, removes thirst and vomiting, and strengthens the
stomach. Its action is said to be similar to that of prunes. (Contin. l.
ult. i, 699.) On his own authority Rhases says of Tamarinds in another
place, that they are of a cold nature, loosen the bowels, repress intense
bile and blood. (Ad Mansor. iii, 49.) Avicenna calls Tamarinds cold and
dry in the second degree, says they are laxative, and more attenuant
than prunes, and contain less juice: that they stop excessive vomiting,
and thirst in fevers, and brace the stomach when it is relaxed. They
are beneficial, he adds, in syncoptic fevers, and other disorders in
which it is necessary to open the bowels gently. (ii, 2, 691.) Mesue
describes Tamarinds as being acidulous dates, or the fruit of wild
palms growing in India. He gives a very minute description of them,
which we need not copy. As to temperament he says, they are cold and
dry in the second degree; and in order to correct their bad effects in
cold affections of the stomach, he directs them to be mixed with mace,
spikenard, mastich, fennel, parsley, endive, &c. He further directs their
action to be increased by giving them in the whey of goats, the infusion
of fumitory or of hops. He gives very minute directions for preparing
Tamarind whey, both simple and compound. As to its virtues, he says, it
brings away bile, represses the ebullition of it, and the heat of the
blood, is beneficial in inflammation of the liver and stomach, quenches
thirst, removes all heat connected with it, is useful in jaundice, stops
vomiting, and is a good medicine in acute fevers which require to be
repressed. Being of a weak nature, Tamarinds, he says, require to be
given to the amount of from two to five ounces. (De Simpl.) Ebn Baithar’s
description of Tamarinds is full and accurate, but does not contain
anything of importance in addition to the information which we have
extracted from the other authorities who preceded him. (See Vol. I, 212.)


_Myrobalani._

We have stated under the head of _Balanus_, that the Greek authorities
before the Arabian period were entirely unacquainted with the stone
fruits which now bear the name of _Myrobalans_. As these substances are
now scarcely known in this country, we shall find it convenient again,
in the present instance, to give, in the first place, a brief account
of them from modern authorities. They are well described by Geoffroy,
Alston, the Commentators on Mesue, and many other writers on the Mat.
Med. They held a place in the British Dispensatory as late as the time
of Quincy, and are described by Boerhaave in his Mat. Med. They have not
lately been used in the practice of medicine either in Europe, or by our
English physicians in the East Indies, as far as we have been able to
learn. Five species are described by all writers on them, both ancient
and modern, namely, the Citrine, Belleric, Chebulic, Emblic, and Indian.
For a particular description of them see Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 262);
Ainslie (Mat. Ind. i, 236), and Royle (Antiq. of Hindoo Med.) According
to the last of these authors, the Black _or_ Indian, the Yellow _or_
Citrine, and the Chebulic, are the product of the _Terminalia Chebula_;
the fourth _or_ Beleric, of the T. Belerica, all belonging to the natural
tribe of medicines now called Combretaceæ; while the fifth _or_ Emblic is
the fruit of the _Phyllanthus Emblica_, now called _Emblica officinalis_.
See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 280.) We shall now be able to apprehend the
descriptions of the ancient authors.

Rhases quotes several Arabian and Indian authorities on Myrobalans.
The Citrine _or_ Yellow, according to Badigorias (Pythagoras?), is
cholagogue, and the Black stomachic. The other authorities quoted by him
agree in generally holding that myrobalans are cholagogue and stomachic,
and that they are useful in hemorrhoids and palpitation of the heart.
Sarac, the Indian, recommends them as purgative and stomachic medicines
in mental diseases, hemorrhoids, headache, dropsy, and diseases of
the spleen. They all seem to be agreed in holding that myrobalans are
possessed of a purgative power compounded with astringency. (Contin. l.
ult. i, 473.) In his other works he recommends myrobalans for purging
yellow bile, and melancholy or black bile, and also as astringents.
(Divis. i, 144, and Ad Mansor. viii, 54.) In the latter work he says,
that in order to purge, the proper dose of citrine myrobalans is from
ten to twenty drachms. Avicenna describes four species of myrobalans,
namely, the Citrine, unripe, the black Indian, the Kebulic, and the
Chinese, meaning by the last, we suppose, the Emblic, or fruit of the
_Emblica officinalis_. He describes minutely their specific differences,
and states of their general virtues as medicines, that they are cold in
the first degree and dry in the second; that they all extinguish yellow
bile, and are useful in bilious complaints; that the black brightens
the colour, and all kinds are useful in leprosy. He recommends them
in diseases of the eyes, and in those of the chest accompanied with
palpitation and sorrow. He also states several minute distinctions among
them as to medicinal powers, which we do not think it necessary to enter
upon. (ii, 2, 449.) Serapion writes very elaborately on myrobalans,
of which he describes four species, the Citrine, the Black or Indian,
the Kebulic, and the Chinese citrine (Emblic?). The authorities quoted
by him are generally agreed, that myrobalans possess astringency
with bitterness, purge bile and whet the stomach; are cordial, and
prove useful in melancholy, &c. Sarac, the Indian, as quoted by him,
maintains of myrobalans, that they are hot and astringent, and at
the same time eccoprotic, that they strengthen the senses and the
nerves, are useful in leprosy, colic, old hemorrhoids, vertigo, and
dropsy, and that they induce nausea and vomiting. Honain gives minute
directions for the preparation of them, but these we shall not enter
upon. Some apothecaries, he says, fall into the mistake of selling
Kebulic myrobalans of a black colour for the true black kind. For the
true black myrobalans, he says, are brought from India, whereas of the
Kebulic, some are yellow and others black according to the time of
their growth at which they are gathered from the trees. He gives very
minute directions for administering them with other substances, such
as prunes, Sebesten plums, jujubes, and the like; but as most of these
substances are not now much known, it would not be interesting to most
readers to learn his remarks on this subject. (De Simpl. 107.) Mesue
also gives a very elaborate and circumstantial account of myrobalans,
which our necessary limits prevent us from giving at full length. He
ranks them with the Blessed Medicines (_medicinis benedictis_); for,
he adds, in loosening the bowels, they do not weaken but strengthen
the stomach, heart, liver, and the whole body. The only bad effect, he
says, which they ever produce, is obstruction. Their operation, he adds,
is wonderfully increased by combining them with scammony. He says, of
all the kinds, that they are cold in the first degree and dry in the
second. His directions for correcting any bad effects from the use of
them, and for increasing their operation, are most circumstantial, and
bespeak an intimate acquaintance with the subject. He eulogises them
in the strongest terms, declaring that they restore youth, improve the
complexion, the breath, and the perspiration, impart joy and hilarity,
strengthen the stomach, heart, and liver, are useful in palpitations,
cleanse the stomach, are useful in hemorrhoids, extinguish heat in
cholera, and this more especially the citrine. He also speaks favorably
of them in a prescribed preparation for complaints of the eyes, and
for tertian and bilious fevers. The Kebulic, he says, are phlegmagogue,
and especially the prepared kinds; they improve the sight, cleanse
and comfort the stomach, and are useful in dropsy and chronic fevers.
The Black bring away black and adust bile, are useful in melancholy
and palpitations, clear the colour, cure leprosy, remove sadness, and
are beneficial in quartans. The dose from two to five drachms. (De
Simpl. ii.) He treats separately of the Emblic and Belleric, but we
need not enter upon his account of them. And here we would refer our
readers to Costa’s commentary on this part of Mesue, as containing all
the interesting information which can be gleaned from ancient authors
on the subject of myrobalans. For the other Arabians, see Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 54); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42); Ebn Baithar (pluries); and
Avenzoar (Antidot.) None of these supply much that is important after
what we have given from the other authorities. Of the Greek writers on
medicine, Actuarius is the only one that gives any distinct account of
myrobalans, and he professes to derive his information from “the wise
barbarian doctors,” meaning the Arabians. He first describes the Citrine,
the Kebulic, and the Black or Indian, and represents them as possessing
purgative powers, combined with some astringency and tonicity. Besides
these three kinds he mentions, as possessing purgative powers of a like
nature, two medicines, which he calls _empelilez_ and _empletze_, by
which he no doubt meant Emblic and Belleric. (Meth. Med. v, 8.) The
five kinds of myrobalans, namely, the Citrine, the Kebulic, the Indian,
the Belleric, and the Emblic, occur in one of the antidotes of Nicolas
Myrepsus, who recommends them in various remittent and intermittent
fevers. (i, 24.) Myrobalans have always been much esteemed by the Hindoo
physicians. See the Susruta, and Wise’s Book on Hindoo Medicine (pluries.)


_Manna._

Though the Arabians would certainly appear to have been the first to
introduce the substance now used medicinally under this name, it is
impossible to believe that the Greeks and Romans can have been wholly
unacquainted with it. It, we need scarcely inform our professional
readers, is procured principally from the _Ornus Europæa_ or flowering
ash, either by incision, or the puncture of an insect. The ancients,
however, applied this term to a variety of the _thus_, as we have stated
in the preceding commentary on this section, and also to the _honey-dew_
described in Vol. I, pp. 178, 179 of this work. We have further mentioned
under the head of _Elæomeli_, that it probably was some species of manna.
Altogether then the term we are now considering is often a puzzle in
reading the works of the ancient authorities. See further Ainslie (Mat.
Ind. i, 209); Sprengel (R. H. H.); Pereira (M. M. 928); Lindley (Veg.
Kingd. 547, 617, 737, 341, 342.) Even the Arabians, who appear to have
been perfectly well acquainted with its medicinal properties, confound it
with the honey-dew, and seem to say that it falls from heaven upon the
trees. Serapion describes it by the name of _Tereniaben_ or mel roris,
and says it falls from above upon certain trees, and resembles granulated
honey. Its virtues he states, upon the authority of Isaac ebn Amram, to
consist in opening the bowels, and moistening the chest, and he adds that
it suits with persons of a hot temperament, especially when dissolved
in water of jujubes, or of prunes. His other authorities recommend it
in the same complaints, and also in the inflammation of ardent fevers
and for quenching thirst. The dose is said to be from ten to twenty
drachms. (De Simpl. 10.) We may mention that Serapion and all the other
authorities mention that manna is found most abundantly on thorns.
Avicenna’s account of this subject is so like to that of Serapion that
it would be superfluous to give any abstract of it. (ii, 2, 694.) Rhases
also gives nearly the same description of manna upon the authority of
Abinerog, Mesaurice, Mesue, and Chuz. (Contin. l. ult. i, 711.) All these
authorities represent it as being a gentle purgative and expectorant,
and as being useful in acute and intermittent fevers. In another of
his works (Ad Mansor. ix, 14), treating of hoarseness and coryza, he
prescribes an expectorant decoction, one of the ingredients of which is
“_manna_, quam aërium appellant.” In his chapter on angina (ix, 51) he
prescribes a laxative medicine containing tamarinds, cassia fistula, and
“_manna_ quam veteres mel aërium appellant.” Mesue gives an elaborate
account of the origin, characters, temperament, and virtues of manna,
which is well worth consulting, although it contains nothing of any
great importance in addition to what is stated above on the authority of
Serapion, Avicenna, and Rhases. He would appear moreover to confound the
_manna thuris_ with the manna of the ash. Like the other authorities, he
holds manna to be a gentle cholagogue, and says it softens the throat,
the chest, the bowels, and quenches thirst. The dose from six to fifteen
drachms. (De Simpl. 8.) We have not found anything further of interest in
the works of Averrhoes, Haly Abbas, and Ebn Baithar. The last of these
says the Ros Melleus is a substance which falls upon trees in Chorasan;
that it is useful in ardent fevers, moistens the chest, proves more
detergent than sugar, cools thirst, improves the memory, purges yellow
bile, &c. He evidently alludes to the true manna of the ash. Actuarius
mentions cassia fistula and manna as two purgative medicines which may be
safely given to children and pregnant women. (Meth. Med. v.)


_Turpeth._

There can be no doubt that it is the _Convolvulus Turpethum_. Rhases
recommends turpeth for purging crude and recrementitious humours from the
knees and other joints. His two authorities, Mesue the elder, and Chuz,
give it the same character. (Contin. l. ult. i, 729.) Avicenna, after
describing it, represents it as being efficacious in diseases of the
nerves and joints, as being phlegmagogue, and if mixed with ginger, as
bringing away crude humours. (ii, 2, 701.) Serapion confounds it with the
tripolium of Dioscorides and Galen, as we have stated under that head.
Upon the authority of Aben Mesuai he assigns it the property of purging
viscid phlegm, but says that it brings on mental depression by its horrid
taste, and, therefore, it ought not to be taken alone. Other Arabian
authorities, quoted by him, give it the same character. He describes the
medicine very minutely, and the marks by which we may determine whether
it be sound or not. The dose is from one to two drachms. (De Simpl.
337.) Haly Abbas treats of it in his chapter on purgatives, but confines
himself principally to a description of the medicine itself. (Pract. ii,
2, 557.) The ancient author who has treated most fully of turpeth, is
Mesue the younger in his work ‘De Simpl.’ (11.) He gives a circumstantial
description of it, and full directions for correcting its bad
qualities by mixing it with other substances, such as scammony, dates,
ginger, almonds, &c. He recommends it principally as a phlegmagogue,
and an evacuant of gross humours in diseases of the joints, and as a
preservative from leprosy and other diseases of the skin. It has been
much disputed whether or not the turpeth of Mesue be the same as that of
the other Arabians. (See his Commentators l. c.) We see little reason for
questioning their identity. We have not found anything additional of much
interest in the great work of Ebn Baithar under this head. The turpeth of
Actuarius is the root of the pityusa, that is to say of the _Euphorbia
pityusa_. (Meth. Med. v, 9.) Dr. Ainslie, treating of the _Convolvulus
turpethum_, says: “Our present article had long a place in the Mat. Med.,
but of late years has fallen into disuse. Alston (M. M. ii, 530) speaks
of turpeth as being a strong resinous cathartic, recommended in his days
in gout, dropsy, and leprosy.” (Mat. Ind. ii, 384.) It is still known
in the shops as a rough purgative. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharm.) We are
satisfied that it was not known to the Greeks before the Arabian period,
that it was neither the Tripolium, as we have already stated, nor yet
the Alypias, as some have supposed. It has been long used as a purgative
medicine by the Hindoo physicians. See Wise (Hindoo Med. 145.)


_Dende._

Serapion gives a very lengthened account of the _Dend hayse_, and
describes two species of it. He speaks of part of it being poisonous, and
states that it purges strongly, and induces tenesmus. A person who has
taken of it is directed to vomit, to take butter and milk in drink with
astringents of a demulcent nature, such as purslane, gum Arabic, &c. He
mentions that it is a medicinal herb much used in India and Babylonia,
along with other purgatives, but he adds that it induces great debility
in that hot and dry country, whereas in Yemen, where the heat is attended
with great rains, no class of medicines answer so well as that which
possesses astringent and laxative powers combined, such as turpeth,
myrobalans, manna, and the like. But _dend_, he says, answers only in
cold countries like Seni (China?). When it brought on hypercatharsis, he
says, he directed his patient to sit in a cold hip-bath, and to get cold
water dashed over his body. (De Simpl. 388.) Avicenna’s description of
_dende_ is mostly taken from Serapion. He directs it to be administered
only in a cold country, and along with substances calculated to restrain
its violent operations, such as starch and saffron. He says it purges
humours and phlegm from the joints. (ii, 2, 215.) We have not been
able to discover any traces of it in the works of Haly Abbas, Rhases,
Mesue, nor Averrhoes. Ebn Baithar, however, treats of it fully. He
says, or at least his German translator makes him say, that it is the
_Ricinus_, and not an _Euphorbia_, as some had supposed. He gives a
minute description of three kinds—the Chinese, the Indian, and the
Arboreus; and of these the first is said to be the best and strongest in
its purgative operation. It is said to be hot, sharp, and oily, and to
purge the body effectually, especially the humours in the joints. It is
not given, he says, in hot countries, such as Irak, the sea-coast, the
land of Egypt, and Yemen, because fluxes in these countries are common,
and owing to the relaxation of the body, it cannot bear this violent
medicine. One of his authorities, Honain, wisely remarks that in all
hot countries severe medicines ought to be avoided. Minute directions
are given for counteracting its deleterious effects. It is said to act
as a hot drastic purgative, and to excoriate the intestines. Its bad
effects are best counteracted by an emetic, butter, gum lac, and other
demulcents. We used to think there could be little or no doubt but that
Sprengel was right in referring it to the strychnos colubrinus; but of
late, certain authorities, for whom we feel much respect, have held it
to be the _Croton Tiglium_. See Royle (Antiq. Hind. Med. 36; Mat. Med.
552); Pereira (739); and Sontheimer apud Ebn Baithar. We still think
that the _lignum colubrinum_ is at least as applicable to the dende. It
has been used medicinally in modern times. See Hill (Mat. Med. 693);
Gray (Pharmacop. 58); and Pereira (922.) Pereira mentions that he had
analysed it, and found that it contains nearly the same ingredients as
St. Ignatius’ Bean. Dr. Lindley calls the tree, which furnishes the
lignum colubrinum, the _Strychnos ligustrina_, and mentions of it that it
had been used in paralysis of the extremities, and as an anthelminthic.
(Veg. Kingd. 603.) Dr. Royle mentions (M. M. l. c.) that when in India
the seeds of the croton tiglium were given him as the _dund_ of the
Arabians. Is it not more probable that they were merely meant as the
_succedaneum_ of the _dende_?


_Fel._

Serapion treats of this substance under the same head with two others,
_bel_ and _sel_. The _bel_ has never been well ascertained, but Sprengel
and Ainslie are agreed that the _sel_ is the _Ægle marmelos_, on which
see Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 458.) And now with regard to the _Fel_, Serapion
describes it as a fruit having an external covering like a filbert,
containing a grain like that of the larger pine, its colour being
intermediate between yellow and white, and it, he adds, is the part which
is administered. He says it relieves the inflation of hemorrhoids. (c.
261.) Avicenna gives exactly the same account of _Fael_, which in the
glossarium is described as being “radix seu fructus nenufaris Indi.”
He calls it a well-known Indian medicine, useful in relaxation of the
nerves, and in inflation of hemorrhoids. He says his virtues are like
those of the apples of mandragora. (ii, 2, 251.) Rhases, in like manner,
says briefly of _Fel_ that it is a well-known Indian medicine, having
powers like those of mandragora. (Contin. l. ult. i, 298.) Dr. Ainslie
writes of it thus: “The croton nuts were known to the Arabian physicians
by the name of _fell_ (Serapion 261), and were formerly brought to
England under the name of _Molucca grains_.” (Mat. Ind. 106.) Sprengel
also in his R. H. H. refers the _Fel_ to the _Croton Tiglium_. Dr. Hill
says of the Molucca grains: “The grana tiglia are of the ricinus kind;
they are the _nucula cathartica quarta Moluccana purgatoria_,” &c. See
further p. 540, and Geoffroy (iii. 5, 30.) Certainly it appears to us
that the medicinal virtues of the _Fel_, as given above by Serapion,
Rhases, and Avicenna, do not agree well with the known powers of the
croton tiglium. We cannot, however, pretend to determine what substance
the Fel was.


_Santalum rubrum._

Avicenna describes the two kinds of sandal wood (_lignum pterocarpi
santalini_) still well known in practice. He says it is a cold and dry
medicine, which repels determinations to parts, and this more especially
the red. The diseases he most particularly recommends it in are,
palpitation of the heart, fevers, weakness of the stomach, and this
both in liniments and in draughts. The white, he says, is useful in hot
fevers. (ii, 2, 649.) He quotes Galen under this head, but his translator
is sensible of this being a mistake. Serapion describes the white, the
yellow, and the red kinds of sandal-wood, and gives a very circumstantial
account of them. He says sandal-wood is brought from Sini (China?). The
various authorities quoted by him concur in giving the different kinds
of sandal-wood the same characters as Avicenna, representing it as being
useful in complaints of the stomach, and in cardiac disease; and mixed
with camphor and rose oil as an external application in hot vertigo when
rubbed into the temples. They also agree in representing it along with
other cooling plants as being serviceable in gout. The sandal-woods,
in short, they all hold to be cold in the third degree and dry in the
second. (De Simpl. 346.) Rhases gives a brief account of the red and
white sandal-woods, which his authorities recommend in weakness of the
stomach, and pain of the head; and also for palpitation of the heart in
fevers, when rubbed over the stomach, and for erysipelas when rubbed into
the face. (Contin. l. ult. ii, 1, 609.)


_Azedarach._

Avicenna describes it as being a well-known tree, having fruit like the
Lotus Arbor (_Celtis Australis?_). He says it is a very large tree,
and that its flower is hot in the third degree, and dry in the end of
the first, and that it is possessed of deobstruent powers; and the
decoction of its leaves kills lice in the hair and strengthens it. Its
fruit is bad for the stomach and chest. It is anthelminthic, and useful
in colics and in pituitous fevers along with fumitory and myrobalans.
(ii, 2, 17.) Rhases gives the same account of the _assedarach_. (Contin.
l. ult. i, 89.) It is barely mentioned by Serapion as being a large
tree, but we have not been able to discover it in his Mat. Med. The
Arabian authorities of Ebn Baithar give an elaborate account of it,
representing it as being dangerous to persons who take it in large doses,
but in smaller ones useful for various purposes, and more especially
for promoting the growth of the hair. (i, 30.) There can be no question
that it must have been the _Melia azedarach_ or “bead tree.” Dr. Ainslie
says of it that “in India the bark of the melia azedarach has been
ascertained to possess powerful tonic and antifebrile virtues,” and that
“it is ordered for almost every purpose that the cinchona is in Europe.”
(Mat. Ind. i, 70, ii, 454.) See further on the tree, Miller (Dictionary);
Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 464); and Crantz (Mat. Med. iii, 40.) The last of
these says of it, that he had “read in the _Encyclopedia_ (!!) that it
kills lice, &c.” The azedarach is frequently noticed in the Susruta. See
also Wise’s Book of Hindu Medicine. (119.)


_Anacardium._

On this see Serapion (De Simpl. 356); Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i, 47);
and Avicenna (ii, 2, 40.) Of these authorities Avicenna describes it
most minutely. They all recommend it in mental diseases, and especially
in loss of memory, and say it is useful in coldness of the nerves,
in paralysis, and spasms. Avicenna recommends it as a fumigation to
hemorrhoids. Without doubt it is the _Semicarpus Anacardium_, or “marking
nut tree” of commerce. It has been used in modern practice, but has now
fallen into disuse. See Hill (Mat. Med. 490.) Rhases quotes Galen on the
_anacardium_, referring, as we suppose, to his χρυσοβάλανος. (De Comp.
Med. sec. gen. viii.) That the latter was the _semicarpus anacardium_
seems not unlikely. See Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 209.) It is briefly
noticed also by Myrepsus and Actuarius under the name of ξανθοβάλανος.
And further, it is deserving of remark that _anacardia_ occurs as an
ingredient in one of our author’s antidotes (c. 170, Ed. Basil.) To
say the least then, it appears doubtful whether the Greeks were wholly
ignorant of these substances as stated by Matthiolus. (Comment. in
Dioscor. 189.)


_Diudar._

Avicenna says of it that it belongs to the genus _abhel_ (sabina?) and is
called the Indian pine; that it is pungent, and contains a milk which is
hot and occasions thirst. He adds that it is good for relaxation of the
nerves, paralysis, &c., also for cold apostemes (chronic inflammations?)
of the brain, apoplexy, and catalepsy. He concludes by stating of it that
it is lithontriptic, binds the bowels, and that its decoction removes
relaxation of the anus. (ii, 2, 213.) In the Glossarium of Avicenna (l.
c.) reference is here made to Rhases (Cont. l. ult. iii, 31), but we
can find no notice of the Diudar there, nor in any part of the works of
Rhases. Ebn Baithar’s account of this article is taken literally from
Avicenna. Dr. Royle has ingeniously pointed out the correspondence both
of name and characters between the _Diudar_ of the Arabians and the
_Pinus Deodara_. (Antiquity of Hindoo Med. 36.) See also Lindley (Veget.
Kingd. 228.)


_Sandaracha_, or _Gum vernix_.

It is to be remarked, on the outset, that Serapion and Avicenna in
treating of the vernix do not make any reference to Dioscorides and
Galen, as is their wont, from which it may be inferred that they did
not recognise it as one of the articles which had been described by
their Grecian masters. Serapion’s Arabian authorities on this head
are, Albugerig, Aben Mesuai, Badegoras, Mesarugie, Abrix, Alabari,
Rhases, and Isaac Eben. They agree in recommending it in fumigations
for catarrhs, for stopping immoderate menstruation, drying fistulæ; as
an anthelminthic, and remedy for hemoptysis and hemorrhoids. One of
his authorities (Isaac Eben) describes it as being a gum of a yellow
colour, like the _karabe_, and says it is brought from the land of the
Christians. He adds, respecting the _karabe_, that Galen says it is
the gum _haur romane_ (populi Romanæ [?]). Whether by this he meant
amber, we shall inquire presently. Avicenna says of the _sandaracha_ or
_vernix_, that it is hot and dry in the second degree, and that it has
some astringency, and the power of stopping hemorrhages. He says it is
used for removing obesity, for drying fistulæ, that the smoke of it cures
catarrhs, and is the best of all remedies for toothache; that it cures
palpitation as well as the _karabe_, stops fluxes of blood, cures humid
asthma, and is used by wrestlers to strengthen the breath. It is good, he
concludes by saying of it, in diseases of the spleen, and its fumes cure
old sores and hemorrhoids. (ii, 2, 619.) It may be proper to remark here,
that although Avicenna applies the term _sandarach_ both to _realgar_
and _gum vernix_ he does not fall into the mistake of confounding these
substances with one another. This will be clearly seen by comparing ii,
2, 48, with l. c. The Latin translation of the chapter in Rhases’s
‘Continens,’ on Sandarach, is so particularly barbarous, that some
passages of it are scarcely intelligible to _us_, albeit we have spent
more time than most people in poring over these most _unclassical_
productions. It is clear, however, that his Arabian authorities recommend
vernix in exactly the same cases as Serapion and Avicenna do, namely, in
fumigations for asthma and coryza, as a drying application to fistulæ and
hemorrhoids, as a stimulant in diseases of the eyes, and as a remedy for
defluxion and fluxes of blood from the womb. (Contin. l. ult. i, 610.)

Dr. Lewis, treating of the Juniperus, says, “In the warmer climates,
particularly on the coasts of Africa, there exudes from a larger species
of juniper a resinous juice which concretes into semi-pellucid, pale,
yellowish tears, resembling mastich, but larger; the _sandaracha_ and
_gummi juniperi_ of the shops, called by some, from the use to which it
is principally applied, _vernix_. It has been given internally against
hemorrhages, old fluxes, and ulcerations; but is principally employed
externally in corroborant, nervine, and traumatic applications.” (Mat.
Med. ii, 24.) Recent authorities have decided that the gum sandarach is
not the product of the juniperus communis, as usually supposed, but of
the _Callitris quadrivalris_. See Pereira (Mat. Med. 727); and Lindley
(Veg. Kingd. 229.) On the vernix see further Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop.
201.)

Is this the same as the _Cedria_ of the Greeks and Romans? See
Dioscorides (i, 105); Galen (De Simpl. vi.) We are inclined to think that
it either was the same, or, at all events, that both were procured from
trees of the same genus. See the description of the Cedria given by Pliny
(H. N. xxiv, 11) with the notes of Harduin. We have stated under _Cedrus_
that it generally signifies a large species of juniper. And further,
upon comparing the medicinal uses of the _cedria_ as given by Pliny (who
follows Dioscorides closely) with those of the Sandarach as given above
from the Arabians, no one can doubt that they must apply to the same
thing, or at least to substances of a like kind. The _cedria_ must not be
confounded with _cedrium_ described by Pliny. (H. N. xvi, 21.) The latter
would appear to have been a liquid procured from the wood by distillation
or boiling. There appears much probability in the conjecture of Berzelius
that the _cedrium_ was a sort of pyroligneous acid. Pliny says it was
used for embalming dead bodies. (l. c.)


_Karabe_, or _Populus_.

Avicenna describes it as being the gum of a tree called _haur romana_
(populus Romana?), resembling vernix, of different colours, and when
of a ruddy colour attracting chaff and other small objects. He says
the gum is like the flower of the tree in virtues but colder, being
astringent in the case of all fluxes, especially bleeding from the
nose, and hemoptysis. He agrees with Rhases and Serapion that it is
a good periapt in cases of hot apostemes. He recommends it as a good
cordial medicine, and one which is useful in affections of the stomach
and bowels. (ii, 2, 364.) He treats of the other parts of the poplar
separately, and also gives a distinct chapter on _Ambra_, and in his work
‘De Med. Cord.’ he treats separately of _Ambra_ and _Karabe_. Serapion
under the head of _haur romi_ first gives abbreviated translations of
Dioscorides’s and Galen’s descriptions of the black poplar (ἄιγειρος),
and then a translation of an extract said to be from Paulus, but which
we cannot trace in the works of our author. In that extract _Karabe_
is called the gum of the _haur romi_; it is said to be astringent, and
to be confounded by some with the sandarach, and that it was called
the funeral gum because the Latins used it in burials. He concludes by
giving extracts from several Arabian authorities regarding its medicinal
characters, which agree in the main with those given above from Avicenna.
(De Simpl. 276.) He gives a perfectly distinct chapter on _Ambra_ (c.
196.) Rhases has a chapter on the “_haur seu fagus_,” which, except that
it does not contain the pretended extract from Paulus, is made up from
almost the same authorities as the one of Serapion which we have just
discussed. _Karabe_, it is said, is the gum of the tree. (Contin. l. ult.
i, 256.) Although there is a good deal of confusion in the accounts of
_Karabe_ contained in these extracts, we think it impossible to avoid
drawing the conclusion that the authorities meant to apply it to the
resin of some _balsam poplar_, probably some variety of the _Populus
nigra_, or _dilatata_. It would be a great mistake then to identify the
_Karabe_ with amber. Indeed, Ebn Baithar distinctly says that amber
is _not_ the gum of the black poplar as had been supposed, which he
clearly establishes by showing that the characters of the gum poplar,
as given by Dioscorides and Galen, by no means accord with those of
amber (succinum.) See further under _Electrum_, _Sandarach_, and _Ambra
grisea_. It is proper to mention that although our opinion with regard to
the _Karabe_ be as we have stated, most of our modern authorities have
set it down as being identical with the _succinum_. See Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 215); Royle (Mat. Med. 648); Pemberton (Dispensatory, 102.)
We are persuaded, however, that whoever will carefully read the ninth
chapter of the first part of Avicenna’s work “on Cordial Medicines,”
must agree with us that he held the _Karabe_ and _Ambra_ to be totally
different substances, and a careful study of Mesue (De Electariis)
will confirm this conclusion. The gum or resin of the black poplar is
mentioned by Schroeder. (Chemical Dispensat. 442.)


_Tembul_ and _Faufel_.

We treat of these substances under one head for a reason which will
become apparent before the conclusion of our article upon them. _Tembul_,
according to Avicenna, is cold in the first degree and dry in the second;
it is astringent and desiccant; it strengthens the gums, and for this
purpose is constantly chewed by the Indians; it also strengthens the
stomach, and for this purpose also is frequently chewed by the same
people. (ii, 2, 699.) Haly Abbas gives a very similar account of it;
he says it is brought from India, and that seafaring men made much use
of it, because they lived much upon fish. (Pract. ii, 36, 207.) Ebn
Baithar treats of it at great length. One of his authorities, Abuthanifa,
says it improves the state of the mouth. Elmasudi gives an interesting
description of it; he says it renders the breath fragrant, improves the
mouth, and even the mind, and he says further of it that it reddens the
teeth. Elgafaki says it cures bleeding and swelling of the tonsils, being
of an astringent and desiccant nature. Elscherif calls it hot in the
first, and dry in the second degree, and says it produces exhilaration
of spirits, and cures flatulence. He describes minutely the Indian mode
of using it. The author himself under this head warns his readers not to
confound the plant used in his time for the tembul, with the true tembul,
which he says was seldom brought from India in his days because it lost
its virtues by being carried to a distance. (ii, 200.)

_Faufel_, or _Avellana Indica_, is described by Serapion’s authorities
as being like the nutmeg, and as having a slight degree of heat with
some bitterness. Its virtues are said to be like those of the sandal
tree. It is recommended as an application to hot apostemes. Some of
his authorities call it hot and dry, and all seem to agree in holding
it to be astringent. One of them, Mesarugie, says that it suits with
toothache and scabies of the eyebrow. Mesue says it strengthens the
teeth, represses the gums when swelled, and is useful in swelling of
the eye. (De Simpl. 345.) Avicenna describes it as being cold with some
astringency, and as being useful in hot apostemes of a gross nature, and
inflation of the eye. (i, 2, 256.) Ebn Baithar calls it a palm, and says
of it that it is a gentle purgative, makes the breath fragrant, is a
cordial, and strengthens the gums and teeth. (i, 267.)

Now there can be no doubt that the former of these is the _piper betel_,
and the latter the _areca catechu_. The nuts of the latter, which modern
authorities describe as resembling the nutmeg, are cut into slices, and
along with the leaves of the betel constitute the famous masticatory
of the East called _betel_. For an account of these two substances,
consult in particular Ainslie (Mat. Ind. i, 268, 465); Royle (Antiq. of
Hindoo Med. 85); Pereira (M. M. 616); Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 137); Meyen
(Geograph. of Botany, as edited by the Ray Society.)


_Chubabe_, or _Cubebæ_.

Avicenna under this head refers to the _carpesium_ of Galen, but it
evidently was a different substance. Some, he says, had called it
refrigerant with some heat, but he holds it to be truly hot and dry in
the second degree. He calls it aperient and attenuant, and recommends
it in putrid ulcers of the members and gums, as a medicine which clears
the voice when held in the mouth, and as a deobstruent of the liver
in _engorgement_ thereof; as a cleanser of the urinary passages, as a
diuretic medicine which promotes the discharge of gravel and stones of
the kidneys, and of the bladder, and he adds, “Sputum masticantis eam
delectat eam cum qua habetur coitus.” (ii, 2, 134.) Rhases also, through
some mistake, quotes Galen under this head, and gives exactly the same
account of its medicinal powers as Avicenna. (Contin. l. ult. i, 242.)
Serapion under this head gives Dioscorides’s description of the wild
myrtle with further references to Galen and Paulus, but concludes by
saying that he was sensible Dioscorides had not treated of cubebs. (De
Simpl. 288.) Ebn Baithar mentions that certain of the authorities had
taken it for the _carpesium_. He says it renders the breath fragrant and
cures affections of the bladder. He further quotes Ebn Sina (Avicenna?)
as stating that it enhances the delight of coitus. (i, 344.) By the way,
Dr. Pereira mentions that the Indians still take them to excite the
sexual feelings. We would beg to refer for further information on this
subject to his excellent account of the _Piper Cubeba_. (754.) See also
Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 204), and Royle (M. M. 562.)


_Usnen._

See Avicenna (ii, 2, 713); Serapion (De Simpl. 257); Rhases (Contin. l.
ult. i, 753.) This term is used rather vaguely by the Arabian authors,
but there can be no doubt that it comprehended the _salsola fruticosa_.
They call it abstergent, cleansing, and aperient, and recommend it as an
emmenagogue, and in difficulty of urine and dropsy. Rhases says it is
of a hot and dry nature, and is purgative, deobstruent, and corrosive.
(Ad Mansor. iii, 22.) The _confectio de usnen_ of Serapion containing
fourteen other ingredients mostly of an aromatic nature, is recommended
by him for debility of the stomach. (De Antidot. 71.)


_Fagara_, or _Fagre_.

See Serapion (De Simpl. c. c.); Avicenna (ii, 2, 260); Rhases (Cont. l.
ult. i, 312.) Serapion’s authorities compare it to the vetch, and say of
it that it is hot and dry in the second degree, and is stomachic. Isaac
ebn Amran describes it as having a small, black, round grain within,
and a red one without, as forming a good gargle in fætor of the mouth,
and entering as an ingredient into powders and ointments. Avicenna’s
description of it is to the same effect; he says, however, that it is
hot and dry in the third degree. He recommends it as an astringent,
stomachic, and hepatic medicine. Rhases’s account of it is very short,
but not far different from the others. Dr. Lindley describing the
_Xanthoxylon hastile_, says of it, “that its capsules and seeds are
employed in Northern India for intoxicating fish; they are also given as
the faghuret of Avicenna. The X. piperitum and Avicennæ are used in China
and Japan as antidotes against all poisons; they would undoubtedly in
many cases be of considerable use as a stimulant remedy.” (Veg. Kingd.
473.) See further Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 270), and Royle (M. M. 326.)


_Artamita._

Avicenna gives such a description of it as fully justifies Sprengel in
deciding it to be the _Cyclamen Persicum_. He recommends it in diseases
of the joints, as a sternutatory, and for the cure of hiccup, and says of
it that it is alexipharmic and produces abortion. (ii, 2, 61.) It is in
use with the Hindoo physicians. See Wise (System of Hindoo Med.)


_Vertz._

From Serapion’s account of it there seems no doubt that it is the
_Memecylon tinctorium_. He gives a very minute description of three
species which grow in Arabia and India, and mentions that some held the
root of one of the species to be the curcuma. They are all remarkable for
containing colouring matter. He recommends them for the cure of leprosy,
pruritus, and pustula. (De Simpl. 170.) Rhases briefly describes it
by the name of _vars_. He says two kinds, the yellow and the red, are
brought from Yemen, and that they are collected upon trees like pounded
saffron. (Contin. l. ult. iii, 110.) Avicenna describes it by the name
of _gures_. (ii, 2, 291.) His description is very similar to that given
by Rhases, and he recommends it in the very same cases as Serapion. Ebn
Baithar gives a very full and interesting description of it both as a dye
and as a medicine, but we need not enter into an exposition of his views,
since they scarcely differ at all from the account of it given above
from Serapion. We may just mention that he says clothes dyed with it are
aphrodisiac. See Vol. I, 585. The memecyls constitute a genus of plants
still well known in India as dyes and articles of food and medicine. See
the works of Royle and Lindley.


_Mahaleb._

See Serapion (De Simpl. 44); Rhases (Contin. l. ult. i, 442); Avicenna
(ii, 2, 471.) It appears to be undoubtedly the _Prunus Mahaleb_, that is
to say, the _Cerasus Mahaleb_ of Miller, Angl., “rock,” _or_ “perfumed”
cherry. Serapion applies to it what Dioscorides and Galen had written on
the _phillyrea_; after which he gives the opinions of several Arabian
authorities who recommend it as a medicine to expel the superfluities of
the system and intestinal worms, and as being useful in gout, and as a
lithontriptic. One of them, Isaac ebn Amram, describes the varieties of
it very circumstantially. Avicenna and Rhases give a similar account of
it.


_Jesemin_ and _Zambach_.

See Serapion (De Simpl. 176); Rhases (Contin. xxii, 838; l. ult. i, 369);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 611); and Ebn Baithar (591.)

Serapion describes them under the same head, the one as having a white
flower, and the other a yellow, of which the latter is the weaker in
its powers. It is got, he says, from Babylonia, where there is another
species which has a sky-blue colour. His authorities recommend it
principally in phlegmatic complaints, and more particularly in those
of old persons, and as an application in impetigo and other cutaneous
diseases of a like nature. He says it induces headache when administered
to persons of a hot temperament. Avicenna gives a very similar account
of these two plants, and neither Rhases nor Ebn Baithar supplies any
additional information regarding them; the latter, however, gives a very
interesting account of them. He says of the yellow species that it was
used for dyeing the hair. Like the others, he speaks favorably of it,
and especially of its oil in complaints of a cold nature. The latter
species, in all probability, was the _jasminum sambac_, still well known
in the East as a perfume. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 651); Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 59); and Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 242.) Whether the other be the
_humile_ or _officinale_, we are unable to determine.


_Secacul._

See Serapion (De Simpl. 89) and Avicenna (ii, 2, 663.) From the
description which they give of it, there can be no doubt, we think, that
it is the _pastinaca secacul_, Russel; that is to say, the Tordilium
orientale, _secacul dictum_ of Miller. (Gard. Dictionary.) They agree in
saying that it is decidedly aphrodisiac, more especially when preserved
with honey. Avicenna concludes his notice of it with stating that
_buzeiden_ is used instead of it. In another part of his work he gives
very sensible directions for preparing _secacul conditum_, that is to
say, “preserved secacul.” (v, 1, 8.) Although, as we have stated above,
we think there is little or no doubt that the secacul was a species of
tordylium, it is proper to acknowledge that the learned commentators on
Mesue are much divided in opinion respecting it. (De Electariis, i, 95.)


_Buzeiden._

See Serapion (De Simpl. 260); Avicenna (ii, 2, 95); and Ebn Baithar
(ii, 183.) Avicenna describes it as being an Indian medicine possessing
virtues resembling those of beer. He says it is hot in the second degree,
and dry in the first; is attenuant, proves serviceable in pains of
the joints and in gout; is aphrodisiacal and alexipharmic. (ii, 295.)
Serapion calls it a species of satyrion (orchis?). He calls it an Indian
medicine, little used in his country. He says it resembles hermodactyls
in the cure of arthritic diseases or of gout, and that it engenders
semen, but hurts the testicles. Its bad effects are best corrected by
mustard; its dose two drachms. Ebn Baithar, in this instance, supplies
no additional information. After what we have stated of it, we need have
no hesitation in agreeing with Sprengel that it is the _orchis morio_,
or at all events some species of that genus. As Serapion does not quote
any Greek authorities under this head, it may be inferred that he held
it to be distinct from the _orchis_ of Dioscorides and his followers.
Several species of this genus are still used in India as medicines. The
famous _salep_ is procured principally from the _O. mascula_. See Royle,
Lindley, and Pereira.


_Mial_, or _Storax humida_.

The liquid Storax is described distinctly by Avicenna, who states that
one species of it exudes from the tree and the other is got by boiling;
that the former is of a lighter colour and is highly valuable, whereas
the other is darker and is less esteemed. Some, he says, held it to
be beneficial in cerebral diseases, but this opinion he rejects, as
it induces vertigo. See under _Storax_. He quotes only from Arabian
authorities. (ii, 2, 423, 615.) Both kinds of storax are treated of
largely by Serapion. (De Simpl. 46), and are noticed by Rhases. (Contin.
l. ult. i, 687.)

It is still disputed what tree it is which produces the Liquid Storax.
According to Sprengel and most modern authorities, until of late, it was
held to be the _Altingia excelsa_. Dr. Pereira, however, shows that this
is a doubtful point, and mentions that Dr. Lindley holds that the liquid
storax of the shops is produced by the _liquid ambar orientale_. But in
his recent publication on the ‘Vegetable Kingdom,’ Dr. Lindley says,
“Liquid storax is thought to be yielded by the Dammar pine.” (p. 229.)
Landerer has recently shown that it is obtained from Storax officinale.
(Pereira, Mat. Med. 1325, 2d ed.)


_Kadi._

It is described by Serapion as being a plant which grows in Arabia, from
which the aromatic oil of Kadi is formed. He gives a curious description
of it, but does not mention any medicinal purposes to which it was
applied. (De Simpl. 40.) It would appear that it is also described by Ebn
Baithar (i, 337.) He describes it as being a species of palm, which it
resembles in all respects, and says that a fragrant oil is prepared from
it. Its country is Arabia. He quotes on it Rhases, in his ‘Continens’ and
‘Treatise on Smallpox,’ but we have been unable to discover the passages
which he refers to. His authorities describe, in glowing colours, the
virtues of this substance, and more especially of its wine, in smallpox.
What species of palm it was we are unable to say decidedly.


_Meizaragi._

Serapion gives a full account of it upon the authority of Abugerit and
Abir, who agree in recommending it in arthritic diseases. They give
minute directions for using it in electuaries, pills, and decoctions.
Its dose with sugar is one drachm. They mention that, when put into
rivers, it intoxicates fish. (De Simpl. 365.) Avicenna describes the
_Mehezeheregi_, as being a tree like esula (_spurge?_); and says it is
hot and dry in the third degree, and intoxicates fish when thrown into a
river. He adds, that it is carminative and phlegmagogue, and is useful in
gout, sciatica, and arthritis. (ii, 2, 480.)

We need have no hesitation in agreeing with the best authorities, that
it is cocculus indicus, or the seed of _Menispermum cocculus_ L., i. q.,
_Anamirta cocculus_ of Lindley. (See Veg. Kingd. 309.) He says of it,
that it contains a most venomous principle, the picrotoxine, and that in
its pericarp is found the not less formidable alcaloid menispermine. See
also Gray (Pharmacop. 119), and Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 132.) Both these
authors mention of it, that it is used to intoxicate fish. See, further,
an excellent account of the cocculus indicus in Pereira (M. M. 1326.) It
was used by the Hindoo physicians for the cure of nervous diseases. See
Wise (System of Hindoo Med. 557.) Dr. Royle is somewhat doubtful whether
the cocculus was known to the Arabian physicians, but upon the whole
inclines to this opinion. (Mat. Med. 249.)


_Nux Vomica._

We have briefly treated of the _Nux Vomica_ as a poison in another
place (Vol. II, 241.) We have now to say of it, that it was also used
medicinally as an emetic. For example, Haly Abbas treats of it in his
chapter on Medicines which procure Vomiting. (Pract. ii, 65; see also
Pract. x, 12.) Serapion, in like manner, treats of it in his chapter on
Emetic Medicines. (vii, 36.) Thus he gives the following formula for
an emetic: “℞. Concarned (cardamomi?), nucis vomicæ, seminis raphani,
omnium ān ʒ j. Terantur et dentur in potu cum aqua mellis et decoctione
anethi.” Serapion treats of it also in his work ‘On Simples,’ where he
states, that “easy vomiting” may be induced by administering it agreeably
to the formula which we have just quoted from his other work. He adds,
that perhaps it will also loosen the bowels. Abram, another of his
authorities, likewise says, that given to the amount of two drachms, with
two drachms of dill or of fennel seed, and drunk with warm water, it will
produce vomiting and loosen the bowels. (De. Simpl. 163.) Ebn Baithar’s
authorities give an interesting account of the _Nux Vomica_, from which
it is clear that it was frequently used as an emetic, along with fennel,
natron, mustard, &c. in hydromel.

Dr. Pereira, upon the authority of Dale (Pharmacol.), decides that the
Strychnos Ignatia was the nux vomica of Serapion. But, notwithstanding
our great respect for his opinions, we cannot agree with him in the
present instance. For, considering how common the nux vomica is in Persia
(Ainslie, Mat. Ind.), there is a strong presumption that the Arabians
cannot have been unacquainted with it, and it is not pretended that the
nux vomica is treated of by them by any other name unless it were the
_methel_, which we will presently show it not to be, nor is it attempted
to be shown when and how the misapplication of the term originated.
See, however, in support of Dr. Pereira’s views, Parkinson (Theatre of
Plants, 1601.) It is also proper to mention, that the learned Geoffroy
calls the Faba sancti Ignatii the _nux vomica legitima_. But as it is
admitted by the best authorities on toxicology, that St. Ignatius bean
is much more energetic in its action than nux vomica (see Christison,
644, and Orfila, ii, 276), there is still less probability of its having
been used medicinally than the other. See further in support of the
views we are advocating, Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 250.) We may mention also
in conclusion, that the nux vomica was used as an emetic by the Hindoo
physicians, more especially in the case of poisoning. See Wise (Hindoo
Med. 402.)


_Nux Methel._

We have briefly alluded to this substance (_Datura Methel_) as a poison
elsewhere. (Vol. II, 241.) Serapion, quoting from Arabian authorities,
compares its nut to the nux vomica, and its seed to that of mandragora:
its bark, he adds, is rough, its taste pleasant and unctuous, and its
virtues cold in the fourth degree; if given in a small dose (_kirat_ or
_siliqua_?) it intoxicates strongly, and if two drachms are given it
proves fatal at once. Rhases, as quoted by him, says it is a narcotic,
a sedative, and perhaps emetic medicine, and that it proves fatal in
large doses, and in small intoxicates. He directs its pernicious effects
to be counteracted by taking warm butter, and thus producing vomiting,
and otherwise treating the case in the same manner as in poisoning by
mandragora. (De Simpl. 375.) Rhases, in his work entitled ‘Ad Mansor.,’
says of the nut methel, that it is a dangerous medicine, which induces
stupor, nausea, vomiting, and inebriety. (iii, 30.) His account of it
in his ‘Continens’ is very brief. Avicenna describes it in his ‘Mat.
Med.’ as being a nut similar to the nux vomica, and having seed like the
citron (?). Like the others, he says it inebriates, induces stupor, and
is inimical to the brain and heart. In the dose of a drachm he says it
proves fatal. (ii, 2, 501.) Ebn Baithar’s authorities give a full account
of it, but differing little from the others already given. One of them
says, that a drachm will kill on the spot, and in small doses it induces
stupor, vomiting, and loss of sense. They direct these bad effects to
be counteracted by the administration of an emetic of natron (soda), by
giving wine and pepper, and keeping up the heat of the body. The Hindoo
physicians held that it is alexiterial. See Susruta and Wise (Hindoo Med.)

An excellent modern authority says of the _Datura Metel_, that “its
seeds are narcotic, more powerful than the _Datura Stramomium_, and
produce temporary idiotcy.” Gray (Suppl. to Pharm. 52.) Dr. Lindley,
after describing the _Datura Stramonium_ as a violent narcotic, says of
the _Metel_, that it has a similar action. (Veg. Kingd. 619.) Comparing,
then, the effects of the _Nux Methel_, as described by the ancient
authorities with those of the _Datura Methel_, as given by those recent
authorities, we cannot hesitate in recognising their identity.


_Rachaba_, or _Nux Mechil_.

One of Serapion’s authorities states that an Arab had told him that it
is a great tree, like the nut-tree, having leaves like a great fig, and
fruit like small pomegranates, and speaks very indistinctly about its
being Pharoah’s nut; but it is difficult, from his language, to make
out what he says on that point. He says it is sweet, has a pleasant
smell, and is eaten by shepherds and others. He mentions that some had
confounded it with the nux vomica; but he concludes by saying that
whoever will compare the descriptions of the rachaba and nux vomica must
see the difference. (De Simpl. 164.) From this description it is quite
clear that this cannot be the nux vomica, but rather one of the eatable
figs, probably the _ficus benjamina_.


_Nux Henden_, or _Banden_.

See Serapion (De Simpl. 79) and Avicenna (ii, 2, 496.) According to the
latter it is a grainy mass, like the vetch, white, inclining to yellow,
which is brought from Barea and Chorasan, and of which a wine is made
with honey. He quotes Paulus (by some mistake we suppose) as saying of
it that it is refrigerant, extinguishes inflammation, and is slightly
desiccant. It suppresses fluxes of blood, fattens, cures impetigo, and
is aphrodisiac. Serapion’s authorities give a more lengthy description
of it, but do not supply many more particulars. Rhases, one of them,
calls it the fat of the earth, and the rock of the earth, and another
calls it pigeon’s root. They all agree that it makes an excellent wine,
which forms semen, fattens the body, and is aphrodisiac. They also state
that it stops fluxes, and causes vomiting. Ebn Baithar’s account of it
is nearly the same as Serapion’s. He says it is called honey earth in
Andalusia. (i, 274.) Sprengel suggests—how correctly we leave it to our
readers who are better acquainted with the productions of the East than
we can pretend to be, to determine—that it is the _Garcinia Mangostena_,
or Mangosteen, a fruit which has the reputation of being the finest in
the world. The description of it, given by Serapion, as far as we can
judge of it from the barbarous Latin translation, would certainly seem
to agree in some striking points with that of the mangosteen. Compare it
with ‘Loudon, Encycl. of Gardening,’ 1531.


_Meisce_, or _Mes_.

See Serapion (De Simpl. c. 116); Avicenna (ii, 2, 481); Ebn Baithar (ii,
465.) It is described at some length, and in nearly the same terms by
all these authors. They call it a small grain like a vetch, of a green
colour, and say that some used it for fasils, and that it was wholesome
but not very nutritious. They say of it that it is cold, and rather
desiccant, useful in catarrhs and coughs, and as a plaster to bruised
and torn parts. In our edition of Serapion it is marked as _mango_ in a
very old looking hand-writing, and it is recognised as the _Phaseolus
mango_ by Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 266), and by the German translator of Ebn
Baithar.


_Horon_, or _Bombax_.

See Serapion (De Simpl. 66) and Ebn Baithar (i, 305.) Abuhanifa, one
of Serapion’s authorities, says that some medical men had informed him
that cotton grows on trees like quinces. So at least we understand the
passage; but as it is very curious, and also very obscure, it may be well
to give the Latin translation: “Dixerunt mihi quidam medici de kelbe
quod _coton_ nascitur inter eos in arboribus quæ sunt sicut arbores
antipsicorum.” Compare Pliny (H. N. xii, 10.) The next of Serapion’s
authorities, Aben Mesuai, recommends the juice of it in the diarrhœa of
children. Mescha says its seed is beneficial in coughs and good for the
breast. Albasari says of it that it is good for clothes, and that its
juice is an excellent application in cutaneous diseases of the face.
Rhases also, as quoted by him, recommends it in the same cases, and
further says of it that it is aphrodisiac. Ebn Baithar’s authorities
also give an interesting account of it, recommending it in much the
same cases as those of Serapion, namely in infantile diarrhœa, and as
an application to cutaneous diseases; and he further states that it was
used to burn warts, no doubt like the raw flax, often mentioned in the
works of Hippocrates. The leaves are said to have been useful in uterine
complaints, and in gout mixed with rose-oil. Clothes prepared from it
are much praised by the author. There can be no doubt from what we have
stated, that it must have been the _Gossypium arboreum_ or _herbaceum_,
most probably the latter. See Meyen (Geogr. Botany.) From Ainslie’s Mat.
Ind. it will be seen that oil prepared from the former is still used for
cleaning the skin of spots, and that the leaves are given for the cure of
diarrhœa. (ii, 284.)


_Musa._

See Serapion (De Simpl. 84); Avicenna (ii, 2, 484); Ebn Baithar (ii,
535.) According to Serapion’s first authority, Aben Mesuai, it is hot
in the middle of the first degree, and moistening in the end of it,
little nutritious, and has the property of being useful in heat of the
breast, lungs, and bladder, and softens the bowels; if much used, it
creates a load on the stomach, and obstruction in the liver, and if taken
by a person of a cold temperament in great quantity, he ought to take
hydromel, oxymel, or prepared ginger with it. Another of his authorities,
Sindaxar, says it promotes the growth of the fœtus in utero. A third,
named Alchalebemen, says it is a good medicine for the chest and the
kidneys, and is diuretic. The book on ancient medicine, as quoted by
him, says of it that it is aphrodisiac, and heavy on the stomach; and
Avicenna’s account of it is so similar that it would not be worth while
to give an exposition of it. Ebn Baithar describes it minutely as being a
species of Palm. Its medicinal characters, as stated by him, are nearly
the same as those given above from Serapion. There can be no doubt that
it is the _Musa paradisiaca_, or common plantain tree. On it the reader
may find it interesting to consult Ainslie (Mat. Ind. 316), and Loudon
(Encycl. of Garden. 1530.) The plantain tree is briefly noticed by
Theophrastus (H. P. iv, 5), but does not occur in the works of the Greek
and Latin physicians.


_Granum Kelkel_, or _Alkelkel_.

See Avicenna (ii, 2, 302); Serapion (De Simpl. 275); Rhases (Contin.
l. ult. i, 378); Ebn Baithar (ii, 315.) Serapion’s authorities say of
it that it is hot and moistening, increases the secretion of semen,
especially when taken with the oil of sesame; that when taken in too
large a dose, it induces cholera, and after other food occasions vertigo.
The account of it given by Rhases and Avicenna is little different. The
latter says of it that it is fattening, and comforts relaxed bodies. Ebn
Baithar gives a very minute description of it; he says he planted it in
his own country, and that it produced fruit. He ascribes the same good
and bad effects to it as Serapion. When roasted, he says, it does not
engender bad chyme. Its seeds are said to be aphrodisiac. We suppose
there is little or no doubt that it is the _Cassia tora_. On the modern
use of it by the Hindoos, see Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 405.)


_Lehibach_, or _Lahiba_.

See Avicenna (ii, 2, 425); Rhases (Contin. l. ult. i, 389.) Rhases quotes
Galen as saying of it that it has powers like horehound. We are at a
loss to say what substance he alludes to among the Simples of Galen.
Another authority quoted by him seems to say that a portion of it flung
into a lake containing fish, will make them swim on the surface, and
Avicenna confirms this statement. Avicenna further says it is emetic
and hydragogue. We would refer it with Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 249) to the
_Mussaenda frondosa_.


_Gilbenee._

Avicenna compares its seed to turbith, and its operation to hellebore.
He says when given to the amount of half a drachm it operates as an
emetic, and that one drachm may prove fatal. He mentions the case of a
paralytic person who took it, and having vomited was thereby cured. He
adds of it that it also acts as a purgative (ii, 2, 282.) It is evidently
the _gilbeuce_ of Rhases, who in like manner describes it as a powerful
emetic, the operation of which resembles hellebore, and is useful to
paralytics. More than a drachm of it, he says, given in a dose, may
occasion death. (Ad Mansor. iii, 30.) It appears decidedly to be the
_Cerbera manghas_ L., i. e. _Arbor lactaria_, Rumphius. See Sprengel (R.
H. H. i, 252); Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 261.) Dr. Lindley says of it: “The
kernels of _Cerbera manghas_ are emetic and poisonous; the milky sap
is purgative; the leaves and bark are used in Java as a substitute for
senna.” (Veg. Kingd. 600.)


_Kustberkush._

Avicenna gives a description of it which appears to us very
unsatisfactory, but which determines Sprengel to refer it to the _Tamarix
orientalis_. He calls it hot and dry in the second degree, and attenuant.
(ii, 2, 371.)


_Nefrin_, or _Nerfin_.

See Avicenna (ii, 2, 506); Serapion (De Simpl. 187.) Avicenna compares
it to the narcissus, and says it resembles the jasmine in virtue, but is
weaker than it. He recommends it in coldness of the nerves, and as a cure
in noises and pains of the ears, and in toothache. He also recommends
it externally in headache, inflammations of the throat and tonsils, and
for stopping vomiting and hiccup. Serapion compares it to the rose and
jasmine, and recommends it in pleurisy and pains of the womb. Rhases, as
quoted by him, says that in Chorasan he had seen it given to the extent
of two drachms as a purgative. It seems highly probable that it is the
_Narcissus orientalis_.


_Muluchia._

Avicenna (ii, 2, 194); Serapion (De Simpl. 149); Ebn Baithar (ii, 537.)
Avicenna’s description of this article, which he also calls “Olus
Judaicum,” would seem to decide that it is the _Corchorus olitorius_ or
Jews’ mallow. The other two authorities quoted above are not so precise
in their description of it. It is more properly an article of food than
of medicine. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 372), and Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii,
387.)


_Moschus._

Musk, the inspissated secretion of the follicle in the prepuce of the
_Moschus moschiferus_ L., would appear to be first mentioned in the
works of Aëtius (xvi, 122), who gives formulæ for various fumigations
(suffumigia) containing a great many aromatics, and among them musk. But
as we have already had occasion to state, we entertain strong suspicions
that the concluding chapters of this author may be spurious. Indeed, as
this important article is not noticed by authors subsequent to Aëtius,
such as Oribasius, it would appear to us that this circumstance is the
strongest possible presumption, that the passage in Aëtius had been
added after the Arabian period of medicine. There is one notice of it
also by our author, but it also has a suspicious appearance. (p. 292,
ed. Basil. See also 296.) Serapion gives a long account of it, first
upon the authority of Abuhanifa, who calls the animal the musk gazelle,
and says its habitat is in the countries of _Tumbasci_ and _Sini_, by
which he probably means Thibet and China. Of these the better kind, he
says, is that procured from Thibet, as the animal in that country lives
on fragrant herbs, and the inhabitants are better acquainted with the
process of extracting it from its follicles. And, moreover, he says, the
Sinenses (Chinese?) are apt to adulterate their musk. The animal which
produces musk, he adds, does not differ in figure, colour, nor horns from
other gazelles, and the best musk is procured after it is full grown.
He then gives an anatomical description of its canine teeth, and of the
modes of catching it by snares, gins, and by shooting it with arrows; and
also the manner of extracting the musk from the animal after its death.
But the best musk, he says, is procured from the animal when it is in a
state of orgasm, and rubs its follicles against a rock until the musk
drops out of them. The inhabitants of Thibet (homines de Thebeth) know
the places where the animal feeds, and collect the musk thus procured
from them. This, he remarks, is the finest musk of all, and is reserved
for royal personages and held in high esteem. This authority concludes by
saying that in the region of _Thebeth_ there are many cities, but that
the one, from which musk is procured, is that city which is properly
called _Thebeth_. His next authority is Alcholabama, who calls musk hot
in the second degree, and dry in the third. The following one, Aben
Mesuai, says of it, that it comforts the heart and internal viscera, both
when drunk and when applied externally in plasters. His next authority is
Honain, who recommends musk in diseases of the eyes. The others supply
little additional information on it, but in general recommend it in
diseases of the brain. He says the Persian doctors applied the oil to
the member as an aphrodisiac. (De Simpl. 185.) Rhases recommends musk in
headache, and all cold affections of the head, and also as a stomachic.
(Ad Mansor. iii, 22.) In his ‘Continens’ he quotes from several Arabian
authorities, all of whom give it the characters already stated, and
recommend it most especially in diseases of the brain and eyes. (l. ult.
i, 483.) Avicenna gives an accurate description of it, as far as we can
judge from the wretched translation of his works. He recommends it in
errhines with saffron, and with a little camphor for vertigo, and other
affections of the brain. He also thinks favorably of it as a cordial
in affections of the heart, and in melancholy. He concludes by saying
of it that it is alexipharmic, especially in cases of poisoning with
napellus. (ii, 2, 452.) See also his treatise (de Med. cordial., ii.)
There does not appear any distinct mention of it in the works of Mesue
the younger. It occurs frequently as an ingredient in the antidotes
of Myrepsus. Ebn Baithar gives a very full description of it and its
medicinal virtues, but it agrees so well with the description of it by
Serapion, that we need not enter much into particulars. He recommends it
particularly in diseases of the eyes, and says that the oil of it is a
useful application to piles, and when rubbed into the genital member, is
strongly aphrodisiac. It is, moreover, said to be an excellent cordial.
Of the Greek authorities Symeon Seth is the only one that gives anything
like a distinct account of musk. He describes three kinds, of which the
best is procured from a city east of Chorasan called _Trepet_ (Thibet?).
The next in quality is the Indian, and the worst is that which is
procured from the Sines (Chinese?). All the kinds, he says, are formed in
the umbilicus of an animal with one horn, resembling the gazelle. Like
Serapion he states that it is got from the animal while in a state of
sexual orgasm. Musk, he says, is hot and dry in the third degree, and of
a volatile nature. As to its medicinal powers, it strengthens weak parts,
and is beneficial in cold intemperaments of the head, but injurious in
hot. It is adapted for the recovery of persons in a fainting fit, in loss
of strength, and in affections of the heart. (De Alimentis.) An antidote
of musk occurs in Actuarius. (Meth. Med. v, 6.)


_Volubilis._

This name is loosely applied by the Arabian authorities to several genera
of the climbing plants. For example under this head Serapion describes
the _lebleb_ or _cussus_, the _acfin_, the _atthin_, and _lebleb maju_.
Of these the first is unquestionably the κισσὸς or ivy, and is described
in extracts from Dioscorides and Galen. Of the _acfin_ he says that it is
laxative, and quotes Dioscorides as saying that it loosens the bowels.
He says the _atthin_ is styptic, and quotes Dioscorides and Galen as
recommending it in rheums of the eyes, and fluxes of the bowels. The
last or _lebleb_ he describes upon the authority of Aben Mesuai, who
says it is hot in the middle of the first degree, dry in the beginning
of the same, of a cutting nature with some saline properties, and purges
adust bile. Afterwards he describes its medicinal powers in the same
terms as Dioscorides and Galen describe the _cissus_, that is to say, he
represents it as being rather a medicine than an article of food; says
it purges bile in doses of from one third to two thirds of a pound, when
clarified without boiling, by means of ten drachms of sugar or penidia.
His next authority, Isaac ebn Amram, says it is deobstruent. Alkanzi says
it is cold and dry, is purgative and useful in indurations. His last
authority, Abix, says the _lebleb_ is cold and moistening, cholagogue,
and along with cassia fistula and oil of almonds it proves useful in
clearing out the bowels, and relieves coughs. (De Simpl. 42.) Avicenna
under the head of _Volubilis_, i. e. _hedera_ (ii, 2, 724), and under
_Cussus_ (ib. 169), describes the κισσὸς of Dioscorides, but the former
of these rather confusedly so as to create suspicions that he used the
term in rather a lax manner. Mesue is the ancient author who treats
most elaborately of the _volubilis_, applying the term to five distinct
species, or rather genera, of which the first is probably the Hedera, the
second the Helxine, and the third the Clematis of the Greeks; the fourth,
which he calls lupulus, is acknowledged to be the _Humulus lupulus_, and
the fifth the _Convolvulus scammonium_. See his learned commentator Costa
(c. 24.) As all the others have been already treated of, we shall confine
our attention at present to the account which he gives of the medicinal
powers of the _hops_. He says the lupulus brings away some yellow bile,
clears the blood, allays its inflammation, and that its infusion or whey
is of great use for this purpose, and its syrup, he adds, cures jaundice.
He says it was little used by the physicians of his time. He recommends
it as a deobstruent of the liver, and of other internal viscera, as a
remedy in asthma, and protracted fevers; and as a plaster to the head
with rose oil or oil of chamomile, &c. (i, 24.) He treats of scammony
separately in the next chapter. The character thus drawn of the _lupulus_
does not seem at first sight to agree well with the acknowledged virtues
of the _Humulus Lupulus_. But, as Rutty remarks, he probably alludes to
the stem and not to the flowers of the plant, as being a medicine which
purges yellow bile. (M. M. 296.) The _Humulus Lupulus_ is not noticed by
any Greek writer, nor by any Roman, with the exception of Pliny. (H. N.
xxi, 50.)

The _lebleb_, noticed above, there is every reason to suppose, was the
_dolichos lebleb_. It is also treated of by Avicenna as well as Serapion.
They represent it as containing saltish juices which purge adust bile.
It is a well-known article in Hindoo Medicine. See Wise (Book of Hindoo
Medicine, 104.)


_Abrong_, or _Abrugi_.

Serapion describes it as a round grain, spotted with black and white,
which is brought from Seni (China?), having a bitter taste, hot and
dry in the second degree, a laxative of the bowels, and vermifuge. (De
Simpl. 153.) According to Dodonæus and Parkinson, it is the pea which
the latter describes and represents under the name of _pisum cordatum
vesicarium_. See Theatre of Plants (1378.)


_Ribes._

This has been supposed the ribes _or_ raspberry, but it is now well
ascertained that it is a species of _Rheum_, namely the _Rheum Ribes_.
See Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 257.) Serapion gives a full account of it;
he represents it to be a cold, astringent plant, and recommends it
in various complaints, such as cholera, smallpox, measles, and in
hemorrhoids. (De Simpl. 241.) Avicenna briefly recommends it in nearly
the same complaints. (ii, 2, 581.) See also Rhases (Cont. l. ult. i,
582.) Ebn Baithar gives a full and very interesting description of it.
He says it grows in alpine localities in Syria, and in the northern
countries, but not in Spain; that it has large, broad, round leaves, and
tender reddish spots. He calls it bitter and astringent, and recommends
it in palpitation of the heart, vomiting, and marasmus. He also praises
it in hemorrhoids, and the red flux (menorrhagia) of women; and further
commends it in measles, smallpox, and plague. Dr. Royle says (M. M. 521)
that the _Rheum Ribes_ is “the _Riwas_ of Serapion, who mentions it as
making a good sherbet.” Does he allude to the chapter on the _Ribes_
quoted above?


_Aurantium._

When we stated in another place (Vol. I, 134) that no ancient author had
noticed the _orange_, we were unacquainted with the works of Ebn Baithar,
and of D’Hanvantare, the author of the Susruta. In the latter work the
orange is enumerated with acid fruits, of a somewhat indigestible nature.
(140 et alibi.) Ebn Baithar says of the orange that it produces an oil
which is useful in flatulence and pains of the joints. The rind of the
fruit, he says, is carminative and anthelminthic, an antidote to poisons,
and removes spots from clothes. The Hindoos have been long familiar with
the _Citrus aurantium_. See the Susruta and Wise’s Hindoo Medicine (p.
191.)


_Limon._

We are now inclined to think that we were mistaken in stating (Vol.
I. 137) that the lemon was mentioned by Avicenna (ii, 2, 433.) His
description is probably to be referred to the _Statice limonium_.
However, beyond all doubt, the _Citrus medica Limon_ is fully described
by Ebn Baithar. He says the rind is bitter, acid, astringent, and
aromatic, excites the appetite, improves digestion, renders the breath
fragrant, is cordial, and an antidote to poisons. He recommends it
particularly in fevers, exanthemata, palpitation of the heart, vomiting,
&c. It appears also to be noticed several times in the Susruta. (See p.
142 et alibi.) Lemons are likewise noticed by the Persian writers on the
Materia Medica by the names of _Leemoo_ and _Neemboo_. See Royle (Mat.
Med. 297.) They have been long known to the Hindoos. See Wise (Hindoo
Med.)


_Margaritæ._

Though the Greeks and Romans were well acquainted with pearl-mussels, as
is obvious from several passages in the classical authors, it does not
appear that they ever used these articles in the practice of medicine.
They were used by the Arabians as an ingredient in their celebrated
Electuarium _de Gemmis_, (Mesue _de Elect._) and were reckoned among
their cordial medicines. Avicenna says of pearls, that they resemble
_karabe_ in medicinal powers, but are more powerful in their operation.
(De Med. Cordial.) Serapion gives a fuller account of them upon the
authority of several Arabian writers, who describe pearls as being cold,
desiccant, and attenuant, and recommend them in diseases of the eyes,
and in hemorrhages, as dentifrices in diseases of the teeth, but more
especially as cordials in palpitations and other affections of the heart.
(De Simpl. 397.) We could have wished to have given in this place, since
we have had no convenient opportunity to do so elsewhere, an exposition
of the views of the Arabians respecting the operation of _cordial
medicines_; but as this subject could not be understood without a fuller
explanation of certain parts of the higher philosophy of the ancients
than is consistent with our limits, we are reluctantly obliged to dismiss
it with a very brief notice. We would beg leave to refer our readers to
Avicenna’s elaborate treatise ‘de Medicinis Cordialibus.’ He there gives
an ingenious disquisition on medicines which operate upon the animal
spirits and dispel vapours, and first advocates views which have formed
the basis of many a modern hypothesis on this subject. Among the cordial
medicines described by him we would remark amber, gold, silver, citron,
coral, cinnamon, camphor, myrobalans, hyacinth (the gem), lapis lazuli,
myrtle, musk, mace, frankincense, silk, sandal-wood, tamarinds, zerumbet,
zeduary, &c. One important class of cordials consists of medicines which
evacuate black bile, namely, melanogogues, which we will have to treat of
in a subsequent section of this work.

In imitation of the Arabians, Paracelsus and the modern alchemists have
attributed great virtues to the precious metals and stones as cordial
medicines. See Schröder (Chemical Dispensatory, pluries.) He says of
pearls, that “they are an excellent cordial, that strengthens the balsam
of life, resists poison, pestilence, and putrefaction, and clear the
spirits.” (167.) Pearls and other precious stones have always been highly
esteemed by the Hindoo physicians. See the Susruta and Wise’s Hindoo
Medicine (124.)


_Sericum._

We have mentioned above, that silk is one of the cordial medicines
treated of by Avicenna. Silk, and especially raw silk, he says, is
attenuant and desiccative, acts as a cordial, improves the memory, proves
useful in affections of the eyes, in obstructions of the liver and other
complaints. (De Med. Cord. ii, 3.) The silkworm (_bombyx mori_) and
the uses of silk in medicine, are described with considerable accuracy
by Serapion. Like Avicenna he ranks it with the cordial medicines,
and recommends it in this capacity along with pearls, karabe, corals,
and musk. (De Simpl. c. 28.) Silk forms one of the ingredients in the
electuary of Mesue, to which he gives the following imposing title,
“Electuarium ex granis tinctoriis ad cordis palpitationem, syncopem,
mentis alienationem, seu desipentiam, moerorem sine causa manifesta,
facultates enim nostrum corpus dispensantes mirifice roborat.” See f.
89, and the interesting Commentary of Costa. It is also an ingredient in
several of the Antidotaria of Avenzoar. Ebn Baithar says, that various
Arabian authors had written on the medicinal properties of silk. One of
them quoted by him describes the use of it in medicine by burning it,
and using its ashes for collyria and other purposes. He remarks, that
Ebn Sina (Avicenna) says, that silk as an article of clothing prevents
the formation of lice. Raw silk has been used as a medicine in modern
times. Moses Charras, in his ‘Royal Pharmacopœia,’ writes thus of it:
“Many writers have attributed great virtue to raw silk. But although the
use thereof had been at all times unknown in physic, my judgment is that
it is too fragrant, that it has too much beauty, that it affords too
many conveniences to human life, that there are too many wonders in the
first original, progress, labour, and metamorphosis of the worm which
produces it, to be despised.” He adds, “that is called raw silk which
was never boiled, but is still as it were in the grain, out of which
the worm has been but newly taken.” He says further of the composition,
whereof raw silk is an ingredient, namely, _Confectio alkermes regia_,
“This confection is, without question, one of the best cordials that
ever Galenic physic invented. For it repairs and recreates the vital and
animal spirits, it ceases palpitations of the heart and swooning-fits; it
fortifies the brain, &c.” (R. P. 149.) A still more recent authority on
pharmacy, says of raw silk, _Sericum_, that it is “cordial, restorative,
one drachm in powder.” Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 215.)


_Hyacinthus._

This is one of the precious stones which often occurs as an ingredient
in the Arabian formulæ for antidotes. Ebn Baithar remarks, that it is
not described by Dioscorides nor Galen. He mentions three kinds, a
yellow, a red, and a black, of which the red is the noblest. Its powers,
he says, are increased by fire. It was used as an amulet, and was held
to be cordial and alexipharmic; and, in fact, Ebn Baithar says it is
possessed of many virtues. From his mentioning of it, that, when rubbed,
it attracts straw, there seems every reason to suppose that it was
tourmaline. Some have taken the hyacinth of the Greeks and Romans for the
same, but Heeren rather supposes it to be the ruby. It is briefly noticed
as a cordial by Avicenna, Mesue, and Serapion. The last of these gives
nearly the same account of it as Ebn Baithar; that is to say, both had
copied from the same authorities. He particularly mentions it as being an
excellent phylactery to guard the body during thunder-storms. (De Simpl.
398.) The _Confectio de Hyacintho_ has been very celebrated in modern
times. See Moses Charras (Roy. Pharmacop. 147.)


_Hager Albuzedi._

It is thus described by Serapion: “Hager albuzedi is a red stone, but
less so than the hyacinth, the redness of which is more agreeable to
the eye, as there is no obscurity in it. The mines where this stone is
found are in the East. When taken from the mine it is opake; but when
divested of its outer coat by a lapidary, its goodness is discovered and
it becomes transparent. When this stone has been strongly rubbed against
the hair of the head, it attracts chaff, as the magnet does iron.” He
speaks of its being useful to the eyes when they are rubbed with it, and
says that as a seal it dispels frightsome dreams. (de Mineral. 399.)
According to Beckmann this is most probably not the tourmaline, although
it bears some resemblance to it in properties, but belongs rather to the
hyacinths. (History of Inventions.) In fact, it would appear to us highly
probable, that this article like the preceding was a variety of the ruby.


_Hager Salachil_, or _Lapis Corneolus_.

Several species of it are described by Serapion, of which the best he
says is the red. They are brought, he adds, from the mines of the Romans,
and were used principally as an amulet and dentifrice. It must have been
the same as the _Sardion_ of Theophrastus (De Lapidibus), and of Plato
(Timæus.) The term would appear to have been used in a general sense
for several of the finer kinds of agates. (De Simpl. 400.) A modern
authority thus describes it: “The Sarda _or_ Cornelian. It is a gem half
transparent, like the water wherein flesh is washed, or like bloody
flesh: hence it is called Carneolus or Cornelian. The best cornelians are
found in Sardinia.” Schröder (Chemical Dispensatory, p. 160.)


_Tincar_, or _Borax_.

We have treated of this article already under the head of _Chrysocolla_,
with which it has been often confounded. It was introduced into medical
practice by the Arabians, and there appears to us no doubt that it was
the same as our borate of soda. It was very much used for the cure of
toothache. See the authorities quoted under _Chrysocolla_. It was used
medicinally by the Hindoo physicians. See the Susruta (pluries), Wise
(Hindoo System of Medicine, 117); Ainslie (Mat. Ind. 576); Royle (Mat.
Med. 97.)


_Hager Alcazaha._

It is difficult to determine precisely what this precious stone was,
although it is pretty minutely described by Serapion. He says it is
brought from Yemen, and is of divers colours, from white to black, and
that it occasions disturbed dreams when worn as an amulet: he recommends
it, however, to be thus used by infants, and says a vessel prepared from
it, if used for holding any article of food or drink, prevents sleep. (De
Simpl. 401.)


_Lapis Lazuli._

We have in so far treated of this substance under _Cyanus_ in the
preceding Commentary. It was used, like the other precious stones, as an
amulet, but was more particularly celebrated as a melanogogue medicine.
It was further said to be useful in asthma, and as an emmenagogue.
See Serapion (De Simpl. 369); Avicenna (ii, 256). A modern authority
describes it thus: “It is a stone like a sapphire, or the flowers of
cyanus adorned with golden stones or flowers, harder than the Armenian
stone. It is in virtue like the Armenian stone, but weaker; it purgeth
chiefly melancholy. It is worn about the neck for an amulet to drive away
frights from children,” &c. Schröder, (Chymic. Dispensat.)


_Berengemish_, or _Ozimum Gariofilatum_.

Serapion, after quoting a description of it from Isaac ebn Amram, says
of it, that it is hot and dry in the end of the second degree, is useful
in coldness of the stomach, promotes digestion, is a hepatic and cordial
medicine, dispels melancholy, renders the eructations fragrant, &c.
His other authorities recommend it in similar cases. (De Simpl. 156.)
Avicenna gives a similar account of it in all respects. (ii, 2, 254.)
We suppose there is no doubt that it is the clove basil, or _Ocimum
gariofilatum_ of Miller; or, according to Sprengel, the _O. monachorum_.


_Behen._

Serapion briefly describes two varieties of it consisting of fibrous
roots, being brought from Armenia, and having a good smell with some
viscidity. Both kinds, he says, are hot and humid, and increase the
secretion of semen. (De Simpl. 223.) See also Avicenna (ii, 2, 82), and
Rhases (Contin. l. ult. iii, 29.) Avicenna holds that it is also cordial
in addition to its power of forming semen. It is the _Centaurea Behen_ L.


_Spinachia._

We have already treated of the spinach (_Spinachia oleracea_) as a
dietetical article introduced by the Arabians. (Vol. I, 113.) According
to Avicenna it is laxative of the bowels, useful in orthopnœa, and other
diseases of the chest. It is noticed in like terms by Serapion (De Simpl.
140); by Rhases (Contin. l. ult. i, 671.) Ebn Baithar says of spinach
that it is an excellent potherb, and useful in diseases of the neck and
chest, being much used for this purpose by the inhabitants of Nineveh,
who are very subject to such complaints.


_Rhabarbarum._

We have stated under _Rheum_ in the preceding Commentary (317), that it
was the _rheum rhaponticum_, which is the only species of the _rheum_
described in the regular treatises on the Mat. Med. of the Greeks and
Romans. Our author, however, would seem to allude to the _Rheum barbarum_
or purgative rhubarb, at Book I, 43, and VII, 11. Although it is stated
by some learned authorities that the rheum of Trallian (viii, 3) was a
species of the Rhabarbarum, we are satisfied from a careful examination
of the passage, that it was the rhaponticum. There can be no doubt
that the general use of the purgative rhubarb was introduced by the
Arabians, of whom Ebn Baithar is by far the most copious and instructive
under this head. He states decidedly that there are four species of
rhubarb, three of which are perfectly distinct. On the first species, by
which he evidently means the _R. Rhaponticum_, he gives extracts from
Dioscorides, Galen, Oribasius, and Paulus. He says the older physicians
knew nothing of the virtues of the purgative kinds of rhubarb until
they were discovered near to his time. He says the purgative rhubarb
acts as a deobstruent and strengthener of all the internal viscera, is
useful in mental diseases, dropsy, jaundice, marasmus connected with
obstructions, especially when combined with gum lac. He says it is most
useful in chronic diarrhœa when taken in an aromatic wine and with Indian
spikenard, and also in uterine fluxes, dyspepsia, and other complaints
of a similar nature. He praises it most especially as a stomachic.
He states, that of all the kinds of rhubarb, the Turkish possesses
the purgative quality in the highest degree. Of the other Arabian
authorities, Averrhoes is one who gives a very distinct account of the
true purgative rhubarb. (Collig. v, 42.) Mesue describes three species of
the Rhabarbarum, _or_ Rhaued, namely, Indianum, Barbarum, and Turcicum,
to all of which he ascribes purgative powers, and recommends them as
being possessed of hepatic, stomachic, and deobstruent properties, which
render them particularly serviceable in dropsy, obstructions of the
spleen, and jaundice. The dose of the infusion, he says, is from one to
ten drs.; and of the pounded, from one to three. He appears not to have
been acquainted with the Rhaponticum (De Simpl. v), whereas Avicenna and
Serapion would seem not to have known the other. It may be proper to
mention, in conclusion, that the Rheum rhaponticum is the common culinary
or tart rhubarb of this country. According to Loudon, it was introduced
in 1573, but it is most probable that we owe the introduction of it to
the Romans.

       *       *       *       *       *

But it is time that we should draw this Appendix to a close. And now we
trust it will not be thought out of place to conclude with Professor
Beckmann’s eloquent eulogy on the Literature of the Arabians in his
celebrated work on the ‘History of Inventions and Discoveries.’

“What a noble people were the Arabs! We are indebted to them for much
knowledge and for many inventions of great utility; and we should have
still more to thank them for were we fully aware of the benefits we
have derived from them. What a pity that their works should be suffered
to moulder into dust, without being made available! What a shame that
those acquainted with this rich language should meet with so little
encouragement! The few old translations which exist have been made by
persons who were not sufficiently acquainted either with languages or
the sciences. On that account they are for the most part unintelligible,
uncertain, in many places corrupted, and besides, exceedingly scarce.
Even when obtained, the possessors are pretty much in the same state as
those who make their way with great trouble to a treasure, which, after
all, they are only permitted to see at a distance through a narrow gate.
Had I still twenty years to live, and could hope for an abundant supply
of Arabic works, I would learn Arabic. But ὁ βίος βραχὺς, ἡ δὲ τέχνη
μακρή.”


SECT. IV.—ON SIMPLE PURGATIVE MEDICINES.

Give of aloes one drachm, with honeyed water, in the morning. But they
who administer it in the evening or after food occasion mischief, for
it makes the food spoil. It evacuates yellow bile, less if given to the
extent of three oboli, for in that case it proves solely and entirely
eccoprotic. But purgative medicines being generally bad for the stomach,
aloes alone is stomachic. Those who cannot endure the bitterness of it
may take it formed into pills. It is manifest that purgative medicines do
not evacuate by any one simple temperament such as heat (for then all hot
things would be evacuants, such as pepper), but by some specific property
of their whole substance in like manner as the magnet attracts iron. Of
purgative medicines those which are simply laxative have been treated of
in the First Book. We are to use drastic purgatives either in order to
transfer some matter, or to dislodge and remove an indurated diathesis,
or as an alterative to the system, and in order to change the temperament
of it, or to displace any offending humour. There are certain mixed modes
complicated of the afore-mentioned. Purgative medicines are to be given
to those whose powers are firm and their understanding strong; to such as
have passed the first stage of life, and have not yet come to the last;
to those who have a strong stomach, and have collections of superfluous
matters in the body, and are not very sanguineous. The best seasons for
purging, if there be no urgent necessity, are the spring and the autumn.

_On those things which evacuate bile._ We may give cholagogue medicines
at any season except winter, to persons in the vigour of life and in the
decline; to persons of dry and muscular habits, and who are of a dark
or ruddy complexion; to men rather than to women; to those whose food
is apt to spoil on their stomachs, and whose bellies are constipated;
to such as abound in bitter bile, are irascible, pass little urine, and
use hot and dry food: in icteric, hepatic, and pleuritic affections; in
phrenitis, cynanche, mania, cephalæa, ophthalmy, erysipelas, leprosy,
fevers, and to such as are troubled with collections of bile. Aloes
is given to such as are troubled with heaviness of the head, with
ophthalmy, with thirst, with disturbed dreams without fever; to such as
have a sensation of departing rigor; to those who pass acrid flatus,
and have gnawing pains of the intestines; to those who are seized with
burning heat about the stomach, or nausea producing eversion of it;
and to those who being troubled with a collection of excrementitious
matters cannot bear evacuations by clysters. For it evacuates the whole
body, and does not occasion disorder of it unless given in very great
quantity, and brings along with it any bile lying in the intestines,
stomach, and gullet.—Hellebore agrees both with those in acute diseases
and those in chronic requiring a cholagogue medicine, such as maniacs,
those troubled with hemicrania, and such as have defluxions of the eyes
and complaints in the chest. But it suits most with such viscera as the
uterus and bladder when they require a cholagogue remedy. It is also
proper for chronic affections of the trachea, for jaundice, exanthemata,
lichen, herpes, erysipelas, and leprosy. Black hellebore evacuates bile,
especially yellow, from the whole body and without trouble. Hence it
is given to those not affected with heavy fever, and more especially
to such as are free from fever, in the quantity of one drachm of the
roots triturated in honeyed water or plain water, while fasting, or
with honey made into pills. Some mix with it pennyroyal, savoury, or
some of the volatile stomachics.—Scammony purges like hellebore, and
more especially yellow bile, but of all purgative medicines it is the
most prejudicial to the stomach. It is, therefore, to be given to those
who are free from fever, and such as have strong stomachs, to the
amount of four oboli, with salts, pepper, ginger, or some one of the
volatile stomachics, or along with honey. It is also formed into pills
with gum.—The medullary part of the fruit of the Colocynth evacuates
especially bile and mucous matters, not from the blood like hellebore
and scammony, but from the nerves and nervous parts, when given to the
amount of one drachm in two cyathi of honeyed water which has rue boiled
in it. But it is to be triturated for a long time, because otherwise
its rough particles sticking in the internal parts produce ulcerations
and nervous affections by sympathy. It is to be given to those who have
affections of the head, namely, when the meninx or the pericranium
is affected, such as those labouring under vertigo or hemicrania, or
those troubled with cephalæa; also in epilepsy, apoplexy, cynic spasms,
chronic defluxions on the eyes, orthopnœa, asthma, and chronic coughs;
likewise in arthritic cases to those who have affections about the
kidneys or bladder.—Elaterium evacuates like scammony. Such as is green
like leeks, light, and not older than a year, is to be chosen; and it is
to be given to the amount of three oboli, triturated with one hemina of
milk.—Tithymallus, _spurge_, evacuates bile like elaterium and scammony.
Four or five drops of the juice are given, mixed with polenta and quickly
swallowed. For if retained long in the mouth they ulcerate the tongue
and surrounding parts.—Lathyrides (a species of spurge) purge bile like
hellebore and scammony. They are to be given to the amount of seven,
eight, or as many as fifteen grains to such as are robust and require
much purging, who are to be directed to chew them. But those who are
weaker and have bad stomachs, must swallow them whole.—The dried tops
of the Peplium are to be given to the amount of eight oboli in honeyed
water. They evacuate bile like hellebore, and occasion the breaking of
wind.—Agaric has similar powers to the colocynth, but acts slowly and is
not prejudicial to the stomach. It is given to the amount of two drachms
with honeyed water. It should be very white, brittle, and not very woody
nor carious.—Illyrian Iris purges in like manner when given to the amount
of eight oboli in honeyed water. It ought not to be old nor carious.—The
small Centaury by purging bile and mucus is particularly adapted for
cases of ischiatic disease. The decoction is to be drunk of a drachm
and a half of centaury, boiled in a hemina of water until it be reduced
to the half.—The flower with the fruit of Tragoriganum is given to the
amount of two drachms, in honeyed water, to the same class of persons as
the black hellebore. It is more stomachic than the hellebore, but less
purgative.—Four drachms of Chamelæa (mezereon?) boiled in two heminæ of
honeyed water, until reduced to a fourth part, purge like hellebore. Some
administer chamelæa by making it into pills with a double quantity of
wormwood.—Aristolochia, _birthwort_, purges like colocynth, one drachm of
the species called clematis being given in honeyed water.—The dried root
of Polypody when pounded and sprinkled on honeyed water, or triturated
along with it, has the same effects as colocynth.

_Medicines which evacuate black bile._ Medicines which evacuate black
bile are to be given in an especial manner to melancholic persons,
to such as are easily moved to paroxysms, to passionate persons, to
misanthropists, to persons of solitary habits, or to such as during
convalescence require purging, during the heat of autumn, in dry habits,
and to such as are not muscular.—Epithymum, _dodder of thyme_, is the
best of those medicines which evacuate black bile. It is to be given to
the amount of five drachms triturated with a hemina of milk.

Epithymbrum, or the substance which grows upon savory, evacuates in like
manner with the epithymum, but is weaker. Pennyroyal, when taken to the
amount of an acetabulum, in honeyed water, evacuates black bile.—The
Heracleatic Tragoriganum in the same dose evacuates like pennyroyal. But
both must be dried. Alypum, the seeds of it have been said to purge black
bile when given in the same quantity as the epithymum with salts and
vinegar; but, as Dioscorides says, it occasions slight ulceration of the
intestines. It is, I think, that substance which is now called alypias.
It is to be given in honeyed water.—Parthenium (matricaria?), _feverfew_,
when dried and drunk in like manner, evacuates the same humours. Alypon,
_madwort_, drunk with salts, purges in like manner.

_Medicines which evacuate phlegm._ We are to administer phlegmagogues
in cold habits; to aged persons, in winter; in paralytic and apoplectic
cases; for loose œdematous swellings; to such persons as have great
collections of phlegm in the belly, chest, or stomach; and in cases of
the female flux. They agree also with those who have a copious running
from the nose and thick expectoration, with cases of anorexia and
ischiatic disease when the joint becomes mucous or pituitous; but they
are particularly adapted for those cases of dropsy which are called
anasarca.—One drachm of white Storax, drunk with an equal quantity of
turpentine rosin, evacuates phlegm.—The bark of the root of Olive to the
amount of one drachm, with wine or water; nine oboli of Pellitory, with
water; two drachms of the seed of Lychnis (_campion_); one drachm of the
root of Sow-bread, with hydromel; two drachms of Garlic, with honey;
ground Pine, triturated and given in the form of pills; half a drachm of
the flakes of copper, with an equal quantity of rosin, in pills, purges
bile strongly.—A drachm and half of the green leaves of Bay; two oboli of
the bark of the root of the wild Cucumber; forty seeds of that species of
ricinus called Crotones stripped of their bark and eaten, do the same.
A half of that part of Parsley connected with the root (which some call
chamæraphanus), when eaten; two drachms of Bdellium, with hydromel; but
Gum is particularly adapted for defluxions on the eyes.

_Medicines which evacuate water._ We are to give hydragogues in that
variety of dropsical disease called ascites; to women troubled with
the whites; and to those who have ulcers accompanied with a copious
discharge.—One drachm of the flakes of Copper, when drunk with honeyed
water evacuates water; but a little vinegar must also be swallowed lest
it be vomited.—The Granum Cnidium when stripped of its bark, triturated,
and drunk with boiled honey, that it may not touch the orifice of the
stomach, evacuates water. Twenty, twenty-five, or thirty grains are to
be given, and to those who are stronger, as many as forty.—One drachm
of Euphorbium, drunk with boiled honey, evacuates phlegm, but more
especially water.—Eight oboli of the seed of rough Spleenwort, with
honeyed water, evacuate water.—Cneorum, in like manner, purges water when
drunk with polenta.—Five drachms of the seed of Cnicus, when triturated
together in ptisan, are swallowed with a small quantity of salts.—One
drachm of Ammoniac perfume, drunk in honeyed water, evacuates water. Some
give it in affections of the spleen with oxycrate.—The juice of the bark
of the root of the Elder-tree, when drunk to the amount of two ounces
with wine, evacuates water.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The philosopher Aristotle thus explains his ideas respecting
the action of purgatives: “When purgatives are conveyed to the stomach,
and are there dissolved, they are carried by the same passages as the
food, and when they cannot be digested, but their prevailing power
remains unsubdued, they return, and carry with them whatever opposes
them, and this is called purging.” (Problem. 43.) See also Alexander
Aphrodisiensis (Probl. ii, 58.)

Hippocrates administered purgative medicines freely and boldly,
but at the same time he cautions against the unseasonable and rash
administration of them in several parts of his works. We do not find
any theory, however, of the _modus operandi_ of purgatives, nor any
general remarks on the cases in which they are applicable, in any of the
Hippocratic treatises which are now acknowledged to be genuine. Some
ingenious remarks, however, may be found on this subject in the work ‘De
Nat. humana.’

Celsus has a chapter on purgative medicines which contains much curious
and valuable matter. He says the more ancient physicians gave various
purgative medicines very freely, such as black hellebore, polypody,
squama æris, the milky juice of lactuca marina (_euphorbia paralias?_),
the milk of asses, with a little salt; but he holds that purgatives hurt
the stomach, and are not to be given when any fever is present. The
rules, which he lays down for the administration of them, are highly
judicious, and deserving of consideration. He approves of them when the
head feels heavy, when the eyes are misty, when there is obstruction of
the bowels, and when there is pain there or in the hip-joint, when the
stomach is oppressed with bile or phlegm, and when there is dyspnœa, when
venesection is indicated, but the powers of the system will not admit of
it, and in several other cases. (v, 12.) He mentions that Asclepiades
totally rejected the use of purgative medicines. (i, 3.)

Galen has devoted a complete treatise to the discussion of the question
regarding the _modus operandi_ of purgatives. He decidedly inclines to
the theory that every purgative by some specific property attracts, and
as it were, sucks to it the humour to which it has a natural alliance,
in like manner as the magnet attracts iron. He divides Purgatives into
Cholagogues, Melanogogues, Hydragogues, and Phlegmagogues. He rejects
the hypothesis of Erasistratus, who maintained that each medicine
converts the juices presented to it, into its own specific nature:
thus that cholagogues convert them into yellow bile, melanogogues
into black bile, and so forth. Although Galen flatters himself that
he effectually demolishes this hypothesis, we have long looked upon
it as a very plausible one, and believe that at the present time the
prevailing opinion in the profession inclines much in that direction.
For example, the green and dark discharges which are brought off by
mercurial purgatives, are now generally supposed to be occasioned by the
fluids in the secretions entering into combination with the medicine
administered. It is to be regretted that no ancient author has given us
a clear exposition of the hypothesis of Erasistratus. Galen gives a long
list of cases, in which purgatives prove beneficial, such as erysipelas,
epilepsy, apoplexy, gout, rheumatism, melancholy, and many chronic
complaints. He insists strongly on the benefit derived from cholagogues
for the cure of jaundice. (De purg. Med. vi.)

Antyllus, in an extract preserved by Aëtius, espouses the theory which
maintains the specific operation of purgatives, and that they act by
attracting the humours to which they are allied. He recommends them
for various complaints, as malignant cutaneous diseases, spontaneous
ulceration, and rheumatic affections. (iii, 23.)

The account of this subject, given by Oribasius, is taken from the works
of Galen and Ruffus. It is too lengthy for our limits. Ruffus directs the
surgeon to consider well the patient’s constitution, and regulate the
dose of the medicine accordingly, as there is a great difference in the
susceptibility of persons to be acted upon by purgatives. The following
is a list of the purgatives described by Ruffus in this fragment:
Polypody, iris, colocynth, phacoides (a species of spurge olive?),
peplos, peplium, aloe, hippophaes, hippophæstum, clematis, pycnocomon,
vines, thyme, epithyme, marjoram, Greek savory, poppies, cucumber, the
smaller heliotrope, the lesser sesamoides, the tithymalli or spurges,
the chamelæa, lathyris, agaric, and euphorbium. His description of the
operation of each medicine bespeaks a good acquaintance with the subject.
(Med. Collect. vii, 26.) See also Actuarius (Meth. Med. iii, 7.)

Haly Abbas makes some acute remarks on the action of Cathartics. Every
purgative, he says, attracts the humour, to which it is allied. Different
opinions, he adds, have been entertained regarding the _modus operandi_
in this case. Some maintain that, when such a medicine is swallowed, it
goes to the members where its cognate humour is lodged, from which both
are expelled by the expulsive faculty of the part, and return to the
bowels together. This theory, however, he rejects. He mentions further
that others maintain that the medicine attracts its peculiar fluid, as
a magnet does iron; and of this theory he adopts a modification. He
states it as his opinion that, when such a medicine has been swallowed,
it attracts its cognate fluid from the surrounding parts, to which all
the similar fluids in the body are afterwards determined, being conveyed
thither by the veins. He gives a full account of all the purgatives known
in his time. (Pract. iii, 53, 54.) Much the same theory is advocated, and
fully explained by Serapion. (De Antidot. vii, 10.)

Avicenna and Rhases object to the doctrine of Galen that he appears to
have maintained that there is a peculiar alliance between a purgative
medicine of a certain class and the fluid or humour which it attracts,
whereas they argue that, as there is no alliance between the magnet and
the iron which it attracts, so is it in like manner with purgatives and
the peculiar fluids which they evacuate. This, however, is only a more
precise exposition of the theory advanced by Galen. Rhases (Cont. xii,
1); Avicenna (i, 4, 4.) The ancient theory is very acutely stated by
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 21.) See also Mesue (Canones universales.) There
appears to be some originality in the theory of Mesue. He says that a
purgative medicine operates by occasioning a preternatural increase
of the vital, or, as it is now called, animal heat of the part to
which it is applied, whereby its attractive powers are increased. He
maintains very ingeniously that purgation is an act of Nature, that
is to say, an operation of the _vis medicatrix naturæ_, and that the
medicine is merely the instrument of Nature in this case, for, he adds
(as Hippocrates says), it is Nature, and not the physician, that cures
diseases. A purgative medicine, then, he argues, acts by rousing the
expulsive power of Nature. He joins the preceding authorities, however,
in illustrating the attractive power of purgatives, by comparing it
to the property which the magnet has of attracting iron, and amber
of attracting straws. Purgative medicines, he says, have the faculty
of clearing away the humours from the different parts of the body;
from the stomach and intestines they do so readily; from the meseraic
veins less easily; still more difficultly from the liver, and with
the greatest possible difficulty from the joints, especially when the
humours are impacted there. He forbids purgatives to be given in the
extremes, either of hot or cold; in this practice observing the rule
of Hippocrates. In hot weather, he says, emetics, and not purgatives,
are indicated. The directions which he gives for correcting the noxious
qualities of purgative medicines are highly important, but they are too
lengthy for our limits. Aromatics added to purgatives, he says, dispel
flatus; bitters do the same, and strengthen the stomach; saltish things
increase their purgative powers; unctuous, by lubricating the intestines,
accelerate their operation, and render it easier; and sweet substances
render them less nauseous, and diminish their acrimony.

On the ancient arrangement of purgative medicines Dr. Paris makes the
following pertinent remark: “It is impossible to concede to the opinion
of Dr. Hamilton, that the different species of purgative medicines do
not possess distinct powers over the different species of matter to be
evacuated; on the contrary, there is reason for reviving the ancient
theory, too inconsiderately abandoned, and which acknowledged these
different distinctions in the operations of cathartic medicines under
the appropriate names of hydragogues, cholagogues, &c.” (Pharmacop.)
Dr. Alston likewise writes thus: “We have a very learned essay in
confirmation of the ancient doctrine of the specific operation of
purgatives by Dr. G. Martyn (Lond. 1740, in 8vo.) I shall not enter into
the controversy, but only observe that there is nothing impossible, yea,
nor improbable in the theory.” (Lectures.) See a learned dissertation on
the action of purgatives in Mangeti ‘Bibliotheca Anatomica,’ i, 159. We
may mention further that Dr. Murray in his Materia Medica inclines to the
Galenic theory of the specific operation of purgatives. (c. viii.)

_On Cholagogues._ Most of these medicines are sufficiently well known,
and therefore do not require to be treated of at greater length. See also
Aëtius (iii) and Oribasius (M. Col. vii.)

The Arabian author Mesue gives the following table of Cholagogues:

              _Clementer._                            _Valenter._
            { Aloe                                  { Agaricus.
            { Absinthium  } Trahendo et             { Asarum.
            { Rosa        } astringendo,            { Aristolochia.
            { Rhabarbarum } flavæ: nam aliæ         { Bryonia.
            { Myrobalani  } aliud vacuant.          { Cyclaminus.
            { Pruna.                                { Cucumer agrestis.
  Cholagoga { Tamar Indi  } Astringendo.    Radices { Dracunculus et arum.
            { Cassia      }                         { Elleborus.
            { Manna.                                { Esula.
            { Viola nigra } Lubricando.             { Hermodactylus.
            { Psyllium    }                         { Iris.
            { Adiantum etiam phl.                   { Scilla.
                                                    { Turbith.

It will be perceived that this list contains several articles with which
the Greeks were unacquainted, namely, myrobalani, tamarindi, manna, and
turbith. Of all these substances we have already given some account in
the Appendix to the Third Section. Mesue calls the _tamarinds_, the fruit
of an Indian palm-tree, the word _tamur_ signifying a _date_. He says,
that they are excellent medicines for repressing the acrimony of the
humours, purging bile, cooling the heat of the blood; that they prove
useful in hot fevers, jaundice, inflammation of the stomach and liver,
and that they stop vomiting. He calls them refrigerants and desiccants
of the second order. To prevent them from hurting the stomach by their
coldness, he recommends to give them with spikenard, mace, mastich,
wormwood, fennel, or any such calefacients. Avicenna states their
medicinal characters in the same terms. Serapion says, that they are
desiccants and refrigerants in the third degree. Averrhoes ranks them
among the refrigerants of the third, and desiccants of the second order.
We have already mentioned, that the earlier commentators are decidedly
of opinion, that the tripolium of the Greeks was _turbith_, but this is
now generally acknowledged to have been a mistake. Mesue calls it the
root of a milky herb, having leaves like a ferula, but smaller. Probably,
however, as his commentator Manardus remarks, there is some mistake in
the comparison of it to the ferula, as there is no resemblance between
them. An accurate modern author, Moses Charras, calls it the bark of
a milky root, which is chosen by its weight, dark-coloured without,
white within, and clear from its pith, which is hard and fibrous. Mesue
represents it to be a hot, nauseous purgative. It is given in powder, he
says, to the amount of from one to two drachms.

Serapion recommends Cholagogues particularly in jaundice, inflammatory
affections of the brain, mania, epilepsy, erysipelas, herpes, and
tertian fever. He describes the following medicines as cholagogues:
aloes, southernwood, black hellebore, scammony, colocynth, agaric,
claterium, two species of mezereon, lathyris, the root of the lily,
centaury, polypody, birthwort, myrobalaus (the yellow, the black, and
the chebulic), pomegranate, cassia fistula, violet, ivy, and two Arabian
substances _anabac_ and _alterariabin_. We are unable to determine what
the last two were.

A modern writer, Christianus Margravius, in his ‘Materia Medica
Contracta,’ thus enumerates the cholagogues of his time.

                Cholagoga,
    Cassia, manna, tamarindi, succusque rosarum,
    Scammonium, myrobalani, rhabarbarum, aloe.

Professor Alpinus gives an accurate account of the ancient cholagogues.
(Meth. Med. iii, 9.) The following medicines are said to be used as
purgatives by the Hindoos; we give the scientific names as given by
Dr. Wise: 1. Convolvulus turpethum. 2. Panicum frumentaceum. 3. Croton
polyandrum. 4. Anthericum tuberosum. 5. Abrus precatorius. 6. Cessampelos
hexandra. 7. Asclepias geminata. 8. Clotoria ternata. 9. A kind of
convolvulus. 10. _Shabraba._ 11. Cassia fistula. 12. Plumbago zeylanica.
13. Acheranthes aspera. 14. Poa cynosurides. 15. Saccharum spontaneum.
16. _Jelaka?_. 17. A variety of the convolvulus turpethum. 18. _Ramaka._
19. Bignonia suaveolens. 20. Terminalia chebula. 21. Indigofera
tinctoria. 22. Ricinus communis. 23. Costus speciosus. 24. Euphorbia. 25.
_Suptachetta._ 26. Calotropis gigantea. 27. Halicacabum cardiospermum. Of
these the turbet, myrobalans, and castor oil, are particularly commended.
(On Hindoo Medicine.)

_On Melanogogues._ The other Greek authorities treat of nearly the same
number of Melanogogues. They are treated of methodically by Galen,
Oribasius, and Aëtius. The _Alypias_ is supposed by Bernard (Nota in
Nonni Epit.), and Prosper Alpinus, to have been the turbith; but, as is
now maintained, erroneously. See Sprengel’s Notes on Dioscorides (iv,
177) and the preceding _Appendix_.

The following is Mesue’s list of Melanogogues:

               _Clementer._                           _Valenter._
             { Stæchas.                               { Balanus Myrepsica.
             { Aqua lactis.                           { Centaurium.
             { Fumaria.                    Fructus et { Colocynthis.
             { Epithymus.                   Flores    { Coccum Gnidium.
  Melanogoga { Thymus leviter, magis phleg.           { Genista.
             { Polypodium.                            { Ricinus.
             { Jus gallorum phleg. cum phleg.         { Senna.
             { melanogogum cum melanogog.
                                                      { Armenus lapis.
                                                      { Cyanus lapis.
                                              Terrea  { Nitrum.
                                                      { Salis genera.

Of these medicines, the only one which we owe to the Arabians is _Senna_.
Mesue, it is true, quotes Galen as an authority on it, but this is most
probably a mistake, as no mention of it is now to be traced in any part
of his works. Averrhoes, accordingly, ranks it among the newly-discovered
medicines. He says, that it is both phlegmagogue and cholagogue. Serapion
and Rhases give nearly the same account of it. They state the minimum
dose of the powdered leaves at one drachm, and of the decoction at five
drachms. Mesue directs us to prepare a vinous tincture by infusing
the leaves in musk. He recommends us to correct its nauseousness and
unpleasant effects by the addition of ginger, and other cordials. He says
that it cleanses the liver and spleen. Actuarius briefly notices it. He
says it evacuates bile and phlegm. (Meth. Med. v, 8.) See Appendix. The
Arabian authors represent the lapis lazuli to be the same as the lapis
armenus of the Greeks. We have stated what we believe to be the truth of
the matter in the preceding commentary. Margravius, in his enumeration of
melanogogues, makes a distinction between them:

                    Melanogoga—
    Sunt ludiæ balani, lazuli lapis, armenusque,
    Senna, polypodium quernum, helleborusque, epithymum.

Averrhoes states that the lapis lazuli is the most potent medicine of
this class. (Collig. v, 43.)

_On Phlegmagogues._ Mesue’s list is as follows:

                       _Clementer._                     _Valenter._
               { Cnicus.                              { Euphorbium.
  Phlegmagoga  { Lupulus.                  Lachryma   { Opoponax.
               { Hyssopus.                            { Scammonium.
               { Eupatorium etiam cholag.             { Sagapenum.
                                                      { Sarcocolla.

Serapion directs us to administer these medicines to persons of a cold
habit, in cold seasons of the year, to those affected with anasarca and
apoplexy, in sciatica and hemorrhages. His list is little different from
our author’s. Margravius enumerates the phlegmagogues as follows:

                      Phlegmagoga—
    Carthamus, agaricus, turpeth, mechoaca, jalappa,
    Emblica, belliricæ, chebulæ, colocynthis, amara,
    Hermodactylus, euphorbium, opoponax, sagapenum.

_On Hydragogues._ The hydragogue properties of the elder-tree are
commended by Boerhaave and Sydenham. See the section on Dropsy in the
Third Book.

There is some difficulty in determining what the cneoros was. We are
inclined to think that it was the _cassia fistula_, the medicinal
characters of which, as stated by Mesue among the Arabian, and Prosper
Alpinus among the modern, authorities, correspond with the account of
cneoros given by our author.

Gum ammoniac is an ingredient of the purgative salt, a receipt for
which is given by Apicius. It also enters into the sales purgatorii of
Myrepsus. (ii, 9 and 10.) See the commentary on the next Section.

Prosper Alpinus says of the coccum gnidium, or fruit of the thymelæa,
that in doses of fifteen grains it is a strong purgative, and evacuates
principally serous humours in dropsy. He reckons the squama æris among
the drastic purgatives.

Serapion’s account of the hydragogues is nearly the same as our author’s.
The following is Margravius’s list of them:

    Esula, gratiola, atque ireos succus, mechoaca,
    Post ebuli semen, et succus, cortexcque elaterium,
    Soldanella virens, et gummi gutta, jalappa.


SECT. V.—ON COMPOUND PURGATIVES.

_Pills from aloes._ Of the medullary part of colocynth, p. j; of the
juice of wormwood, p. j; of aloes, p. j; of scammony, p. ij; make with
water pills of the size of a chick-pea. The dose xj grains.

_The oxymel of Julian._ Of rue, oz. iij; of marjoram, oz. iij; of the
hair (capillary-leaves?) of thyme, oz. iv; of dill, oz. iss; of iris, oz.
j; of the root of mandrake, oz. iss; of agaric, oz. ij; of fatty dead
pines, oz. xij; of the granum Cnidium, oz. iv; of lathyrides, oz. iij; of
alypias, oz. iij; of polypody, oz. ij; of the cassia-leaf (malabathrum),
oz. j; of costus, oz. j; of spikenard, oz. j; of rha Ponticum, oz. iss;
of squills, oz. iij; of the tops of the elder-tree, oz. iij; of canopus,
which is the bark of elder, oz. iij; of asarabacca, oz. j; of pennyroyal,
oz. iij; of dodder of thyme, oz. ij; of hellebore, oz. ij; of sweetflag,
oz. ij; of water-parsnip, oz. j; of amomum, oz. j; of St. John’s wort,
oz. j; of cumin, oz. j; of anise, oz. ij; of vinegar, ten sextarii; of
honey, five sextarii: macerate the herbs in the vinegar for three days;
then, having boiled it until more than one half be consumed, add the
honey, and having strained, add the lathyrides, the costus, the granum
Cnidium, and the spikenard triturated, and, if you please, after it is
fully boiled, the oxymel. The full dose is oz. j; or according to the
patient’s strength. It is useful in gouty affections and epilepsies; and
when we require at the same time to evacuate or dislodge thick humours.

_The purgative hydragogue from cloves._ Of aloes, of dodder of thyme, of
cloves, of granum Cnidium, of stone-parsley, of rha Ponticum, of each,
oz. ss; of euphorbium, scr. iv; of honey, q. s. The dose is one spoonful.

_The purgative medicine from rhodomel, of Alexander._ Of the juice
of roses, two sextarii; of honey, one sextarius; of scammony, oz.
iv. A full dose is five spoonfuls, a small, two, a medium dose three
spoonfuls.—_Otherwise_: of honey, lb. j; of the juice of roses, lb. j; of
pepper, dr. ij; of scammony, dr. viij; of mastich, dr. iv; and of ginger,
dr. ij.—_Otherwise_, one which I use: of spikenard, of asarabacca, of
dodder of thyme, of each, oz. ss; macerate in a hemina of water for three
days; and having boiled it to a moderate degree, mix with the water of
the juice of roses, half a sextarius; of honey, half a sextarius; and
having boiled it until it acquire consistence, add scammony to the amount
of oz. iss.

_A purgative medicine from quinces._ Of roasted quinces, oz. iv; of
pepper, oz. ss; of scammony, dr. j; of honey, oz. v. Having triturated
it, give one spoonful, according to the strength.

_The stomachic purgative from citrons._ Boil of the bark of a citron,
and of the flesh of the same, lb. j, in a sextarius and a half of water,
until a third be left; add half a sextarius of honey, and having boiled
until it acquire the consistence of honey, sprinkle of the powder of long
pepper, oz. j; of scammony roasted in leaven, oz. j.

_The purgative called Buccellatus._ Of baked scammony, oz. j; of pepper
and of parsley-seed, of each, scr. j; of fennel, of anise, of each, oz.
j; of honey, lb. j; having roasted it moderately, give in hippocras to
the amount of one ounce.

_Purgative olives._ Of scammony, oz. j; of pepper, oz. j; of dodder of
thyme, of toasted cumin, of stone-parsley, of rue, of the green leaves of
mint, of each, dr. iv; of laserwort, dr. j; of dates, oz. v; of honey,
oz. v; of vinegar, two heminæ; of pickled olives (namely of schistous),
one sextar. Some add a moderate quantity of fish-sauce. The dose is v,
vij, or ix.

_A purgative trochisk._ Of scammony, dr. iv; of euphorbium, dr. iv; of
the cassia-leaf (malabathrum), dr. ij; of pepper, dr. ij; of honey, lb.
j. The dose is oz. j.

_A purgative and stomachic posca._ Of cumin, of fennel, of each, oz. j;
of pennyroyal, of parsley, of anise, of each, oz. ss; of dodder of thyme,
of scammony, of each, oz. j; of salts, oz. ij. The full dose is two
scruples in the oxycrate. Some add also of euphorbium, scr. iv.

_A purgative wine for dropsical cases._ Of squills, oz. iij; of
parsley-seed, oz. vi; of pepper, dr. j; of the root of capers, dr. iv; of
the granum Cnidium stripped of its bark, dr. j; of the leaf malabathrum,
two balls; of wine, twelve heminæ; of honey, oz. iij. Having pounded the
squills, macerate in wine, and mix the other things when triturated.

_Purgative salts._ Of common salts toasted, dr. vj; of parsley-seed, of
ginger, of dried bread, of each, scr. vj; of anise, of pepper, of each,
oz. ss; of scammony, of dodder of thyme, of each, oz. j. The dose is one
spoonful.

_The podagric purgative from hermodactylus._ Of hermodactylus, oz. iij;
of anise, of Ethiopian cumin, of bishop’s weed, of the clusters of thyme,
of white pepper, of ginger, of each, scr. iij; of dodder of thyme, oz.
ss; the dose is scr. iv; some give scr. vj. It is administered in the
morning with hippocras, honeyed water, or strong wine heated.

_The same purgative otherwise._ Of hermodactylus, oz. j; of Ethiopian
cumin, of anise, of agaric, of ginger, of each, scr. vj; of mastich, scr.
ij; of spikenard, scr. ij; of musk, one siliqua; of cnicus, scr. ij. The
dose is scr. iv with hydromel. We reject scammony, because it is bad for
the stomach. But if more evacuation be required, mix with the dose three
siliquæ of scammony; give after the bath.

_Pills from the lapis Armenicus, given principally in arthritic cases._
Of aloes, oz. iv; of scammony, oz. vj; of agaric, oz. j; of dodder
of thyme, oz. j; of lapis armenicus, scr. xij; of cassia, oz. j; of
spikenard, oz. j; of baked squills, oz. ij; of saffron, scr. xij; add to
rhodomel. The dose is scr. ij.

_The purgative from coronopodium, applicable in the same cases as that
from hermodactylus, a stomachic._ Of ginger, scr. ij; of pepper, scr. j;
of agaric, scr. j; of the internal part of cnicus, scr. iv; of the root
of buckthorn plantain (coronopodium), scr. vj; the dose is scr. iij, but
to those persons whose belly is difficult to move, twenty-three siliquæ,
which make altogether seven oboli, or nearly eight. After evacuation,
having bathed, let them take eggs and bread for food.

_That from Cyrenaic juice, for quartans._ Of Cyrenaic juice, of pepper,
of ginger, of the leaves of rue, of each, dr. j. The dose is the size of
a filbert.

_A purgative pap, useful in cases of œdema and aggravated elephantiasis,
and when one wishes to dislodge a thick and viscid humour._ Having cut
up two colocynths, evacuate the seed, and allowing the medullary part
to remain, fill them with sweet oil, and covering them up with their
proper covers allow them to remain a night and a day. On the following
day, having evacuated the oil, boil the colocynths in water until they
are reduced to a soft consistence; then throw them away, and the oil
being mixed with water, add to it three oboli of black hellebore, and
of scammony, dr. j; but boiling along with them a pap of similago, or
dried bread pounded, and then give of it to the patient, who has been
formerly restricted to a simple diet, to the size of eight, ten, or at
most fourteen filberts; and let him drink hot water.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It may be proper in this place to apprize the reader of
the reason why he will not find the remainder of the work so copiously
illustrated by notes as the preceding parts of it. The combination of
simple medicines in pharmaceutical preparations is so arbitrary, and so
little regulated by any fixed principle, that it is seldom we can find
any two authors exactly agreeing as to the ingredients which enter into
any one preparation. Now to follow all the ancient writers on pharmacy
through all their complex formulæ, and point out every little difference
which prevails among them, would be a very wearisome task, and one which
would scarcely recompense us or our readers for the time and attention
which such an undertaking would necessarily demand; and neither is it
much required, since, as will be seen, our author’s system of pharmacy is
sufficiently copious and accurate for all practical purposes. We shall
therefore be content with giving a general explanation of each class of
these medicinal preparations, and only offer some occasional remarks on a
few of the more important articles.

Under this head we shall give some account of the _Halatia Cathartica_,
or _Purgative Salts_ of the ancients. The ἅλες κοινὰι πεφρυγμέναι are the
same as the sal commune frictum of Apicius. Humelbergius thus explains
it: “_fricti_, id est cremati et torrefacti.” The following is Apicius’s
receipt for the “Sales conditi ad multa:” Of common salt roasted, lb. j;
of sal ammoniac roasted, lb. ij; of white pepper, oz. iij; of ginger,
oz. ij; of bishop’s weed, oz. iss; of thyme, oz. iss; of parsley-seed,
oz. iss. The purgative salts of Aëtius contain sal ammoniac mixed up
with many purgative and cordial medicines, such as scammony, laserwort,
parsley-seed, ginger, pennyroyal, spikenard, and pepper. (iii, 109.)
These are the ingredients of a sal purgatorius recommended by Actuarius.
(Meth. Med. v, 10.) Myrepsus gives prescriptions for various purgative
and stomachic salts. They all consist of sal ammoniac, or common salt
mixed with scammony and aromatics in different proportions. (Sect. ii.)
See also Haly Abbas. (Pract. x, 10.)


SECT. VI.—ON THE MANAGEMENT OF THOSE WHO TAKE PURGATIVE MEDICINES; AND
WHAT IS TO BE DONE TO THOSE WHO ARE NOT PURGED BY A PROPER DOSE OF
PURGATIVES.

In general when any of the drastic purgatives is to be taken, the
medicine is to be given to the patient with an empty stomach, and after
digestion has been performed; and he is to be prevented from sleeping
until it has been wholly purged off, and if possible he should make
moderate motion, and abstain during the time from all food and drink,
until the purging is over.

_From the works of Philagrius._ But if he cannot endure abstinence from
food, either because the mouth of the stomach is troubled with bile
from long fasting, which has preceded, or any such cause, we must give
him bread out of diluted wine, or the juice of ptisan, or of chondrus,
not after the evacuation has begun, lest it spoil in the stomach, but
straightway after the medicine has been taken; for in this way by its
weight it contributes to the speedy evacuation of the medicine. But
if, after taking any of the laxative medicines, one does not purge nor
evacuate, provided the case be not at all serious, we need not be very
solicitous about it; but if the greatness of the disease be urgent, or
the patient experiences acute tearing pains with distension of the belly,
we must necessarily administer a clyster. But if even thus the belly is
not evacuated, and there is a pungent pain and disorder of the body,
he is to be bathed and rubbed freely with oil; or if he feels full and
heavy, a vein must be opened, more especially if he is of a sanguineous
habit of body, and if his eyes be red and prominent, not naturally but
incidentally, owing to his having drunk the medicine. When none of these
symptoms trouble him, but he experiences a gnawing and lancinating pain,
he may take food immediately after the bath, and drink wine freely, and
in the meantime he is to receive a clyster, if he does not settle; and
again he is to be bathed. The oil used in the clyster, should be that of
rue or prepared from some other of the carminative medicines.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Hippocrates, as Galen mentions, recommends a draught of
ptisan to be swallowed immediately after taking a purgative medicine,
in order to facilitate the operation of the medicine and wash away any
particles of it which may lodge in the intestines. Both forbid it to
be given after the operation has commenced, as it tends only to blunt
the powers of the medicine. Galen remarks, that sometimes a purgative
does not operate, either from idiosyncrasy of the patient, or from
the smallness of the dose, or from the intestines being blocked up by
indurated fæces, which must be removed by means of a clyster before the
medicine can operate. At other times, he adds, the medicine is determined
to the kidneys, or is digested and converted into food. As all purgatives
are bad for the stomach, he recommends us to weaken the impression of
them by the mixture of aromatic seeds, which possess attenuating and
cutting powers—_Quosnam oportet purgare_, &c.

Oribasius treats fully of this subject in two extracts from the works of
Galen and Ruffus. Ruffus directs us, when the bowels are difficult to
move, to give beforehand a soup of shell-fish, with mallows, beet, and
the like, or to administer a clyster. He forbids us to give purgatives to
persons who are apt to vomit. (Med. Collect. vii, 26.)

Mesue has treated more fully of all the circumstances connected with
the administration of purgatives than any other ancient author. When
the operation of the medicine is retarded by flatus, or the bad state
of the humours, he recommends us either to administer a clyster or give
an emetic. When this arises from debility of the expulsive faculty of
the intestines, he directs us to give, first, a moderate draught of
cold water, and then some astringent potion, such as one from quinces,
or pears. When the passage is obstructed, he directs a clyster to be
administered; and in this case he forbids cold water to be given, as it
will increase the contraction of the intestine. When violent pains are
excited in the stomach by the medicine, he recommends an emetic, and if
in the bowels, a clyster. (Canon. Univers. iii.) See also Avicenna (i,
iv, 8), and Rhases (Contin. xii.)


SECT. VII.—ON THE TREATMENT OF HYPERCATHARSIS.

In cases of hypercatharsis the body is to be rubbed and bathed in hot
water, and before the bath a thin, pale-coloured and yellow wine is to be
given (for such is the most speedily distributed), and bread soaked in
it, and pomegranates. But if the evacuation continue, the limbs are to
be bound with ligatures, extending from above downwards, and tightened
so as to intercept the blood and spirits. A moderate quantity of the
theriac from the flesh of vipers is also to be given. For it soon passes
to the skin, and quickly gives a counter-determination to the defluxion
of fluids upon the belly, and blunts the poisonous and deleterious
property as it were of the cathartics. When in want of it we may use the
theriac trochisks, and also that from seeds, and the antidote called
Philonius. Cupping-instruments are also to be applied over the stomach,
and cataplasms from polenta, and wine and honey; after which we must
use the astringent epithemes. But they will derive the most sensible
advantage from frictions of the whole body, and draughts of the aforesaid
medicines. They must abstain from very cold and very hot air; for the
one occasions a determination from without inwards, and increases the
discharge, and the other dissipates and reduces the strength. But if
the evacuation is increased by irritation in the bowels, we must apply
cataplasms of the afore-mentioned things, and injections of emollients,
such as the fat of geese, sweet wine, nard, and the like.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Oribasius remarks, that when an overdose of a purgative
medicine has been taken, it purges first yellow bile, then black bile,
and at last blood. He recommends us, in cases of hypercatharsis, to give
a hot draught, to apply tight ligatures and violent friction to the
extremities, and cupping-instruments to the hypochondrium and back. When
the patient can readily be made to vomit, he directs us to produce this
operation by the administration of a copious draught of tepid water,
and by putting a feather or the fingers down the throat. This is in
accordance with Celsus’s rule of practice: “Longas dejectiones supprimit
vomitus.” (ii, 8.)

Hippocrates and Aëtius, in cases of excessive purging from the
administration of medicine, recommend the bath and a light-coloured wine
before and after it.

Avicenna lays down the rules of treatment with great precision, but
they are mostly the same as our author’s. After friction, cupping,
tight ligatures, and restorative draughts have been tried, should the
excessive purging continue he recommends us to administer narcotics. (i,
4, 7.) See, in like manner, Rhases (Contin. xiii, 1, 2), and Serapion
(de Antid.) But Mesue is the author who has treated of all the symptoms
connected with hypercatharsis at the greatest length. He recommends us
to reserve narcotics as an _ultimum remedium_, as from the unseasonable
administration of them much harm might result. He directs us to add
cordials and aromatics to the narcotics. When the tenesmus is severe he
directs us to stop it by suitable enemata and suppositories. For the
debility and lassitude occasioned by too great purgation he recommends
a tepid bath of sweet water, and friction with warm oils. (Canones
Universales.)


SECT. VIII.—ON THE ANTIDOTES CALLED HIERÆ.

_The hiera of Antiochus._ Of germander, of agaric, of the medullary part
of colocynth, of cassidony, of each dr. x; of opoponax, of sagapen, of
stone-parsley, of the species of birthwort called clematis, of white
pepper, of each dr. v; of cinnamon, of spikenard, of troglodytic myrrh,
of the leaves of saffron, of each dr. iv; of honey, q. s.—_Another
hiera._ Of the medullary part of colocynth, dr. xx; of baked squills,
of agaric, of ammoniac perfume, of the bark of black hellebore, of
scammony, of St. John’s wort, of each dr. iij; of dodder of thyme, of
dried polypody, of bdellium, of aloes, of germander, of horehound, of
cassia, of each dr. viij; of troglodytic myrrh, of opoponax, of sagapen,
of stone-parsley, of the common long, and white pepper, of cinnamon, of
saffron, of castor, of the long birthwort, of each dr. iv; of honey, q. s.

_The hiera of Justus._ Of dodder of thyme, dr. xij; of horehound, of
cassidony, of germander, of black hellebore, of scammony, of agaric,
of long pepper, of baked squills, of each dr. xvj; of euphorbium, of
the medullary part of colocynth, of aloes, of saffron, of gentian, of
stone-parsley, of ammoniac perfume, of sagapen, of each dr. viij; of
opoponax, of poley, of cinnamon, of myrrh, of spikenard, of the flower of
the rush, of pennyroyal, of each dr. iv; of long and of round birthwort,
of each dr. ij; of honey, q. s. The dose is two, three, or four scr.,
with honeyed water and salts.

_The hiera of Galen._ Of germander, of long pepper, of white pepper,
of cassidony, of black hellebore, of scammony, of spikenard, of baked
squills (and some of dodder of thyme), of each dr. xvj; of myrrh, of
saffron, of ammoniac perfume, of euphorbium, of each dr. viij. Mix with
honey.

_The hiera of Ruffus._ Of sicyonia, or the medullary part of colocynth,
dr. viij; of germander, dr. x; of sagapen, dr. viij; of stone-parsley,
dr. v; of round birthwort, dr. v; of white pepper, dr. v; of cinnamon,
dr. iv; or of cassia, dr. viij; of base horehound, of saffron, of poley,
of myrrh, of each dr. iv; of honey, q. s.

_The hiera of Archigenes._ Of horehound, of agaric, of germander, of the
medullary part of colocynth, of cassidony, of each dr. x; of opoponax,
of sagapen, of stone-parsley, of round birthwort, of white pepper, of
each dr. v; of cinnamon, of spikenard, of myrrh, of the cassia leaf
(malabathrum), of saffron, of each dr. iv; pound the dry things together,
and strain. The opoponax, sagapen, and myrrh, being bruised, are to be
put into a mortar to macerate with honeyed water for one night; then
triturate and add the dry things; then mixing them with the finest honey
lay them up in a glass or leaden vessel. This is the common method with
all the hieræ. The full dose of them is dr. iv. Add to it also of salts,
dr. j; of honey, two cyathi; of water, q. s. If we wish to make those
compositions of this class which have not scammony more purgative, we
must add to each of them an obolus of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The hieræ, for the most part, consist of drastic purgatives,
combined with aromatics. There is a great variety of these compositions
described in the works of the ancient winters on pharmacy. Galen makes
mention of an aloetic hiera, which was much used by the celebrated
Archigenes. The following is his prescription for it: “R. Aloes, dr.
c; cinnamomi, nardi, xylobalsami, mastichæ chiæ, asari, croci, ā ā dr.
vj.” Galen remarks, however, that the proportion of aloes is too great,
and recommends us to substitute xc or lxxx dr. instead of the quantity
directed. (De comp. Med. acc. loc.) Mesue describes the composition of 6
hieræ, Haly Abbas of 5, and Serapion of a much greater number. But for
variety, Myrepsus surpasses all the other authorities. He describes the
composition of 30 hieræ. The following is his receipt for the _Hiera
Picra Galeni_: “℞. Aloes flavæ, dr. xivss.; cinnamomi, croci, costi,
floris junci odorati, xylobalsami, cassiæ fistulæ puræ, mastiches, asari,
rosarum, amomi, absinthii, ā ā dr. j; Tere subigendo cum mellis Attici
q. s.” Moses Charras’s receipt for it is very little different. (Royal
Pharm. i, 20.)


SECT. IX.—ON LINIMENTS TO BE APPLIED TO THE ANUS, AND PURGATIVE
APPLICATIONS TO THE NAVEL.

_A liniment to the anus for the discharge of flatulence._ Rue is
triturated with honey so as to form one juice, and the inner parts of the
fundament rubbed with it. It becomes more efficacious if a small quantity
of cumin and natron, or the juice of sowbread be added. It is daubed
upon flocks of wool and introduced; or a suppository is formed with the
addition of honey. For the flatus escapes freely, affording relief.

_A liniment to the anus, evacuating the belly; called Chezananche._ Alum
being triturated with honey is to be boiled until it become yellowish,
and the anus is to be rubbed with it. It forces a free evacuation of many
things, but not without trouble.

_An application to the navel as a laxative of the bowels._ Of sowbread,
dr. iv; of natron, dr. iij; of black and white hellebore, of each,
dr. ij; of colocynth, dr. iij; of scammony, dr. ij; of the juice of
elaterium, dr. iv; of granum Cnidium, dr. iv; of fatty dried figs,
oz. ij; of the gall of bulls, oz. j. _Another_ very excellent one: of
elaterium, of lathyrides, of galbanum, of sowbread, of black hellebore,
of each, dr. iv; of the medullary parts of colocynth, dr. viij; of fresh
wild cucumber, of scammony, of granum Cnidium, of each, dr. ij; of
spurge, dr. ij; of turpentine, dr. iij; mix these with the gall of bulls,
and use as a liniment. Some, by mixing with them of wax, oz. vij, and of
Sicyonian oil, q. s., make it of the form of a plaster.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. It is clear that the liniments applied to the anus were a
sort of suppositories. The _Chezananche_ is described in much the same
terms as our author’s by Myrepsus. The rest of his compositions of this
class are also very similar to our author’s. (xxvi, 2.) Actuarius gives a
full account of them. (Meth. Med. v, 9.)

Purgative applications to the navel were much trusted to by the ancient
physicians as laxatives, but they are now seldom used. The late Dr. Kerr,
of Aberdeen, however, sometimes had recourse to them, and spoke highly of
their efficacy.


SECT. X.—ON EMETICS, AND THE MODE OF ADMINISTERING HELLEBORE.

Persons in health have recourse to emetics when the system is loaded with
too much food or humours, and those in acute diseases, when troubled
with phlegm or the like. But neither persons in health nor those in
acute diseases should be permitted to use emetics, but only in chronic
affections, more especially in cases of indurations, and for such matters
as require to be dislodged by forcible means, as in gout, epilepsy from
the stomach, elephantiasis, dropsy, melancholy, and the like. They are
improper in spittings of blood, weakness of the stomach, and suffocative
complaints. The readiest of the emetics is the oil of privet (oleum
Cyprinum), the fingers or some feathers being dipped in it and pushed
down the throat. And dr. vij of Celtic nard taken in honeyed water
evacuate upwards powerfully. In like manner v or vj dr. of betony drunk
in honeyed water, and three green leaves of the daphnoides pounded and
eaten. And an obolus of elaterium taken in a draught of water, purges
phlegm and bile upwards; and fifteen grains of stavesacre with thick
honeyed water. Of plants with bulbous roots, those usually eaten if taken
raw, and the boiled roots of narcissus purge upwards. And the upper part
of the root of parsley, namely, that which is exposed to the air, when
eaten, purges upwards. Some call it chamæraphanum. The under part of the
root purges downwards. When the whole is eaten it purges both upwards
and downwards. Radishes purge less than the aforementioned, but more
usefully. They are to be taken when very acrid and fresh, and cut into
small parts; and having allowed them to soak in oxymel for two or three
hours, as many of the pieces as possible are to be swallowed, so that
one may vomit three or four times after supper, and once if fasting. But
after, large draughts of oxymel are to be swallowed; and after walking
about for two hours, and drinking tepid water, one may compel one’s self
to vomit by inserting the fingers or some feathers into the throat.

_Modes of administering hellebore._ Hellebore is to be given in
protracted and severe complaints, and when all hope from other remedies
is precluded, because the disease has proved stronger than them all. It
is to be given in continued diseases, as dropsy, elephantiasis, cachexia,
paralysis, and the like; and in certain complaints which attack at
intervals, as epilepsy and gout. There being many modes of administering
hellebore, the simplest, and rather the preparative for a course of
hellebore, is this method: having perforated radishes with a reed, pieces
of the dried roots of the finest white hellebore are to be inserted
into the perforations, and having been allowed to remain for one night
they are to be removed. Having cut the radishes in pieces they are to
be given with oxymel, in the manner described, to the patient who has
been accustomed before to emetics, and after an interval of the number
of hours mentioned, he is to be forced to vomit. The established mode
of administering hellebore is as follows: having allowed two ounces of
the best hellebore to macerate in a hemina of water for five days, boil
until only a third part of the water remain, and having expressed the
hellebore, mix with the water an equal quantity of honey, and boil it
until it thicken; and after the patient has been exercised with vomits in
the manner described, give it to him when fasting, and after digestion
has been performed, and the contents of the bowels evacuated, either
spontaneously or by one or two injections, according to his strength. But
the most efficacious mode is this: having cut the roots of the hellebore
into pieces resembling the seeds of Indian corn (for when reduced to a
downy powder it occasions suffocation by its powerful action), give to
those who are of a weaker constitution dr. ij, at most, or, at least,
dr. j of the hellebore, in the juice of ptisan, of halica, or the like;
but to those who are stronger, it is to be given in hot water or honeyed
water. The purging begins after three or four hours; but when it is
longer of commencing, it operates more effectually. When the vomiting
is slow of beginning, give honeyed water to drink, and let the patient
be compelled to vomit by inserting feathers dipped in oil into the
throat. If even thus he will not vomit, let him be put into the bath.
When vomiting commences, if it go on properly, we need not interfere;
but if lancinating pains or convulsions supervene, we must give a
mixture of water and oil to drink. For thus is an evacuation downwards
occasioned (which otherwise sometimes takes place when hellebore has been
administered), and they bear the concentration of the medicine better.
When the patient falls into deliquium animi he is to be resuscitated
by strong-smelling things and the like. Any other symptoms which may
happen to occur are to be treated in a suitable manner. When the purging
is excessive, they are to be allowed to take food and sleep, and do
otherwise as mentioned in describing the treatment of hypercatharsis.
But if it continue, cupping-instruments are to be applied over the
stomach, and ligatures tied round the limbs. When the evacuation proceeds
properly we must give to drink a moderate quantity of honeyed water, in
order to wash away the superfluous particles of the medicine. After a
little while, give some food of easy digestion. When apprehensions are
entertained of the administration of hellebore by the mouth, and the
medicine is by all means required, Antyllus uses the following injection:
having allowed two drachms of white hellebore to macerate in a sextarius
of water for a day and a night, on the day following we are to boil the
hellebore in the water until but a half remain. Then we are to inject it
by the anus so as to produce vomiting. It purges upwards somewhat more
feebly than when the medicine is drank. After sufficient purging, an
acrid suppository is to be introduced so as to occasion the discharge
of the injection and stop the vomiting. After the discharge of it, an
injection of honeyed water is to be given once or twice in order to
wash out the gut. The same person says: A suppository is made of white
hellebore, pounded and strained, and mixed with boiled honey, which
purges like the injection of hellebore. But the following is a better
method; for we have it in our power to regulate the purging: The quantity
is to be dr. ij of hellebore, and the suppository is to be wrapped round,
or bound with some flocks of wool firmly. The head of this ball of wool
is to be allowed to hang out of the anus, in order that after sufficient
purging it may be in our power to remove the suppository. This method
purges effectually, and neither occasions convulsive suffocation nor any
other dangerous symptom.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The gentle emetics used by the ancients on ordinary occasions
have been treated of in Book I. We have now to give some account of the
more drastic emetics.

Galen and Oribasius recommend, as effectual emetics, the bulb of the
narcissus, the seed of the anagyrus, and the fleshy part of nut ben. The
Unguentum irinum and the U. cyprinum are stated by Aëtius and most of the
other authorities to be safe and effectual emetics. Aëtius also commends
the decoctions of hyssop and of thyme, the seed of bastard saffron
pounded with oily grain, the oils of sesame, radishes, and narcissus,
and the leaves of the daphnoides. Nitre or an impure carbonate of soda
was also a medicine in general use as an emetic. The Lemnian earth was
often given as an emetic, being a sort of red ochre. Avicenna and Rhases
make mention of a species of black turbith, called _gilbenec_, which they
describe as an effectual emetic, but somewhat unsafe. See the Appendix.
Avicenna says that tickling the throat with a feather, smeared in the oil
of sesame, readily excites vomiting. He remarks that vomiting is promoted
by motion and stopped by rest. The bulbus emeticus was in general use
to produce vomiting. Serapion directs us to give it boiled along with
honey. He also commends the nux vomica as an emetic when given along with
a small quantity of salt. We need scarcely say that it is now seldom or
never given for this purpose, although it still holds a place in some of
the continental systems of Materia Medica. The earlier modern writers on
medicine recommend it freely as an emetic. See Guido de Cauliaco. (vii,
1.)

But of all the medicines of this class the _white hellebore_ was
undoubtedly the most powerful, and in important cases was the most
generally used. We must, therefore, take this opportunity of describing
the forms in which it was administered. Hippocrates appears to have been
familiarly acquainted with it as a medicine, and to have administered
it very freely. Aretæus concludes his work with a spirited eulogium on
hellebore; “But in all inveterate chronic diseases, when other remedies
have failed to produce the effect, this alone is to be depended upon
for the cure. For, in power, white hellebore resembles fire, and with
still greater powers hellebore, by pervading the inward parts, produces
freedom of respiration from obstruction, a healthy colour from paleness,
and plumpness of body, in place of emaciation.” But on the modes of
administering hellebore, the fullest and most accurate of the ancient
authorities is Oribasius, whose interesting account of it we shall now
attempt to give in an abridged form. His description is mostly taken
from Archigenes, Herodotus, and Antyllus. He sets out, then, with giving
directions about preparing the patient for entering upon a course of
hellebore. This consists principally in putting him upon a regulated
diet, and administering occasionally some of the gentler emetics,
especially the one from radishes. He, then, describes at considerable
length the marks by which good hellebore may be recognised. When broken,
he says, it ought to be white in the inside; and when taken into the
mouth it ought to be felt hot and acrid, but at first of a sweetish
taste; thereafter gradually becoming more stimulant, and provoking a
great flow of saliva, and that frequently attended with vomiting. He
recommends the following preparation of hellebore as being efficacious
and perfectly safe: A pound of hellebore is to be macerated for three
days in six heminæ of water, which we are to boil at a gentle fire until
a third part of the water is consumed, when the hellebore is to be
expressed; then two heminæ of honey are to be added to the decoction,
which is to be again boiled until it no longer stain the finger. Of this
preparation, the dose, to those who do not require strong purging, is
two cochlearia, but to robust persons, the quantity called a mystrum.
Another of his authorities, Antyllus, directs us to allow five drachms
of the shavings of hellebore to macerate for three days in half a
hemina of rain-water, after which it is to be strained and heated in a
double vessel. Oribasius also mentions that the medicine may be given
in a coarse powder. He afterwards lays down the rules of treatment when
the action of the medicine superinduces dangerous symptoms. We need
not go over this part minutely. Suffice it to say that, according to
circumstances, he directs us to provoke vomiting by tickling the throat
with feathers dipped in one of the emetic oils; to open the bowels with
oily clysters; and to rouse the patient when in a state of stupor, by
stimulants, restoratives, shaking him, pinching him, or tossing him
in a garment. He recommends hellebore in cases of mania, melancholy,
inveterate pains of the hip and other joints, epilepsy, catalepsy,
vertigo, chronic headache, lethargy, leprosy, and other cutaneous
diseases. He also praises it as a remedy in hydrophobia. (Med. Collect.
viii.)

Aëtius states that hellebore is given in infusion, in decoction, and
in substance, either cut into pieces or pounded and sifted. When
administered in pieces it soon begins to act as a purgative, generally
within two hours, bringing away bile and phlegm without much trouble,
and after four or five hours the medicine itself is generally vomited
up, and the purging stops. When given in a fine powder it acts violently
but slowly, so that four or five hours have generally elapsed before its
operation commences. He adds that in all its forms it evacuates bile and
phlegm, but that it is attended with danger of bringing on convulsions
or hypercatharsis. On the infusion he remarks, that it suits with old
persons and children, to those who have a feeble constitution, and for
the cure of elephantiasis. Five drachms of cut hellebore are to be
allowed to macerate for three days in half a hemina of rain-water, after
which it is to be strained and heated, when the whole of the infusion
is to be taken. The decoction he recommends to be given to persons of a
firmer habit of body, and in cases of mania and melancholy. It is to be
thus prepared: A pound of hellebore, cut into pieces, is to be allowed
to macerate for three days in two sext. of rain-water; after which it
is to be boiled gently upon the coals until only a third remain; then,
having strained it, we add to the decoction two pounds of scummed honey,
and boil to the consistence of honey. It may be given as a linctus to the
amount of a large spoonful, or mixed with hot water in a draught, when it
will not superinduce spasms, contractions, or hypercatharsis. To those
who stand in need of more violent concussion, who are of a strong habit
of body and possess fortitude, and vomit readily, it is given cut into
pieces; and to persons of still greater determination, or who have been
accustomed to it, in the form of a sifted powder. It is to be cut into
pieces of the size of malt or bran, and taken in ptisan or barley-water,
a draught of mead or plain water being swallowed after to wash it away.
The maximum close of it is dr. iiss. Hellebore may also be pounded and
sifted in a fine sieve, when the larger particles may be given in halica
(barley-water?) or pottage; but the smaller particles may be formed into
pills with boiled honey. (iii, 131.) Macer Floridus concludes that scr.
ij. is a sufficient dose of the white hellebore. (De Herb. vir.)

The Arabians give this medicine in the same forms and under the same
circumstances as the Greeks. They estimate the dose of it at from dr. j
to dr. ij. Mesue forbids it to be given in the form of a powder. He and
Haly Abbas, however, recommend it in pills with hiera, colocynth, agaric,
and various aromatics for the cure of elephantiasis and melancholy.
Serapion states that there is great danger of its inducing convulsions if
improperly administered. Avicenna’s account of the modes of giving it is
very interesting.

Upon this subject we shall give the observations of the celebrated
Prosper Alpinus: “Elleborus albus inter medicamenta vomitoria perpetuo
apud omnes gentes præcipuum locum obtinet, fuitque in usu elleborismus,
id est, purgatio per elleborum album, admodum familiaris apud antiquos,
ad morbos sanatu difficillimos tollendos, cujus quidem usu complures ab
affectibus ferè prorsus insanabilibus sanabantur, atque ita cito, et
probè, ut eæ sanationes miracula viderentur; unde olim antiquorum illorum
medicorum laus insigniter augebatur. Nunc vero non sine ægrotantium
damno, atque magno artis medicæ dedecore, ipsius usus apud omnes
ferè medicos obsolevit, qui nunc neque audent, neque sciunt, quomodo
veratrum album exhibendum est.” (Med. Meth. iii, 10.) He gives the
following prescription for making a preparation of hellebore: “Nonnulli
ex recentioribus parant elleborum accipientes, ʒiss; vini dulcis
aromatici, lb. j; turis, ʒiss; hyperici, ʒj; sacchari, ʒij; bulliant ad
consumptionem mediatatis. Cujus decocti dant uncias tres.” He likewise
approves of giving hellebore by boiling it in oil. (Ibid.)

The following is a very simple receipt for the preparation of the
mel helleboratum or honey of hellebore: “Take of the roots of white
hellebore, dried and sliced, one pound; of clarified honey, three pounds;
of water four pints. After steeping the roots three days in the water,
boil them a little while, then boil the liquor, well pressed out and
strained, with the honey to a due consistence.” Dr. Pemberton (London
Dispensatory, A. D. 1746.) By due consistence is meant the consistence of
honey.


SECT. XI.—ON THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF ANTIDOTES.

The Preface of Galen’s work on Antidotes. Those compositions which
cure affections not when they are applied externally, but when taken
internally, are named antidotes by the ancients. There are three
different kinds of them. The first are those which are administered for
deleterious substances; the second, for those animals called venomous;
and the third are the remedies for affections occasioned by bad articles
of food. Some antidotes profess to fulfil all these three purposes, such
as the one called theriac.

_The preparation of the hedychroum, which forms an ingredient of the
theriac._ Of the bark of the root of aspalathus, of calamus aromaticus,
of costus, of asarabacca, of xylobalsam, of valerian, of amaracus, of
mastich, of each, dr. vj; of carpobalsam, dr. ij; of marum, dr. xvj; of
the flower of the rush, dr. ij; of cinnamon, dr. xxiv; of amomum, of
cassia, of rheum, of each, dr. viij; of Indian nard, of the cassia leaf
(malabathrum), dr. xij; of myrrh, dr. xxiv; of saffron, dr. xij; mix
with fine wine, and form into trochisks, having smeared the finger with
opobalsam.

_The preparation of trochisks of squills._ Having covered over the
squills with clay or dough, roast it moderately, and taking of the
inner parts of it, p. ij; and of the flour of tares, p. j; and having
triturated in like manner, form trochisks.

_The preparation of the theriac trochisks._ Having chosen four or five
vipers of a tawny colour, and recently taken, cut off their heads, and
four fingers’ breadth of the part next the tail, and having removed the
skins and entrails, boil the rest in a new pot, with dill and a moderate
quantity of salts, until the spines be separated from the flesh. Then
removing and cleaning away properly the flesh from the spines, and having
mixed with them an equal quantity of clean bread, and triturated them
in like manner, form into small balls, having your fingers smeared with
opobalsam, and cool in the shade.

_The preparation of the theriac antidote._ Of the trochisks of squills,
dr. lxviij; of the theriac trochisks, dr. xxiv; of hedychroum, dr.
xxiv; of cinnamon, dr. xxiv; of common pepper, dr. xxiv; of the juice
of poppies, dr. xxiv; of dried roses, dr. xv; of water-germander, of
rape-seed, of Illyrian iris, of agaric, of liquorice, of opobalsam,
of each, dr. xij; of myrrh, of saffron, of ginger, of rhaponticum, of
the root of cinquefoil, of calamint, of horehound, of stone-parsley,
of cassidony, of costus, of white and long pepper, of dittany, of the
flower of sweet rush, of male frankincense, of turpentine, of mastich,
of black cassia, of spikenard, of each, dr. vj; of the flower of poley,
of storax, of parsley-seed, of seseli, of shepherd’s pouch, of bishop’s
weed, of germander, of ground pine, of the juice of hypocistis, of Indian
leaf (malabathrum), of Celtic nard, of spignel, of gentian, of anise,
of fennel-seed, of Lemnian earth, of roasted chalcitis, of amomum,
of sweet-flag, of balsamum, of Pontic valerian, of St. John’s wort,
of acacia, of gum, of cardamom, of each, dr. iv; of carrot-seed, of
galbanum, of sagapen, of bitumen, of opoponax, of castor, of centaury,
of the species of birthwort called clematis, of each, dr. ij; of Attic
honey, lb. x; of Falernian wine, oz. ij. Put into a mortar the opium,
hypocistis, myrrh, sagapen, liquorice, storax, acacia, and opoponax, and
having poured in some honey pound and dissolve: then pouring in wine
so as to cover them, macerate for three days; then having pounded the
others, unite them, and scum the honey. It is to be laid up in vessels
of silver or glass, not quite full, and the covers taken off every day.
In case of need it may be used for persons bitten by venomous animals,
and those who have taken anything poisonous, after seven years, a
quantity of it, to the size of a filbert, being drunk twice a day, in
three cyathi of wine. In like manner, to those who are in a dangerous
state from some obscure cause, when the disorder in the body imitates the
quality of a mortal poison, as is the case particularly in pestilential
diseases, it is to be given once a day. But in all other affections, it
is to be used from the tenth to the twentieth year. For coughs, pains
of the chest or side, it is to be given at night, if free from fever,
with wine and honey; but if feverish, with hydromel, to the extent of an
Egyptian bean. In all cases of hæmoptysis, it is to be given morning and
evening, to the size of an Egyptian bean; if recent, in oxycrate; or, if
chronic, in the decoction of comfrey. In cases of flatulence, tormina, or
cæliac affections, it is to be taken in the morning, to the size of an
Egyptian bean, in hot water. It excites an intense appetite, and removes
rigors, coldness, and vomiting of bile when drunk before the attack. It
promotes menstruation, and expels the fœtus when dead, if drunk to the
size of an Egyptian nut with honeyed water, or sweet wine, in which rue
or dittany has been boiled. In the case of loss of voice, it is drunk
alone, and with double the quantity of tragacanth in wine and honey, or
sweet wine, being retained under the tongue and allowed to melt. For
diseases of the spleen or liver, it is given with oxycrate; but if they
are in a scirrhous state, with a cyathus and a half of oxymel, or vinegar
of squills. For nephritic complaints, it is given with oxymel to the
size of an Egyptian bean. In dysenteric cases it is given to the same
amount, with the decoction of sumach, morning and evening. For dimness
of vision it answers excellently thus: Mix oz. ij of the antidote, and
of opobalsam, with one cyathus of honey, and after a little anoint with
it. It is also used as a dentifrice. Many, for the sake of prophylaxis,
take it at new moon to the size of a Grecian bean, after digestion, with
a cochleare of honey and two cyathi of water. In like manner they use it
when upon a journey they suspect that the air or water is bad.

_Theriac salts._ Take four female vipers recently caught; and then
putting into a mortar one Italian modius of ammoniac or common salt,
pound into thick pieces, along with it, of gentian, lb. iss; of round
birthwort, lb. iss; of the hair of the small centaury, lb. ij; of
cardamom, of horehound, of each, oz. vj; of water germander, of parsley,
of Cretan germander, of each, lb. j; of the seed of garden rue, sext.
ij: unite these with a sufficient quantity of Attic honey, and throwing
the half of them into a new pot, and then the four vipers alive, add
to them fresh tender squills, cut into small pieces, and then join to
them the remaining half of the mixture formerly mentioned. Then having
covered up the pot carefully, make three or four perforations in its lid
to allow the vapour to escape, that it may indicate to you the progress
of the operation of roasting. At first much smoke will be seen issuing,
fuliginous and very turbid, indicating that the fire is acting upon the
animals. You must then take care lest you inhale any of this smoke, which
is infected with the exhalation from the vipers. When this vapour has
ceased, you may see a fine flame issuing through the holes, by which you
may know that they are properly roasted. Then having removed the pot from
the fire, and allowed it to cool for a whole day and night, take out the
ashes, pound them carefully, and sift them along with these mixtures: of
the seed of wild rue, of Cretan hyssop, of each, oz. ix; of the seed of
fennel, of Celtic nard, of Scythian base horehound, of each, oz. vj; of
Macedonian stone-parsley, of Indian leaf, of each, oz. iv; of amomum, of
grapes, of the seed of horminum toasted, of each, oz. iij; of the shoots
of marjoram, of the shoots of thyme, of each, oz. ij; of juniper berries,
of white and of long pepper, of each, lb. j; of the root of laserwort,
oz. x; of coriander seed, of ginger not perforated, of the seed or root
of satyrium, of pennyroyal, of the seseli of Marseilles, of mint, of
each, oz. vj; of cassia fistula, oz. ij; of cinnamon, oz. j. I, however,
have made the preparation, so that I did not burn the animals, but mixed
the trochisks from them, as related under the theriac, with those things
which are burnt along with the vipers, that the bitterness which they
have in them may be laid aside during the burning. I added just such a
proportion of the trochisks as I conjectured to agree with the contents
of the four vipers. And truly in this way they turned out excellent.

_The Mithridatic antidote from scinks._ Of troglodytic myrrh, of
ginger, of cinnamon, of each, dr. x; of spikenard, of frankincense, of
shepherd’s pouch, of opobalsam, of schœnanth, of costus, of cassidony,
of seseli, of galbanum, of turpentine, of long pepper, of castor, of
hypocistis juice, of storax, of the leaves of malabathrum, of each, dr.
iv; of black cassia, of poley, of white pepper, of water germander, of
carrot-seed, of carpobalsam, of cyphi, of bdellium, of Celtic nard, of
gum, of stone-parsley, of opium, of cardamom, of the seeds of fennel,
of gentian, of rose-leaves, of each, dr. viij; of dittany, of anise,
of sweet flag, of valerian, of each, dr. iij; of Athamantic spignel,
of acacia, of the belly of a scink, of the seed of St. John’s wort, of
each, dr. iss; of wine and honey, q. s. Prepare it in like manner as the
theriac. Galen says, that it applies to the same cases as the theriac,
with the exception of those who have been bitten by the viper, for there
the theriac is more efficacious.

_The antidote from different kinds of blood being a remedy against all
venomous animals and deadly poisons._ Of white and long pepper, of
costus, of sweet flag, of valerian, of anise, of Cretan dittany, of each,
dr. ij; of amomum, of opobalsam, of the seed of wild rue, of the seed of
fennel, of Ethiopian cumin, of dill, of the dried blood of a male duck,
of the blood of a kid, of the blood of a goose, of the blood of a female
duck, of the seed of the wild rape, of each, dr. iij; of gentian root, of
trefoil, of the schœnanth, of frankincense, of dried roses, of each, dr.
iv; of cinnamon, dr. ij; of water germander, dr. viij; of stone-parsley,
of poley, of myrrh, of nard, of each, dr. vj; of cassia, dr. iij; of
Cyrenaic juice, dr. iij; of cassidony, dr. v; of asarabacca, dr. ij; of
ammoniac perfume, dr. iij; of Athamantic spignel, dr. ij; of agaric, dr.
ij; of carpobalsam, gr. xx; of boiled honey, q. s.

_Simple oxymel._ Of the most acrid white vinegar, sextar. j; of water,
sextar. ij; of honey, sextar. j; boil to the consistence of the most
liquid honey, despumating the honey.

_The vinegar of squills._ Of white squills cut into pieces, dried in
the shade for forty days, and again cleaned, one mina; of good vinegar,
sextar. xij. Put them into a vessel, cover it up, and allow to remain in
the sun for sixty days; after which the squill is to be expressed and
thrown away, and the strained vinegar laid up in a vessel. Some add one
mina of squills to sextar. vj; others add the same quantity of green
squills to the vinegar, and allow them to remain in the vessel six
months; and it becomes more penetrative. It is applicable for defluxions
of the mouth, as a gargle, and when drunk, for many internal affections,
excepting when there is ulceration, and for many other purposes.

_The oxymel of squills._ Of the internal tender parts of squills,
lb. ij; of strong white vinegar, sext. xv; of pepper, of Macedonian
stone-parsley, of each, dr. ij; of Cretan carrot, of bishop’s weed,
of anise, of Celtic nard, of lovage, of asarabacca, of cardamom, of
spikenard, of amomum, of rha Ponticum, of each, oz. ss; of the seed
of fennel, of cumin, of laserwort, of ginger, of pellitory, of Cretan
hyssop, of costus, of pennyroyal, of each, oz. j; of green mint, one
fasciculus; of green rue, five branches; of Attic honey, one sextarius;
of rob, sext. ij; of green parsley, one fasciculus. Put the white inner
parts of the squills bruised into the vinegar, and allow it to macerate
seven days during the heat of the dog-days: then taking out the squills,
which, if dried, are to be pounded, but if green, not pounded, add to the
vinegar, and again, after seven days, having strained all, add the honey
and rob to the vinegar, and having boiled to a proper consistence, lay
them up in a glass vessel. This remedy is to be taken as a potion before
food, or along with food for a sauce. It is much used.

_Galen’s medicine from squills, answering particularly with epileptics._
Having broken down squills with your hands into small pieces, put into
a vessel used for containing honey, and having covered it up properly,
put it in a place exposed to the midday during the heat of the dog-star;
forty days after the rising of the dog-star loose it, and you will find
that the body of the squill is melted down. Taking, then, its juice,
sweeten it with some very fine honey, and give every day a spoonful of
it, if to children, a small one, but if to adults, a large one. But
triturate the body of the squill itself with honey and give a spoonful of
it. It is inferior in power to the juice.

_The antidote of Philo._ Of white pepper, dr. xx; of hyoscyamus, dr.
xx; of the juice of poppies, dr. x; of saffron, dr. v; of pellitory, of
euphorbium, of spikenard, of each dr. j; of Attic or any other fine,
well-boiled honey, q. s. Give to adults the size of a filbert, to smaller
persons, that of a bean, and to children, the size of a chick-pea. It is
an excellent anodyne and soporific medicine.

_The Athanasian anodyne and pleuritic antidote, from Oribasius._ Of
cassia, dr. viij; of spikenard, of amomum, of saffron, of opium, of
storax, of myrrh, of costus, of each, dr. iv; of despumated honey, q. s.
The dose the same as that of the antidote of Philo.

_The antidote from two peppers of similar powers._ Of cardamom, of
castor, of opium, of each, dr. iij; of myrrh, of costus, of white and of
long pepper, of galbanum, of each, dr. iij; of saffron, dr. iij. Mix with
well-boiled honey, and give to the size of a bean.

_The antidote from poppy-heads and rob._ Having macerated, in a sextarius
of rob, eight or ten green, but not watery heads of poppy the day after
they are gathered, and an ounce of liquorice for one day, boil until
they are dissolved; and after they have acquired a moderate consistence,
take from the fire, and put into a vessel, and use in the case of
watchfulness, accompanied with fever, and when there is a thin defluxion
from the head upon the chest.

_The antidote from poppy-heads and honey._ Boil the poppy-heads, as
mentioned above, and the ounce of liquorice in oz. j of rain-water
or spring-water until dissolved; and having squeezed it out, add to
the decoction half a sextarius of honey and boil until it acquire
consistence. Give it in those cases which, along with a mitigation
of pain and the production of sleep, require purgative and detergent
medicines, for the parts within the thorax, or about the lungs and
kidneys.

_The compound antidote from poppy-heads._ Take of the water in which
poppy-heads have been boiled, according to the above-mentioned
proportion, sext. j; of sweet wine, two heminæ; of honey, lb. j; of
saffron, of the juice of hypocistis, of each, dr. iv; boil to a proper
consistence. That which is prepared from honey, poppy-heads, and quinces
is more grateful to the stomach. It becomes more efficacious if along
with the poppy-heads some melilot and liquorice be also boiled in the
water.

_A simple linctus or lohock from horehound, principally for
consumptions._ Boil a pound of the hair of horehound in six heminæ of
water until but a third remain; then throw away the herb, and adding to
the water an equal quantity of honey, boil to the consistence of honey,
and give one cochleare (spoonful).

_A compound lohock from horehound._ Of the hairy parts of horehound, of
Illyrian iris, of hyssop, of pennyroyal, of liquorice, of parsley, of
each, oz. ij; of fatty dried figs, oz iij; of the kernels of the pine
containing rosin, oz. iij; bruise the dry things into large pieces, and
macerate with the figs in sextar. iij of water, and boil to a third part.
Then having strained the water, add of honey, lb. ij, and boil to the
consistence of honey.

_The lohock from tares._ Of bitter almonds, oz. ij; of the flour of
tares, oz. iv; of hyssop, oz. iv; of iris, oz. ss; of toasted pine-nuts,
oz. ij; of honey, sextar. j, or q. s.

_The lohock called Dodecatheon._ Of Illyrian iris, oz. iv; of tares, oz.
iv; of hyssop, oz. ij; of nettle-seed, oz. ij; of liquorice, oz. ij; of
fenugreek, oz. ij; of the bulbi, oz. iv; of toasted linseed, oz. iv; of
gith, scr. xviij; of pennyroyal, scr. viij; of toasted pine-nuts, oz. ij;
of pepper, scr. vj; of honey, q. s.

_The antidote Sotira._ Of spikenard, scr. xxxix; of myrrh, scr. xxvij;
of saffron, scr. xxxvij; of castor, scr. xxxix; of opium, scr. xxxvj; of
stone-parsley, scr. xlv; of anise, scr. ix; of parsley, scr. vij; of the
schœnanth, scr. xxxvj; of cassia, scr. xij; of long pepper, scr. xij; of
the seed of sinon, scr. vj; of storax, scr. xviij; of amomum, scr. xij;
of seseli, scr. xij; of hedychroum, scr. xviij; of costus, scr. xviij; of
asarabacca, scr. xviij; of honey, q. s.

_The cough medicine from storax._ Of amomum, of cassia, of each, oz. ij;
of storax, of spikenard, of each, oz. iss; of saffron, of white pepper,
of each oz. j; of honey, sext. j; give a spoonful.

_The medicine of Philoxenus for empyema and chronic defluxions._ Of
turpentine, dr. xxviij; of nard, dr. xvj; of the oil of myrrh, dr. vj;
of cardamom, of the bulbi, dr. vj; of saffron, dr. xij; of galbanum, dr.
xvj; bitter almonds, lxxx; of honey, a hemina. It is given in water to
drink to the size of an Egyptian bean.

_The much-used antidote of Esdra; it is very desiccative._ Of amomum,
scr. vj; of saffron, scr. xviij; of the seed of carrot, scr. iss; of the
seed of fennel, scr. iij; of cassia, scr. iss; of schœnanth, scr. iiiss;
of cinnamon, scr. iij; of the juice of hypocistis, scr. ivss; of sulphur,
scr. v; of poppy-seeds, scr. v; of pellitory, scr. iij; of stone-parsley,
scr. iss; of Illyrian iris, scr. vijss; of the seeds of henbane, gr.
xiijss; of spikenard, scr. vijss; of the seeds of rue, scr. iss; of
dill, scr. iij; of cardamom, scr. iij; of dried roses, scr. ivss; of the
flower of nerium (it is, as it were, the flower-cup from which the rose
of the _rose-bay_ emerges), and of the rose of it, of each, scr. iij; of
Pontic rhubarb, scr. vj; of gentian, scr. vj; of hedychroum, scr. iss; of
tragacanth, scr. xv; of buckthorn, scr. vj; of the leaves of citron, scr.
vj; of the seed of basil, scr. iss; of anise, scr. iij; of euphorbium,
scr. iij; of Indian leaf, scr. ij; of Celtic nard, scr. vj; of spignel,
scr. iij; of costus, of myrrh, of each, scr. vj; of bdellium, scr. xvj;
of the juice of southernwood, scr. xiij; of Syriac sumach, scr. xxvss; of
asarabacca, of the belly of a cormorant, of the jasper-stone, of each,
scr. iij; of pepper, scr. xv; of castor, scr. iss; of Cimolian earth,
scr. vj; of sison (bishop’s weed?), scr. ix; of storax, scr. ix; of
opobalsam, scr. xij; of the herb seseli, scr. iss; of honey, oz. xxviij;
of wine, q. s.

_The medicine from the flesh of quinces._ Three pounds of clean quinces
are boiled in three sextarii of old wine, then pounded, and there is
added to them, of pepper, of anise, of lovage, of each, when triturated,
oz. j. Some also add, of ginger, oz. ss; and others, instead of the wine,
use vinegar.

_The medicine from the juice of quinces of approved efficacy for anorexia
and dyspepsia._ Of the juice of ripe quinces, sext. ij; of fine honey,
sext. ij; of vinegar, sext. j; of ginger, oz. iij; of white pepper, oz.
ij: boil to a proper consistence. Galen prepares it for those affected
with cold. But, he says, when bile prevails, prepare it without the
pepper and ginger.

_The preparation of a tablet from quinces._ Six pounds of clean quinces
are boiled in wine until they become soft. Then being strained and
triturated, some add, of honey, lb. viij, and boil at a slow fire,
stirring with a piece of reed until the whole will not stain the hand;
and then they add the following things bruised: of pepper, oz. iij; of
anise, oz. iij; of stone-parsley, oz. j. Some also add of ginger, oz. j,
and of mastich, oz. j. When mixed, they are formed into cakes of half an
ounce each, and are composed along with bay-leaves.

_Another medicine from quinces, having the pieces bruised, but entire._
Of clean quinces cut into pieces, lb. viij are boiled in sext. viij
of wine moderately, so that they may not be dissolved. Then there are
mixed with them of despumated honey, lb. viij; of pepper, oz. viij;
of stone-parsley, of anise, of each, oz. iij; of ginger, oz. v; of
spikenard, oz. iss; of cloves, oz. j. When all these things are pounded
and moderately boiled to the consistence of broth, take them off, and
having cooled it, add the pieces of quinces to the broth.

_The antidote from three peppers._ Of common, of white, and of long
pepper, of each, dr. vij; of ginger, of anise, of thyme-tops, dr. ij; of
honey, q. s.

_Another, of Oribasius._ Of white pepper, oz. ij; of black and of
long pepper, of spikenard, of cinnamon, of bishop’s weed, of walnut,
of hyssop, of seseli, of carrot, of stone-parsley, of each, oz. j; of
ginger, dr. iv; of honey, lb. iij.

_Another._ Of common pepper, oz. iij; of white pepper, oz. j; of long,
oz. j; of stone-parsley, of cinnamon (or double the quantity of cassia),
of ginger, of each, oz. j; of honey, oz. xxj, or q. s.; and have also
mixed of the corymbi of thyme, oz. j.

_The diospolites._ Of cumin, which has been macerated in water and
toasted, oz. j; of pepper, of ginger, of each, oz. ij; of green rue, oz.
iss; of natron, dr. iiss. Mix with honey.

_The medicine from calamint._ Of stone-parsley, of penny-royal, of
seseli, of calamint, of each, oz. iij; of parsley-seed, oz. j; of the
corymbi of thyme, oz. j; of lovage, oz. iv; of pepper, dr. xij; of honey,
q. s.

_The medicine from citron, for those of slow digestion._ Of vinegar,
heminæ iij; of the flesh of citron, lb. j; of hyssop, of rue, of origany,
of each, a fasciculus; having been allowed to macerate for a night
and a day in the vinegar, they are to be boiled to a third, and being
expressed, are to be thrown away. But with the vinegar is mixed of honey,
sext. j; and then it is to be boiled to the consistence of honey. When
it acquires consistence, there is to be added to it, of asarabacca, of
spignel, of white pepper, of each, oz. ij. The dose is a spoonful in the
morning and at bedtime.

_The picra of Galen._ Of aloes, dr. c; of xylobalsam, of mastich, of
saffron, of spikenard, of asarabacca, of cinnamon, of each, dr. vj; some
add also, of schœnanth and of cassia, of each, dr. vj. Give dr. j in
hydromel.

_The picra from oxymel for stomach complaints, colics, affections of the
uterus, and dropsy._ Of aloes, oz. iv; of Indian leaf, oz. ij; of costus,
of cassia, of amomum, of iris, of each, dr. j; of the bark of the root of
fennel, lb. j; of mastich, of Celtic nard, of ginger, of each, dr. j; of
pepper, dr. j; of spignel, dr. j; of vinegar, sext. iss; of honey, sext.
iss. The fennel being first boiled in the vinegar is thrown away, then
the honey is added, and after boiling to the consistence of honey, the
other things are sprinkled in powder.

_An excellent composition from the liver of a wolf._ Of gentian, of
ground-pine, of stone-parsley, of horehound, of the gall of a bear,
of mustard, of ceterach, of the root of panax, of rubrica, of madder,
of cabbage-seed, of long birthwort, of white pepper, of spikenard, of
costus, of the seed of rocket, of the seed of eryngo, of poley, of
viper’s bugloss, of hemp-agrimony, of juniper-berries, of the liver of a
wolf, of elecampane, equal parts. Mix with well-boiled honey. The dose is
the size of a filbert, with boiled wine and honey.

_The antidote Theodoretus with anacardia._ Of anacardia, oz. iss; of
saffron, of cassia, of Indian leaf, of spikenard, of cloves, of spignel,
of agaric, of schœnanth, of Pontic rhubarb, of dodder of thyme, of each,
dr. iv; of sweet-flag, of pepper, of each, oz. iss; of aloes, oz. iij; of
saxifrage, of mastich, of Illyrian iris, of each, oz. iss; of nutben, oz.
j; of honey, lb. vj, or q. s.

_The Theodoretus without anacardia._ Of aloes, dr. lx; of agaric, dr.
xxiv; of saffron, of cassia, of Pontic rhubarb, of sweet-flag, of
cinnamon, of mastich, of each, dr. x; of costus, of the seed of rue, of
white pepper, of each, dr. viij; of spikenard, dr. iij; of xylobalsam, of
asarabacca, of germander, of spignel, of each, dr. iv; of honey, q. s.
Some here add two anacardia. The dose is dr. ij, with honeyed water.

_The cyphoides for hepatic affections and complaints in the chest._
Of the flesh of dried grape, dr. xxv; of saffron, dr. j; of calamus,
dr. ij; of bdellium, dr. iiss; of cassia, dr. iss; of cinnamon, three
oboli; of nard, three oboli; of sweet rush, dr. ij; of myrrh, dr. iv;
of turpentine, dr. iv; of the scrapings of aspalathus, twelve oboli; of
honey, dr. xvj; of wine, q. s.

_Another cyphoides, of Alexander._ Of saffron, of cinnamon, of bdellium,
of each, dr. iv; of myrrh, of calamus, of each, dr. ij; of bitumen, of
schœnanth, of each, dr. iij; of cassia, of nard, of each, dr. j; of
turpentine, dr. xvj; of the flesh of dried grapes, dr. clx; of honey,
hemin. iss; of Chian wine, q. s.

_An hepatic medicine from cacanus._ Of cacanus, oz. j; of costus, oz. j;
of Indian leaf, scr. viij; of white pepper, scr. vj; of spikenard, scr.
vj; of honey, q. s. Give a spoonful with hippocras.

_The Zopyrius._ Of myrrh, dr. v; of saffron, of cassia, of each, dr.
iv; of cinnamon, dr. iij; of spikenard, dr. ij; of schœnanth, dr. ij;
of white pepper, dr. iss; of frankincense, dr. j; of costus, dr. j; of
honey, q. s.

_The Pæonian antidote._ Of the styrax calamite, dr. vj; of frankincense,
of amomum, of saffron, of each, oz. iss; of spikenard, dr. vj; of Indian
leaf, dr. ij; of white pepper, dr. vj; and of common, dr. viij; of myrrh,
oz. j; of costus, oz. j; of honey, q. s.

_The hepatic pills, of Dositheus._ Of aloes, oz. j; of spikenard, of
Indian leaf, of costus, scr. ij; of agaric, scr. viij; of mastich, scr.
xiij; of dodder of thyme, dr. iv; of Pontic rhubarb, scr. j.

_The splenic oxymel._ Of the bark of the root of capers, of
scolopendrium, of spikenard, of asarabacca, of iris, of schœnanth, of
the flower of cyperus, of anise, of cumin, of fennel, of sweetflag, of
the fruit of heath, of each, oz. j; of the leaves of tamarisk, of the
leaves of willow, of the root of parsley, of the frankincense tree, of
squills, of each, oz. ij; of vinegar, sextar. iij; of honey, sext. iij;
of ammoniac perfume, oz. iij. Prepare like that from squills. Give two
spoonfuls.

_An oxymel for calculous complaints._ Of saxifrage, of bettony, of
couch-grass, of maiden-hair, of spikenard, of carpesium, of asarabacca,
of eryngo, of each, oz. j; of Macedonian stone-parsley, of the seed of
rue, of each, oz. ss; of green fennel, of iris, of baked squills, of
knee-holly (chamædaphne), of each, oz. ij; of the bark of the root of
capers, oz. iij; of water-parsnip, oz. ij; of water, of vinegar, of
honey, of each, sext. ij.

_The lithontriptic posca._ Of pennyroyal, of mastich, of parsley-seed,
of dried mint, of each, oz. j; of common salt toasted, lb. j; of
coriander-seed, of spikenard, of anise, of bishop’s weed, of each, scr.
vj; of Indian leaf, scr. iv; of white pepper, oz. ss, (or of common
oz. j); of the seed of gromwell, oz. vj; of bettony, oz. vj; of fine
vinegar, sext. v. When all are pounded, sifted, and triturated very
fine, let them be mixed with vinegar for three days, and exposed in
the sun for forty days. At the time of using, having made a decoction
of black chick-peas, and of the root of asparagus, and of maiden-hair,
and of parsley, add, for the sake of temperament, of vinegar hemin. ij,
and let the patient drink it in the hot bath. Some give scr. xij of the
afore-mentioned things, in powder with oxycrate mixed with the decoction
of the afore-mentioned herbs; and the medicine is no less efficacious.

_A lithontriptic hippocras._ Of white pepper, of saxifrage, of spikenard,
of gromwell, of bettony, of each, oz. j; of stone-parsley, of Indian
leaf, of each, oz. iss; of the seed of wild rue, oz. ss; of honey, sext.
j; of Ascolonitic wine, sext. xvj.

_The medicine from the blood of the buck-goat._ When the grape begins to
ripen, take the blood of a full-grown buck-goat, and having dried it in
the sun, give to persons affected with calculi two spoonfuls of it with
Cretan must. Some also mix, of amomum, of Indian leaf, of each, oz. iij;
and others of myrrh, scr. iv.

_The nephritic composition from cicadæ._ Of gromwell, of the garfish
burned, of seseli, of each, oz. j; of bishop’s weed, of the seed of the
garden cucumber, of common saxifrage, of grapes without their stones, of
the seed of marsh-mallows, of the white fasil, of lyncurium, of each, oz.
ss; of spikenard, of valerian, of spignel, of the stones from sponges,
of each, dr. j; of maidenhair, of the seed within the Christ’s thorn, of
water-parsnip, of the root of brambles, of couch-grass, of polypody, of
each, dr. iij; of goat’s blood dried, as described, scr. vj; of dried
cicadæ, without the head, wings, and feet, oz. iv; of white pepper,
dr. vj; of boiled honey, q. s. The dose is the size of a filbert in
hippocras, or the decoction of caltrops, or of saxifrage, or of sinon, or
of the root of asparagus, or of couch-grass, or of cinquefoil, or of the
root of fullers-herb.

_The antidote from gromwell._ Of gromwell, of betony, of saxifrage, of
stone-parsley, of white pepper, equal parts. Mix with honey.

_The antidote from the seed of leeks._ Of white and of black pepper, of
Cretan carrot, of the seed of the garden cucumber, of the seed of fennel,
of the seed of leeks, of Macedonian stone-parsley, of pellitory, of
ginger, of the Indian leaf, of each, oz. j; of honey, q. s.

_The antidote from tecolithos, or lapis Judaicus._ Of spikenard, of
hyssop, of lapis Judaicus, of each, scr. viij; of pepper, scr. xij; of
ginger, of stone-parsley, of costus, of saxifrage, of each, scr. vj;
of cassia, of parsley-seed, of each, scr. iij; of cyperus, scr. vj; of
the scrapings of ivory, scr. iv; of the wood of cardamom, scr. vj; of
gromwell, scr. iv; of honey, q. s.

_The antidote from the seed of the wild mallow._ Of the seed of the
garden cucumber, dr. xij; of the seed of henbane, dr. vj; of the seed of
hemlock, dr. iij (but some use vj); of opium, of fennel, of the seed of
the wild mallow, of saffron, of each, dr. iij; of parsley-seed, dr. vj;
of cassia, dr. iv; almonds, x; walnuts, x; filberts, x; of asarabacca,
dr. iv; mix with Cretan must, and give three oboli, if the patient be
free from fever, with rob. But some mix it with honey.

_A nephritic medicine from dessert-fruits, for ulceration of the bladder
and kidneys._ Of the white grape, deprived of its stones, of fresh
pine-nuts, of each, oz. ij; of the seed of cucumber, stripped of its
bark; of myrtles deprived of their bones; of bitter almonds, of fatty
dates, of parsley-seed, of poppy-seed, of saffron, of each, dr. j; of
myrrh, oz. ij. Give a drachm of it in must to the patient, fasting.

_The satyriac antidote._ Of ginger, of the superior satyrion (herb
dogs-tooth?), of each, dr. viij, of the tail of a scink, of spignel,
of asarabacca, of stone-parsley, of cardamom, of seseli, of each, dr.
iv; of the seed of rocket, of cinnamon, of each, dr. iij; of all-good
(horminum), of white pepper, of the seed of bastard saffron, of each,
dr. ij; of the schœnanth, of spikenard, of each, dr. j, of goat’s blood,
a mystrum (spoonful). A drachm is given with wine, but to those who are
weaker, with milk.

_Pills from xylomacer for dysenteries._ Of xylomacer, of opium, of Pontic
rhubarb, of each, scr. vj; of gall, of myrrh, of each, oz. j; mix with
palm wine.

_Remedies for the gout. The antidote from corallium._ Of rheum barbarum,
of pæony, of troglodytic myrrh, of spikenard, of each, oz. ij; of Indian
leaf, oz. j; of cloves, gr. xv, of the pimpernel having the purple flower
which they call corallium, oz. ss; of long birthworth, oz. iv, and of
round, oz. vj. One scruple is to be given as a dose every day to the
patient, when digestion is accomplished. We must begin at the autumnal
equinox, which is about the 24th of the month of September; and it is to
be taken regularly for fifty days, and then interrupted for fifteen days;
and this is to be done until the whole 365 days be completed. It is to be
given up during the whole of the dog-days, that is, from the 24th of June
to the end of August. The patient must abstain from venery, from flesh,
particularly that of swine, and from pickle, sauce, beet, carrot, mint,
and from boiled lettuces and pompions; from fishes, as the mullet, gomphi
(gobii?), mollusca, and the testacea; from all the legumes, and in short
from all things which furnish a thick chyme, and from black wine, and
from much wine of any kind. He is to bathe every day, and take exercise
either on foot or on horseback, or in a vehicle. Those who are of a drier
habit have not been injured by a less restricted diet.

_The podagric antidote of Agapetus._ Of Indian leaf, of rheum barbarum,
of saffron, of spikenard, of troglodytic myrrh, of costus, of germander,
of each, oz. ij; of hepatic aloes, oz. v; of St. John’s wort, of pæony,
of each, oz. iij; of long birthwort, of valerian, of spignel, of vervain
mallow, of pimpernel, of each, oz. iv. The mode of using it is the same
as that of corallium.

_The podagric remedy, called atactos._ Of Indian leaf, of spignel, of
vervain mallow, of the pimpernel having the blue flower, of madder,
of mastich, of saffron, of cassia, of hepatic aloes, of gentian, of
germander, of each, oz. j; of cloves, of white and of black pepper, of
each, oz. ss; of spikenard, of myrrh, of rheum barbarum, of the root of
pæony, of the long birthwort, and of the round, of each, oz. ij. To be
used in like manner.

_The podagric antidote of Proclus, answering also with ischiatic
disease._ Of germander, oz. ix; of centaury, oz. viij; of birthwort,
oz. vij; of gentian, oz. vj; of St. John’s wort, oz. v; of Macedonian
stone-parsley, oz. iv; of spignel, oz. iij; of agaric, oz. ij; of
valerian, oz. j; of Attic honey, two heminæ.

_The composition from seven ingredients for the same purposes._ Of St.
John’s wort, of long birthwort, of each, oz. j; of centaury, of ground
pine, of agaric, of each, oz. iij; of germander, oz. vj; of gentian, oz.
v. Some add likewise, of stone-parsley, oz. j; of honey, dr. v. The dose
is dr. j.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Celsus thus defines the nature of antidotes: “Antidota
raro, sed præcipue interdum necessaria sunt, quia gravisismis casibus
opitulantur. Ea recte quidem dantur collisis corporibus vel per
ictus, vel ubi ex alto deciderunt, vel in viscerum, laterum, faucium,
interiorumque partium doloribus; maxime autem desideranda sunt adversus
venena, vel per morsus, vel per cibos, aut potiones nostris corporibus
inserta.” He gives prescriptions for three antidotes. They consist
principally of stimulant and aromatic medicines, mixed with honey and
wine. (v, 23.)

Most of the antidotes treated of in this chapter are copied from Galen’s
work ‘De Antidotis,’ but our author, in many instances, has used the
liberty to introduce various alterations, either with the view of
simplifying or improving upon the formulæ of Galen. Mesue also treats
fully of antidotes in his work, ‘De Electariis,’ wherein he substitutes
a considerable number of Arabic articles for those used by the Greeks.
Serapion describes these compositions with extreme prolixity. (Tract.
vii.) But what shall we say of Myrepsus, who gives prescriptions for
511 antidotes? Of these, and such like multifarious compositions, it
would be idle to attempt any general analysis, and therefore we shall
pass by all the articles treated of in this chapter unnoticed, with
the exception of the _Theriac_, which was so celebrated in the records
of ancient medicine, that we think ourselves called upon to give some
further account of it. Galen devotes two distinct treatises to the
consideration of the celebrated theriac from vipers, besides giving a
general description of it in his work on antidotes. Our author’s account
of it is merely an abridgment of his. Galen mentions that Mithridates,
king of Pontus, had, by repeated experiments upon condemned malefactors,
acquired a most thorough knowledge of the proper antidotes for almost
every venomous reptile and poisonous substance, and hence he constructed
the composition bearing his name, which was long esteemed as a general
antidote to deleterious substances. From it Andromachus, the chief
physician to the emperor Nero, formed his famous theriac, having added
the flesh of vipers, and otherwise altered some of the ingredients in
the theriac of Mithridates. The prescription for it was translated into
verse by Damocrates, and the poem, consisting of 174 lines, is preserved
in Galen’s work, ‘De Antidotis.’ As stated by Galen, it was composed
of inspissated juices, liquid juices, barks, roots, flowers, seeds, and
fleshes. Of the vegetable substances which entered into the composition
of it, it is difficult to remark any one general character, although
one can have no difficulty in perceiving that by far the greater number
of them are hot, volatile stimulants, which, agreeably to the ancient
views of practice, as explained by us in the Fifth Book, were supposed
to counteract the frigidity of poisons. It was, no doubt, with the same
intention that Andromachus added the flesh of vipers, from which, as
a modern author, Moses Charras, remarks, a volatile salt and oil are
procured. In preparing the vipers, Galen directs us to cut off the head
and tail to the extent of four fingers’ breadth, and then to take out
their entrails and fat, and boil them until the backbone be separated
from the flesh, when the latter is to be taken out and formed into
trochisks, with crumb of bread. We need not occupy time with detailing
all the other steps in the formation of this multifarious composition,
as our author’s account is sufficiently ample and accurate. Galen
expresses great confidence in it, especially as an antidote to poisons,
and a remedy for inveterate diseases of the skin, such as leprosy and
elephantiasis. It derives its name, he says, either from its being used
as a remedy for the stings of venomous animals (θήρια), or because the
flesh of such a reptile, namely, the viper, entered into the composition
of it.

The Greek authorities subsequent to Galen repeat his directions for
forming this celebrated medicine, and any alterations which they make in
it are not very important. The Rheum barbarum instead of the Rhâ Ponticum
appears in the prescription given by Myrepsus. Like his predecessors,
he praises the theriac not only as an antidote to poisons, but as a
preservative from pestilential diseases. Actuarius, who describes it very
accurately, pronounces it to be the best of all the antidotes.

Averrhoes’s treatise on the theriac is interesting and worth consulting,
although his views are upon the whole much in accordance with those of
Galen. He seems to have referred its action as a medicine to its power in
rousing the vital heat of the system; and hence he very properly forbids
it to be administered in all cases of an inflammatory and bilious nature.
He therefore condemns the use of it in pleurisy unless when the pain is
dull and chronic. He says, it ought not to be given in cases of difficult
parturition, unless when it is wished to rouse the expulsive faculty, or
when the fœtus is dead. According to his account, the composition has
not arrived at perfection, when it is four years old, and it retains its
powers until after forty years.

Haly Abbas sums up the medicinal properties of the theriac with stating
that it dries the natural humidity, strengthens the viscera, cleanses the
organs of food and respiration, and expels superfluities from the brain.
Hence he pronounces it to be a remedy for all the diseases which attack
the human body. (Pract. x, 4.)

Serapion describes the following methods of trying whether the theriac be
good: 1st. Give of it to the amount of a drachm to a person who has taken
a powerful emetic or cathartic, such as white hellebore or scammony, and
if it counteract the effect of the medicine that has been taken, we know
that it is genuine. 2d. As Galen directs, having got a wild cock, allow
it to be stung by a venomous reptile, and then give it a proper dose of
the theriac. If the fowl escape unhurt we are sure that the medicine
is good; but if he die we know that it is not to be depended upon. 3d.
Give a poisonous substance, such as opium, to a cock or a dog, and then
administer the theriac, the powers of which may be judged of from the
result.

Moses Charras, who published ‘The Royal Pharmacopœia’ about the end
of the seventeenth century, thus enumerates the medicinal uses of the
theriac of Andromachus: “Treacle being composed of a great quantity
of hot medicaments, ought to be very much esteemed for the cure of
cold diseases, and of all those where the natural heat is feeble and
languishing, especially, among the rest, of palsies, epilepsies,
convulsions, and all cold diseases of the head. It is proper against all
weaknesses and want of retention in the stomach and intestines; against
the diarrhœa, dysentery, lientery, morbus cholera, and all sort of
colics; against agues, and particularly the quartan; against the worms;
against all sorts of poison, the pestilence, smallpox, the measles, and
all epidemic diseases; against the biting of mad dogs and all sorts of
venomous animals; against want of sleep, and griping pains in children;
against hysteric passions, the jaundice, and an infinite sort of other
diseases.” (P. i, c. 20.)

This famous medicine was expelled from the ‘British Pharmacopœia’ about
the middle of the last century. When its rejection was proposed by Dr.
Heberden, the College divided upon the question, and there were found
to be 13 votes for retaining, and 14 for rejecting it. Its medicinal
virtues had been previously questioned by Capivaccius, Trincavallius,
and Julius Alexandrinus. It is still retained, however, in the ‘Codex
Medicamentarius’ of Paris; and, we understand, is much used by the Greek
physicians in Constantinople. A formula for a theriac is contained in
the Greek Pharmacopœia of the present day. Although it still retains the
name of “Theriaca Andromachi,” it consists of but a very small number
of ingredients in comparison with the original preparation. Dr. Mead
says of it, “The physicians in Italy and France very commonly prescribe
the broth and jelly of viper’s flesh to invigorate and purify the mass
of blood exhausted with diseases or tainted with some vicious and
obstinate ferment.” (On Poisons.) Upon the virtues of viper’s flesh,
Duemerbroeck expresses himself in the following terms: “Carnes viperinas
ac serpentinas adversus multa venena eximiam antidotalem vim obtinere
adeo notum est ut absolutè negari non possit, idque non tantum liquet ex
Galeni testimoniis verum etiam ex quotidianâ experientiâ. Sic Hartmannus
scribit se propriis oculis vidisse, a quodam experto medico tribus diebus
continuis intra corpus gravissima quædam venena assumpta eademque paulo
post sine ullâ noxâ, ab exhibito pulvere cum astantium admiratione iterum
expulsa fuisse.” (De Peste, iii, 5.)


SECT. XII.—ON TROCHISKS, OR TROCHES.

Trochisks are so named from their form. There are three kinds of them.
For some of them are to be swallowed, some injected, and some rubbed in.
Of those which are swallowed, some are for restraining the belly, or a
flow of blood, or any other discharge, by their cooling, astringent,
obstruent, or desiccative qualities, such as that from Egyptian thorn,
that from seeds, and the like. Some are anodyne, either by deadening
the sensibility, such as the saffron, or by dispelling, like those from
aromatic substances. Some act as deobstruents on the spleen, kidneys,
and liver, such as that from bitter almonds. Of those which are injected,
some are for blunting acrimony, as in dysentery, such as those from
pompholyx, starch, and Samian earth, injected with the juice of ptisan,
or the like. Some act as astringents upon the alvine discharges, or a
flow of blood, as those from alum, acacia, and omphacium, such as that
of Philip; or that consisting of Egyptian thorn, injected with the juice
of roses or of plantain. Those that are caustic agree with spreading
dysenteries, being composed of sandarach, arsenic, quicklime, and burnt
pepper; but they are to be injected with the juice of lentils or of
rice, the intestine being first washed out with salt water, and the
patients having eaten and drunk beforehand, so that none of the powers
of the medicine may be carried up to the stomach. Those trochisks which
are injected prove serviceable principally in affections below the
navel, for their power does not reach higher up. Those which are rubbed
in are possessed of similar powers to those which are injected. But
the astringent ones are applicable in herpes, exanthemata, intertrigo,
hemorrhage, and ulcers attended with discharges, such as that of Andron
and that of Polyides. Those possessed of blunting powers agree with
carbuncle, and ill-conditioned ulcers, such as the white trochisks, and
that from lotaria. Those which burn as those mentioned above, like the
Faustian, are applicable in spreading ulcers in the pudenda and anus, and
for pterygia and sarcomata.

_The trochisk aster._ Of saffron, of castor, of spikenard, of cassia,
of myrrh, of Lemnian earth, of the bark of mandragora, of each, oz. iv;
of carrot, of parsley, of anise, of seseli, of the seed of henbane, of
storax, of each, dr. viij. Triturate with wine.

_The trochisk trigonus._ Of the seed of parsley, of the seed of henbane,
of each, dr. ij; of anise, dr. viij; of opium, dr. iij. Triturate with
water.

_The trochisk from seeds._ Of anise, of bishop’s weed, of the seed of
fennel, of each, dr. iv; of the seed of parsley, of opium, of the seed of
henbane, of each, dr. ij. Triturate with water.

_The trochisk croceus_, or _saffron trochisk_. Of anise, of the seed of
Cretan carrot, of each, dr. iv; of myrrh, of castor, of each, dr. ij; of
saffron, of opium, of each, dr. iij; of the seed of parsley, of storax,
of each, dr. iv; of the seed of henbane, dr. vj. Triturate with water.

_The trochisk from roses._ Of acacia, of gum, of the flower of roses, of
pomegranate flowers, of the juice of hypocistis, of galls, of each, dr.
iij; of the juice of green roses, of the seed of plantain, of each, dr.
j; of Indian buckthorn, dr. j.

_The trochisk from corallium._ Of the seed of henbane, of frankincense,
of each, dr. viij; of Samian earth, of corallium, of Sinopic vermilion,
of opium, of each, dr. iv; of starch, of the flowers of the wild
pomegranate, of each, dr. ij. Mix with the juice of knotgrass.

_The trochisk from amber._ Of fleawort, oz. v; of mastich, oz. iv; of the
scrapings of amber, of iris, of saffron, of each, oz. iv; of opium, oz.
ij.

_The trochisk from Egyptian thorn._ Of Egyptian thorn, of sumach, of
frankincense, of acacia, of stone-alum, of the juice of hypocistis, of
galls, of Lemnian earth, of corallium, of comfrey, of Samian aster, of
aloes, of Cretan cistus, equal parts. Mix with wine.

_The trochisk which Galen entitles the aphrodisiasticum clidion._ Of the
flowers of the cultivated pomegranate, of Egyptian thorn, of the flowers
of the wild pomegranate, of the juice of hypocistis, of acacia, of each,
dr. vj; of buckthorn, of Pontic rhubarb, of opium, of each, dr. iv; of
myrrh, dr. ij. Mix with myrtle wine, or the decoction of roses or of
myrtles.

_The clidion of Oribasius, for dysentery and cæliac affection._ Of the
immature gall, dr. viij; of opium, dr. iv. Form into pills with water,
and give three or four.

_The trochisk from hartshorn for dysentery and hæmoptysis._ Of snails,
dr. xij; of burnt hartshorn, of roasted galls, of roasted acacia, of
each, dr. v; obol. xij; of black myrtles, dr. xv; of dried opium, of
the juice of hypocistis, of each, dr. v; of the œnanthe, dr. v; of the
juice of the root of mandragora, of terra aster, of each, dr. xij; of the
sumach used for condiments, dr. xiv; of roasted pomegranate rind, dr.
vij; of frankincense, dr. viij; of the roasted bark of pine, dr. xiv; of
the seed of henbane roasted, dr. x; of the rhus coriaria, sext. ii; of
dark-coloured wine, what will be sufficient to boil the sumach until the
wine become thick. When it is strained, add the other things, and form
the trochisks.

_The trochisk of the Amazons._ Of the seed of parsley, of anise, of each,
dr. vj; of the hair of wormwood, dr. iv; of myrrh, of pepper, of opium,
of castor, of each, dr. ij; of cinnamon, dr. vj. Mix with water.

_The trochisk from bitter almonds._ Of anise, of the seed of parsley,
of asarabacca, of bitter almonds, of the hair of wormwood, equal parts;
form, with water, trochisks of dr. j each. Give to those who are free
from fever in wine and honey, and to those who have fever in water and
honey.

_The splenic trochisk from heath._ Of the fruit of heath, dr. iv; of
white pepper, of Syriac nard, of ammoniac perfume, of each, dr. ij. The
ammoniac is dissolved in water, and added to the powders, and trochisks
are formed containing a drachm each. The dose is one trochisk, with one
cyathus of oxymel.

_The trochisk from alkakengi._ Of the seed of the cultivated cucumber,
stripped of its bark, oz. iv; of the seed of henbane, of hemlock, of
each, oz. ij; of fennel, of the seed of dock, of saffron, of pine nuts,
of bitter almonds, of opium, of each, oz. j; of alkakengi, sext. iij; of
wine, q. s.

_The trochisk of Philip, for dysentery._ Of the flowers of the wild
pomegranate, of acacia, of the juice of hypocistis, of opium, of sumach,
of frankincense, of myrrh, of saffron, of gall, of aloes, of Pontic
rhubarb, of the rind of pomegranate, of myrtles, of each, dr. iv. Mix
with austere wine, and form into trochisks of three oboli each. Give
to those who are free from fever with wine, and to those in fever with
hydromel.

_The trochisk of Musa._ Of alum, of aloes, of myrrh, of copperas
(blue vitriol?) of each, oz. iss; of pomegranate rind, of saffron, of
crocomagma, of each, dr. vj, in wine.

_The preparation of the crocomagma._ Of saffron, oz. ij; of roses, of
starch, of myrrh, of aloes, of frankincense, of gum, of each, oz. j; of
costus, of spikenard, of each, dr. j, in wine. In the prescription for
oil of saffron another mode of preparing crocomagma is described.

_The trochisk Nerè, from the works of Hera._ Of myrrh, of aloes, of
saffron, of each, dr. viij; of fissile alum, dr. c. Mix with water.

_The sigillum of Polyides._ Of fissile alum, dr. iij; of frankincense,
dr. iv; of myrrh, dr. viij; of copperas (chalcanthum?), dr. ij; of the
flowers of the cultivated pomegranate, dr. xij; of the gall of bulls, dr.
vj (others use dr. xvj); of aloes, oz. j. Mix with austere wine.

_The trochisk of Pasion._ Of squama æris, dr. xij; of burnt copper, of
sal ammoniac, of round alum, of scraped verdigris, of frankincense, of
each, dr. viij; of wine, q. s.

_The trochisk Andronius._ Of the flowers of the cultivated pomegranate,
dr. x; of myrrh, dr. iv; of galls, dr. viij; of round birthwort, dr. iv;
of copperas, of saffron, of fissile alum, of crocomagma, of misy, of
frankincense, of each, dr. ij. Triturate with astringent wine or vinegar.

_The trochisk of Faustinus._ Of arsenic, dr. xij; of sandarach, dr. vj;
of quicklime, dr. viij; of burnt paper, dr. j. Mix with the juice or
decoction of myrtles; make into trochisks, and inject along with the
decoction of myrtles, of lentils, and of the roots of bramble.

_The trochisk from paper._ Of burnt paper, lb. ij; of quicklime, of
arsenic, of sandarach, of each, oz. j. Mix with the juice of plantain.

_The trochisk called Thronus Marcellius._ Of burnt paper, dr. x; of
sandarach, of arsenic, of squama æris, of fissile alum, of each, dr. iv;
of the flowers of the wild pomegranate, dr. iij; of opium, dr. ij; of
quicklime, dr. iij; of omphacium, dr. j; of the juice of hypocistis, dr.
iij. Mix with myrtle wine, and form troches of four drachms each. When
you have boiled the pomegranate rind, myrtles, and roses to a third part,
give one trochisk, or simply dr. iv to six cyathi of wine.

_The trochisk from cork._ Of burnt galls, of burnt paper, of burnt
cork, of burnt bread, of each, dr. xv. In another prescription there is
added of burnt hartshorn, dr. xv; of arsenic, dr. ij; of sandarach, of
quicklime, of each, dr. xv; of acacia, of ceruse, of each, dr. v; of
litharge, dr. iij. Triturate in wine.

_The trochisk Bithynus._ Of pomegranate rind, dr. x; of calamine, oz.
iij; of birthwort, of galls, of the root of all-heal, of iris, of
copperas, of fissile alum, of chalcitis, of misy, of squama æris, of
manna (and some also of costus), of each, oz. iss. Mix with vinegar.

_The trochisk from castor, for ulcers, spreading sores, and defluxions._
Of saffron, of aloes, of frankincense, of each, oz. j; of the flowers of
the cultivated pomegranate, of fissile alum, of castor, of manna, of
scraped verdigris, of each, oz. j; of sinopic vermilion, lb. j. Mix with
old wine.

_The trochisk from castor, for colics._ Of myrrh, of castor, of each,
scr. vj; of saffron, of opium, of each, scr. ix; of anise, of parsley
seed, of carrot seed, of each, oz. ss; of the seed of henbane, scr. xviij.

_The trochisk from wine and oil, for the fundament and pudendum._ Of
ceruse, oz. x; of litharge, oz. v; of frankincense, of the dross of lead,
of fissile alum, of each, oz. ij. Triturate with wine that does not
contain salt water. At the time of using it, mix with wine and rose oil,
or wine and myrtle oil.

_The trochisk from Phrygian stone, for the pudenda._ Take three Phrygian
stones burnt and extinguished, and mix the first with butter or rose oil;
the second with wine; and the third with honey, to the extent of oz. ij;
add, of the flower of roses, oz. iv; of pomegranate rind, oz. j.

_The trochisk from lotaria to the fundament and pudendum._ Of ceruse, of
starch, of glaucium, of saffron, of alum, equal parts. Triturate with the
juice of lotaria or wine.

_The white trochisk._ Of terra aster, oz. iv; of pompholyx, of ceruse, of
starch, of each, oz. ij; of opium, scr. iv. Mix with water.

_The trochisk from halicacabus_, or _winter cherry_. Of litharge, dr.
xxiv; of ceruse, dr. xij or xxj; of winter cherry, dr. viij; of copperas
(chalcanthum), dr. iv; of fissile alum, dr. iv; of vermilion enough to
give it colour. Mix with water.

_The trochisk from the two hellebores, and also from the two acacias._
Of the black and of the yellow acacia, of artificer’s glue (in another
prescription of fish-glue), of each, oz. iv; of ammoniac perfume, of
glaucium, of aloes, of each, oz. ij; of male frankincense, of black and
of white hellebore, of each, oz. j. Mix with vinegar of squills, and at
the time of using it dissolve either in the same or in common vinegar,
and anoint before and after the bath.

_The trochisk Criogenes._ Of myrrh, of burnt copper, of round birthwort,
of scraped verdigris, of the squama stomomatis, of the straight vervain,
of round alum, of each, oz. j; of vinegar, q. s. The vervain is to be
gathered when the sun is in Aries. It may be made into a plaster thus:
take of the trochisk, of wax, of Colophonian rosin, of oil, equal parts;
of vinegar what will be sufficient for the trituration of the trochisk.

_The trochisk melanchlorus_, or _black-coloured_. Of myrrh, of aloes, of
burnt squama æris, of arsenic, of fissile alum, and of round alum, of
iris, of chalcitis, of misy, of fossil salt, of copperas, of ceruse, of
natron, of litharge, of the root of all-heal, of calamine, of pomegranate
rind, of galls, of round birthwort, of the squama stomomatis, of scraped
verdigris, of each, oz. j; of vinegar, q. s. It is formed into a plaster
thus: of the trochisk, oz. ij; of Colophonian rosin, of wax, of oil, of
each, oz. vj; of vinegar, what will be sufficient for the trituration of
the trochisk.

_The trochisk pantolmius, for chironian and malignant ulcers, and for
discharges._ Of cassia, of burnt copper, of ceruse, of litharge, of
scraped verdigris, of fissile alum, and of round, and of liquid, and of
the plinthitic alum, of the root of all-heal, of the long and of the
round birthwort, of pomegranate rind, of copperas, of purslain, of the
iris called astragalitis, of chalcitis, of misy, of ammoniac perfume,
of sal ammoniac, of verdigris, of iron, of squama æris, of aloes, of
diphryges, of frankincense, of galls, of sarcocolla, of burnt lead, of
olive leaves, of sori, of myrrh, of liquid melanteria, of the flowers of
the wild pomegranate, of the Egyptian thorn, of sulphur which has not
been touched with the fire, of natron, of red sumach, of Syriac sumach,
of chrysocolla, of elm-leaved sumach (rus coriaria), of acacia, of the
spuma salis, of omphacium, of arsenic, equal parts. Triturate during the
heat of the dog-days with vinegar for thirty days.

_The trochisk of Nymphodotus._ Of aphronitrum, oz. j; of Alexandrian
natron, of Gallic soap, of each, oz. j; of Cappadocian salt, of mastich,
of galls, of each, dr. iv; of rose leaves, of amomum, of starch, of each,
oz. j; of Indian leaf, dr. j; of fissile alum, of costus, of each, dr.
ij; of myrtle wine, q. s.

_The trochisk from thapsia, for hemicrania._ Of the juice of thapsia
(deadly carrot), dr. xvj; of myrrh, dr. viij; of opoponax, of euphorbium,
of each, dr. vj; of natron, of the Parthic juice, of each, dr. iv; of
pepper, of sagapen, of each, dr. ij; of vinegar, q. s. In using it, rub
it in with vinegar, and after six hours wash it off. If you wish to
use in a reduced state, mix with equal parts of cerate, and spread it,
allowing it to remain for a day and a night.

_The trochisk called subdititious, for dysentery and pains of the anus._
Of terra aster, of starch, of each, oz. iij; of saffron, oz. ij; of
acacia, of tragacanth, of each. oz. j; of castor, of frankincense, of
buckthorn, of each, oz. ss; and in hotter temperaments, also, of opium,
oz. ss; mix with the juice of fleawort, and form into oblong trochisks.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Celsus informs us that they are the same as the _pastilli_
of the Latins. He thus describes their general properties: “Pastilli
hæc ratio est: arida medicamenta contrita humore non pingui, ut vino
vel aceto, coguntur, et rursus coacta inarescunt, atque, ubi utendum
est, ejusdem generis humore diluuntur.” He gives prescriptions for six
trochisks. (v, 20.)

Galen remarks that trochisks derive their name from their spherical
shape. He treats of them at great length in the fifth book of his work
‘De Comp. Med. sec. gen.’ Many of our author’s receipts are copied from
him.

For an account of the Arabian trochisks, see in particular Serapion
(vii, 18); Haly Abbas (Pract. x, 14); and Mesue (i, 8.) The following is
Mesue’s formula for the trochisks of camphor: “The trochisks of camphor,
for ardent fevers, heat of the blood and bile, warm intemperament of the
liver, insatiable thirst, jaundice, consumption, and hectics.—℞ Of rose
leaves dr. iv; of spodium, of liquorice āā, dr. ij; of yellow saunders,
dr. iiss; of the seeds of citrons, melons, cucumbers, and gourds, of
saffron, of tragacanth, of gum, of spikenard, āā dr. j; of lignum aloes,
of cardomum, of starch, of camphor, āā dr. j; of white sugar, of manna,
āā dr. iij. Mix with the mucilage of fleawort and water of roses.”
Myrepsus’s formula for the same is little different. He describes the
composition of 136 pastils.

Moses Charras gives the following account of trochisks: “They are also
called pastils, rolls, cakes, and lozenges. Trochisks were invented as
well to preserve a long time the virtue of certain medicaments as to
unite together the virtue of several. To which purpose having finely
powdered the ingredients, which are to be powdered, they are to be
incorporated with some juice, syrup, or other viscous liquor, to make
therewith a solid paste, out of which are formed little trochisks, flat,
round, triangular, square, long, or otherwise, which being spread upon
paper, and dried out of the sun, and at a distance from the fire, to the
end they may be dried in all parts alike, may be put up in boxes or pots
for use.” (Royal Phar. ii, 21.)

Troches are pharmaceutical preparations still frequently used. According
to the directions in the ‘Edinburgh Dispensatory,’ “they are composed
of powders made up with glutinous substances into small cakes, and
afterwards dried.” There is this difference, however, between the troches
of the moderns and the trochisci of the ancients, that all the former
are given internally, whereas many of the ancient trochisci were used
as external applications. Of this description are five out of the six
pastilli described by Celsus. Le Clerc says of them: “Ils differoient des
emplâtres, et des collyres, en ce qu’il n’entroit aucune matière huileuse
dans les trochisques et qu’ils servoient pour le dedans aussi bien que
pour le dehors.” (Hist. de la Méd.)


SECT. XIII.—DRY APPLICATIONS AND ABSTERGENTS (SMEGMATA.)

Of dry applications or powders, some suit with ulcers, and some are
applied to the skin. Of those which suit with ulcers, some act as
incarnants of hollow ulcers, and some restrain fungous flesh, and
some are cicatrizing, some caustic and septic, and some styptic. The
incarnative applications act either by cleansing foul ulcers, such as
those from tares, birthwort, iris, all-heal, myrrh, frankincense, and
aloes; or by drying the superabundant discharge, as those from copper,
diphryges, squama æris, burnt paper, the bark of pine and thorn. But
these promote cicatrization, either by blunting acrimony and pungency,
such as those from pompholyx, starch, ceruse, sphecla (impure potass),
the lapis specularis, burnt oysters, terra Samia, and the like, and the
compositions from them possess similar powers. Of repressing medicines,
some are mild, such as those from squama æris, those from misy and
chalcitis, when burnt, and galls; but those from copperas, verdigris,
misy, and chalcitis, not burnt, are stronger. The caustics and septics
are prepared from quicklime, arsenic, sandarach, and sphecla, which is
the burnt lees of wine. All these things when reduced to a fine powder
and sprinkled upon ulcers, are less pungent. The coarser the powder to
which they are reduced, the more pungent are they. Styptics restrain
bleeding, either by astringing or cooling, or proving desiccative or
obstruent by burning and forming an eschar; and the materials of them
have been mentioned in the section on Trochisks. Of those which are
applied to the skin, some cleanse and absterge, such as those from
Cimolian earth, pumice, bean-meal, barley-leaven, the flesh of pompions,
and the flower of salt; some are attenuant and discutient, such as those
from hellebore, alcyonium, sulphur, stavesacre, mustard, pellitory,
the seed of the rosemary, lemnitis, or adarce, and the shell of the
cuttle-fish. But those having quicklime and arsenic added to them, with
some liquid, become depilatory and abstergent. Some are applied to the
head in order to dry up the discharge from it, such as those from natron,
salts, galls, the rind of pomegranate, and the like. All the smegmata
_or_ abstergents should be applied to the skin when it is not anointed.

_The dry cephalic application._ Of tares, oz. v; of iris, oz. iss; of
manna, oz. iss; of birthwort, of squama æris, of each, oz. iss.

_Another._ Of the bark of pine, dr. vj; of frankincense, dr. iv;
of pumice-stone, dr. iv; of iris, dr. ij; of dry rosin, dr. vj; of
birthwort, dr. ij.

_From aloes._ Of aloes, dr. vj; of tares, dr. viij; of manna, dr. iv; of
galls, dr. iij; of fissile alum, dr. ij.

_The dry application of Manetho from the burnt lees of wine._ Of
calamine, burnt and washed, oz. j; of terra aster, oz. j; of burnt lees
of wine, oz. iv; of lapis specularis, oz. iv; of frankincense, oz. iv;
some add, also, of starch, oz. iv.

_The melitera of Oribasius._ Of chalcitis, of squama æris, of galls, of
the flowers of the wild pomegranate, of long birthwort, of each, oz. j;
of pomegranate rind, of fissile alum, of each, oz. ss.

_From oysters._ Of calamine, of frankincense, of each, oz. j; of oysters
burnt, oz. iij.

_The powder from frankincense._ Of litharge, of frankincense, of
calamine, of ceruse, equal parts.

_The powder called aphroditarium._ Of frankincense, of squama æris, of
rhœdarium (a preparation from sumach), of starch, of ceruse, equal parts.

_The Rhodian styptic for spreading ulcers and fungous flesh._ Of unripe
galls, dr. vj; of galls burnt, and extinguished in wine and dried,
dr. xij; of the black squama æris, or, if not, of the red, dr. viij;
of copperas, dr. xxiv; of fissile alum, dr. xxvij; triturate for a
sufficient number of days.

_The powder called flavus._ Of burnt chalcitis, dr. xl; of burnt
copperas, dr. viij; of burnt misy, dr. x; of burnt copper, dr. v.

_The powder called psarus._ Of misy, oz. v; of galls, oz. iv; of
chalcitis, oz. ij; of squama æris, oz. ij; of copperas, oz. j; of scraped
verdigris, oz. ij.

_The caustic powder called heliocaes._ Of arsenic, lb. j; of calx viva,
lb. ij. Triturate with water during the dog-days, then dry and use.

_The florid powder._ Of cyperus, dr. viij; of myrrh, dr. xij; of
sandarach, dr. iij; of the flowers of roses, dr. ij; of saffron, dr. ij;
of crocomagma, of fissile alum, of Illyrian iris, of each, dr. ij.

_The powder from paper, principally for spreading ulcers of the mouth
and those of the pudendum._ Of squama æris, of burnt paper, of each, dr.
viij; of arsenic, of sulphur vivum, of each, dr. xij; of burnt lead, dr.
vj. For the more humid mortifications use it dry, but for such as are dry
mix it with rose-oil, and sometimes with honey along with rose-oil.

_The powder from butcher’s broom (oxymyrsine), for the same purposes._
Of elm-leaved sumach, oz. ij; of the leaves of butcher’s broom, of
sandarach, of each, dr. viij; of the dried leaves of willow, of
pomegranate rind, of each, dr. vj; of fissile alum, of chrysocolla, of
aloes, of crude chalcitis, of squama æris, of arsenic, of common salts,
of each, dr. iv.

_The powder of Massaliotes._ Of roasted natron, of chrysocolla, of
Asian stone, of sandarach, of misy, of chalcitis, of fissile alum, of
diphryges, equal parts. Use dry.

_The dry abstergent application (smegma) called the Æsculapian._ Of bay
berries, of Alexandrian natron, of roasted salt, of Cappadocian salt,
of ammoniac perfume, of aphronitrum, of pumice-stone, of each, lb. j;
of black hellebore, of fuller’s herb, of pellitory, of the burnt lees
of wine, of stavesacre, of mustard, of cyperus, of fissile alum, of the
schœnanth, of iris, of galls, of each, oz. vj; of sampsuchum (a species
of marjoram), lb. j; of the seed of the chaste tree, of pennyroyal,
of the flour of beans and of lupines, of each, oz. vj; of the black
chamæleon, of sulphur, of gum, of frankincense, of pepper, of the root
of the wild cucumber, of horehound, of Cimolian earth, of pæony, of the
shell of the cuttle-fish, of the leaf of fenugreek, of costus, of cumin,
of euphorbium, of spikenard, of each, oz. iij. But Alexander adds the
following things: of bitter salts, of salts from nitrous fountains, of
Tragesæan salt (“see Plin. xxxi, 61”), of each, lb. j; of adarce, oz. j;
of liquid alum, of Celtic, of cnicus, of granum Cnidium, of dried grass,
of dried bryony, of each, oz. iij.

_The abstergent application from pompions_ (_smegma peponaton_). Of
frankincense, of mastich, of ammoniac perfume, of each, oz. j; of
tragacanth, oz. iss; of the juice of wild grape, oz. ix; of the fresh
seed of pompion, oz. iij; of similago, sext. v; the whites of xxi eggs,
of iris, oz. iv. Some also use of black hellebore, oz. ij.

_Otherwise, that of Crito._ Of bean meal, one modius; of similago, sext.
iv; of trefoil, of nutben, of Illyrian iris, of each, lb. iv; of ammoniac
perfume, lb. j; of costus, lb. j; the whites of seven eggs, of the flesh
of pompions, sext. ij; of the juice of unripe grape, sext. ij. Mix, and
having formed trochisks, dry, then having pounded and strained, use.

_Otherwise._ Of tragacanth, of frankincense, of mastich, of ammoniac
perfume, of each, dr. x; of the juice of unripe grape, dr. v; of
similago, sext. v; of the white of an egg, oz. j; of the flesh of
pompions, oz. j. Prepare as above described.

_A desiccative smegma for defluxions of the head._ Of the tawny-coloured
Alexandrian natron, oz. v; of common salts, roasted, oz. iss; of
Cappadocian salts, oz. j. Having mixed these with the strongest vinegar,
put into a linen bag, and burn in a furnace until it be reduced to
cinders. Then having cooled it, rub with it triturated, adding a little
wine in the bath.

_The soap of Constantine._ Of dried roses, of aloes, of galls, of
pomegranate rind, of Indian leaf, of sarcocolla, of each, oz. iij; of the
flowers of the wild pomegranate, of myrrh, of sandarach, of spikenard,
of each, oz. ij; of costus, oz. j; of Gallic soap, lb. j. Mix with the
decoction of lupines.

_The depilatory powder for the gout._ Of mastich, of male frankincense,
of stavesacre, of white hellebore, of litharge, of each, oz. iij; of
Indian leaf, of starch, of black hellebore, of the flower of Asian stone,
of each, oz. j; of alcyonium, of roasted pumice-stone, of Cimolian earth,
of sampsuch (marjoram), of each, oz. iij; of spikenard, oz. j; some also
add of aloes, oz. j. Having pounded them, keep the powder in a vessel;
and when going to use it, put the juice of rice and of ptisan in a pot,
and after it boils add of the powder, oz. iss; of Gallic soap, oz. iss;
of arsenic, of fissile alum, of each, oz. iss; of sandarach, oz. iss; of
recent quicklime, lb. j. Use this unguent thrice a month, on the 9th day
of the moon, the 19th, and the 29th, for a whole year, and afterwards
once a month on the 29th day of the moon.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The terms are thus explained by Blancard: “_Diapasma._
Plinio, medicamentum aridum ex siccis pulveribus conflatum inspersile,
quod aut vestibus ad gratiam odoris, aut ulceri vulnerique variâ ratione,
aut potui etiam ad luxum inspergitur, διάπασμα, κατάπασμα, κατάπαστον
φάρμακον. Oribasius non malè discrimen inter has voces ex Antyllo ponere
mihi videtur ut ἐμπάσματα sint, quæ sudoribus cohibendis, et commovendo
pruritui adhibentur: quæ _Sympasmata et aspergines_ Aurelianus nominat:
καταπάσματα sunt quæ ulceribus superponuntur, ξήρια etiam dicta:
διαπάσματα vero conciliandæ in vento fragrantiæ.” (Lexicon Medicum.) The
different forms of medicines are thus characterized by Dr. Blomfield:
“Quatuor sunt φαρμάκων genera, quorum principuè mentio fit apud auctores
Græcos: φάρμακα χριστὰ, παστὰ, πλαστὰ, et πιστὰ vel πότιμα, quibus
interdum additur quintum genus, τὰ βρώσίμα, et sextum ἐπωδὰι, prout eis
ad _unguendum_, _inspergendum_, _emplastro obtegendum_, _bibendum_,
_edendum_, vel _incantandum_ utebantur.” (Glossarium ad Æschyli Prometh.
l. 488.) Theocritus uses the word ἐπίπαστον in its medical sense. (Idyll.
xi, 2.) He says, no medicine, either in the form of ointment or powder,
is a remedy for love. Le Clerc thus explains the medicines of which we
are treating: “Les _poudres_ s’appelloient en Grec ξήρια ὀυ ξηρὰ c’est à
dire, _médicamens secs_. On les appelloit _Diapasmata_, _Catapasmata_,
_Catapasta_, _Sympasmata_.” He says of the Smegma: “On s’en servoit
particulièrement pour nettoyer le peau, pour ôter le démangeaison, &c.”
He adds: “Lorsque il s’agissoit de faire tomber le poil on prenoit des
matières encore plus fortes et plus acres que celles qu’on a indiquées,
comme de l’orpiment, de la sandaraque, de la chaux vive, et l’on les
détrempoit avec les sucs. En ces cas on donnoit à cette composition le
nom particulière de _psilothrum_ ou _dépilatoire_.” (Hist. de la Méd.)
On the meaning of the terms see, further, Eustathius (ap. Iliad, iv);
Scholiast. Aristoph. (Plaat); and Gataker’s Antoninus (v, 9.)

Celsus gives the following general description of these medicines:
“Quædam autem mixturæ medicamentorum sunt quibus aridis neque coactis
utimur, sic ut inspergamus, aut cum aliquo liquido mixta illinamus.” The
powder of gollas, if prepared according to his directions, would consist
of potass, sulphur, quicklime, and orpiment. His ninth preparation of
this class is a sternutatory, and the tenth is one for making a gargle.
(v, 22.)

Most of our author’s formulæ are borrowed, with a few alterations, from
Galen. (De Med. sec. gen. v.)

For a description of the Arabian _Pulveres_, see, in particular, Haly
Abbas (Pract. x, 16,) and Mesue, (i, ix.) Many of Mesue’s compositions
are internal medicines, consisting principally of aromatics. Thus, his
first preparation, which is intended to dry humidity of the stomach,
dispel flatulence, and assist digestion, consists of lignum aloes, oz.
ss; of galls, dr. iss; and of white sugar, oz. iss.

Nicolaus Myrepsus, in his copious ‘Dispensatory,’ describes the
composition of 50 smegmata and 143 pulveres. The far greater number of
the former are intended as applications to the skin in diseases thereof,
such as impetigo, leprosy, itch, and the like. The pulveres consist of
applications to the skin, sternutatories, gargles, and injections. None
of them, we believe, are to be taken inwardly.


SECT. XIV.—ON LINIMENTS TO THE MOUTH AND THROAT.

As much as the coat which lines the mouth is finer and softer than the
skin, such a difference must there be with regard to the applications
made to the mouth. At the commencement, therefore, of inflammation,
medicines for repelling the defluxion are required, such as the
dry applications, namely, omphacium, the gall omphacitis, the juice
of sumach and of hypocistis, and alum, the bark of pine and of the
frankincense-tree, and the flowers of the wild pomegranate tree; and,
in a word, all the astringents, with the exception of those which are
unsavoury and deleterious; and the liquid applications, such as the juice
of the blackberries, both of the brambles and those called mulberries:
also the juice of the bark of green walnuts and of pomegranates,
more especially such as are acid, and of quinces and Aminean must.
Honey is mixed at the commencement solely for the preservation of
the medicines. But when the humour lodges in the part, digestive and
moderately-repellent articles are to be mixed, such as saffron, myrrh,
and the juice of liquorice. And during the whole time that intervenes
between the acme and decline, a compound of both kinds is to be used, I
mean, the repellent and discutient; and at first the repellent are to be
the prevailing ingredients, but afterwards the discutient. In the decline
we must use discutients, which have no astringency, such as natron,
aphronitrum, origany, hyssop, thyme, calamint, iris, besasa and the like.
The liquid application then should be rob, that from boiled must, that
from dried figs and palm-nuts, and the sweet must itself with honey. When
but a little of the inflammation remains, we are to mix also some sulphur
vivum. We must first boil the juice with honey, to the consistence of the
more liquid honey, and then sprinkle the powders finely levigated, and
afterwards boil moderately until the whole are properly united, and then
it is to be laid up in vessels of glass.

_The simple liniment to the mouth from mulberries._ Of the juice of
mulberries, sext. iij; boil until a third part be consumed, add of honey,
sext. j, and boil to the consistence of honey.

_The compound one from mulberries._ Of the juice of mulberries, hemin.
vj; boil to the consistence of the sordes in baths, then mix, well
triturated, of saffron, dr. j; of myrrh, dr. ij; of the juice of unripe
grape, dr. j; of fissile alum, three oboli; of honey, one hemina; and
boil to a proper thickness.

_Of the bramble-berries._ The composition from bramble-berries is
prepared in like manner, being more astringent.

_The simple one from walnuts._ Of the juice of the pounded bark of
green walnuts, hemin. v; of honey, hemin. j; it is boiled like that from
mulberries.

_The compound one from walnuts._ In the commencement, and at the acme of
inflammations in the mouth, mix of saffron and of alum, of each, oz. j;
of myrrh, dr. ij; and in the decline add, as a discutient, of natron, dr.
j; of sulphur, dr. j, to the aforementioned proportions of the juice and
of honey.

_The preparation from the juice of pomegranates._ Of the juice of sweet
pomegranates, without their kernels, sext. iv; of the juice of acid
pomegranates, sext. ij; of honey, sext. j; of the Minnæan myrrh, dr.
viij; of crocomagma, of galls, of each, dr. viij; of fissile alum, dr.
iv; of Illyrian iris and of omphacium, of each, dr. viij. Prepare like
that from mulberries.

_The same otherwise._ Of the juice of sweet pomegranate bruised with
their kernels, sext. vj; of fine honey, sext. j; of fissile alum, oz. j;
of myrrh, oz. ss.

_The preparation from must._ Of must, sext. vj; of galls, of fissile
alum, of each dr. ij; of saffron, of myrrh, of each, dr. j. If you
mean it for a demulcent, let the must be sweet, but if as a repellent,
austere. The middle state has intermediate properties.

_The Egyptian stomachic._ Of honey, lb. j; of oil, oz. viij; of
turpentine, oz. ij; of saffron, dr. iv. They are melted in a double
vessel.

_The stomachic medicine, from besasa._ Of anise seed, of parsley seed,
of the schœnanth, of the seed of bishop’s weed, of fissile alum, of
Illyrian iris, of besasa (which some call harmala, it is the wild rue),
of cinnamon, of troglodytic myrrh, of saffron, of gall, of each, oz. j;
of long birthwort, of cassia, of crocomagma, of dried roses, of each, oz.
j; of costus, of the fresh ashes of pigeons, oz. iij; of Indian nard, of
amomum, of each, oz. ss; of honey, q. s.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Celsus thus sums up the general properties of these
preparations: “Gargarizationes autem aut lævandi causa fiunt, aut
reprimendi, aut evocandi. Lævant, lac, cremor vel ptisanæ, vel furfurum:
reprimit aqua, in qua vel lenticula, vel rosa, vel rubus, vel cotoneum
malum, vel palmulæ decoctæ sunt: evocant, sinapi, piper.” (v, 22.)

Galen treats of these compositions very systematically, and at great
length, in the sixth book of his work, ‘De Comp. Med. sec. loc.’ The far
greater number of our author’s prescriptions are copied from it. Myrepsus
likewise gives a long list of such like compositions (§ ix.) See also
Aëtius (viii.)


SECT. XV.—ON DELICIOUS AND OFFICINAL POTIONS.

Of delicious officinal potions, some are composed of wine, having certain
articles added to it, such as pepper, wormwood, sowbread, and many other
things, from which they sometimes receive their appellation, sometimes
having honey mixed with them and sometimes not; and some are composed
from water in which have been boiled apples or roses, with certain
juices, such as those of unripe grapes, pomegranates, and myrtles.

On this account the finest scummed honey is mixed with them for the sake
of preservation, sweetness, and sometimes of utility. The austere and
vinous hydromel brought from Cebyra in small vessels is an exception;
for I have known it formed without honey, as the apomel is made from
honey alone and water, without any other substance. But those things
which are prepared from wine, which are called propotions (or “whets”?)
receive sext. j of scummed honey to four of wine and are made without
being boiled. Those which are prepared from water and juices, if boiled,
receive one part of honey to three of the liquor, about two parts of
which are consumed in the boiling; but if they are not boiled they
receive one part of honey to two of the liquor. Those things which are
not boiled are to be isolated for a sufficient time, and particularly
the omphacomel. Those from water require to be boiled, because from
their weakness they are readily changed. They are all to be laid up in
small pitched earthen vessels, which are to be carefully covered up and
deposited in situations above ground until they are concocted. They are
to be used as attenuants, and well mixed with water. But the omphacomel
after being boiled like must, and settling, is to be covered up. Those
composed from wine we use principally in cases which are free from fever,
or for the relish only (with the exception of those which are prepared
from scammony, the granum Cnidium, or the like purgatives); or in such
affections as when we would use the medicines which are the ingredients
of them by the mouth. Those prepared from water, or the juices we use
in febrile cases, or as sweeteners, when the disease does not admit the
use of wines, and sometimes as agreeing with the affections, as apomel
for a sialogogue, diuretic, laxative of the bowels, or attenuant of
humours; and hydromelon and hydrorosaton in cases of thirst, ardent
fevers, resolutions, and derangements of the stomach; and omphacomel,
myrteton, rhodostacton, and rhoita, in cæliac and dysenteric cases, and
for vomitings and other defluxions. They are frequently used as washes in
affections of the mouth.

_The hydromelum from the juice of apples._ Of the juice of clean quinces
bruised, sext. ij; of honey, sext. iij; of water, sext. vj. Boil,
scumming it until it be reduced to a third part. _Another._—Of clean
quinces cut into pieces, lb. v. Boil in sext. j of well-water until
they become soft. Then removing them from the fire, after they become
cold, strain, and having filtrated the apples throw them away. Having
measured the water, mix with it half the quantity of honey, and boil
again, scumming it until the eighth part be consumed. Some compose the
hydromelum in like manner from sweet apples.

_The composition of the hydrorosatum._ Of roses deprived of their nails
(the white parts of the leaves), lb. iv; of water, sext. v; of honey,
sext. ij.

_The preparation of the Rhodomelum._ Of the juice of quinces, sext. j;
of roses, lb. iij; of honey, sext. iij; of water, sext. v. But since the
apples are not found at the same season with the roses, these are to be
added to honey at the proper season, and when the apples appear, the
composition is to be completed.

_The preparation of the omphacomel._ Of the juice of unripe grapes, sext.
iij; of honey, sext. j. Having mixed, expose it to the sun for forty
days, or boil.

_The preparation of Myrteta._ Of the juice of myrtles, sext. iij; of
honey, sext. j. Boil till the third is consumed.

_Apomel from the works of Phalagrius._ Of white honeycombs filled with
honey, lb. j; of spring water, lb. iiiss; having broken down the comb and
united them, boil the water with the honey until the scum of it and the
waxy part swim on the top and is separated, then cool and cover it up
carefully.

_The composition of rhodostactum._ Of the juice of roses without their
nails, sext. ij; of honey, sext. j. Boil, scumming it, until the fourth
part be consumed.

_The preparation of rhætes._ Of the juice of pomegranate, sext. iij; of
honey, sext. j. Boil to a third part.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. We shall in the first place give some account of the Propoma.
It was a draught generally containing wine, which was taken at the
commencement of the supper, or principal meal of the ancients. Horace
alludes to it in the following lines:

    “Anfidius forti miscebat mella Falerno,
    Mendose: quoniam vacuis committere venis
    Nil nisi lene decet: leni præcordia mulso
    _Prolueris_ melius.”—(Lib. ii, Sat. 4.)

Catius here condemns the practice of using strong wine for the
composition of the Propoma. Old Falernian wine was thought the best. Thus
Macrobius says of it: “Mulsum quo probe temperes, miscendum esse novo
Hymetto et Falerno vetulo.” (Saturn. vii, 12.) “To the Propoma,” says
Athenæus, “were added pepper, Indian leaf, myrrh, cyperus, and Egyptian
ointment.” (Deip. ii, 25.) A long list of receipts for Propomata is given
by Myrepsus (§ 38.) Most of them contain wine, honey, and aromatics. See
a learned Dissertation on the Propoma by Casaubon (in Athen. Deipnos. ii,
17); also Lister (in Apicii Op. i, 1.)

It will be proper here to give some account of the medicated wines, or,
as we would now call them, the _Vinous Tinctures_, of the ancients.
Dioscorides details the composition of them very fully in the fifth book
of his ‘Materia Medica.’ The following is his prescription for the _wine
of squills_: Take a mina of squills, and having pounded it, sift, and
bind it in a thin piece of linen; then put it into 20 sextarii of good
fresh must, and allow it to macerate for three months; afterwards strain
the wine into another vessel, and cover it up carefully. The _wine of
quinces_ is to be prepared by putting 12 minæ of quinces, deprived of
their seeds, into a cadus of must, and allowing it to remain for thirty
days. Wines from other kinds of apples, such as medlars, services, and
pears, may be prepared in like manner. He afterwards gives similar
directions for preparing the following medicated wines:

  Wine of wild vine.
          pomegranate.
          roses.
          myrtles.
          lentisk.
          turpentine.
          palms.
          figs.
          sycamores.
          resin.
          cone of the pine.
          cedar _or_ juniper.
          cedar-rosin.
          pitch.
          wormwood.
          hyssop.
          germander.
          cassidony.
          betony.
          tragoriganum.
          bunium.
          dittany.
          horehound.
          thyme.
          savoury.
          marjoram.
          calamint.
          fleabane.
          aromatics.
          myrrh, pepper, and iris.
          elicampane.
          spikenard.
          asarabacca.
          wild nard _or_ valerian.
          carrot.
          sage.
          panacea.
          sweet-flag.
          parsley.
          fennel and dill.
          hellebore, wild cucumber, or scammony, for procuring abortions.
          spurge-flax.
          mezerion.
          ground-pine.
          mandrake.
          hellebore.
          scammony.

The preparation of these factitious wines is also described by Pliny. (H.
N. xiv, 19.) To this class we may refer the _Vina condita_ of Apicius.
(Cap. i.) See also in particular Aëtius (iii); Myrepsus (§ 27); Haly
Abbas (Pract. x, 21); Serapion (vii, 35); Actuarius (Meth. Med. v, 7.)
Actuarius gives the following prescription for preparing a _vinous
tincture of poppies_, which he recommends for coughs, cholera, and such
like complaints: Of poppy-heads, c; of liquorice-root, lb. j; of sodden
must, lb. c.


SECT. XVI.—ON COLLYRIA AND AGGLUTINATIVE APPLICATIONS.

The materials from which ophthalmic medicines are composed are various.
For inspissated and liquid, seeds, fruits, the parts of herbs, and metals
are ingredients in them. Of these, some sooth acrimonies, and are, as it
were, obstruents, such as pompholyx, spodium, starch, lead, Samian aster,
calamine, all washed substances, and the white of an egg. These are to
be used after evacuation of the head, for if there should be plethora
of it, there will be danger of the coats of the eyes being ruptured by
distension. The opposite class of collyria being of an acrid nature, are
deobstruents and evacuants of the humours permanently lodged there; such
as the Cyrenaic and Median juices, sagapen, euphorbium, and the like.
Some are detergents of foul ulcers, such as the squama æris, copper,
chalcitis, misy, sori, the flowers of copper, and antimony burnt. Allied
to these are those called abstergents, such as arsenic, sandarach, the
flower of Asian stone. Some are astringent, and of these such as are
moderately astringent are of extensive use for ophthalmies, ulcers, and
defluxions, as the leaves, fruit, and flowers of roses, spikenard, Indian
leaf, saffron, glaucium, and hypocistis. Those possessed of a stronger
astringency are mixed with those remedies which are used for sharpening
the sight, such as omphacium, acacia, the flowers of the wild and of the
cultivated pomegranate, and galls. Some are concoctive and discutient,
such as myrrh, saffron, castor, rosemary, and the juice of fenugreek.
Of compound ophthalmic medicines, some are simply called plasta, some
xerocollyria, and some hygrocollyria. The first class admit of all the
materials formerly mentioned, and agree with all states. They are to be
prepared most commonly in spring, for in summer their strength is apt
to evaporate, and in winter the articles being constricted do not mix
properly. They are to be rubbed with the addition of a fluid, but not in
great quantity that the metallic parts may not subside, nor the aromatic
float on the surface, but in small quantities, so that it may be rubbed
until it is like the sordes of baths. Rain-water should be used, because
it is finer and moderately astringent. But if not, those things are
to be levigated and triturated with wine or some juice; the metallic
substances for a longer time, and the juicy substances for a shorter.
At last, after sufficient trituration, we must add the gum, and having
formed them, lay them up in copper vessels especially, or in glass. Those
prepared from juices are to be used immediately, but the metallic improve
by keeping. Of the xerocollyria, some melt down, and absterge callus,
sycosis, pterygium, and scabious affections, being composed of chalcitis,
verdigris, and misy. Some occasion a discharge of tears, agreeing with
obstructions and dimness of sight, and are composed of these things,
pepper and spikenard. Some are prophylactics for preventing influxes,
such as those from Phrygian stone, sarcocolla, glaucium, aloes, calamine,
antimony, and saffron. All these medicines are to be applied to the eyes
in a state of the finest powder. But the hygrocollyria are prepared
from Attic honey, opobalsam, oil of the most subtile kind from age, the
juice of fennel, the galls of different animals, the Cyrenaic juice, and
many other things. Those things which are attenuant, calefacient, and
purgative are useful for dimness of sight, and incipient suffusions.
These and all acrid things are to be used when the head is free from
plethora, and when the atmosphere is serene and pure, and the wind is
northerly, and not very hot nor very cold. Those preparations called
agglutinants are made from such things as are obstruent, agglutinative,
constringent, refrigerant, styptic, or desiccative, such as pollen,
manna, Samian earth, myrrh, shells, acacia, opium, with the white of an
egg. They are glued to the forehead when the humour is not under the
scalp, but external to it.

_The collyrium monemeron for incipient and old ophthalmies._ Of acacia,
dr. xxxvj; of gum, dr. xxxij; of calamine, dr. xxiv; of burnt and washed
copper, dr. viij; of opium, dr. j. Triturate in austere wine. It is
discutient and desiccative.

_The collyrium chiacum._ Of sinopic vermilion, of the immature gall, of
saffron, of the flower of fresh roses deprived of their nails (which we
call the pouch), of gum, of each, oz. iv; of opium, oz. j. Triturate with
Aminæan, Falernian, or Chian austere wine. But the wine must not contain
salt water.

_The collyrian cygnarium._ Of calamine, burnt and washed, oz. vj; of
washed ceruse, oz. iv; of pompholyx, oz. iv; of starch, oz. ij; of
tragacanth, of roasted opium, of gum, of each, oz. ij. Triturate with
rain-water.

_The pale-coloured cygnus._ Of calamine, burnt and washed, oz. ij; of
terra aster, oz. ij; of ceruse, oz. iv; of pompholyx, oz. viij; of
starch, oz. ij; of opium, oz. ij; of acacia, of tragacanth, of each, oz.
j; of gum, oz. iv. Triturate with rain-water.

_The white cygnus._ Of calamine, oz. xv; of ceruse, oz. xvij; of opium,
dr. viij; of frankincense, dr. vij; of starch, oz. vij; of gum, oz. xiij.
Triturate with rain-water.

_The collyrium pelarion for ulcers._ Of calamine, of ceruse, of each, dr.
xxiv; of acacia, of opium, of each, dr. xviij; of gum, of tragacanth, of
starch, of each, dr. ix; of myrrh, dr. iij; of copper, of saffron, of
each, dr. iss. Triturate with water.

_The brown collyrium, for hypopium and great affections._ Of tender
calamine, dr. xxiv; of ceruse, dr. xvj; of scraped verdigris, dr. xij;
of antimony, dr. viij; of fissile alum, dr. iij; of burnt chalcitis,
dr. iij; of Indian nard, dr. iv; of the oil of unripe olives, dr. ij;
of copper, dr. ij; of squama æris, dr. viij; of the fruit of heath, dr.
xiij; of the juice of poppy, dr. xxiv; of saffron, dr. iv; of castor, dr.
iij; of myrrh, dr. vj; of Indian buckthorn, of acacia, of gum, of each,
dr. iv; of fresh roses, dr. iiss. Triturate with Falernian, Surentine,
Aminæan, or Chian austere wine. It is rubbed in three times a day, in a
watery state, being diluted with the juice of fenugreek, then the white
of an egg or milk, and at last, with water, thicker.

_The collyrium severianum._ Of calamine, oz. vj; of ceruse, oz. xij; of
tragacanth, oz. iij. Triturate with the juice of fenugreek. Having burnt
the calamine, dissolve it in milk and then wash.

_The collyrium from decoctions._ Of calamine, oz. xvj; of ceruse, oz.
viij; of starch, of opium, of tragacanth, of acacia, of each, oz. ij; of
gum, oz. vj. Triturate with the decoction of dried roses, of melilots, of
poppy, of poppy-heads, of liquorice, in equal parts.

_The repellent collyrium, from hydria or water vessels._ Of the sand
found in copper vessels used for heating water, lb. iij; of calamine
burnt and washed, lb. j; of washed ceruse, of washed pompholyx, of washed
terra aster, of each, oz. vj; of frankincense, oz. j; of myrrh, oz. j; of
the juice of linseed, of fleawort, of ptisan, of fenugreek, of each, lb.
j; of tragacanth, oz. vj; of gum, lb. j.

_The collyrium of Nilamon._ Of calamine, oz. viij; of pompholyx, oz.
iv: of ceruse, lb. j; of tragacanth, of gum, of opium, of each, oz. iv.
Rain-water.

_The collyrium spodiacon, for inflammations, defluxions, and chemoses._
Of frankincense, of antimony, of each, dr. c; of calamine, of ceruse, of
each, dr. xxiv; of Samian earth, of the juice of poppy, of each, dr. iij;
of gum, dr. xv. Triturate with the juice of fresh olive leaves. Prepare
the juice thus: having pounded in a mortar the more tender leaves of
olive, washed, add a moderate quantity of water, and filtrate through a
piece of linen rag.

_The tender collyrium from olive leaves._ Of frankincense, dr. iv; of
antimony, dr. xv; of calamine, dr. xxviij; of ceruse, dr. xlix; of Samian
earth, dr. xviij; of opium, dr. vj; of gum, dr. j; of lead, burnt and
washed, dr. viij. Mix with the juice of green olive leaves.

_The yellow collyrium from green olive leaves._ Of burnt copper, dr. xij;
of sandyx, oz. xxiv; of olive leaves, oz. ij; of opium, oz. ij; of gum,
oz. x. Mix with palm wine, or Aminæan.

_The Claudiac collyrium from myrrh._ Of glaucium, of sarcocolla, of each,
dr. xlviij; of saffron, dr. xxiv; of opium, of myrrh, of bloodstone,
of each, dr. vi; of tragacanth, dr. xlviij; of gum, dr. xvj. Mix with
Italian wine. To be used with an egg.

_Another collyrium from myrrh, for fistula lachrymalis._ Of calamine
washed, of bloodstone washed, of each, dr. xxviij; of myrrh, of Cyprian
spodium, of each, dr. xxiv; of opium, dr. viij; of saffron, dr. iv (but
some use dr. viij); of white pepper, grs. xxx; of gum, dr. xvj. Mix with
Italian wine. To be used with an egg, and in recent cases diluted with
water.

_The stacticon of Prosechius._ Of calamine, of gum, of each, dr. xx; of
antimony, of copperas, of each, dr. viij; of opium, dr. xiv; of scraped
verdigris, dr. x; of white pepper, dr. vj; of saffron, dr. viij; of raw
misy, dr. viij; of opobalsam, dr. iv. Water.

_The hygidium of Ammonius._ Of calamine, of copper, of each, dr. xvj;
of ceruse, of castor, of aloes, of saffron, of each, dr. iv; of squama
(æris?), dr. v; of the flower of roses, of burnt lead, of each, dr. viij;
of buckthorn, dr. iij; of the stone schistos, dr. iv; of opium, dr. x;
of acacia, dr. xj; of gum, dr. xlviij. Water.

_The collyrium Olympus_, or _Olympiacum_. Of acacia, of spikenard,
of frankincence, of each, dr. viij; of copper, burnt and washed, of
antimony, burnt and washed, of ceruse, burnt and washed, of calamine, of
each, dr. xij; of myrrh, of roasted opium, of each, dr. iv; of saffron,
dr. v; of scraped verdigris, dr. iij; of the stone schistos, of the red
squama, of Indian buckthorn, of the oil of unripe grapes, of each, dr. j;
of castor, of the flower of roses, of each, dr. ij; of palm-nuts, dr. iv;
in like manner the bones of burnt palms, to the number of v; of gum, oz.
v. Rain-water. Let there be soaked in water for three nights and days, of
the aromatic reed, of the seed of henbane, of dried roses, of each, dr.
iv; of Indian leaf, dr. j.

_The collyrium of nard._ Of calamine, of saffron, of gum, of each, dr.
xxxvj; of burnt copper, dr. xviij; of antimony, of acacia, of each, dr.
xxx; of Syriac nard, dr. xij; of opium, of myrrh, of each, dr. xvj. With
water.

_The small Theodotian collyrium._ Of antimony, of acacia, of each, dr.
xx; of burnt copper, dr. viij; of ceruse, dr. iv; of myrrh, dr. iv; of
verdigris, dr. ij; of aloes, of meconium, of buckthorn, of each, dr. j.
Rain-water.

_The collyrium rhinarion._ Of bloodstone, of the stone schistos, of each,
dr. xvj; of burnt copper, of calamine, of verdigris, of each, dr. viij;
of opium, dr. v; of chalcitis, dr. ij; of gum, dr. viij. In wine.

_The collyrium xyster._ Of burnt pumice-stone, of burnt misy, of burnt
shells, of each, oz. vj; of calamine, of opium, of burnt chalcitis, of
saffron, of hepatic aloes, of castor, of Indian leaf, of each, dr. ij;
of antimony, of acacia, of each, oz. j; of burnt copper, oz. iv; of
troglodytic myrrh, dr. iv; of spikenard, dr. j; of ceruse, dr. viij; of
gum, dr. iv. Rain-water. Some also mix wine.

_The hecatomb collyrium for thick cicatrices._ Of calamine, burnt and
washed, of copper, burnt and washed, of each, dr. viij; of antimony
burnt, of the yellow acacia, of gum, of each, dr. xv; of aloes, of galls,
of ærugo vermiculata, of castor, of buckthorn, of spikenard, of saffron,
of opium, of myrrh, of ceruse, of the shavings of ebony, of chalcitis, of
each, dr. j; of roses, dr. lx. Rain-water.

_The collyrium from horn, of Galen._ Of burnt lead, of burnt hartshorn,
of each, oz. ij; of ceruse, of squama æris, of starch, of frankincense,
of cuttle-fish, of burnt shell, of verdigris, of myrrh, of gum, of each,
oz. j. Rain-water.

_The collyrium from frankincense._ Of frankincense, oz. vj; of calamine,
of pompholyx, of terra aster, of starch, of gum, of each, oz. iij; of
ceruse, oz. vj; of squama æris, oz. iv; of tragacanth, oz. iij; of opium,
oz. vj. Rain-water.

_The Libanian collyrium._ Of washed calamine, of starch, of each, dr.
xij; of ceruse, dr. xij; of spodium, of pompholyx, of terra aster, of
lead, burnt and washed, of tragacanth, of each, dr. viij; of opium, dr.
xij; of gum, dr. iv. Rain-water and the whites of twenty eggs. Some add
also of myrrh, dr. iv.

_The collyrium called the aster of Magnus._ Of pompholyx, of calamine,
of ceruse, of each, dr. xvj; of lead, dr. viij; of starch, dr. xviij;
of frankincense, dr. x; of terra aster, dr. xij; of myrrh, dr. ij; of
tragacanth, of gum, of each, dr. viij. Water.

_The collyrium Uranium._ Of terra aster, washed, oz. iij; of spodium,
washed, oz. j; of gum, oz. iv; of antimony, burnt and washed, oz. ij;
of squama æris, washed, oz. j; of opium, dr. vj; of calamine, burnt and
washed, dr. ij. Rain-water. It is an incarnant and repellent.

_The collyrium from the juice of fenugreek._ Of calamine, of tragacanth,
of each, oz. viij; of ceruse, oz. xxx; of starch, oz. xxx; of opium, oz.
j. Triturate with the juice of fenugreek.

_The collyrium of Cleon._ Of pompholyx, of lead, of each, oz. v; of
saffron, oz. iss; of the squama stomomatis, oz. j; of gum, oz. ij.
Rain-water. Inject diluted.

_The collyrium containing lxxii ounces of roses._ Of green roses, oz.
lxxii, of calamine, burnt and washed, dr. xxiv; of scraped verdigris, dr.
ij; of spikenard, dr. j; of squama æris, washed, dr. ij; of antimony,
burnt and washed, of opium, of myrrh, of each, dr. iij; of saffron, dr.
viij; of starch, dr. ij; of gum, dr. xxiv. Rain-water.

_The white collyrium from roses._ Of calamine, burnt and washed, of
ceruse, washed, of each, lb. j; of starch, of opium, of tragacanth, of
each, oz. iij; of aloes, oz. iss; of gum, oz. iij; of saffron, oz. iss;
of roses without their nails, oz. vj. Water.

_The collyrium from aloes._ Of calamine, of ceruse, of aloes, of each,
oz. x; of green roses, oz. vj; of starch, oz. iij; of opium, oz. j; of
tragacanth, oz. ij; of gum, oz. iij. Rain-water.

_The saffron collyrium from roses._ Of spikenard, of dried roses, of
aloes, of each, dr. ij; of the white henbane, dr. iss; of saffron, dr.
ivss; of glaucium, oz. vj; of sarcocolla, oz. vj; of opium, dr. ij; of
tragacanth, oz. j. Rain-water.

_The collyrium from roses, of Nilus._ Of tender roses, dr. iv; of
saffron, dr. ij; of poppy, obol. j; of gum, dr. iv. Rain-water.

_The collyrium lynceus for sharpening the sight._ Of calamine, of burnt
copper, of ammoniac perfume, of each, dr. xij; of myrrh, of bloodstone,
of Thebaic opium, of each, dr. vj; of hepatic aloes, of the gall of
bulls, of galbanum, of sagapen, of each, dr. iv; of scraped verdigris, of
opoponax, of sal ammoniac, of each, dr. j; of gum, dr. vj. Rain-water.

_The collyrium Proteus, for the same purposes, and it also attenuates
cicatrices._ Of calamine, of ceruse, of crude chalcitis, of each, dr. xl;
of pepper, dr. iss; of Cyrenaic juice, dr. viij; of saffron, dr. xij; of
Thebaic opium, dr. x; of sagapen, dr. xij; of Ethiopian olive, dr. xij;
of arsenic, of fissile alum, of each, dr. viij; of myrrh, dr. xij; of
ammoniac perfume, dr. xx; of opoponax, dr. xvj; of opobalsam, dr. x; of
gum, dr. xx. In rain-water.

_The collyrium from the juice of fennel._ Of calamine, dr. xvij; of
Indian ink, dr. xvj; of long pepper, dr. xiij, and of white, dr. xij; of
Cyrenaic juice, dr. viij; of opobalsam, dr. vj; of spikenard, dr. vj; of
sagapen, of opoponax, of each, dr. v; of opium, dr. iv; of euphorbium,
dr. j; of gum, dr. j. Triturate with the juice of fennel.

_The collyrium from opobalsam._ Of calamine, of ceruse, of each, dr.
viij; of the oil of unripe olives, dr. iv; of white pepper, dr. xvj; of
opium, dr. iv; of opobalsam, of gum, of each, dr. xvj. Rain-water.

_The collyrium called thalasseros._ Of calamine, oz. viij; of verdigris,
oz. ij; of Indian ink, oz. viij; of white pepper, oz. iv; of Median juice
(assafœtida?) oz. j; of opobalsam, oz. ij; of gum, oz. vj. Water.

_The collyrium harmation._ Of ammoniac perfume, of burnt copper, of the
bark of frankincense, of each. dr. iv; of verdigris, dr. j; of gum, dr.
iv. Rain-water.

_The collyrium malabathrinum, called also isotheon._ Of calamine, dr.
xvj; of copper, burnt and washed, dr. xiv; of opium, of Indian buckthorn,
of Indian leaf, of Indian nard, of saffron, of aloes, of each, dr. ij;
of ceruse, dr. viij; of castor, dr. ij; of myrrh, dr. iv; of acacia, of
antimony, of each, dr. xl. With water. To be used with an egg.

_The thicker collyrium from wine._ Of calamine, of the lapis hæmatitis,
and schistos, of each, dr. xl; of burnt copper, dr. xxx; of chalcitis,
dr. xxxij; of the seed of poppy, dr. xiij. Having boiled the poppies
in water, and strained the juice, add and triturate with palm wine or
Aminæan.

_Another from wine._ Of burnt copper, of the calamine called placitis,
of each oz. ix; of bloodstone, washed, oz. vj; of saffron, of myrrh, of
aloes, of ammoniac perfume, of each, oz. iij; of Indian buckthorn, of
spikenard, of each, oz. j; of white pepper, gr. cl; of the yellow acacia,
oz. ix; of gum, oz. iij. Triturate with Falernian or Aminæan wine.

_The collyrium from two stones for asperities._ Of lapis hæmatitis and
schistos, of cassia, of each, dr. xviij; of copper, of calamine, of
opium, of scraped verdigris, of each, dr. ix; of gum, dr. ix; of burnt
chalcitis, dr. vj. Water.

_Xerocollyria. The prophylactic of Galen._ Of Asian stone cut into small
pieces and burnt in a pot, until it become red-hot and extinguished
in butter not old, and then again burnt and extinguished in Falernian
wine; and a third time burnt and extinguished in honey, and dried, lb.
j; of burnt copper, of white pepper, of Indian leaf, of each, oz. j; of
antimony, oz. iss: and when all the things are levigated, and you wish
to lay up the medicine, add of the juice of balsam, not thick (for this
prevents the preparation from getting dry) but of the most transparent,
oz. j. Apply it to the eyelids only, not allowing the pencil to touch
the coats, but so that it may only reach the eyelids when opened. They
are to be anointed, not once, but often before food and after it, and
more especially if a sense of ophthalmy be present. It preserves in a
wonderful manner, before every other medicine.

_The dry collyrium from saffron._ Of sarcocolla, dr. viij; of saffron,
dr. iv; of glaucium, dr. iv. Anoint often in the day. Some also add aloes.

_Another dry collyrium for xerophthalmy, sycosis, mortifications, and
hypersarcoma._ Of calamine, dr. x; of chalcitis, dr. xx; of pepper, gr.
xv; of Celtic nard, dr. j; triturate the calamine and chalcitis with
wine, and when dried add the other things and reduce to a fine powder.

_The liquid collyrium from wild carrot._ Of the juice of wild carrot, of
germander, of cresses, and sometimes of othonna, equal parts. The othonna
is the great celandine.

_Another, for sycosis, encanthis, and sarcoma._ Of roasted misy, dr. vj;
of copperas, dr. iv; of Attic honey, sext. j.

_The liquid collyrium panchrestus of Erasistratus_, having wonderful
efficacy, in complaints of the eyes, tonsils, pudenda, and suppurated
ears. Of copper, dr. vj; of roasted misy, of myrrh, of each, dr. iij; of
saffron, dr. iss; of pepper, dr. j; of Chian wine, and of Cretan must, of
each, hemin. iss. Having triturated all the things in the wine until dry,
pour in the must and boil to the consistence of honey.

_Agglutinants for defluxions of the eyes._ Of Samian earth, of manna, of
frankincense, of myrrh, equal parts. Adding to it the white of an egg,
apply to the forehead spread upon linen.

_Another._—Of the seed of henbane, dr. j; of opium, dr. j; of myrrh, dr.
ij; of saffron, dr. j; of pollen, dr. iv; the yelks of two roasted eggs.
Mix with the white of an egg.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Gorræus derives the word collyrium from κολοβὴ ὀυρὰ, i. e.
_cauda trunca_, being expressive of their conical shape. (Defin. Med.)
Blancard prefers the derivation from κωλύω and ῥοῦς. (Lexicon Medicum.)

Oribasius states that collyria were applied—to the eye, to the uterus,
and to fistulous ulcers. (Med. Coll. x, 23.) It is obvious, therefore,
that the ancients used the word in a more general signification than
the moderns do. Le Clerc gives the following description of the ancient
collyria: “Les uns, qui étoient composés de matières sèches, eurent le
nom de ξηροκολλούρια, _collyres secs_. Les autres, où il n’entroit que
des matières liquides, s’appellèrent ὑγροκολλούρια, _collyres humides_
ou _liquides_. Les ingrediens des premières, qui étoient les mêmes que
ceux des collyres _entières_, étoient des poudres _métalliques_, de
_ceruse_, de _pompholyx_, _d’antimoine brulé_, de _vert-de-gris_, de
_chalcitis_, de _cadmia_, et autres semblables. Il y entroit aussi des
poudres tirées des plantes, quelques sucs d’herbes, et quelques gommes,
comme du _saffran_, des _roses_, du suc de _chelidoine_, et de _fenouil_,
de _l’aloes_, de la _myrrh_, de _l’opium_. On mêloit tous ces ingrédiens
et on en formoit des masses que l’on faisait sécher, et dont on faisait
de la poudre lorsqu’on vouloit s’en servir. Les collyres liquides étoient
seulement composés de matières liquides. On prenoit, par exemple, du
_miel d’Attique_, qui étoit estimé le meilleur, de _l’opobalsamum_, avec
du _fiel de vipre_, de _perdrix_, ou de quelque autre animal, et du _suc
de fenouil_. On faisait de cela un mélange, dont on laissoit tomber
quelques gouttes dans les yeux de ceux qui avoient la vue foible, ou
quelque suffusion commençant.” (Hist. de la Méd. iii, ii, 1.)

The Ophthalmic Collyria are treated of with extraordinary accuracy and
minuteness of detail in books iv and v of Galen’s work ‘De comp. med.
sec. locos.’ Notwithstanding the success with which the surgery of the
eye has been cultivated of late, we are confident that the oculists of
the present day might derive still further improvement from an attentive
study of these books. It is to be remarked that several of his collyria,
as well as those of Celsus, contain opium, so that the use of the _vinum
opii_ in modern practice is not an original invention. Many of them
contain very powerful escharotics, such as copper and arsenic, which
indicates a great degree of boldness in ancient practice. Why is arsenic
never used now for the cure of complaints of the eye? Our author’s
account of them, which is mostly taken from Galen, is very accurate and
deserving of consideration.

All the collyria of Celsus are ocular remedies. As he states, they
consist principally of soothing and refreshing medicines variously mixed.

Scribonius Largus describes fully the composition of collyria, which he
divides into the soothing and the acrid. The former consist of saffron,
gum, tragacanth, calamine, antimony, opium and the like. The latter
contain such ingredients as these, burnt copper, verdigris, chalcitis,
misy, alum, ammoniac, and galls.

Myrepsus gives prescriptions for 87 ocular collyria, of every possible
variety of character.

For the Arabian collyria, see particularly Serapion. (De Antidot. vii,
34.) Camphor is an ingredient in many of them.


SECT. XVII.—ON PLASTERS, AND THOSE THINGS WHICH ARE ADDED TO THE BOILING
OF THEM, FROM THE WORKS OF ANTYLUS, AND,

_On the proportion of wax to oil._ Of those medicines which are the
ingredients of plasters, some are terrene, as the metals, and some are
kinds of stones and earth, as lees, ashes, and shells; some are oily,
some tears, some soluble, some inspissated juices, some liquid juices;
also a few admit seeds, herbs, and roots. Of plasters themselves, some
are vulnerary, and are called bloody, agglutinative, and plasters for
fractures, which must be composed of desiccants, not in the extreme,
but in the second order complete, and the commencement of the third.
Such are willow, oak, cypress, the barks of pine and pitch-tree, myrrh,
rosemary, bitumen, aloes, birthwort, the ashes of the wood of vine,
ceruse, litharge, and the most of the metals. They are boiled until they
do not stain. The cicatrizing plasters are also composed of desiccants,
but more so than the agglutinants. Such are, burnt copper, the squama
æris and ferri, verdigris, chalcitis, the flower of burnt copper, alum,
gall, molybdæna, calamine, pumice-stone, and the shells. The discutient
are formed from the calefacient and moderately desiccative, such as
birthwort, thapsia, old oil, and the oil of radishes, honey, opobalsam,
pitch, turpentine, galbanum, burnt salts, and the flower of salt. The
emollient are formed from litharge, fats, marrow, old oil, bee-glue,
ammoniac, storax, galbanum, bdellium, mastich, turpentine, the root of
marsh-mallows, and of the wild cucumber. The desiccative are made of
sulphur, natron, salts, ashes, bitumen. The epispastic are formed from
salts, natron, bee-glue, verdigris, leaven, dung, sulphur, turpentine.
The digestive are composed of wax, ladanum, dried grape, amomum, saffron,
frankincense, pitch, Egyptian mastich, storax, myrrh, galbanum, butter,
œsypum, fats, verdigris. The suppurative are formed from water and oil,
pollen, wheaten bread, chondrus, butter, the fat of swine and of calves,
frankincense, pitch, rosin. The paregoric are made of litharge, ceruse,
oil, dill, camomile, starch, white wax. The bloody-plasters (as they are
called) are to be applied when the wounds and fractures are recent, and
to co-operate with them, sponges soaked in oxycrate are to be bound on,
above the pledgets, and are to be loosened on the third day, and the
same pledgets and not others, again applied. The emollient, epispastic,
discutient, and suppurative are applied after the use of cataplasms and
cerates. But the suppurative agree best at the commencement and in cases
of extreme pain. Of the boiling of them we will speak afterwards.

_The plaster tetrapharmacon, basilicon._ Of wax, of Colophonian rosin, of
pitch, of bull’s suet, equal parts.

_The plaster from the juice of linseed for discussing and breaking._ Of
old oil, lb. ij; of wax, oz. xx; of Colophonian rosin, of axunge, of
each, lb. iss; of litharge, lb. j; of ceruse, oz. vj; of the juice of
linseed, oz. vj; of pollen, oz. j; of frankincense, oz. iv.

_The plaster from honey._ Of litharge, of wax, of oil, of each, lb. iv;
of turpentine, lb. ij; of honey, of axunge, of each, lb. j. Another. Of
litharge, lb. vj; of oil, lb. vss; of Colophonian rosin, lb. viiss; of
wax, lb. iiiss; of honey, lb. iij.

_The diachylon, or plaster from juices._ Of litharge, lb. vj; of oil,
in summer, lb. vij, but in winter, lb. ix; of fenugreek, sext. ss; of
linseed, sext. ss; of marsh-mallows, lb. iij. Boil the marsh-mallows and
seeds in sext. xx of water, until but a little be left, and of it, mix
lb. iv to the oil, and boil until the bubbles cease; then sprinkle with
the litharge finely levigated, and boil at a gentle fire until it no
longer stain.

_The plaster from pollen._ Of fine flour, of ammoniac perfume, of each,
lb. j; of pine-rosin, of wax, of axunge, of each, lb. iij; of the juice
of linseed, q. s.

_The botanicon, or plaster from herbs._ Of dock, of sordid oil, of the
anchusa called the Chærospelethos (it is the Onoclean), of the plantain
which has seven fibres (Plantago major?), of each, oz. iij; of oil, lb.
vj; of axunge, lb. vj. The herbs, being boiled in the oil, are thrown
away, but the other things are melted in the oil.

_The plaster from king’s-spears._ Of the juice of the root of asphodel,
lb. j; of oil of roses, of oil of camomile, of the fat of geese, of each,
oz. ij; of axunge, oz. iij; of wax, oz. iv.

_The leaven-plaster for breaking abscesses._ Of leaven, of axunge, of
each, oz. vj; of salts, oz. iv; of pine-rosin, oz. iij; of wax, oz. iv;
of aphronitrum, oz. j; of ammoniac perfume, oz. ij; of honey, oz. vj; of
soap, oz. ij.

_The dothiene, or plaster for furunculus._ Of ammoniac perfume, lb. j; of
Alexandrian natron, oz. vj; of aphronitrum, oz. vj; of swine’s seam, lb.
ij; of wax, lb. ij; of turpentine, lb. j; of old oil, oz. j; of vinegar,
q. s.

_The plaster from soapwort for discussing strumous swellings._ Of
litharge, of soapwort, of birthwort, of each, oz. iv; of galbanum, of
squama æris, of aloes, of each, oz. j; of manna, oz. ij; of ammoniac
perfume, oz. vj; of pine-rosin, oz. xvj; of vinegar of squills, sext. iv;
for the trituration of the powders.

_The plaster smilium for abscesses._ Of old oil, lb. iss; of litharge,
of red natron, of sal ammoniac, of the lye of figs called protostacton,
of rosin, of each, lb. j; of galbanum, of ammoniac perfume, of each, oz.
iij; of copperas, oz. iv; of wax, oz. vj; of verdigris, of opoponax, of
each, oz. j; of vinegar, q. s. Boil the litharge and the verdigris in the
oil until it cease to stain, and then add the other things.

_The plaster from garlic for breaking abscesses._ Of wax, oz. vj; of
Colophonian rosin, oz. iv; of pine-rosin, oz. iij; of bull’s suet, oz.
iv; of yellow natron, oz. iss; the heads of garlic cleansed, xx; of oil,
sext. ss. Having boiled the garlic in the oil, throw it away, and mix the
other things.

_The discutient plaster from apyranon._ Of the fat of geese and of
pheasants, of each, oz. iij; of old oil, oz. xxvj; of fleawort, oz. iij;
of nettle-seed, of the green root of apyranum, of each, lb. j; of white
wax, oz. x; of diachylon plaster, oz. ij; of turpentine, oz. j. Having
divided the root into small pieces, macerate in the oil with the fleawort
and nettle-seed a night and a day; and then having boiled, throw them
away, and mixing the soluble substances with the oil, dissolve.

_The wheat-plaster for hardness and scirrhous swellings._ Of
marsh-mallows, of palm-nuts, or of Nicolan dates, of each, lb. ij; of
fenugreek, of linseed, of each, sext. ss; of camomile, of melilot, of the
bark of palms, of each, oz. vj; of Aminæan wine, sext. vj; of litharge,
lb. j; of ceruse, of Colophonian rosin, of each, lb. ij; of wax, of
turpentine, of each, lb. j; of old oil, lb. v; of water, lb. ij; of dried
bread broken down and sifted, lb. v. The juice of the herbs is extracted
by boiling in wine, and the bread is soaked in it; on the day following,
the litharge and ceruse are triturated in the water, and afterwards the
oil is added and boiled until it ceases to stain; and then the other
things are added. Being removed from the fire, the bread is added and
stirred strongly. To these are then added, of scraped verdigris, of the
flower of salt, of each, oz. vj; of iris, of birthwort, of each, oz. vj;
of turpentine, lb. j.

_The plaster Pelarion, from the dross of silver, for excoriations and
the like._ Of wax, of the fat of bulls, of each, oz. v; of the dross of
silver, oz. vj; of Colophonian rosin, oz. iv; of pitch, of oil, of each,
oz. ij; the dry dross is triturated in wine or the juice of fenugreek.
When the dross is not at hand we may use molybdæna.

_The plaster from marshmallows, in gouty cases and other indurations._
Of the juices of fenugreek, linseed, and marshmallows, of each, lb. iij;
of oil, lb. ij; having boiled it until the juice be consumed, add of
Colophonian rosin, lb. j; of turpentine, lb. j; of the tear of ivy, oz.
iij. When dissolved, having taken it from the fire, add of wax, lb. j, of
galbanum, oz. iv, both pounded together, and having dissolved, stir with
a spatula.

_The plaster kissinon, or ivy plaster, for wounded nerves and punctures,
especially chronic._ Of red squama, oz. ivss; of frankincense, oz. j; of
misy, oz. iss; of chalcitis, dr. iv; of vinegar, vj. Triturate in the
summer sun until consumed, when having dissolved, of wax, oz. viij; of
oil, oz. xviij (“deest aliquid”); mix. But if a nerve be divided and laid
bare, instead of the galbanum, add of turpentine, oz. ij.

_The melanchlorus, for the same purposes, and for bleeding wounds._ Of
pomegranate rind, of burnt copper, of galls, of round birthwort, of sal
ammoniac, of squama æris, of fissile and liquid alum (but some instead of
the liquid use the round), of iris, of misy, of copperas, of chalcitis,
of scraped verdigris, of calamine, of aloes, of myrrh, of frankincense,
of the root of all-heal, of litharge, of ceruse, equal parts. All of
which are triturated in the sun during the season of summer, with vinegar
for a sufficient number of days, and formed into trochisks. It is made
into a plaster thus: of the medicine, oz. ij; of wax, oz. vj; of oil, oz.
viij; when for wounded nerves the oil is to be old, but otherwise the
common.

_The plaster from groundsel._ Of the juice of groundsel, lb. ij; of
old oil, lb. iss; of oil of privet, oz. iv; of old axunge, lb. j; of
turpentine, oz. j; of galbanum, oz. ss; of pine rosin, oz. vj; of
verdigris, of frankincense, of the medicine œsypum, of each, oz. j; of
squama æris, scr. viij; of wax, oz. x; of the old pitch of ships, oz.
xiv. Boil the oil with the juice to the consistence of the sordes of the
oil in baths, with swine’s seam, and triturate the powders with oil of
privet; beat the galbanum with the wax, and put it into a pot. And if the
pitch of the ships be dry, having triturated and strained it, weigh and
sprinkle it. If it cannot be triturated let it be strained, with part of
the oil dissolved, and then let all the things be mixed.

_The discutient plaster of Mnasæus._ Of wax, of axunge, of each, lb. j;
of Colophonian rosin, oz. vj; of litharge, lb. ij; of fine wax, lb. iv.

_The Ariobarzanian plaster, for the same affections._ Of litharge, oz.
iss; of ceruse, lb. j, oz. v; of sea-water, oz. xxv; of old oil, lb. iss;
of buccina burnt, oz. viiss; of yellow wax, oz. ix; of turpentine, oz.
vj; of frankincense, oz. iij, scr. iiiss.

_The plaster from dracunculus_, or _dragon-herb_. Of wax, of Colophonian
rosin, of dried pitch, of axunge, of rosin, of each, lb. iv; of ammoniac
perfume, lb. ij; of the root of dracunculus, lb. v. The root being dried
and triturated is sprinkled, with the other things dissolved.

_The plaster called Psittacion._ Of wax, of Colophonian rosin, of swine’s
seam, of the tender leaves of henbane, or the juice of them, equal parts.
But in Alexandria, of wax, lb. iiss; of henbane, lb. ij; of axunge, lb.
iiss; of Colophonian rosin, lb. x. This is more discutient.

_The myrtle plaster, or emplastrum myrsinatum._ Of litharge, of ceruse,
of sandyx, of lead, burnt and washed, of each, oz. j; of wax, oz. vj; of
myrtle oil, lb. j; of wine, q. s.

_The plaster from ceruse, or from eggs._ Of white wax, oz. vj; of rose
oil, lb. iss; of litharge, oz. ij; of ceruse, oz. ij; of starch, oz. iij;
the whites of v eggs.

_The plaster Parygron, of Oribasius._ Of litharge, oz. iss; of ceruse,
oz. iss; of wax, oz. iv; of swine’s seam, oz. vij; of Colophonian rosin,
oz. ix; of the juice of linseed, of oil, of each, oz. x. It answers
admirably for fissures of the heels. But, says he, it must be kept from
ulcers, for it becomes fetid.

_The epulotic plaster from calamine._ Of burnt chalcitis, oz. ij; of
calamine, of manna, of each, oz. j; of wax, of colophony, of myrtle oil,
of each, lb. j; of wine, q. s.

_The palm plaster, or emplastrum palmulatum._ Of old axunge, lb. ij; of
old oil, lb. iij; of litharge, lb. iij; of crude chalcitis, oz. vj. First
the chalcitis is to be levigated in a proper vessel, or in the sun. After
it has become of the consistence of the lees of the oil in baths, add the
litharge, previously triturated, and afterwards the suet. After they are
properly triturated, boil with a gentle fire until it cease to stain,
stirring with palm branches.

_The plaster from alkanet, for burns._ Of white wax, oz. ix; of rose oil,
oz. xviij; let these be melted, and sprinkle upon them of the dried root
of the purple alkanet, finely levigated, oz. iv. _Another._ Of the green
root of alkanet, of the hair of horehound, of each, oz. iij. Boil in oz.
ix of oil, and throw away. Add to the oil v oz. of white wax and dissolve.

_The plaster called pompholygeron._ Of pompholyx, oz. ij; of litharge,
oz. iij; to be triturated with the juice of linseed, and then to be added
when dissolved and cooled; of wax, oz. vj; of the grease of geese or
domestic fowls, oz. ij; of chamomile, oz. vj.

_The anodyne plaster phycotyche, for the fundament._ Of frankincense,
oz. xvij; of myrrh, oz. vij; of opium, dr. iv; of fissile alum, dr. ij;
of butter, dr. iv; the yelks of iv eggs roasted; of calamine, burnt
and washed, dr. iv; of pompholyx, dr. vj; of Tuscan wax, oz. viij; of
the grease of geese, dr. xvj; of stag’s marrow, dr. xj; of lead, burnt
and washed, dr. viij; of bloodstone, dr. j; of liquid œsypum, dr. iv.
Triturate the powders with Italian wine, and mix the soluble substances.

_The plaster of Amythaon, for distorted and torn joints. It is also
epispastic._ Of ammoniac, of wax, of bdellium, of each, dr. viij; of
turpentine, of Illyrian iris, of galbanum, of each, dr. xx.

_The Aristophanian emollient plaster._ Of pitch, lb. iv; of the pitch of
ships, lb. ij; of wax, lb. j; of opoponax, oz. j; of vinegar, hemin. j.

_The plaster from molybdæna, for hot affections._ Of molybdæna, oz. iv;
of litharge, oz. ij; of ceruse, oz. ij; of wax, oz. viij; of myrtle oil,
lb. ij. Triturate the dry things with wine.

_The plaster coracon from oxymel, for the pudendum and spreading sores._
Of galls, oz. ij; of squama æris, oz. iss; of chalcitis, of frankincense,
of each, oz. j. Triturate with vinegar for a sufficient number of days;
then mix of honey, oz. v. But having made separately a cerate from oz. ij
of myrtle or rose oil, and of the seam of bulls, oz. viij; of wax, oz.
iv; of turpentine, oz. j; having mixed, triturate together, and use like
that from paper, both by means of an instrument for extracting pus and by
a pledget.

_The plaster from vinegar and oil._ Of litharge, p. j; of oil, of
vinegar, of each, p. ij, some make it iij.

_The plaster from agate, being discutient and emollient._ Of agate stone,
half burnt, oz. iss; of wax, oz. v; of roasted rosin, oz. iij; of oil,
oz. j.

_The plaster Isis, for bloody wounds, being agglutinative, incarnative,
and cathartic._ Of squama æris, of burnt copper, of round birthwort, of
each, dr. viij; of fissile alum, dr. vj; of ammoniac salts, dr. viij;
of frankincense, dr. viij; of ammoniac perfume, dr. viij; of myrrh, dr.
xij; of aloes, dr. xij; of galbanum, dr. xij; of the juice of the root of
dracunculus, dr. viij; of wax, lb. j; of Colophonian rosin, lb. ij; of
old oil, oz. iij; of vinegar, q. s.

_The plaster Athena, for foul ulcers, infarctions, and wounded nerves._
Of pomegranate rind, of burnt copper, of galls, of round and long
birthwort, of sal ammoniac, of ammoniac perfume; of squama æris, of
fissile alum and of round, of iris, of misy, of copperas, of chalcitis,
of scraped verdigris, of calamine, of aloes, of myrrh, of frankincense,
of bee glue, of galbanum, of each, oz. j; of wax, dr. _cc_; of pitch, dr.
_cc_; of Colophonian rosin, dr. _c_; of oil, oz. vj; of vinegar, q. s.

_The agglutinative plaster from dittany, for the bites of dogs and all
sorts of ulcers._ Of litharge, lb. ij; of squama æris, oz. iss; of old
oil, sext. ij; of diphryges, oz. iij; of gentian, oz. iss; of birthwort,
of scraped verdigris, of each, oz. iss; of dittany, of burnt copper, oz.
iss; of Colophonian rosin, lb. j; of manna, of galbanum, of aloes, oz.
iij; of ammoniac perfume, oz. vj; of bee glue, oz. ij; of common wax,
oz. viss. The oil must first be boiled with the litharge, until it cease
to stain. Then taking it off the fire, we are to add the verdigris and
squama, and again boil until it cease to stain; and again taking it off
the fire, add the rosin, the ammoniac sifted, and stir until it cease
boiling; and place it at the fire, and when it boils but a little add the
copper and diphryges and boil again until it thicken; then add the common
wax, and boiling until it cease to stain, put in the bee glue, and after
a little the aloes, manna, dittany, birthwort, and gentian, are to be
sprinkled finely levigated when but a little cooled.

_The Barbaric plaster, for bloody sores, and for promoting the formation
of callus in fractures._ Of Judæan asphaltos, of dried pitch, of wax,
of rosin, of each, lb. j; of turpentine, oz. ij; of litharge, oz. j; of
ceruse, oz. iss; of manna, oz. ij; of opoponax, oz. ij; of myrrh, oz. ij;
of oil, oz. iij; of vinegar, q. s.

_The agglutinative plaster from willows, for hæmoptysis and empyema when
applied to the chest._ Of misy, of chalcitis, of verdigris, of ceruse,
of galls, of fissile alum and of round, of melanteria, of each, oz. vj;
of wax, lb. ij; of pine-rosin, lb. ij; of pitch, lb. ij; of pomegranate
rind, oz. vj; of asphaltos, lb. ij; of willow-leaves, lb. ij; of the oil
of roses, oz. iv; of copperas, oz. vj; of vinegar, q. s. Some add also of
turpentine, oz. ix.

_The plaster of Nicolaus, for bloody wounds and an agglutinant of
sinuses._ Of squama æris, oz. iv; of scraped verdigris, oz. iss; of
litharge, oz. iss; of long and of round birthwort, of each, oz. j; of
fissile and of round alum, of copperas, of each, oz. j; of sulphur vivum,
oz. j; of the gall omphacitis, oz. iv; of ammoniac salts, oz. j; of misy,
oz. j; of marjoram, oz. j; of chamæleon, oz. j; of the calamine called
racemosa, oz. j; of white hellebore, oz. j; of hog’s-fennel, oz. iij;
of parsley-seed, oz. ij; of the root of comfrey, oz. iss; of ceruse,
oz. iss; of the juice of mandragora, oz. ss; of chalcitis, oz. iss; of
Samian aster, oz. j; of male frankincense, oz. j; of aloes, oz. j; of
bdellium, oz. ij; of Thebaic opium, oz. ij; of troglodytic myrrh, oz.
ss; of ammoniac perfume, oz. j; of fenugreek, oz. vj; of the juice of
perdicias, oz. vj; of yellow wax, lb. iij; of Colophonian rosin, lb. ij;
of pine-rosin, lb. j; of bitumen, lb. j; of mastich, oz. vj; of black
pitch, lb. ij; of old oil, lb. j; of storax, oz. j; of opoponax, oz. iss;
of vinegar, q. s.

_The Icesian plaster, for strumæ, abscesses, the spleen, joints, and
ischiatic disease._ Of litharge, dr. cxx; of old oil, sext. ij; of
vinegar, sext. j; of verdigris, dr. iss; of the bark of the pine, dr.
viij; of chamæleon, with the root, dr. xvj; of euphorbium, dr. xvj; of
the juice of hypocistis, dr. xvj; of bee-glue, dr. xvj; of myrrh, dr.
xvj; of elicampane, dr. xvj; of pellitory, dr. xvj; of wax, lb. iij.

_The plaster of Nero, for blows and all pains of fleshy parts._ Of old
oil, lb. iss; of litharge, lb. j; of ammoniac perfume, oz. j; of ceruse,
oz. iv; of galbanum, of manna, of myrrh, of frankincense, of each, oz. j.

_The much-used emplastrum oxyrum._ Of dried pitch, dr. ij; of wax, lb. j;
of ammoniac perfume, oz. j; of turpentine, lb. ss; of galbanum, oz. ij;
of manna, oz. ij; of vinegar, sext. iss.

_The agglutinative plaster without wax, or emplastrum aceratum of Galen._
It is digestive and promotes the suppuration of ulcers, with oleum ricini
and old oil, when spread upon a pledget. Of litharge, lb. iij; of oil of
ricinus, or old oil, lb. iv; of the most acrid vinegar, lb. ij; of the
black squama æris, of chalcitis, of verdigris, of each, oz. ij. Boil the
litharge with the oil to the consistence of the lees in baths; then add
the metallic substances, triturated for many days with vinegar.

_The plaster from metals._ Of chalcitis, oz. j; of misy, oz. ij; of
squama æris, oz. iij; of frankincense, oz. iij; of Colophonian rosin, oz.
ij; of galbanum, oz. iss; of wax, lb. j; of oil, oz. xv; of vinegar, q. s.

_The plaster harmonia, for fractures._ Of chalcitis, oz. iv; of squama
æris, oz. iiss; of burnt copper, oz. j; of frankincense, oz. ij; of oil,
lb. j; of vinegar, lb. j. Boil the metals in the oil until it cease to
stain, then add the frankincense.

_The emplastrum melinum of Serapion._ Of litharge, lb. j; of wax, oz.
vij; of ammoniac perfume, oz. iiiss; of galbanum, of verdigris, of each,
dr. ix; of Colophonian rosin, oz. vij; of myrrh, dr. j: of oil, hemin.
iss. Boil the litharge with the oil until it cease to stain, then add the
other things.

_The emplastrum anicetum, being agglutinative, discutient, removing
scales, and answering with distortions._ Of bay-berries, of dried iris,
of frankincense, of each, dr. lx; of burnt copper, dr. xx; of natron,
of sal ammoniac, dr. xx; of pellitory, of stavesacre, of the seed of
rosemary, of the granum Cnidium, of mustard, of pigeon’s dung, of
birthwort, of cumin, of verdigris, of cyperus, of the seed of rocket, of
each, dr. viij; of vinegar, hemin. xii. Triturate during the heat of
the dog-days until the vinegar is consumed, then add, of the thickest
decoction of dried figs, oz. ix; and having mixed, form trochisks and
dry. In using it, triturate of the trochisks, oz. ij, with vinegar, and
mix, of rosin, oz. iij; of Tuscan wax, oz. ij; of oil, oz. ij.

_The plaster from darnel._ Of pitch, lb. ij; of pine-rosin, oz. ix; of
Tuscan wax, oz. v; of oil, oz. iij; of strained bitumen, oz. ij; of the
flour of darnel, sext. j; of vinegar, q. s.

_The plaster from the juice of mulberry-tree._ Of litharge, of dried
pitch, of bull’s-seam, of each, oz. viij; of turpentine, oz. iij; of wax,
oz. v; of scraped verdigris, of opoponax, of galbanum, of each, oz. j; of
the oleum ricininum, oleum susinum, or very old oil, hemin. j; of liquid
pitch, hemin. j; of the juice of the mulberry, the fruit of which is
called sycomora, hemin. j.

_The double-coloured plaster, or dichromos._ Of burnt copper, of fissile
alum, of ammoniac perfume, of each, oz. j; of wax, lb. j; of Colophonian
rosin, lb. j; of swine’s seam, lb. j; of vinegar, q. s.

_The Indian agglutinative plaster, for spreading ulcers and hæmoptysis._
Of wax, of roasted rosin, of dried pitch, of the liquid Zacynthian
bitumen, of each, lb. j; of ceruse, of chalcitis, of misy, of melanteria,
of fissile and of round alum, of the gall omphacitis, of the rind of the
pomegranate, of each, oz. vj; of vinegar, q. s.

_The plaster from the ashes of asps, for discussing strumæ and gout._ Of
turpentine, of Asian stone, of Judæan bitumen, of each, dr. ccclx; of
wax, of bay-berries, of ammoniac perfume, of aphronitrum, of the fat of
calves, of each, dr. cccxl; of the lapis pyrites, of quicklime, of each,
dr. cxl; of the ashes of asps, dr. cxl; of old oil, hemin. ij. Sprinkle
the ashes upon the medicine when cooled. It is prepared also without
the ashes, because some have an aversion to them, and it is no less
efficacious.

_The desiccative and discutient plaster, called leæna or lioness._ Of
ammoniac perfume, of plumbago, of each, dr. c; of mustard, dr. viij; of
the root of chamæleon, dr. xvj; of Colophonian rosin, dr. c; of squama
æris, of the root of soapwort, of euphorbium, of verdigris, of each, dr.
viij; of birthwort, dr. xvj; of pellitory, dr. viij; of old oil, hemin.
j; and of the oil of radishes, q. s.—_Another._ The leæna for altering
and evacuating humours. Of copperas, oz. ij; of arsenic, oz. j; of black
hellebore, of cantharides’ breasts, of each, dr. iss; of sandarach, oz.
iij; of wax, lb. iss; of roasted rosin, lb. j; of oil, hemin. ij.

_The Macedonian plaster._ Of wax, of Colophonian rosin, of pitch, of the
suet of bulls, of rosemary, equal parts. Having melted and removed them
from the fire, sprinkle the frankincense.

_The plaster sphærion, for febrile complaints._ Of ceruse, of litharge,
of quicklime, of each, oz. iij; of wax, oz. iss; of Berenicarian natron,
of rose oil, of each, oz. j. Pour the melted things upon the dry and form
small balls. In using, melt, of oil, oz. vj, with oz. ij of wax, and add,
of the medicine, oz. j, and stir with a spatula. When cooled, bruize with
oz. ix of water; add also of rose-oil, oz. iij.

_The anti-inflammatory plaster from ochre, both for those cases of
inflammation which occur spontaneously, and those occasioned by judicial
torture._ Of Attic ochre, lb. ij; of chalk, lb. j; of litharge, oz. viij.
Triturate with wine, of wax, of Colophonian rosin, of pitch, of pine
rosin, of each, lb. j; of turpentine, oz. viij; of oil, lb. ij. It is
dissolved thus: of wax, lb. j; of old oil, lb. iij; of the medicine, lb.
j. Bruise with wine.

_The plaster from cedria, being agglutinative, discutient, and
detergent._ Of wax, of dried pitch, of each, lb. j; of Colophonian rosin,
oz. viij; of cedar rosin (gum juniper?), oz. vj. Having melted them
together, boil until they cease to stain.

_Another emollient plaster._ Of wax, of pitch, of each, oz. viij; of
Colophonian rosin, dr. xxv; of bee-glue, dr. xvij; of cedar rosin, dr. xx.

_The cicatrizing plaster from pumice-stone._ Of myrtle oil, lb. ij; of
wax, lb. j; of pumice burnt and extinguished in wine, dr. vj; of the
squama stomomatis, dr. vj; of burnt copper, of Cimolian earth, of each,
dr. v. It is put upon a pledget, and a sponge out of water is applied
above.

_The plaster called Paula or Rest, for strumæ and buboes._ Of wax, of
Colophonian rosin, of natron, of each, lb. j.

_The plaster from natron, for carbuncles._ Of roasted natron, oz. iij;
of wax, of oil, of Colophonian rosin, of each, dr. iss; of Cyrenaic or
Median juice, dr. x. It is applied, diluted, upon a pledget.

_The plaster from anemone._ Of anemone stripped of its nails (“the white
parts of its flowers”), oz. ij; of wax, oz. v; of oil, oz. iv; of rosin,
oz. vss; of Colophonian rosin, lb. iiss.

_The green plaster of Machærion for ischiatic diseases, infarctions of
the joints, and abscesses._ Of opoponax, of galbanum, of verdigris, of
myrrh, of iris, of ammoniac perfume, of birthwort, of each, oz. j; of
turpentine, of wax, of the oil of unripe olives, of each, oz. vij.

_Another simple green plaster._ Of rosin, lb. iij; of wax, lb. j; of
scraped verdigris, lb. ss; of frankincense, dr. xxv; of vinegar, q. s.

_Another green plaster for humid and fungous ulcers._ Of Colophonian
rosin, oz. vj; of scraped verdigris, oz. iss; of wax, oz. ij; of
Cappadocian salts, oz. j; of rose oil, oz. ij; of vinegar, q. s.

_The plaster from rue, for pleuritic cases._ Of green rue, lb. j; of
butter, lb. iss; of turpentine, oz. xv; of the medicine œsypum, oz. xv;
of opoponax, oz. iij; of galbanum, oz. iij; of oil of dill, lb. j.

_The plaster from lye, for ischiatic, arthritic, and œdematous
complaints._ Of wax, of old oil, of protostacton (“a mixture of lime with
some other sort of lixivial ashes”), of each, lb. j; of roasted rosin,
of Alexandrian natron, of white natron, of turpentine, of each, oz. vj.
Triturate the natron with the ashes.

_The plaster from natron, for abscesses and scirrhous swellings._ Of
old oil, of wax, of aphronitrum, of soap, of ashes, of each, lb. j; of
turpentine, oz. vj; of galbanum, of bee-glue, of ammoniac perfume, of
each, oz. j. Prepare like the former.

_The plaster from salts._ Of wax, oz. iv; of oil, lb. j; of common salts,
oz. iv; of aphronitrum, oz. iv; of ceruse, oz. viij; of vinegar, oz. ij,
for the trituration.—_Otherwise._ Of common salts, of natron, of each,
oz. iv; of wax, of old oil, of each, oz. vj; of sea-water, q. s.

_The plaster from bacon, for dissolving tophi._ Of the fat of old swine’s
bacon, of ammoniac perfume, of the old cheese of cow’s or goat’s milk,
of bull’s fat, of the pitch of ships, of each, lb. j; of the marrow of
stags, oz. viij; of the cerate of œsypum, oz. iij; of the oil of privet,
oz. vj: of Egyptian wine, q. s.

_The plaster from dragon’s blood (cinnabaris), for tophi and all other
scirrhous swellings. It is called pampathes._ Of litharge, lb. j; of old
oil, sext. j; of squama æris, oz. j; of burnt copper, oz. j; of sanguis
draconis, scr. xviij; of a living magnet, oz. j; of Phrygian stone,
dr. vj; of the stone pyrites, of calamine, of scraped verdigris, of
frankincense, of each, oz. j; of diphryges, oz. ij; of aloes, oz. iss;
of galbanum, oz. iss; of the Scythian stone onites, scr. xviij; of the
bloodstone, oz. j; of bee-glue, lb. j, scr. xxviij; of wax, oz. xvij; of
the stone perdicites (another edition has perdiciaton), oz. j; of betony,
oz. j, scr. viij; of gentian, oz. j; of long and of round birthworth, dr.
iv; of the black chamæleon, oz. j; of dittany, scr. xij; of dried rosin,
lb. j; of the fat of the ostrich, lb. j. Triturate the stones with the
litharge, adding of the flower of salt, lb. ij, gradually until the whole
be consumed.

_The plaster from filberts, of tried efficacy, for tophi of the joints._
Of protostacton (“a mixture of lime with some lixivial ashes”), oz.
vj; of the inner part of filberts, oz. ij; of aphronitrum, oz. vj; of
old oil, lb. j; of gallic soap, oz. iv; of honey, oz. viij; the whites
of six eggs; of wax. oz. x; of turpentine, oz. ij. Triturate with the
protostacton.

_An admirable anodyne cerate from the torpedo, for gout._ On the fifth
day of the month of March, put into a pot under ground of common oil,
sext. ij, boil with the wood of vine, and when it boils, add of the
sea-fish torpedo, lb. j; and of the blood of the mole, which some call
madaniuda, oz. iv, and boil until the flesh of the fish be dissolved
or toasted; then, having strained, add of oil and of wax what will be
sufficient to give it consistence, so that the cerate may be very tender,
which, having spread upon a linen rag, apply.

_The plaster from the urine of a mule, for gout._ Of the urine of a
male mule, sext. iv; of litharge, lb. ij; of old oil, one mina. Having
triturated all the things for a long time until they become of the
consistence of the lees of baths, boil till it cease to stain.

_The plaster from the flower of Asian stone, of Philagrius, for
scirrhus._ Of the root of hog’s fennel, of the flower of Asian stone,
or, if it is not at hand, of salts, of ammoniac perfume, of unscoured
wool burnt, of each, oz. j; of round birthwort, of pumice-stone, of
dog’s dung, of scraped verdigris, of squama æris, of misy, of each,
scr. xviij; of castor, scr. xviij; of myrrh, oz. iij; of the most acrid
vinegar, oz. iij; of wax, oz. xiiss; of pine rosin, of Brutian pitch, oz.
xviiiss, scr. vj; of old oil, and of the most acrid vinegar, q. s.

_The same, of Galen._ Of wax, of turpentine, of each, lb. j; of Asian
stone, of manna, of each, oz. iij; of oil of privet, oz. ij; of the
bonnet-maker’s water, q. s.

_The arthritic plaster from the flower of salt, in the decline of the
complaint._ Of turpentine, of roasted rosin, of pine rosin, of wax, of
each, lb. j; of dried pitch, of fissile alum, of the flower of salt, of
each, lb. ss. Boil in a double vessel.

_An incarnative plaster for ulcers._ Of rose-oil, of turpentine, of
honey, of each, oz. ij; of ceruse, of butter, of each, oz. j. Some add
also of frankincense, oz. j.

_The Italian plaster for cleansing and incarnating foul ulcers._ Having
boiled the tender bark of the wild fig in oil, throw it away, and having
melted in the oil a sufficient quantity of dark yellow wax, use on a
pledget.

_The erective plaster._ Of satyrion, of the testicle of a stag, of the
tail of a skink, of each, dr. ij; of the seed of rocket, of pellitory,
of the seed of rosemary, of wax, of each, dr. iv; of turpentine, oz. j;
three eggs of troglodytic sparrows, (“wrens?”) three swifts, of oil of
bay, or of iris, q. s. The swifts are soaked alive in vinegar for forty
days, the vessel being buried in dung.

_The golden plaster for bloody wounds._ Of frankincense, of fissile alum,
of each, oz. ij; of Colophonian rosin, of common rosin, of each, lb. j;
of oil, oz. iij; of arsenic, oz. ij. Triturate the arsenic in the vinegar.

_The plaster for fractures, of Oribasius._ Of Brutian pitch, lb. j, oz.
iv; of litharge, lb. j, oz. iv; of frankincense, oz. viij; of turpentine,
oz. v; of bull’s suet, lb. j, oz. iv; of galbanum, of opoponax, of each,
oz. j; of wax, oz. iv; of old oil, lb. j; of vinegar, oz. v.

_A plaster for fractures with a wound and without a wound. From
Heraclitus._ Of dried pitch, mina j; of litharge, mina j; of manna, mina
ss; of calves’ suet, mina j; of Tuscan wax, oz. xxvj; of opoponax, dr.
viij; of scraped verdigris, of Cyprian copper, of each, the fifth and
tenth part of a mina; of turpentine, min. iss; of copper, oz. j; of oleum
ricini (castor oil), or old oil, hem. j; of vinegar, hemin. ss.

_The preparation of the medicine called the liquid œsypum._ Of melilot,
oz. iv; of cardamom, oz. ij; of unscoured wool, oz. vj: having macerated
in sext. ij of wine for three days, boil until little is left; and having
filtrated mix with the wine, oz. iij of oil, and boil until little of the
wine remain, and then add of Colophonian rosin, oz. x; of turpentine, oz.
x. Some add likewise of wax, oz. x, and of the herb hyssop, oz. j, and
boil with the others. Others clean the wool in wine, and having dried the
wine with the sordes, which they call _pinon_, at the time of using, add
of it, oz. iij, and the other things as mentioned.

_On the mixture of wax to oil._ If you wish to prepare ointments like
those called Acopa, add four parts of the oil to the wax; but if, as in
fractures, you wish to make a soft cerate, make it double. When we wish
to give the medicine the form of a plaster, then we mix equal parts of
oil with wax, if the atmosphere be of a moderate temperature. But if the
wax be old or dry, and the atmosphere cold, then there must be a little
more of the oil than of the wax; when the wax is soft and the atmosphere
warm, the wax should be a little less than the oil. This _little_ should
be the twelfth part on each side of the middle, for in this case you will
mix xj or xiij oz. of oil to the pound of wax.

_From the works of Antyllus, on the boiling of those medicines which
are the ingredients of plasters._—Litharge. In the boiling of the
medicines, the litharge will be boiled with the oil; but the litharge
having been previously triturated, is to be triturated again with the
oil, so as to become viscid, and then it is to be boiled at a gentle
fire, stirring incessantly. At first, then, it swells and bubbles; but
when nearly boiled sufficiently, it becomes of a more feculent colour.
It has attained its measure of boiling when the swelling subsides, and
it no longer stains. The molybdæna is to be boiled in a similar manner
to litharge; but the measure of the boiling of it is not only when it
ceases to stain, but when it changes from a fiery colour to a yellow
and strongly florid. Burnt copper in boiling is not to be put in at the
commencement, but when the plaster is half boiled: the measure of the
boiling, unless a small quantity only is put in, is when its colour
predominates and renders the plaster yellow; sori and diphryges are put
in during the boiling. The measure of the boiling of the diphryges,
like the squama, is to be when its colour predominates. With regard
to the sori, there is no particular measure, except the common one,
to make the plaster of such a consistence that it does not stain. The
chalcitis is boiled like copper, and the measure of it is the degree to
which it renders the plaster of a deeper yellow and more ruddy colour.
The flower of copper is like copper, and is regulated by the common
measure of boiling. Copperas (blue vitriol?) is added in the middle of
the boiling, and when boiled it gives a stronger shade to the colour of
the plaster; and if not prevented by other circumstances, it renders
the plaster black; misy is added in the end, but there is no particular
measure with regard to it; arsenic and sandarach are added at the end of
the boiling; burnt lead is put in at the middle of the boiling; ceruse
is put into white plasters at the end, for thus it preserves their
colour and whitens them still more, but it is added to the black at the
commencement, for by being more boiled it becomes blacker; verdigris is
added to the green plasters after the boiling; and, in some cases, it
is not put into the pot at all, but being triturated with vinegar, and
remaining in the mortar, the other things are mixed with it: to those
of an apple colour (pale red?) it is added when the preparation is half
boiled; for when it undergoes moderate boiling, it puts on the apple
colour; but in those which are to have a double appearance, and double
colour, we must boil the verdigris immediately after the commencement;
when the boiling is persevered in, it first puts on the apple colour,
then the double appearance, and at last its colour becomes yellow; alum
is added for the most part after the boiling, but there is no measure
of its boiling; vermilion is added at the end; calamine and pompholyx
are added at the commencement; salts and natron are added at the middle
of the boiling; sulphur at the end, the boiling of it blackens the
plasters. All earths and stones are added at the end for the most part:
pumice-stone, too, at the end. Burnt shells are added at the end. Oil,
if added at the commencement to rosin and liquid pitch, prevents the
plaster from acquiring consistence. The oil, therefore, is to be added
after it has acquired consistence. Other fatty substances which do not
contain salt, are to be added at the middle of the boiling. Of ointments,
the Irinum bears boiling, the Cyprinum and Rosaceum less; the others,
none at all. The ingredients are, therefore, to be added at the end of
the boiling. Wax is not boiled alone by itself, for it burns, neither
with liquid rosin nor liquid pitch, for it remains disunited. But it is
added to pure oil or oily matters boiled with the metals, or to rosin
and pitch, previously boiled and thickened with other things which are
to be added. Dried rosin is added with wax. The liquid, before all other
things, is boiled by itself, unless a very small quantity is used.
Pitch is added before all other things. The measure of the boiling of
the liquid is its acquiring consistence; but of the dry especially, if
boiled with vinegar, when it ceases to bubble and swell. The pitch of
ships, when triturated and separated by a sieve from its recrements, is
sprinkled upon a plaster when boiled; but if soft, it is dissolved with
the oil. The former method is the more correct, because in the second the
weight is not preserved. Bitumen (asphaltos) is boiled by being added
at the commencement. But it is not to be levigated, because it contains
asperities like grains of figs. It is, therefore, to be broken into large
pieces and boiled in vinegar, not stirring it lest it bubble. I, says
Timocrates, have succeeded by boiling it in oil. Bee-glue (propolis)
is to be softened and boiled. For, by the boiling, it is not entirely
incorporated. But if the plaster receives, as an ingredient, common wax,
the bee-glue, like the galbanum, is to be pounded with the wax and added.
Ammoniac is added about the middle of the boiling. But if it can be
levigated, it should be sprinkled in the state of a powder, but if not,
it may be triturated with some liquid; but if it be a plaster for fresh
wounds, it is to be triturated with vinegar or wine; but if for fistulæ
or strumæ, by all means with vinegar. If it be a soft plaster (such as
those for the fundament), it is to be triturated with water; then, being
levigated, it is to be added to the other things when cooled that they
may not boil. Opoponax is added much later than ammoniac: it requires
but very little boiling; but it must be frequently triturated with wine
or vinegar. Galbanum does not bear boiling. But when the plaster has
attained such a consistence that it does not stain, it is to be taken
off the fire, and it is to be softened and added. Sagapenum is pounded
in a mortar, and when it becomes tender it is softened with the plaster
after being removed from the fire. Aloe is sprinkled after the boiling.
Poppy-juice is macerated for one day in a little water, and is then
levigated in a mortar, and in this state the plaster is poured upon it.
Thapsia is sprinkled last, or triturated with some fluid. Bdellium being
levigated, is sprinkled after the plaster is taken from the fire; but if
it is of a fatty nature, and cannot be levigated, it is to be pounded
like sagapen, and made into the form of a plaster, and softened with the
plaster after the boiling. Frankincense and manna are sprinkled at the
end of the boiling, becoming glutinous, with a little honey, vinegar,
water, or wine, if the plaster admit a liquid. Myrrh is added when the
boiling is over. None of the seeds, roots, and herbs can endure boiling;
but when levigated, and while they remain in the mortar, the other things
are poured upon them in a state of solution.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The following are the general directions given by Celsus for
the formation of plasters: “Emplastrum hoc modo fit: arida medicamenta
per se teruntur; deinde mixtis his instillatur aut acetum, aut si quis
alius non pinguis humor accessurus est, et ea rursus ex eo teruntur;
ea vero quæ liquari possunt, ad ignem simul liquantur, et si quid olei
misceri debet, tum infunditur: interdum etiam aridum ali quod ex oleo
prius coquitur.” He describes the composition of 28 plasters. (v, 19.)

The composition of plasters is treated of by Galen at so great length
that it is quite out of the question to attempt even an abstract of his
account of them. His accuracy of detail and attention to minutiæ are
almost inconceivable. See the first four books of his work (De Med. sec.
genera.) Our author, as usual, is much indebted to him.

For further information regarding the emplastra of the ancients, see also
Haly Abbas (Pract. x, 18); Mesue (De Unguentis); and Myrepsus (§ x.)
Myrepsus, as usual, is most copious: he gives formulæ for 199 plasters.

The _diachylon plaster_ is described by Galen and Mesue, but as the
ingredients of theirs are nearly the same as in that of our author, we
need not give their formulæ.

The _Ægyptiacum_, which is still celebrated as a remedy in certain cases
is thus described by Mesue: “Take of verdigris, dr. v; of honey, dr. xiv;
of very acrid vinegar, dr. vij: boil to a proper consistence. Some also
add dr. iiss of triturated frankincense.”

The following is an _itch ointment_ by Mesue: “Take of ceruse, of
litharge, of aloes, of saffron, of calamine, of mercury extinguished,
equal parts; make into an ointment, with oil of oleander and vinegar, q.
s.”

An _itch ointment_ of Myrepsus consists of the fresh leaves of the
bay-tree boiled with oil, and having wax and sulphur added to it. We can
say, from ample experience, that such an ointment is a most effectual
remedy for scabies.

The preparation of the _basilicon_, as directed by Avicenna, is a nearer
approach to the modern ointment of that name than our author’s: “Of
rosin, of pitch, and of wax, equal parts, prepare with olive oil.”


SECT. XVIII.—ON EMOLLIENT PLASTERS AND EPITHEMES.

Of those applications called emollient plasters, or malagmata, some
are applied to the middle parts of the body when in a state of chronic
inflammation, or indurated, or in a hot or cold state, or affected with
defluxions; and some to the extremities when infarcted, or to the nerves
when affected with cold; or they are serviceable to the other parts when
scirrhous. These have been treated of in the section on Plasters, and
will be treated of in that on Acopa. Of those which agree with the middle
parts of the body (which are properly called epithemes), those applied
for the stomach and liver, of whatever kind they are, must require a
strengthening power from astringents; for without these there will be
danger to the life, the functional operations of these parts being
extensive; and, therefore, they are principally composed of aromatics.
When the stomach then is affected with dyspepsia, atony, or inflation,
those from seeds, and from melilots, aloes, and wormwood, from sampsuchum
(marjoram), nard, and mastich are to be applied. To the liver, those
from nutben, ammoniac, fats, and chamomile ointment; and to the spleen,
those from quicklime, arsenic, capers, willows, cardamom, verdigris,
ammoniac, and vinegar are to be applied. For defluxions about the belly,
those from wild vine, alum, apple ointment, and other astringents
are to be used. And these by a misnomer are called by the general
name of malagmata or emollient plasters, although their power be the
reverse of softening. When the viscera are in a hot state, as in ardent
fevers, those from saffron, oil of roses, the juice of linseed, endive,
knot-grass, hog’s lard, or litharge are to be applied; but when in a cold
state those from opobalsam, Indian leaf, sowbread (cassamum), and pepper.
In expectorations of blood, astringent and desiccative applications,
composed from alum, willow, and bitumen, are to be applied to the breast;
and in consumptions, those from bay berries, horehound, cardamom, and lye.

_The malagma from melilots._ Of saffron, of Celtic nard, of cyperus, of
cardamom, of iris, of myrrh, of each, oz. ij; of melilots, lb. j; of
ammoniac perfume, lb. j; of wax, lb. iij; of turpentine, lb. j; of oil of
privet, lb. iij; of gleucinum, lb. ij; of bdellium, oz. vj. Some add also
of cyphi, oz. ij; of wine, q. s.

_The malagma Polyarchium, from Galen’s work, ‘according to the parts.’_
Of wax, of turpentine, of bdellium, of ammoniac perfume, of cardamom, of
cyperus, of each, one mina; of melilot, of amomum, of Indian nard, of
saffron, of myrrh, of frankincense, of the wood of cinnamon, of each, dr.
xxv; of oil of privet, hemina j; of Italian wine, q. s. Prepare and use
sometimes unmixed and sometimes diluted with the cerate of privet.

_The Polyarchium, otherwise._ Of xylobalsam, of costus, of iris, of
cyperus, of myrrh, of the schœnanth, of cardamom, of frankincense, of
spikenard, of mastich, of storax, of bdellium, of amomum, of Indian leaf,
of saffron, of cassia, of pellitory, of long birthwort, of each, oz. j;
of ammoniac perfume, oz. iss; of roasted rosin, oz. iij; of turpentine,
lb. j; of stag’s marrow, oz. ij; of wax, lb. ij; of opobalsam, oz. vj; of
wine, oz. viij.

_The malagma Philagrianum._ Of saffron, oz. iss; of aloes, of ammoniac
perfume, of bdellium, of storax, of each, oz. j; of the fat of geese, oz.
ij; of the medicine œsypum, oz. iv; of palm-nuts, oz. ij; of wax, lb. j;
of nard, oz. vj; of the ointment of apples, oz. vj; of wine, what will be
sufficient for triturating the dry things.

_The fragrant malagma._ Of saffron, of aloes, of mastich, of wormwood, of
storax, of wild vine, of sowbread, of cloves, of each, oz. iij; of nard,
lb. j; of wax, lb. j; of oil of apples, oz. vj; palm-nuts, xij; of wine,
q. s.

_The malagma Baion._ Of cardamom, of cassia, of Celtic wild vine, of the
flowers of the wild pomegranate, of virgin wax, of each, scr. viij; of
savin, of sowbread, of amomum, of each, scr. vj; of the schœnanth, scr.
xviij; of iris, scr. iv; of cloves, scr. iss; of the lily perfume, oz.
ij; of frankincense, of myrrh, of each, oz. j; of ladanum, oz. vj; of
bdellium, of mastich, of aloes, of nard, of the oil of lentisk, of each,
oz. ss; of maple rosin, of pine rosin, of turpentine, of each, oz. iij;
of opobalsam, oz. j; of ammoniac perfume, scr. vj; of wax, oz. vj. The
bruised juicy and dried things are to be pounded with oil of wild vine.
In another prescription, some add, of pepper, scr. xviij, and of musk,
scr. j.

_The Galenian malagma._ Of saffron, oz. ss; of aloes, oz. j; of mastich,
oz. iij; of the fruit of wormwood, scr. viij; of wild vine, scr. viij;
three large dates; of wax, oz. iij; of oil of apples, oz. vj.

_The malagma Brythrion._ Of storax, oz. v; of quinces, oz. xx; of masucha
or masuaphium, of saffron, of each, dr. x; of crumbs of bread, of cyphi,
of each, dr. v; of wild vine, oz. iiss; of sowbread, of wormwood,
of each, dr. x; of cloves, scr. xv; of ammoniac perfume, scr. x; of
opobalsam, scr. viss; of nard, oz. v; of Colophonian rosin, of gleucinum,
of oil of apples, of each, oz. x; of oil of roses, dr. x; of bee-glue,
oz. v; of turpentine, oz. x; of honey, coch. x; of Indian leaf, dr. x; of
spikenard, dr. x; of wax, oz. viiss. Triturate with Falernian and Aminæan
wine.

_The splenic malagma of Nilus, for all other cases of induration._ Of
wax, lb. j; of ammoniac perfume, lb. j; of oil of privet, lb. j; of
saffron, oz. ss (some make it, oz. j); of vinegar, q. s.

_The malagma citrinum._ Of wax, of Colophonian rosin, of each, lb. j;
of ammoniac perfume, of arsenic, of lime, of alum, of vinegar, of each,
cyath. viij. Triturate the dry things with the vinegar.

_The barber’s malagma._ Of dried pitch, lb. j; of wax, of pine rosin, of
ammoniac perfume, of natron, of dry bay-berries, of the fat of bulls, of
each, lb. ij; of the flour of fenugreek, sext. j; of pollen, sext. j; of
the dried root of the black chamæleon, lb. j.

_The malagma, from goat’s dung, of Oribasius, for splenic affections,
dropsies, and scirrhous liver._ Of oil of privet or very old oil, lb.
iij; of wax, lb. iiss; of the dung of goats, of bay-berries stripped of
their bark, of Illyrian iris, of each, sext. j; of turpentine, lb. j; of
mustard, of natron, of cyperus, of the seed of radish, of the bark of
the root of capers, oz. iij; of the medullary part of colocynth, oz. ij;
of fenugreek, oz. j. Sometimes the dry things are added to the soluble
and sometimes they are mixed with vinegar. But if there is a flux of the
bowels, the colocynth must not be added.

_The malagma spongiola, from goat’s dung, for dropsies._ Of Brutian
pitch, lb. iiss; of natron, lb. j; of the medullary part of colocynth,
of pellitory, of opoponax, of granum cnidium, of each, oz. iij; of bark
of the root of capers, of frankincense, of iris, of the fat of bulls,
of elaterium, of squama æris, of parsley-seed, of the seeds of spurge
(lathyrides), of each, oz. vj; of bay-berries, sext. ss; of the flour of
fenugreek, oz. ss; of bull’s gall, oz. ij; of oil of privet, sext. ss; of
wax, lb. j; of roasted rosin, lb. iij; of mountain goat’s dung, of the
seed of rosemary, of cyperus, of cardamom, of each, oz. vj.

_The malagma from bay-berries._ Of wax, of rosin, of pitch, of
bay-berries, of bull’s fat, of each, lb. j; of natron, of ammoniac
perfume, of each, oz. vj; of vinegar, q. s.

_The malagma from seeds._ Of cardamom, of cyperus, of savin, of natron,
of bay-berries, of cassia, of melilot, of fenugreek, of Celtic nard,
of parsley-seed, of sampsuchum, of anise, of the root of panacea, of
frankincense, of ammoniac perfume, of turpentine, of each, oz. iij; of
honey, of wax, of nard, of each, lb. j; of the fat of bulls, lb. j.

_The fetid malagma for pleurisy._ Of pine rosin, lb. j; of wax, of green
rue, of oil of privet, of each, oz. vj; of sulphur vivum, of opoponax, of
sagapen, of each, dr. iv. Some add also of galbanum, dr. iv.

_The malagma from sampsuchum._ Of wax, lb. j; of turpentine, lb. ij; of
sampsuchum (marjoram?), of bay-berries, of fenugreek, of each, sext. j;
of nard, q. s.

_The malagma of Apollophanes for hepatic diseases._ Of wax, dr. lxxx; of
turpentine, of manna, of each, dr. xl. Pound with the lees of iris-oil
and anoint the mortar.

_The malagma copton, for hardness of the stomach and liver._ Of
bee-glue, oz. vj; of storax, oz. ij; of mastich, oz. j; of turpentine,
oz. ss; of the lees of nard, q. s.

_The malagma from wild vine._ Of wild vine, of aloes, of saffron, of
acacia, of fissile alum, of dried roses, of the juice of wormwood, of
galls, of the oil of unripe olives, of Syrian sumach, of manna, of each,
dr. j; of myrtle-oil, of wax, of each, lb. j; five large palm-nuts; of
Aminæan wine, q. s.

_The Antyllian malagma._ Of fissile alum, oz. ss; of aloes, oz. j; of
mastich, scr. vj; of wild vine, scr. viij; of the oil of unripe olives,
scr. viij; of dried roses, scr. viij; of Syriac sumach, scr. x; of the
Egyptian thorn, scr. x; of the flowers of the wild pomegranate, scr. xx;
of galls, scr. xv; of wax, oz. v; of oil of apples, q. s.

_The malagma from grape stones._ Of saffron, of sandyx, of wild vine,
of each, oz. j; of dried alum, oz. iv; of the flowers of the wild
pomegranate, of oil of unripe olives, of the flower of roses, of dried
myrtles, of each, oz. ij; of white wax, lb. j; of oil of apples, lb. ij;
of quinces, oz. iv; ten Nicolan palm nuts; of Aminæan wine, q. s.; of
dried grape stones, oz. viij. In using, take of the medicine, oz. iij; of
wax, oz. j.

_The malagma from dill._ Of green dill, oz. vj; of melilot, oz. ij;
of chamomile, oz. ij; ten green heads of poppy. Having boiled, mix of
the decoction, lb. iij; and as much of oil; and when the decoction is
consumed, add of fresh hog’s lard, lb. ij; and separately triturate of
the inner part of baked squill, oz. ij; and of stag’s marrow, oz. ij. Mix
all together.

_The malagma ambrosia, for stopping fevers._ Of litharge, lb. j; of fresh
hog’s lard, oz. vj; of the juice of linseed, oz. vj; of white wax, oz.
ix; of oil of roses, lb. j; of honey, oz. iij; of saffron, oz. j. Some
add also the raw yelks of ten eggs.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Le Clerc thus describes these preparations: “Ce qu’on
appelloit malagma ne différoit fort de l’emplâtre. Galien déclare
(Pharmac. gén. vii, 5) qu’il est indifférent qu’on se serve du terme de
malagme, ou de celui d’emplâtre.” He adds, “Ce qu’on appelloit epithème
étoit aussi à peu près le même chose.” (Hist. de la Méd.) According to
Galen, the malagmata derived their name from being used as emollient
applications to parts in an indurated state, and were all moderately
calefacient, being in general neither desiccative nor humectative. He
describes the composition of these preparations with his usual accuracy
and minuteness.

Celsus gives a full account of the malagmata. He says plasters,
malagmata, and pastils differ, inasmuch as malagmata consist principally
of aromatics, whereas, the other two are rather formed from metallic
substances. In general, he says, they are rather calefacient than
refrigerant; some, however, are refrigerant, and are used as applications
to the joints in gout. A few are not only calefacient but also
epispastic. He gives prescriptions for 35 malagmata. He makes no mention
of epithemes. (v, 17, 2.) Scribonius Largus, likewise, treats fully of
the malagmata (§ cclv-cclxvii).

Oribasius states that there are three varieties of malagmata: the first
consisting of dry things, namely, roots and herbs; the second kind, of
metallic substances, or a certain proportion thereof; and the third, of
juices, suet, and tears. (Med. Collect. x, 28.)

A full account of them is given by Actuarius (Meth. Med. vi, 9) and
Myrepsus (§ xi, xxxiv.) The following epitheme is said to be powerfully
purgative: “Of scammony, of elaterium, of spurge, of each, dr. viij; of
white and of black hellebore, of bull’s gall, of each, dr. iij; of the
root of the wild cucumber, of the leaves of wormwood, of each dr. x; of
Tuscan wax, dr. viij; of turpentine rosin, dr. iv; of Attic honey, oz.
viij; of red nitre, oz. j.” (Myrepsus, l. c.)

The following is a malagma for luxated joints and contusions: “Of
galbanum, oz. j; of saffron, dr. ij; of ammoniac perfume, of pure wax,
of each, oz. iss; of dried pitch, lb. iss; of very acrid vinegar, coch.
iss.” (Ibid.)


SECT. XIX.—ON RESTORATIVE OINTMENTS (ACOPA), LINIMENTS, CALEFACIENT
PLASTERS (DROPACES), AND SINAPISMS.

The acopa are so named for having been first invented for the feeling
of lassitude, as a tensive, ulcerative, and osseous lassitude; but they
agree with many other complaints. Some, then, are calefacient, some
emollient, and some stimulant. The calefacient are prepared from pepper,
pellitory, the seed of rosemary, and the like. They agree with affections
of the nerves, and strong frigidity which cannot be readily restored to
heat. The emollient agree with induration, scirrhus, and infarction of
the joints; and the materials of which they are formed have been pointed
out by us when treating of plasters. The stimulant being composed of
lemnestis, the seed of rosemary, euphorbium, the granum cnidium, and the
like, are to be used in chronic affections, and such as are difficult
to dislodge, namely, in such cases as sinapisms are applicable. The
consistence of all the acopa is to be intermediate between the cerates
and plasters. The liniments resemble the acopa, but have a more liquid
consistence. The dropax has a two-fold composition, the one being like
a plaster, and the other like a malagma. Some rub them into the part
warm. Their materials are like those of the acopa and plasters. It serves
the purpose of a cataplasm, agreeing with the same chronic affections
in which sinapisms are applicable. A dropax (“calefacient plaster”) is
applied before a sinapism, in order to prepare the body for the mustard;
and after the sinapism, in order to remove the residue of the complaint.
The sinapism is not composed of many ingredients, but is a most powerful
application, agreeing particularly with chronic affections after all
other remedies have been tried in vain. It is more especially applicable
in cephalæa, hemicrania, epilepsy, vertigo, and mania, when applied to
the head; and in asthma, orthopnœa, and chronic cough when applied to
the chest; and in chronic catarrh, a sinapism may be applied both to the
head and chest; and to the stomach and belly in chronic affections of
them. It is a suitable remedy in all ischiatic and podagric cases, to any
part which has lost its tone, or is in a cold state, and cannot easily
be warmed. The limits of the action of the medicine are, when violent
pain has been produced, and the flesh becomes more livid and swelled up,
and so that after the bath it may become blistered in a mild manner. But
if the sensibility has been lost, care must be taken lest the burning
proceed too far without being perceived, and therefore the part is to be
often uncovered and examined. Of acute diseases, lethargy, cataphora,
and catochus admit of sinapisms, which, if at the commencement, are to
be applied to the legs, but if the matter has fixed in the part, to the
head. Those which are in a cold state and cannot be warmed but with
difficulty, must have sinapisms applied to the legs and arms. Sinapisms
are to be entirely proscribed when there is continued fever or an ulcer;
also in affections of cartilaginous parts, and such as have no flesh.
For the parts which are devoid of flesh are sometimes burnt black when
sinapisms are applied to them.

_The acopon called Bromion._ Of wax, of Colophonian rosin, of common
rosin, of each, lb. j; of hog’s lard, oz. iv; of butter, oz. vj; of
marshmallows, of fenugreek, of linseed, of each, lb. ij; of oil, lb. j;
of galbanum, oz. iiss. Having boiled the juice with the oil until the
most of the juice be consumed, add the other things with wax and galbanum.

_The complex acopon._ Of the juice of marshmallows, of fenugreek, of
linseed, of rue, and of cumin, of each, lb. ij; of stag’s marrow, lb. j;
of old oil, lb. j; of the fat of geese, of opobalsam, or nard, of each,
lb. j; of wax, of Colophonian rosin, of common rosin, of each, lb. iss;
of euphorbium, of turpentine, of opoponax, of each, oz. vj; of castor,
oz. iij; of the herbs from which the juice is formed, of each, lb. j, is
to be taken and boiled like the former.

_The acopon of Azanites._ Of hog’s lard, lb. ij; of the fat of bulls, of
rosin, of Colophonian rosin, of the medicine œsypum, of wax; of each, lb.
j; of galbanum, oz. iij.

_The acopon of Basilius._ Of marshmallows, of chamomile, of melilot,
of linseed, of fenugreek, of each, oz. iss; of amomum, oz. iij. These
things are macerated in sext. viij of the wine of Ascalon or the Cilician
for three days, and boiled to a milky consistence. Then lb. v of the
juice, with lb. ivss of old oil are boiled until a moderate quantity
of the juice remain; and then there are added to it of butter, oz. vj;
of turpentine, oz. iv; of the fat of geese, oz. xv; of stag’s marrow,
triturated with a little oil, oz. v; of white wax, lb. iij.

_The acopon Lysiponium._ Of pepper, of castor, of storax, of mastich, of
aloes, of elecampane, of iris, of each, oz. iv; of euphorbium, of costus,
of ammoniac perfume, of myrrh, of marjoram (sampsuchum), of frankincense,
of cyperus, of cassia fistula, of the seed of rosemary, of each, oz. iij;
of adarce, of amomum, of bdellium, of xylobalsam, of each, oz. ij; of
Indian leaf, of spikenard, of pellitory, of saffron, of each, oz. j; of
opobalsam, lb. j; of the ointment of nard, of the ointment of privet, of
gleucinum, of each, lb. ij; of wax, lb. j.

_A fetid acopon from Galen’s work, secundum genera._ Of wax, of
turpentine, of each, dr. xxiv; of galbanum, of ammoniac perfume, of each,
dr. vj; of old oil, hemin. ij; of stag’s marrow, dr. viij. Use both
undiluted and diluted.

_Another fetid acopon._ Of turpentine, dr. lvj; of wax, dr. xxviij; of
œsypum, of honey, of each, dr. vj; of stag’s marrow, dr. vj; of ammoniac
perfume, of galbanum, of aphronitrum, of bay berries, of each, dr. vj; of
old oil, sext. j; of wine, cyath, ij. Some add also of castor, dr. iij.

_The barbaric acopon from euphorbium, for ischiatic diseases, and many
other purposes._ Of opoponax, oz. j; of Tuscan wax, lb. j; of turpentine,
lb. iiss; of galbanum, oz. j; of ammoniac perfume, oz. ij; of euphorbium,
of castor, of white pepper, of each, oz. ij; of stag’s marrow, oz. iv;
of œsypum, oz. iv; of lemnestis, (a saline concretion), it is the same
as adarce, oz. ss; of the oils of storax, of bay, of iris, and of sweet
marjoram, of each, oz vj; of old oil, lb. ij; of hedychroum, oz. vj.

_The acopon called Pyxis._ Of Colophonian rosin, lb. iss; of turpentine,
oz. viij; of ammoniac perfume, oz. iij; of frankincense, oz. ix; of old
oil, lb. ij; of the juice of linseed, lb. j; of cow’s milk, lb. j; of
the fat of geese, oz. vj; of butter, oz. viij; the whites of xxiv eggs.
Having prepared it, lay it up in a vessel of box wood.

_The acopon from the fir, of Galen._ Of the ripe seed of the fir tree,
j Italian modius, i. e. sext. xvj; of oil, lb. xv; of wax, lb. iv; of
rosin, of pine-nut, or of turpentine, of each, oz. iv. Having bruised
the seed of the fir, add it to the oil, and allowing it to remain forty
days, filtrate and throw away; and having mixed the other things, use for
spontaneous lassitude, paralysis, and coldness of the joints. But if the
necessity for using it be urgent, we must boil the seed of the fir with
the oil, mixing with them, sext. iv of water, to prevent them from being
burnt. They are used in podagric and arthritic affections.

_The same otherwise._ Of oil, hemin. xxv, i. e. sext. xiiss; of the fruit
of the fir, mod. j, i. e. sext. xvj; of the rosin of ash, lb. iij; of the
rosin of pine-nut or of turpentine, lb. iij; of wax, lb. j.

_The acopon from the black poplar, for the same affections._ Instead of
the fruit of the fir, adding an equal quantity of the fruit of the black
poplar, prepare the other things in like manner.

_The liniment of Zosimus, celebrated for tremblings._ Of pine rosin, oz.
xvj; of wax, oz. iv; of old oil, lb. j; of opoponax, oz. ij; of adarce,
oz. j; of euphorbium, oz. j; of natron, oz. iv; of tender aphronitrum,
oz. iv. Triturate the natron, euphorbium, and adarce with wine, then
add the opoponax, and triturate together. Melt the soluble substances
separately with alkanet, that they may acquire colour, and having cooled,
mix.

_The dropax, or calefacient plaster Gallus. Of Oribasius._ Of the
Colophonian rosin which is redolent of frankincense, of pine rosin,
and of that which is called the woody, being found only in Italy, of
the pitch of ships, of dried pitch, of each, lb. iv; of wax. lb. iv;
of roasted rosin, oz. xv; of Brutian pitch, lb. ij; of natron, lb. j;
of bitumen, of galbanum, of adarce, of pellitory, of each, oz. vj; of
opoponax, of euphorbium, of white hellebore, of pepper, of each, oz. iv;
of sulphur vivum, oz. iij; of castor, of ammoniac, of the wild grape
dried, of each, oz. ij; of Sicyonian oil, lb. j; of opobalsam, oz. vj.

_Otherwise, a simple dropax._ Of wax, lb. j; of dried pitch, lb. iss; of
Brutian pitch, lb. j; of pine pitch, lb. iss; of roasted rosin, lb. j,
oz. iij. Having first prepared the part with natron, apply.

_The preparation of a sinapism._ On the preceding day, dried figs are
to be macerated in tepid water, and next day they are to be properly
filtrated and strongly pounded. Then some acrid mustard, such as the
Syriac and Egyptian, is to be triturated separately, pouring on it a
little of the infusion, and mixing and forming into a mass; if we wish
to form a strong sinapism, joining two parts of mustard to one of dried
figs, but if weak, in the inverse proportion; and if a moderate one,
mixing equal parts. If the mustard before it is triturated, be allowed
to macerate in vinegar, as some do, it becomes weaker. After the mustard
has been cleared away, and the bath used, if the pain continue violent,
or if redness and blisters supervene, we are to wet a cloth in the juice
of mallows, or of fenugreek, with oil of roses, and apply. Then we may
use the rose cerate with ceruse. But in cases of paralysis, when the
sensibility is impaired, care must be taken, and the part frequently
uncovered and examined, for often they are burnt immoderately without
being sensible of it. And goat’s dung, applied with vinegar, is more
efficacious than mustard, especially in diseases of the hip-joint.

_The liniment from writing-ink acting as a rubefacient, especially in
cases of hemicrania. From the works of Alexander._ Of euphorbium, of
writing-ink, of each, dr. iv; of troglodytic myrrh, of crocomagma, of
white pepper, of each, oz. iij; of saffron, dr. ij; of vinegar, q. s.,
so that these things may be properly triturated, and become of the
consistence of the sordes in baths; and then anoint with it, beginning
from the middle of the eyebrow to the whole temple, especially if it be
bare of hairs; and after it cools, anoint again, and when the remedy acts
properly, let the man be put into a bath.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. Le Clerc says of the Acopa: “On les appelloit _acopa_
comme qui diroit, _Unguens qui ôtent les douleurs_, ou la lassitude,
parcequ’on s’en servoit principalement pour le délasser, ou pour apaiser
les douleurs qu’on sent après le travail et la fatigue.” (Hist. de la
Méd.) Galen explains that although this class of ointments derived
their name from their being originally used as soothing applications to
parts which were pained from severe exertion, they came afterwards to
be applied for various other purposes, as for removing all deep-seated
pains, indurations, contractions, and the like. Their consistence, he
says, is nearly the same as that of the liquid cerates or the ointments
made from wax and oil. According to their qualities, he adds, they have
the epithets of emollient, calefacient, anodyne, relaxant, or alterative,
applied to them. He describes, in prose and verse, the composition of
an almost countless variety of these preparations. (De med. sec. gen.
vii.) Celsus says of the acopa: “Acopa quoque utilia nervis sunt.” He
gives formulæ only for two acopa, which consist of aromatic and stimulant
medicines mixed with oil or some fragrant ointment. (v, 25.) Oribasius
divides them into three kinds, the emollient, the calefacient, and the
scarifacient; the last being a near approach to sinapisms. On the acopa
see further Scribonius and Actuarius.

The _liniments_ of the ancients seem to have been very much the same as
those of the moderns. Celsus says of them: “Ἔγχριστα autem Græci vocant
liquida qui illinuntur.” (v, 243.) In consistence and qualities they
nearly resembled the acopa, being composed of a large proportion of oil
with a small quantity of wax or honey. Myrepsus gives prescriptions for a
considerable number of them.

The _dropax_ is thus described by Le Clerc: “On étendoit une certaine
quantité de cette emplâtre sur la toile, ou la peau; on appliquoit cela
sur quelque partie du corps, on le levoit, ou on l’arrachoit, et on
l’appliquoit derechef, reitérant souvent la même chose, pour faire rougir
la partie, dans le dessein d’attirer en dehors les humeurs, ou les sucs
qui servent à la nourriture des parties, ou dans la vue d’ouvrir les
pores. Pour rendre cette emplâtre plus efficace on y ajoutoit quelquefois
des poudres acres, comme du pyréthre, du poivre, du sel, du soufre. On
emploit aussi le dropax pour faire tomber, ou pour arracher le poil de
quelque partie.” (Hist. de la Méd.) Hesychius appears to have confounded
the _dropax_ with the _psilothron_ or _depilatory_. The former was merely
a sort of calefacient plaster, and was applied to parts not covered
with hairs. Oribasius says of it that it is prepared like the malagma.
When it is desired to make it calefacient, he directs us to add to it
pellitory, the seed of rosemary, and bitumen; when desiccative, the
sulphur vivum, salts, and the ashes of vegetables; and when it is wished
to make it of such a nature as to scarify the parts, he directs us to
add to it limnesium (adarce) and spurge. The part to which it is to be
applied, he says, if weak, should be shaven, but in the more robust, and
when a stronger application is required, it need not be shaven, unless
it is to be applied to the head, chin, or pubes. Myrepsus commends the
following dropax: “Take of bitumen, oz. ij; of wax, oz. j, sext. j; of
dried pitch, dr. j; of pine-rosin, of natron, of each, oz. j; of sulphur
vivum, of pellitory, of white hellebore, of adarce, of each, sext. j; of
stavesacre, of spurge, of each, dr. ⅛; of oil, q. s.” Certain forms of
the dropax seem to have been allied to the _blistering plasters_ of the
moderns. On this subject we cannot do better than copy the remarks of Dr.
Clinch, in his Preface to Ruffus Ephesius: “Quantum usus cantharidum, ex
quibus hodierna vesicantia ubique fere componuntur, veteribus innotuit,
vir Doctissimus Johannes Freind luculenter satis explicuit. Nequeo autem
hic silentio transire, quam graviter erratum sit a Georgio Baglivi,
qui Oribasii meminit, utpote primi ex Arabibus, qui de usu vesicantium
scripsit, quum eundem et Græcum fuisse, et Græcorum idiomate scripsisse,
nemo non noverit. Is profecto aliquid suggerit de eo vesicantium genere,
quæ dropaces et sinapismi dicuntur, qui ex sinapi, pipere, pyrethro et
ejusmodi acribus medicamentis conficiebantur, et semel quidem cantharidum
mentionem facit, neutiquam vero, quod scio, de his loquitur tanquam de
medicina, quâ ad vesicas in cute excitandas utebantur. Ætius quidem
dropacis formam exhibuit, quæ tres cantharidum drachmas recipit, unde
dropax exulcerans vulgo audit.”

Oribasius gives, from Antyllus, a most interesting and judicious account
of the _sinapism_. He says that it does not suit with acute diseases,
or, at least, only when the patient is of an inert constitution, and the
sensibility is obtuse. It is applicable, however, he says, in almost
all chronic diseases when other remedies have failed, except in the
case of an ulcer in the lungs or liver, or when the disease is seated
in a cartilaginous part. He recommends it in all cases of diminished
sensibility. The only acute diseases in which he represents it as
applicable are lethargy, catochus, carus, or fevers attended with loss
of heat and diminished sensibility. Like our author, he directs us to
prepare the sinapism with dried figs and mustard. Aëtius, upon the
authority of Archigenes, details its medicinal properties in nearly the
same terms. Both Aëtius and Oribasius represent goat’s dung, pounded
with vinegar, as being equally efficacious as the sinapism, and applying
particularly to ischiatic diseases. Myrepsus’s account agrees exactly
with that of our author. He mentions that some macerate the figs in
vinegar instead of water, but says that it renders the preparation
weaker. The Arabians prepared the sinapism exactly as the Greeks, and
applied it in similar cases. See Mesue (De Unguentis, i.)


SECT. XX.—DIFFERENT PREPARATIONS OF OILS AND OINTMENTS.

Of unguents and ointments, or of oils in the form of ointments, some
are simple, having only one article added to the oil, and some are
prepared and compounded from more substances. Of the simple some are
formed from flowers put into the oil, such as the oil of roses, that
of chamomile, and the susinum, or oil of lilies; some are formed from
fruits and seeds, and some from certain shoots, as of rue, which are
boiled along with the oil, none of the flowers admitting boiling, and
therefore they are rather exposed to the sun. But if their fragrance be
strong and permanent, if exposed for a number of days to the sun, they
become finer and more useful, such as the oils of roses and chamomile.
But such flowers as are weaker and more volatile bear less insolation,
being easily dissipated, such as the lily and violet. Of those formed
from fruits and seeds, some are formed from them added whole to the oil,
such as the melinum or oil of apples; and some have them pounded or
altered, and the oily part of them removed, either by being squeezed out
in a press and thus separated, such as the oils of walnuts, of sesame, of
almonds, of lentisk, of bay, of Palma Christi, of radish, and the like.
The compound ones are principally composed of aromatic herbs, which are
boiled in the oil with wine, must, or water, and filtrated, some juices,
and sometimes fats and marrows, being mixed with the oil. Of these, some
being of a strictly oily consistence, are called, simply, ointments or
unguents, as the gleucinum, nardinum, sicyonium, and cyprinum: but some
having the consistence of acopa, and receiving wax, rosin, or the like,
into their composition, are called myracopa, such as the decamyron,
amaracinum, and those resembling them. And some are boiled only once,
namely, such as do not consist of complex materials, as the metopium,
mastichinum, and sicyonium; and some at two, three, or four successive
additions, the articles which are most difficult to boil being first
put in, such as rosewood, spathe, frankincense-tree, and bay; then the
aromatics, Indian-leaf, spikenard, amomum, savin; and, last of all, the
juices, fats, marrow, and perhaps wax and rosins being added. The juice
of balsam, or opobalsam, is not boiled at all, but is added after the
boiling is over, and the ointment moderately cooled; and of the ointments
some do not admit of boiling at all, but the ingredients are only mixed,
as the mendesium; but some, when wishing to prepare the green ointment,
after taking it from the fire, an oz. iss of well-triturated verdigris
having been put into lb. v of oil, as in the cyprinum and amaracinum, dip
the ointment in this mixture. The simple ointments are possessed of the
powers of the articles added to them, or which are pounded in them, the
oil being but the groundwork (as it were) or vehicle of them. The nature
of all the complex ointments inclines to heating; but some are powerfully
calefacient and emollient, so as to agree with cases of ancylosis and
infarction, as the metopium, mendesium, marciatum. The pentamyron is more
moderate, as the decamyron is stronger, so as to abrade the surface; but
those which are moderately hot are subtile, paregoric, and digestive,
such as the susinum, amaracinum, irinum, crocinum, foliatum. Some,
in addition to their heating qualities, are sufficiently desiccative
and cutting, such as the cyprinum and sicyonium: some are powerfully
heating, and rather tonic, and hence they agree with the stomach and
viscera in particular when relaxed, such as the mastichinum, nardinum,
gleucinum; but the most tonic are those prepared from wild olives;
but some ointments are used only by women for their fragrant smell,
as the foliatum, spicatum, commagenum, and those called moschelæa or
compositions of musk and oil.

_The rosaceum, or oil of roses._ Of red roses deprived of their nails (or
the white extremities of their flowers), and dried for a night and a day,
oz. iij; of the oil of unripe olives, one Italian sextarius. Having bound
up the vessel carefully, so that it may not evaporate, expose to the
sun in open air for forty days, and then deposit the vessel, not on the
pavement, but upon a table: some instead of the insolation put the vessel
into a well, in order that its fragrance may be preserved by the cold,
but others bury it underground.

_The chamæmelinum, or oil of chamomile._ Of the flower of chamomile,
without the white petals, which has been dried for a night and a day, oz.
ij; of oil, one Italian sextarius. Cover over the vessel with a plain
piece of cloth, so as to allow it to transpire for forty days, after
which it is to be carefully covered over and laid up.

_The anethinum, or oil of dill._ Of the hair of the green dill, dried,
oz. j; of sweet oil, an Italian sextarius: expose to the sun in like
manner. The oil of dill may likewise be prepared at once, without
exposure to the sun; for the hair of dried dill may be boiled in a double
vessel, and used; and the oil of chamomile may be prepared in like
manner; but they are weaker than those from green dill, and especially if
made by exposure to the sun.

_The liliaceum, or oil of lilies, called also susinum, perhaps from
having been invented in Susa._ Of the petals of white lilies, dried in
like manner, oz. ij are to be added to an Italian sextarius of oil, and
carefully covered over so as to prevent it from evaporating, and exposed
to the sun for three days, after which, the first being filtered and
thrown away, other two ounces are to be added for other three days, and
thus laid up.

_The compound susinum, or oil of lilies._ Of oil, sext. iij; of aromatic
cane, oz. v; of myrrh, oz. v; of cardamom, oz. iij; of the petals of
lily, deprived of their nails and dried, lb. j; of cinnamon, oz. iij; of
Cilician saffron, oz. v. The whole process is to be divided into three
successive additions. First, we are to macerate the myrrh and the calamus
in wine for five days, stirring it three times a day, and then we are to
boil it with the oil for a very short time. Secondly, we are to macerate
the cardamom in water for three days, stirring it in like manner, and
then we are to boil it with the oil for one hour. Having filtrated, we
add to the pure oil the third part of the lilies, and after three days,
again having filtrated, we put in the other third of the lilies; and
again, after three days having filtrated and thrown away the first, we
are to add the remainder with triturated saffron. But after other three
days, the oil being filtrated, we add to it the cinnamon pounded, or,
instead of it, arnabo, or double the quantity of cassia or carpesium, and
lay it up.

_The iaton, violaceum, or oil of violets._ They prepare the oil of
violets, some from the purple, some from saffron-like, and some from
white violets, adding oz. iij of the leaves deprived of their nails to
an Italian sextarius of the oil of unripe olives; and covering it up
carefully to prevent it from evaporating; they insolate it for ten days,
changing them three times after every three days like the lilies. And in
laying them up, they add a few completely dried.

_The melinum, or oil of apples._ This is prepared from Cydonian apples
_or_ quinces, which are to be rubbed externally with a piece of cloth and
cut into pieces with their bark; and then lb. iij of them are to be added
to x Italian sext. of oil of unripe olives, and insolated for forty days.

_The sesaminum, or oil of oily-grain._ The oil of sesame is prepared from
oily grains bruised, softened, and squeezed in strainers with screws, or
from the oily part separated in hot water and laid up in vessels of glass.

_The raphaninum, or oil of radishes._ And this is prepared after the same
manner in Egypt from the seed of the radishes with small roots, pounded,
and the oil separated.

_The ricinum, oil of Palma Christi, or castor-oil._ This also is prepared
after the same manner in Egypt from the seed of the ricinus, which is
called croton, similarly pounded or levigated.

_The ægirinum, or oil of the black poplar._ It is found in the season of
spring when there is much rosin in the seed. For breaking down the grains
of black poplar, they add oz. iv of them to sext. j of sweet oil and
insolate for forty days, or boil in a double vessel for three hours, and
thus filtrate and lay up.

_The amygdalinum, or oil of almonds._ This is prepared like the
aforementioned, pure bitter almonds being bruised, a little water poured
in, and the oil separated as described above. Some add oz. ij of pounded
almonds to an Italian sextarius of sweet oil, and boil in a double vessel.

_The oil of almonds, which is called metopium._ The Egyptians, who
invented this oil, called it metopium, because it contains galbanum,
and the shrub from which the galbanum is got is called metopium. It
admits the following things: of the oil of unripe olives, sext. xx; of
bitter almonds, lb. ij; of cardamom, lb. j; of the schœnanth, of calamus
aromaticus, of carpobalsam, of each, lb. j; of myrrh, of galbanum, of
each, oz. vj; of turpentine, lb. ij; of fragrant wine to soak the dry
articles, sext. iv; of Attic honey, lb. iij. The rosin and galbanum being
triturated and dissolved in part of the oil, we put them into the other
things boiled, and then add the honey. When all the things are properly
mixed, and while it is still tepid, we remove it from the fire and strain
it, for it becomes thick when it cools.

_The balaninum, or oil of acorns._ The oil of acorns is prepared like the
oil of almonds, from the acorns of oaks.

_The caryinum, or oil of walnuts._ This is prepared like the aforesaid,
from old walnuts.

_Laurinum, or oil of bay._ The plain oil is formed in the same manner
from the fruit of bay, but the mixed is prepared thus: of ripe olives,
sext. j is added to sext. ij of bay-berries, and all pounded and
expressed. Some mix equal parts of each.

_The lentiscinum, or oil of lentisk._ And this is prepared in the same
manner as the oil of bay, from the fruit of lentisk, in two ways, by
itself and with olives, not ripe but sour.

_The mastichinum, or oil of mastich._ The most simple kind is formed
of Chian mastich, oz. j, being added to an Italian sextarius of oil of
unripe olives, and boiled in a double vessel. Some add also, of wormwood
and of storax, of each, oz. j.

_A more complex oil of mastich._ Of oil, sext. L; of elecampane, lb. v;
of xylobalsam, lb. x; of the schœnanth, lb. v; of cardamom, lb. vij; of
mastich, lb. v; of the wood of mastich, lb. viij; of turpentine, lb. iij;
of the hair of wormwood, lb. j; of fragrant wine, sext. v; of water,
sext. j. The dry things being previously macerated in wine for three
days, are mixed with the oil and the water, and boiled for six hours, and
then the mastich and turpentine are added, and being properly mixed are
filtrated, and when cooled are put into a vessel.

_The simple sicyonian, or oil of cucumbers._ This is prepared by adding
oz. ij of the dried root of the wild cucumber to an Italian sextarius of
oil, and boiling in a double vessel.

_The compound oil of cucumbers._ Of oil, sext. x; of the scraped root of
the wild cucumber, lb. j; of wild thyme, of melilot, of each, oz. v; of
fatty dead pines, of marsh-mallows, of each, oz. v; of asplenium, oz. vj;
of fenugreek, sext. ij. The fenugreek is first soaked in the water for
one day and then filtrated, and is added to the things mentioned with oil
and sext. ij of wine; and when all are boiled, there are added of stag’s
marrow, triturated with a little oil, oz. iv; of the grease of fowls,
oz. iv; and when the oil is again filtrated, it is to be deposited in a
vessel. Some also expose it to the sun after boiling forty days.

_Another oil of cucumbers, more efficacious._ Of the juice of elaterium,
sext. iij; of round and of long birthwort, of storax, of elecampane, of
hyssop, of iris, of colocynth, of pennyroyal, of origany, of cyperus, of
frankincense-tree, of centaury, of bay-leaves, of each, oz. ij; of oil,
sext. v. Having mixed, boil until but little of the juice remain.

_The cyprinum, or oil of privet, from the works of Posidonius._ Of
oil, sext. j; of cyperus, of elecampane, of iris, of each, lb. j; of
sampsuchum, of hyssop, of the seed of chaste-tree, of sage, of each, oz.
iij; of the flower of privet, lb. j. All the other things having been
previously macerated in wine for one day, are to be boiled with the oil
for six hours. To the pure filtrated oil the privet is added, if the
green be at hand, with its tender branches not bruised, but otherwise the
dried are to be pounded with a little water, and boiled for an hour and
a half. But if you wish to give it colour after taking it from the fire,
add of pure verdigris, lb. iss. Posidonius, wishing to avoid the acrimony
of the verdigris, directs, after the boiling, to leave the oil for three
days in a vessel not tinned, and it will acquire the colour, with its
powers unimpaired.

_Another formula for the oil of privet._ Of citron-leaves, of bay-leaves,
of iris, of cyperus, of sage, of each, oz. iij; of frankincense-tree,
of the long birthwort, of the seed of chaste-tree, of each, oz. iv; of
elecampane, of rosewood, of each, oz. vj; of rue, oz. ij; of cypress, oz.
ij; of oil, sext. j. Having first macerated these things in wine, boil
with oil; and having filtrated, add again of xylobalsam, of xylocassia,
of each, oz. iv; of sampsuch, of cumin, of myrtle, of storax, of mastich,
of each, oz. iij; of opoponax, oz. ij; of the flower of privet, oz. vj;
of verdigris, oz. j.

_The amaracinum, or oil of marjoram._ Of elecampane, lb. x; of
xylobalsam, lb. xx; of cyperus, lb. viij; of the schœnanth, of rosewood,
of savin, of each, lb. viij; of opoponax, of seed of amaracus, of each,
lb. ij; of primary oil, sext. lxxx; of fragrant oil, sext. v. All the
other things, being first macerated in wine, are to receive the first
addition, but the second addition is to be the savin; and the former
articles are to be boiled six hours, but this only three. Some dip it
and add of verdigris, oz. iij.

_The irinum, or oil of iris._ Of iris, of rosewood, of cyperus, of each,
lb. v; of opoponax, oz. iij; of alkanet, oz. ij; of oil, sext. xxx; of
water, sext. xv. Some add also, of the schœnanth, oz. vj; of cassia, oz.
iij; of xylobalsam, oz. vj; of Celtic nard, oz. vj. All these things,
being bruised, are to be first macerated in water and oil for five days,
and then boiled in a double vessel for six days, and laid up.

_The crocinum, or oil of saffron, in which is contained the composition
of another crocomagma._ Of the fragrant oil of unripe olives, lb. j; of
calamus aromaticus, oz. v; of troglodytic myrrh, oz. v; of cardamom,
oz. vij; of Cilician saffron, oz. vj. The first addition is to be of
the calamus and myrrh, which, being triturated with wine, are to be
macerated for three days, and three times a day stirred with a spatula of
palm: then they are to be boiled with the oil. The second addition is to
consist of the cardamom which has been macerated in the water for one day
before; and the third, of the saffron in wine. Some add other five ounces
of the myrrh with the saffron. Having filtrated, the pure oil is laid up.
The whole deposit of the articles is formed into trochisks, which, being
dried, constitute what is called the crocomagma.

_The Mendesium._ It is so called because it was invented in Egypt where
Mendes is worshipped. It receives of the oil of acorns, lb. x (in another
formula, sext. x); of myrrh, of cassia fistula, of each, oz. iij; of
turpentine, lb. x (in another formula, sext. x); of cinnamon, oz. iij.
This is not boiled, but the dry things being put in, are stirred for
sixty days: then the turpentine being melted, is added to part of the
oil, and afterwards stirred for sixty days, in which state it is laid up.

_The marciatum._ Of mastich, of wax, of storax, of each, oz. iij; of
the medicine œsypum, oz. ss; of opobalsam, oz. iss; of oil of nard, of
gleucinum, of oil of unripe grapes, of each, oz. iij; of stag’s marrow,
oz. iss; of turpentine, oz. j.

_The oil of unripe olives._ The first addition.—Of rosewood, of the
branches of palms, of melilots, of iris, of the schœnanth, of xylobalsam,
of dried roses, of sweet-cane, of each, oz. iij; of oil of unripe olives,
lb. x; of the juice of unripe olives, sext. x.

The second addition.—Of Indian leaf, of amomum, of spikenard, of costus,
of cloves, of cassia, of cassamum, of each, oz. iij (in another formula
also, of arnabo, oz. iij); of wine, q. s.

The third addition.—Of frankincense, of ammoniac perfume, of storax,
of bdellium, of myrrh, of mastich, of each, oz. iij; of wine, q. s.;
of white wax, oz. v; of opobalsam, oz. vj (some make it oz. viij). The
articles of the first addition are to be first macerated for one day
in the juice of unripe olives and the oil; but those of the second in
another vessel, in Aminæan or some other old and fragrant wine, stirring
every day with a spatula of palm three times for three days; after
which boil in a vessel lined with tin; first, the articles of the first
addition until little remain of the unripe olive juice: then, immediately
add those of the second with the wine. But it is better, having first
filtrated, to add these things to the pure oil; and when boiled until
little of the wine be left, in order that the oil may not be burnt, take
it off the fire and filtrate, and add again to the pure oil the succulent
articles of the third addition, which have been previously triturated in
a mortar with wine such as I mentioned, all except the storax, for it, if
added with the other things, is straightway dissolved. And they are to be
boiled upon coals until the preparation appears to be in a proper state,
when it is to be taken off the fire and allowed to cool. Next day, having
filtrated the oil carefully, and warmed it sufficiently upon the fire,
add the wax, and when it is taken off, stir with a spatula. After it is
cooled add the opobalsam, and lay it up in vessels of glass.

_The gleucinum, or oil of must._ The first addition.—Of oil, sext. x;
of Aminæan must, sext. vj; of rose-wood, oz. iv; of palm-branch, oz.
vj; of the schœnanth, oz. vj; of melilots, oz. iv; of roses, oz. j; of
myrrh, oz. iij; of bay-leaves, oz. ij; of frankincense-tree, oz. vj; of
xylobalsam, oz. vj; of elecampane, oz. vj; of long birthwort, oz. iij; of
iris, oz. iij. Macerate these things in the must.

The second addition.—Of Celtic nard, oz. iv; of cassamum (or sow-bread),
oz. ij; of cyperus, of cassia, of spikenard, of asarabacca, of amomum, of
costus, of sampsuch, of each, oz. iij; of calamus aromaticus, of cloves,
of Indian leaf, of each, oz. j; of cardamom, oz. iv. Macerate in fragrant
wine.

The third addition.—Of mastich, oz. iv; of troglodytic myrrh, of
bdellium, of each, oz. ij; of ladanum, oz. iij; of liquid storax, of
male frankincense, of each, oz. iv; of opobalsam, oz. vj (some add also
of saffron, oz. ij). Prepare like the ointment from unripe olives, except
the wax. But here the articles of the two additions are to be macerated
for seven days.

_The nardinum Cyzicenum, or nard oil of Cyzicus._ The first addition.—Of
primary oil, sext. x; of rose-wood, of cyperus, of elecampane, of iris,
of xylobalsam, of birthwort, of cardamom, of the schœnanth, of each,
oz. vj; of sampsuch, oz. iv; of savin, oz. ij. Some add also of calamus
aromaticus, oz. ij. These things are to be macerated in sext. iv of
fragrant wine.

The second addition.—Of cassia, of cassamum, of arnabo, of each, oz. ij;
of spikenard, oz. iij; of cloves, oz. j; of costus, of amomum, of each,
oz. ij (some add also of Celtic nard, oz. ij). These things are to be
macerated in wine.

The third addition.—Of troglodytic myrrh, of aloes, of frankincense, of
each, oz. ij; of storax, oz. iij; of mastich, oz. iv; of opobalsam, oz.
vj (some add also oz. j of saffron, triturated in wine). Prepare this
also as said above.

_The decamyron, or oil containing ten ingredients._ Of spikenard, of
Indian leaf, of euphorbium, of pepper, of costus, of adarce, of each, oz.
j; of mastich, oz. iss; of opobalsam, oz. vj; of oil of nard, lb. j; of
wax, oz. vj.

_The pentamyron._ Of storax, oz. j; of mastich, oz. ij; of white wax, oz.
iij; of opoponax, oz. iv; of nard, oz. v.

_The foliatum, or ointment of Indian leaf._ Of Indian leaf, oz. iij; of
amomum, oz. j; of cassia, oz. vj; of ladanum, oz. j; of white pepper
grains, xl; of troglodytic myrrh, dr. j. These things being bruised and
sifted are to be again triturated in a mortar, with the addition of one
pound of oil of nard. To render the medicine darker, triturate the burnt
barks of walnuts in a mortar, and add; then mix of opobalsam, cochl. iij,
and use.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The preparation of oils and ointments is fully treated of by
Dioscorides in the first book of his Materia Medica; and in like manner
by Pliny (H. N. xv, 7, and xiii, 2.) See also Avicenna (v, 1, 10, 11);
Serapion (vii, 25); Haly Abbas (Pract. x, 19); and Mesue (De Unguentis et
De Oleis.)

Notwithstanding the importance of these articles for medicinal and
pharmaceutical purposes, we think it unnecessary to treat of them more
at large, as our author’s account is sufficiently ample and accurate,
and few articles of any great consequence are omitted by him. It will be
remarked that most of the unguents and ointments here described are of a
fragrant nature.


SECT. XXI.—ON ŒNANTHARIA.

It is not because they contain the wild vine (œnanthe) that they are
called œnantharia, for some of them have no wild vine at all; but it
is from the wine and flower of the lilies that they have obtained this
appellation. The œnantharia are used by some solely for their fragrance,
and for luxury alone; these persons having them poured over their bodies
after coming out of the bath, and having their tables wiped with sponges
dipped in them. But to those who use them properly, they prove remedies
in cases of paralysis and syncope, if mixed with the tonic cataplasms,
for the stomach; and to convalescents more especially from febrile
diseases. They are to be poured upon the bodies of such persons, and
applied to their noses if they can still inhale. For they are drawn in
deeply, and strengthen the mental and vital spirits. They are useful,
likewise, as preservatives from pestilential diseases, when the state
of the atmosphere appears to be of this nature. The following is the
œnantharium of Posidonius, which he calls Mesopotamenum.

_The preparation of the œnantharium._ Of cassia, of myrrh, of
frankincense, of Indian leaf, of amomum, of mastich, of costus, of
carpobalsam, of opobalsam, of each, oz. iij; of fatty storax, oz. iv; of
fragrant Aminæan wine, x Italian sext. Having pounded and filtrated all
the things, divide the storax into small pieces, put into a vessel with
a broad mouth along with the leaves of lilies, dried the preceding day
and stripped of their nails, placing them alternately; let the lilies be
_ccc_ in number; then put in the wine and the opobalsam, which have been
mixed and stirred together before their addition, and having covered up
the mouth of the vessel, expose to the sun for forty days. Use after the
bath, as a restorative from disease, sprinkling the house and vessels
with it, or dipping sponges in it and applying to the face.

_Another, of our own invention._ Of costus, oz. iij; of spikenard, of
arnabo, of cloves, of each, oz. j; of amomum, oz. iij; of cassia, of wild
vine, of calamus, of each, oz. ix; of storax, of opobalsam, of each, oz.
iv; lilies, _ccc_; of Falernian wine, sext. x. Prepare after the same
manner.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See also Aëtius (xii, 116) and Myrepsus (§ 37.) The
Œnantharia were fragrant preparations, made with wine and aromatics. The
prescriptions given by Aëtius and Myrepsus are so similar to our author’s
that we need not repeat them. We are not aware of the Arabian authors
having treated of them anywhere; at all events, they have not done so by
this name.


SECT. XXII.—ON PERFUMES AND CYPHI.

In materials the cyphi are intermediate between the trochisks which are
drunk and the antidotes. We use them sometimes in fumigations on account
of their fragrance, and so also the perfumes; sometimes we smell to them,
in order to concoct catarrhs and defluxions, and as deobstruents, and to
clear the parts about the brain, and as preservatives from pestilential
disorders; they are also taken by the mouth for these purposes, and to
concoct matters lodged in the chest, and for cold affections in the
liver: hence the ancients invented the antidotes called cyphoid. They are
mixed also with compound medicines, and more especially with epithemes
and antidotes.

_Suffimentum rosatum, rose perfume._ Of costus, of amomum, of myrrh, of
cassia, of each, oz. j; of Chian storax, of bdellium, of onyx, of moss,
of ladanum, of each, dr. ij; of pure roses, oz. xxix; of opobalsam, of
wine, q. s.

_Suffimentum liliaceum, the perfume from lilies._ Of lilies deprived of
their nails (i. e. the white parts of their flowers), lb. j; of primary
storax, oz. ix; of spikenard, oz. iij; of costus, of cloves, of amomum,
of mastich, of burnt onyches, of honey, of each, oz. iss; of opobalsam,
oz. v; of wine, q. s. Triturate and form trochisks.

_The cyphi magnum called the solar, consisting of thirty-six
ingredients._ Of storax, of myrrh, of bdellium, of ladanum, of rosewood,
of elecampane, of each, oz. vj; of Celtic nard, of Indian leaf, of
cypress-seed, of ammoniac perfume, of pine-nuts, of the moss of trees
(splanchnon), or, instead of it, of two large onyches, of carpobalsam,
of each, oz. iij; of cassia, of iris, of seseli, of sphagnon (muscus
arboreus?), of cyperus, of cardamom, of sweet-cane, of each, oz. v; of
dried roses, of saffron, of spikenard, of savin, of the root of kingspear
(but some use the juice), of each, oz. iv; of lacaphthus (it is the bark
of a pine or of some other tree), oz. ix; of costus, of the flower of
schœnanth, of each, oz. ij; forty large juniper-berries and fifty small;
of amomum, of turpentine, of pure palm-nuts, of each, lb. j; of dried
figs without their stones, of dried grapes without their stones, of each,
lb. ij; of scummed honey, lb. v. Posidonius adds, likewise, of fragrant
wine, sext. iij.

_Another cyphi, called the lunar, consisting of twenty-eight
ingredients._ Of bdellium, of elecampane, of each, oz. vij; of schœnanth,
oz. ij; of the moss of trees, oz. v; fifty small juniper-berries; of
cardamom, oz. v; of rose-wood, oz. vij; of cassia fistula, oz. v; of
spikenard, oz. ij; of cyperus, oz. v; of the root of kingspear, of savin,
of each, oz. iv; of cypress-seed, of Celtic nard, of malabathrum with the
leaves, of dried roses, of each, oz. iij; of costus, of saffron, of each,
oz. ij; of ladanum, of myrrh, of each, oz. vij; of fatty dried figs, of
grapes deprived of their stones, of each, lb. ij; of pine-nuts, oz. viij;
of turpentine, lb. j; of storax, oz. vij; of fatty palm-nuts, lb. j; of
honey, lb. v; of fragrant wine, q. s.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See Aëtius (xiii, 37); Oribasius (Synopsis, iii); Myrepsus
(i, 299); Actuarius (Meth. Med. v, 6.) These are sweet-smelling
compositions which were used as restoratives, or in order to sooth. The
following _suffitus_ of Oribasius is soporific: Of storax, of amomum,
of costus, of ammoniac perfume, of Scythian bdellium, of the root of
mandrake, of the juice of poppy. The cyphoid antidotes of Myrepsus
are very multifarious compositions, consisting of a great variety of
aromatics, mixed up with honey and fragrant wines.

Similar preparations are described by the Arabians among the confections
and antidotes. See Avicenna, Serapion, and Haly Abbas.


SECT. XXIII.—THE PREPARATION OF MASUCHA, WHICH SOME CALL MASUAPHIUM.

Of melilots, oz. x; of the wood of balsamum, of rose-wood, of savin, of
myrrh, of amomum, of the schœnanth, of bay-leaves, of the fat of myrrh
(_stacte_), of storax, of calamus aromaticus, of sampsuchum, of each,
oz. ij; of iris, oz. v; of Indian leaf, of saffron, of each, oz. j; of
opobalsam, oz. ss; of gum, lb. j; of dried roses, oz. vj; of wine, q. s.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See Aëtius (xiii, 118); Myrepsus (§ xxi, 14); Actuarius
(Meth. Med. v. 8.) The following is Myrepsus’s formula for the
suffimentum called _Masucha_: Of yellow aloes, of bay-leaves, of costus,
of amomum, of cardamom, of cassia, of carpobalsam, of ladanum, of each,
lb. iss; of myrrh, of iris, of melilot, of Indian leaf, of roses, of the
leaves of olive, of Celtic nard, of each, lb. ss oz. iij; of saffron, oz.
iij; of galbanum, oz. ss; of gum, lb. iss; of fragrant wine, q. s.


SECT. XXIV.—ON PESSARIES, FROM THE WORKS OF ANTYLLUS.

Pessaries are applied to the womb. There are three different kinds of
them; for some are emollient, some astringent, and some are anastomative,
i. e. they open the mouths of vessels. We use the emollient in
inflammations of the womb, in ulceration and coldness of it, in ascension
upwards, eversion and inflation thereof. They are prepared from Tuscan
wax, the oil of privet and of lilies, the fat of geese and of fowls,
unsalted butter, burnt rosin, stag’s marrow, fenugreek, and the like. The
anastomative, or those which open the mouths of vessels, are used when
we wish to recall the menstrual purgation that has been stopped, or to
correct the state of the womb when it is shut up or contracted. These are
prepared from honey, mugwort, dittany, the juice of cabbage, liquorice,
the juice of horehound, rue, scammony, or the like. The astringent
are used in cases the reverse of those for which the anastomative are
applied; for they restrain the female discharge, contract the womb when
it is open, and impel it upwards when prolapsed. The materials of the
astringent have been already pointed out in the chapter on Collyria and
Trochisks. The pessary is to be made of the thickness of bath sordes,
and a little thicker; and then some wool, like a narrow tent, is to be
doubled and dipped in the medicine, and applied to the mouth of the womb,
having a long thread attached to it to draw down the pessary readily
when it is thought proper.—The Saffron Pessary, for inflammations,
eversions, hardness, and inflation of the womb: Of white wax, of calf’s
marrow, of each, dr. xvj; of stag’s marrow, dr. xj; of the grease of
geese, dr. viij; of the grease of fowls, dr. viij; of mastich, dr. iv;
of the medicine œsypum, dr. iij; of honey, dr. ij; of saffron, dr. viij;
of rose oil, q. s. Triturate the saffron with the milk of a woman.—The
Golden Pessary, an excellent emollient: Of saffron, dr. j; of unwashed
wool (œsypum), dr. j; of stag’s marrow, dr. ij; of turpentine, of wax,
of the grease of geese, of each, dr. iij; the yelks of sixteen eggs
roasted; of oil, of iris, of roses, q. s.—The Libanian Pessary, being
emmenagogue, and agreeing excellently with affections of the womb: Of
nard ointment, oz. vj; of Tuscan wax, oz. v; of the ointment of lilies,
oz. iv; of fresh hog’s lard, oz. iij; of the grease of geese and of
domestic fowls, of stag’s marrow, and of the ointment of amaracus, of
each, oz. ij; of bull’s tallow, of turpentine, of œsypum, of each, oz. j.
It is dissolved in a double vessel, as are all the other pessaries.—The
Pessary Enneapharmacus: Of the ointment of roses, of that of ricinus,
of turpentine, of wax, of honey, of the grease of geese and of oxen, of
stag’s marrow, and of butter, equal parts.—The Titian emollient Pessary:
Of wax, oz. vj; of Colophonian rosin, oz. ivss; of bull’s tallow, oz.
iv; of ammoniac perfume, oz. iv. Triturate the ammoniac with water.—The
Egyptian Pessary: Of honey, of turpentine, of butter, of oil of roses or
of lilies, of saffron, of each, p. j; and when there is no inflammation
and the parts are foul, of verdigris, p. ss.—The Pessary called Genitura,
for conception: Of butter, oz. vj; of the medicine œsypum, of stag’s
marrow, of the grease of geese and of domestic fowls, of turpentine, of
aloes, of each, oz. iij; of Tuscan wax, oz. vj; of oil of roses, lb. ij;
of myrrh, of cassia, of each, oz. ij; of spikenard, oz. j; of honey, q.
s.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. The pessaries of the ancients bore no resemblance to the
instruments of box-wood and other solid materials now used to prevent
prolapsus of the uterus. Those of the ancients were medicated ointments
or liniments, which were generally applied to the natural parts upon
wool, most commonly for the purpose of correcting the menstrual
discharge. A modern authority describes them in the following terms:
“Pessaries are made like a finger, of medicines for the womb, taken
into a long linen bag, well-waxed, or incorporated with honey, ladanum,
galbanum, wax and juices. They are in shape like a suppository, but
longer and thicker.” Schröder (Chym. Dispensat. p. 134). They were also
frequently resorted to for the wicked purpose of producing abortion.
Hippocrates, in his Oath, obligates the medical apprentice not to give
such a pessary to a woman. Pessaries of this description consisted of
strong stimulants, such as cantharides, elaterium, colocynth, &c. The
emmenagogue pessaries were formed of such-like ingredients, weakened by
mixture with others of less activity.

Celsus gives a very distinct account of pessaries. He says of them:
“Sed alia quoque utilia sunt; ut ea, quæ fœminis subjiciuntur; πεσσους
Græci vocant. Eorum hæc proprietas est: medicamenta composita molli lana
excipiuntur, eaque lana naturalibus conditur.” (v, 21.) He gives formulæ
for seven pessaries. One, for expelling the dead fœtus, consists of
pomegranate rind pounded with water. (v, 21.)

Pessaries are treated of at great length by Oribasius, Aëtius, and
Actuarius, and preparations are described for every imaginable condition
of the uterus. Aëtius gives formulæ for pessaries to procure sterility,
the ingredients of which, for the most part, are powerful astringents
and bitters. But Myrepsus is the most copious writer on this subject,
for he describes the preparation of forty-five pessaries (§ 38). Their
ingredients, of course, are various, according to the purpose for which
they are to be applied. The Emmenagogue consist of cumin, ginger,
birthwort, the pulp of colocynth, castor, musk, rue, &c., mixed up with
wax, suet; or honey.

As there is nothing original in the views of the Arabians, we need only
say with regard to them that they prepared and applied pessaries on
the principles laid down by their Grecian masters. See, in particular,
Rhases (Cont. xxii); Avicenna (iii, 21, 2); Serapion (de Ægritudinibus
Matricis.)


SECT. XXV.—ON MEDICINES WHICH MAY BE SUBSTITUTED FOR ONE ANOTHER, FROM
THE WORKS OF GALEN.

In Alexandria, he says, wishing to obtain the campion (lychnis) for a
certain woman who was in danger, and not having got it, if I had not
found and used the seed of acanthium, the woman would have been soon
lost. Hence, having been requested by my companions, I made out a list
of the medicines which may be substituted for one another, in order,
beginning with this same article:

  Instead of the seed of acanthium, campion (lychnis).
             southern-wood (abrotonum), origany.
             agallochus, sweet-cane (calamus aromaticus).
             agaric, euphorbium.
             Indian aloes, glaucium, lycium, or centaurium.
             winter-cherry (halicacabus), the seed of strychnos.
             asphaltum, the Bruttian liquid pitch.
             aconite or wolfsbane, the root of the wild iris.
             wormwood, southernwood.
             opobalsam, myrtle-juice.
             quicklime (calx-viva), adarce.
             alkanet, hyacinth.
             sal ammoniac, Cappadocian salts.
             arsenic, sandarach.
             starch, dried flour.
             ammoniac perfume, bee-glue.
             rose-wood (aspalathus), the fruit of heath, or the seed of
               the chaste-tree.
             aracus (a species of pulse), Indian corn.
             bitter almonds, wormwood.
             Armenian stone, Indian ink.
             the elder, thorn.
             prickly-poppy (argemone), seriphium.
             kingspear, the juice of beet.
             wall-pepper, the juice or leaves of lettuce.
             maiden-hair, aphroselinum.
             Ethiopian olive, two parts of the tears of acacia.
             Asian stone, gagate stone, or sal ammoniac burnt.
             fox’s grease, that of a bear.
             shoots of the black poplar, sampsuchum.
             buprestis, bugs (blattæ).
             butter, cow’s milk coagulated.
             the juice of balsam, the juice of myrrh.
             bdellium, the aromatic moss of trees (sphagnus).
             gentian root, aromatic parsley.
             Samian earth, the Egyptian leucographis.
             Eretrian earth, Thebaic lime.
             turnip, the sun-flower.
             liquorice juice, the juice of mulberry.
             vulture’s dung, pigeon’s dung.
             soft earth, plumbago.
             dorycnium, the seed of henbane.
             dittany, sage.
             bay-berries, dried wild thyme.
             carrot, the seed of water-parsnip.
             diphryges, Phrygian stone.
             dracunculus, wake-robin.
             sage, calamint.
             the tear of olive, the juice of hypocistis.
             wild thyme, potamogeton.
             the seed of rocket, the seed of hedge-mustard.
             the juice of elaterium, the juice of the leek.
             the seed of hedge-mustard, soapwort.
             the fruit of heath, the gall omphacitis.
             ebeny, the wood of the lotus.
             the leaves of wild fig, the dung of ibis (?).
             the root of butcher’s broom, the leaves of the mulberry (?).
             black hellebore, the root of papyrus (?).
             enneaphyllon, the potamogeton.
             old oil, boil a double quantity of oil with old hog’s lard.
             ginger, pellitory.
             deadly carrot (thapsia), the juice of the black chamæleon.
             thapsia, the seed of cresses or rocket.
             sulphur vivum, red arsenic (sandarach).
             the rust of iron (rubigo ferri), the squama ferri.
             the mistletoe of the oak, that of black chamæleon.
             Illyrian iris, the aromatic elecampane.
             cinnamon, double the quantity of cassia.
             cyperus, the large juniper.
             cardamom, cyperus.
             costus, juniper-berries.
             juniper-berries, ladanum.
             calamus aromaticus, the moss of trees.
             saffron, crocomagma.
             crocomagma, Indian aloes.
             castor, laserwort (assafœtida).
             calamine, the Egyptian leucographis.
             the tallow of the crocodile, that of the sea-dog.
             hemlock (conium), the seed of coriander.
             cantharides, phalangia.
             the seed of bastard saffron, the seed of chaste-tree.
             the juice of ivy, that of peach.
             the palma Christi, the sordes from the palestra.
             the root of capers, the root of heath or tamarisk.
             the dung of the turtle, pigeon’s dung.
             ceraunium, leucographis.
             coral, moly.
             cat’s dung, that of the ichneumon.
             dragon’s blood (cinnabaris), the rhodoides.
             cumin, the seed of cabbage.
             field basil (clinopodium), the sun-flower.
             calamint, the wild mint.
             colocynth, the seed of the palma Christi called croton.
             navelwort (cotyledon), the onocardium.
             Colophonian rosin, the pitch of ships.
             cynosbatos, the seed of the winter cherry.
             linseed, the juice of beans.
             pumice stone, Cretan earth.
             cyphi, burnt dried fig.
             buccina, oysters.
             cardamom, xylocarpasum.
             wax, bruised beans boiled and pounded with bee-glue.
             frankincense, the terra ampelitis.
             lathyrides (a species of spurge), the granum Cnidium.
             dittander (lepidium), madder.
             the magnet, the Phrygian stone.
             the Phrygian stone, the agerat.
             the seed of lovage, the seed of carrot.
             the stone pyrites, the stone pyrobolus.
             the flower of the stock gilly-flower, soapwort.
             the seed of the lotus, the seed of beet.
             the root of dittander, the leaves of capers.
             the sea-hare, the sea-shell(?).
             the root of dock, the root of pellitory.
             Indian leaf (malabathrum), cassia or Indian nard.
             mandrake (mandragora), dorycnium.
             myrtle oil, the juice of mulberry.
             mastich, the juice of lentisk(?).
             myrobalan, rue.
             mallows, fenugreek.
             honey, rob.
             manna (of frankincense?), the bark of frankincense.
             mice dung, an equal quantity of flies.
             stag’s marrow, stag’s grease or the marrow of a calf.
             quinces, melilots.
             Cyprian misy, Cyprian ochre.
             spignel, myrobalan.
             the juice of mulberries, the leaves of brambles.
             roasted misy, diphryges.
             Syriac nard, the aromatic rush.
             navew, turnip-seed (?).
             xylobalsam, the root of stock gilly-flower.
             poppy-juice, the juice of mandragora.
             opoponax, the milk of mulberry.
             Cyrenaic juice, Syriac juice.
             juice of carpasum, the juice of myrtle.
             juice of the fig, the juice of mulberry.
             juice of the willow, the juice of the black ivy.
             juice of the rose bay, the mistletoe of the oak.
             juice of the œnanthe, that of the cultivated vine-tree.
             all-good (horminum), linseed.
             rice, barley-flour.
             Italian wine, Mendesian wine.
             Rhodian wine, austere wine.
             the star of Bethlehem (ornithogallum), anthyllis.
             the unripe olive, the gall omphacitis.
             onocardium, the herb psyche.
             juice of hog’s fennel, liquorice-juice.
             bee-glue, ladanum.
             canker-worm of the pine, the wasps on the unripe rosin.
             pepper, ginger.
             fern, the seed of cneoros.
             polypody, the root of mezereon, or of the chamæleon.
             vervain, ground poplar.
             polytrichon, wormwood.
             rosin of the fir-tree, turpentine rosin.
             dried roses, the dried leaves of the peach-tree.
             oil of radishes, the oil of ricinus (castor oil).
             rhodoides, Sinopic ochre.
             Colophonian rosin, the pitch of ships.
             aromatic rush, cardamom.
             Cyprian spodium, the ashes of olive-leaves.
             troglodytic myrrh, the calamus aromaticus.
             stag’s grease, the grease of geese.
             grease of the hyena, the grease of foxes.
             grease of the fox, the grease of the bear.
             root of soapwort, the root of the black hellebore.
             satyrium, the seed of rocket.
             salamander, the green lizard.
             aromatic moss of trees, the sweet-rush.
             syricum (psoricum?), litharge.
             dross of lead, the scoria argenti.
             marjoram (sampsuchum), the dried culinary sumach.
             mustard, cresses.
             sagapen, dried pine rosin.
             scammony, the internal parts of the seed of palma Christi.
             pine-nuts, the seed of cucumber.
             alum, fossile salt.
             the skink, satyrium.
             antimony, the squama æris.
             sweet rush, the root of knot-grass.
             dross of copper, the Egyptian melanteria.
             water-cress, basil.
             cultivated grape, the flesh of the Syrian palm.
             Saunder’s herb, southernwood,
             the shell of the cuttle-fish, pumice-stone.
             orchis (serapias), the root of pœony.
             squill, bolbus.
             sesamoides, what remains after the filtration of amaranth.
             Indian grain, linseed.
             the seed of henbane, the seed of sweet briar.
             juice of hypocistis, the juice of acacia.
             liquid pitch, opoponax.
             unscoured wool (œsypum), the marrow of a calf.
             hyacinth, the flower of woad.
             St. John’s wort, the seed of dill.
             burnt lees of wine, sandarach.
             sea-weed, alkanet.
             valerian, the moss of trees.
             the gall of the hyæna, the gall of partridge.
             the gall of the viper, that of the ichneumon.
             gall of the shrew-mouse, that of the camel.
             gall of the camel, that of the swift.
             galbanum, sagapen.
             germander, the root of the wild dock.
             chamomile, anthemis.
             ceruse, the dross of lead (scoria plumbi).
             fleawort, the marsh lentil (lens palustris).
             basil (ocimum), water-cress (sisymbrium).
             ocimoides, the wild mint.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. This is taken from a work ascribed to Galen, the authenticity
of which, however, is very doubtful. Cornarius has attempted many
corrections of the text, and we have found ourselves compelled to make
other alterations.


SECT. XXVI.—ON WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.

The weight is determined by the degree of heaviness; the measure by the
capacity of the vessel: but the vessel is the measure either of a dry or
of a liquid quantity. So then there are three differences of a measured
quantity: first, that of weight; second, that of a dry substance, and, as
it were, of such things as can be heaped; and third, that of a liquid.
There being many and almost infinite varieties of weights and measures
according to the practice of places, and of those who use them, we shall
treat only of those which are familiar to all.

_On the characters used by the Greeks for indicating weights and
measures._ But since some do not indicate these by whole letters, but by
characters, it will be better for us, in imitation of the ancients, to
explain these characters in the first place.

    Transcriber’s Note: The symbols in this paragraph are included
    as illustrations in the HTML version.

First, then, the letter χ having alpha placed above it, signifies
_chalcus_ (i. e. _æreus_), thus [symbol]; but if the χ has ο, _chus_
(i. e. _congius_), thus [symbol]; but if οι, _chœnix_, thus [symbol];
but if η, _cheme_, thus [symbol]; Κ if it has ε placed above it, and
a straight line obliquely intersecting the lower curvature of it
indicates _ceration_ (i. e. _siliqua_), thus [symbol]; but if the Κ has
υ, _cyathus_, thus [symbol] and if ο _cotyle_ (i. e. _hemina_), thus
[symbol]. The circumflex line not surrounded by anything, and placed
altogether obliquely, indicates _obolus_, thus 𐅼; but if there are
two lines not surrounded, they signify two oboli, thus 𐅽, which make
a _gramma_ (i. e. _scrupulum_), which is indicated by γ having ρ near
it, intersected by a straight line, thus [symbol]. Two lines united at
one extremity so as to make an angle, like the two wings which join the
straight line of the letter K, indicate _drachma_ (or _drachm_), which
is synonymous with _holca_, thus [symbol]. But the _holca_ is properly
indicated by λ with ο in its middle, thus [symbol]. But if the λ has ι,
it indicates _libra_ (a pound), thus [symbol]. Some, however, indicate
a pound, by another line intersecting the line of the λ obliquely,
thus [symbol]. But Γ having the letter o within its angle, signifies
_uncia_ (an _ounce_), thus [symbol]. The letter μ having ν in its
middle, indicates _mna_, or _mina_, thus [symbol]; but if the μ has
υ, it indicates _mystrum_, thus [symbol]; but if ε, _medimnus_, thus
[symbol]; and if ο, _modius_, thus [symbol]. The letter τ followed by a
ρ with a υ about it, indicates _tryblium_, thus [symbol]. The letter χ,
if it has ε placed above it, indicates _xestes_ (i. e. _sextarius_), thus
[symbol]. But if it has ο written above, it signifies _oxybaphum_ (i.
e. _acetabulum_), thus [symbol]. Some indicate a sextarius by a χ, with
a straight line intersecting it, thus [symbol]. The letter η, having μ
placed above it, indicated _hemina_, thus [symbol]. The letter κ prefixed
to ρ, and having μ placed above it, indicates _ceramium_, thus [symbol].


_On Weights._

  The Attic and Egyptian _mna_ (i. e. _mina_) contains oz. xvj.
  The Roman mina                                     ”  oz. xx.
  The _libra_ (i. e. _pound_)                       ”  oz. xij.
  The _uncia_ (i. e. _ounce_)                      ”  dr. viij.
  The _drachma_ (i. e. _drachm_)                   ”  scr. iij.
  The _scrupulus_ (i. e. _scruple_)                ”  oboli ij.
  The _obolus_                 contains ceratia or siliquæ iij.
  The _siliqua_ contains chalci (i. e. _ærei_ or _æreoli_) ij. and ⅔.
            So that an obolus contains viij æreoli.


_On the Measures of Liquids._

    The Italic _ceramium_ contains choes (or _congii_) viij.

    The _chus_ or _congius_ contains sextarii vj.

    The _sextarius_ contains cotylæ ij, which are also called
    tryblia.

    The _cotyla_, or _tryblium_, contains great mystra iij, but
    acetabula iv.

    The _great mystrum_ contains acetabulum j, and a third.

    The _acetabulum_ contains cyathus j, and a half.

    The _cyathus_ contains _small chemæ_, or _small mystra_ ij.

But if you would wish to know the measure of the weights of liquids (for
there are many differences of liquid substances according to weight),
we shall illustrate this by the example of oil, wine, and honey. Honey,
then, is heavier than wine by a fourth part, and a tenth part more, which
makes altogether almost a third part. For the same measure of honey as
of wine contains the weight of the wine and a third part more. Honey is
heavier than oil by one half; for it contains the whole weight of the
oil, and a half part of the weight besides. Wine exceeds oil by a ninth
part, for it contains the whole weight of the oil and a ninth part more.
In order to make this appear more manifest, we shall subjoin, as in a
diagram, the proportion of the particular measures, it being obvious that
the words _oil_, _wine_, and _honey_, are to be understood as expressed
in every line of the series.

  The Italian        _Of oil._   _Of wine._          _Of honey._
  Ceramium contains  lib. lxxij  lib. lxxx           lib. cviij.
  Chus, or congius   lib. ix     lib. x              lib. xiiss.
  Sextarius          oz. xviij   oz. xx              oz. xxvij.
  Cotyle or hemina   oz. ix      oz. x               oz. xiiiss.
  Great mystrum      oz. iij     oz. iij, scr. viij  oz. ivss.
  Acetabulum         dr. xviij   oz. ij, scr. xij    oz. iij, scr. ix.
  Cyathus            dr. xij     oz. iss, scr. iv    oz. ij, dr. ij.
  Small mystrum      dr. vj      scr. xx             dr. ix.

Oribasius says, on the authority of Adamantius, that the Italian
sextarius of wine contains oz. xxiv by measure, but lb. j oz. viij by
weight; and that a sextarius of honey contains lb. iiss by weight.


_On the Measures of Dry Substances._

    The Egyptian _artaba_ contains modii iij.

    The Egyptian and Italian _modius_ contains chœnices viij.

    The _chœnix_ contains sextarii ij.

    The _sextarius_ contains two semisextarii, which are called
    heminæ.

    The _hemina_ contains cyathi viij.

    The Attic _medimnus_ contains hemiecta xij.

    The _hemiecton_ contains chœnices iv. Hence the medimnus
    contains modii vj, chœnices xlviij, and sextarii xcvj.

But of these it is not easy to give the weight, because of dry things the
difference, according to the inclination of the balance, is immense.


_The end of the Seventh and Last Book of_ PAULUS ÆGINETA.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMMENTARY. See, further, Galenus (De Pond. et Mens.); Cleopatra (De
P. et M.); Celsus (v, 17); Pliny (H. N. xxi, 34); Rhemnus Fannius (De
Pond. et Metr.); Marcellus Empiricus; Pollux (Onomast.); Hesychius et
Suidas (pluries); Serapion (de Antid. vii, 37); Avicenna (v, 2, 8.) The
best modern writers on the weights and measures of the ancients are,
Arbuthnot (On Ancient Coins, Weights, and Measures); Milligan (Præfatio
et Notæ in Celsum); Poucton (Métrologie); Raper (Philosoph. Transact.
London, 1770, 1771); J. F. Wurm (De Pond. &c.); Conger (Weights,
Measures, &c. of the Greeks and Romans.)

Since a proper knowledge of this subject is indispensably necessary, in
order to attain a practical acquaintance with ancient pharmacy, we shall
not scruple to avail ourselves freely of the information contained in
the works of the modern authorities referred to above. It will be seen,
that in the following sketch, we have followed Arbuthnot very closely;
indeed, it is proper to mention, that when we originally wrote this, our
concluding Commentary, we were not acquainted with the labours of Wurm
and Conger. We now remark that, although the later authorities agree with
Arbuthnot on general principles, they differ from him on a few points, as
will be perceived upon a comparison of his tables with those of Conger.
The discrepance between them, we find, arises from two causes, only one
of which, it will be observed, is of any practical importance. First:
Arbuthnot mixes the fractional with the decimal mode of computation,
whilst Conger uses the decimal method alone. Second: They give different
estimates of the length of the Pes. For example, Arbuthnot states the
contents of the _ligula_ to be ¹⁄₄₈ pint, and the decimals ·117⁵⁄₁₂ solid
inch; whereas Conger rates it at the decimals ·62 pint, or the decimals
·69 solid inch. Now the 48th part of a pint equals the decimal ·6, which,
when added to the former decimals ·117 solid inch, amounts to ·717: the
difference between this number and ·69 is ·027, which being multiplied
successively by the tabular values of the ligula, cyathus, acetabulum,
&c., and the product divided by the number of solid inches in a pint,
gives 12 pints, or 1 gal. 2 qts. as the difference between Arbuthnot’s
and Conger’s contents of the amphora. By Arbuthnot’s table the contents
of the amphora is 7 gal. 1 pint, 10·66 solid inches; by Conger’s, it is 5
gal. 2 qts. 1 pint, and the decimal ·64 of a pint. For example,

                        _gal._ _qts._ _pts._ _sol. inch._
  Arbuthnot’s amphora =   7      0      1       10·66
  Conger’s       ”    =   5      2      1
                          ---------------------------
             Difference   1      2      0       10·66

The Pes is the standard from which the contents of the amphora, and of
the other names of weights and measures in the table are deduced; and,
as our authorities assign slightly different estimates to the length of
the pes, the other measures in the table are consequently affected by
this difference in the assumed standard. Arbuthnot assumes the pes to be
11·604 inches, whereas Conger, with the later authorities, makes it to be
·97075 ft. or 11·649 inches. Now the amphora, being the cube of the pes,
equals, according to Arbuthnot, 1562·5112 solid inches, whereas the cube
of Conger’s pes makes the amphora to contain 1580·75 solid inches.

Having thus pointed out the source of the discrepance between the tables
of Arbuthnot and the later authorities, we shall now proceed with our
extracts, beginning with Dr. Milligan, who, although he can have no
pretensions to be reckoned an original authority on the subject, has been
particularly fortunate in giving from Targa and Arbuthnot, a very lucid
exposition of the weights, measures, and characters, which occur in the
works of Celsus.


Extracts from Dr. Milligan’s edition of Celsus.


_Characterum in Celso obvenientium Tabula._

  P             = Pondo: cum aliis notis junctum quasi pondere; Anglice,
                    _by weight_, significat.
  P., per se    = 1 Libra.
  𐆖             = 1 Denarius.
  𐆐 non per se  = 1 sextantem denominationis antecedentis signat.
  𐆐 per se      = fere unius drachmæ sextantem.
  𐆐 𐆐           = 2 sextantis.
  ⍪             = 1 sextantem.
  —             = ½ sextantis.
  Z             = 1 sextantem.
  8             = 1 sextantem.

Porro P. 𐆐, P ⍪, P Z, P 8, characteres compositi sunt, qui omnino
secundum tabulam superiorem, libræ sextantem singuli significant. Pari
quoque ratione, P. 𐆖. 𐆐, P. 𐆖. ⍪, P. 𐆖. Z, P. 𐆖. 8, denarii sextantem,
vel unciæ quadrigesimam secundam partem designat.

Notæ Celsi lectoribus negotii nonnihil facessere solent. Cum ipso igitur,
id anticipandum nobis erit; ut ponderum divisio quam decimo septimo
libri quinti capite descripsit, hic quasi prærogetur.

  Libra    }       { Uncias duodecim.
  Uncia    }       { Denarios septem.
  Denarius } valet { Sextantes sex.
  Sextans  }       { Obolum unum.
  Obolus   }       { Scrupulum dimidium.

Denarius autem (Greaves, Diss. on the Denarius) grana 62 (_English Troy
weight_) habebat; unde unciæ essent 434, sextanti ejus 10⅓ grana; fere
scrupulum dimidium, ut Celsus, loco citato, docet.

His præposites scire licet,

ά. _Notam P._, per se libram significare.

β´. _Notam_ 𐆐, sextatem indifferenter significare, sed non drachmæ magis
quam libræ, vel cujuslibet denominationis præcedentis, sextantem. Sic
_Notam_ P. 𐆐, uncias duas æquare.

γ´. _Notam_ 𐆐 𐆐, duos sextantes indicare.

δ´. _Notam_ 𐆑, sextantis dimidium representare.

έ. _Notam_ 𐆖, Denarium indicare 𐆐 ⅐ unciæ. Quam vero notam, propter
similitudinem, librarii sæpe cum X, _decem_ indicante confundunt. Nam 𐆖,
perinde ac X decem olim significabat.

Videmus ergo _Notam_ P, libram esse; cum aliis autem notis _pondo_
significat, quasi _pondere_ (Anglice _by weight_) adeo ut ista textus P.
𐆖 𐆐, Denarii sextantem _pondere_, vel grana 10⅓ indicet. Pari ratione P.
𐆖, denarius pondere, vel absolute denarius, qui grana 62, est.

Porro P. 𐆐, P Z, P 8, P⍪, libræ sextantem pondere: P. 𐆖. 𐆐, P. 𐆖 Z, P. 𐆖
8, P. 𐆖 ⍪, denarii sextantem, vel unciæ quadragesimam secundam partem,
designant.

_Constat_ 1. Denarium Romanum grana Trojana Britannica 62⁴⁄₇ pependisse.

2. Pedem Romanum pollicum Britannicorum 11·604 valuisse.

Ab his sequitur, pedem Romanum, ad pendulum latitudinis Londinii per
spatium inane, ad 62 Farenheiti thermometri calefactum, oscillans,
rationem habere quam 11·604 ad 39·1393. Porro congium Romanum ad congium
(_gallon_) Britannicum Imperialem, ut 189·64 ad 274, esse.


_Tabula Ponderum et Mensurarum Pliniana._

                                           =   1 obolus =   10 chalci.
  1 denarius argenteus =  1 drachma Attica =   6 oboli  =   60 chalci.
  1 cyathus            =  10 drachmæ       =  60 oboli  =  600 chalci.
  1 acetabulum         =  15 drachmæ       =  90 oboli  =  900 chalci.
  1 hemina             =  60 drachmæ       = 360 oboli  = 3600 chalci.
  1 mna                = 100 drachmæ       = 600 oboli  = 6000 chalci.


_Tabula Ponderum Celsiana._

                                         1 sextans     =  1 obolus.
                          1 scrupulus =  2 + sextantes =  2 + oboli.
            1 denarius =  3 scrupuli  =  6 sextantes   =  6 oboli.
  1 uncia = 7 denarii  = 21 scrupuli  = 42 sextantes   = 42 oboli.

Sed ut ostendemus, 1 denarius = 62 grana (Troy weight), hinc 62 grana =
1 denarius = 6 sextantes = 6 oboli; dividendo, 10⅓ grana = 1 sextans = 1
obolus.


_Tabula, pondera Trojana, tam mensurarum capacitatis, tam gravitatis,
Romanorum sistens._

        Urna. Libra. Uncia. Denarius. Scrupulus. Sextans. Chalcus. Grana.
  Amphora = 2 = 80  = 960    = 6720  = 20160  = 40320 = 403200 = 420480
  Urna      1 = 40  = 480    = 3360  = 10080  = 26160 = 210600 = 210240
  Congius   ¼ = 10  = 120    =  840  =  2540  =  5040 =  50400 =  52920
  Sextarius      1⅔ =  20    =  140  =   420  =   840 =   8400 =  8760
  Libra          1  =  12    =   84  =   252  =   504 =   5040 =  5256
  Hemina                8⁴⁄₇ =   60  =   180  =   360 =   3600 =  3759
  Acetabulum            2⅐   =   15  =    45  =    90 =    900 =   939
  Sesqi-cyathus         2⅐   =   15  =    45  =    90 =    900 =   939
  Cyathus               1³⁄₇ =   10  =    30  =    60 =    600 =   626
  Sescuncia             1½   =   10½ =    31½ =    63 =    630 =   657
  Uncia                 1    =    7  =    21  =    42 =    420 =   438
  Cochleare                       2½ =     7½ =    15 =    150 =   156
  Drachma                         1  =     3  =     6 =     60 =    62⁴⁄₇
  Denarius                        1  =     3  =     6 =     60 =    62⁴⁄₇
  Scrupulus                                1  =     2 =     20 =    20⅔
  Scrupulus dimidiatus                      ½ =     1 =     10 =    10⅓
  Obolus                                            1 =     10 =    10⅓
  Sextans                                           1 =     10 =    10⅓
  Chalcus                                                    1 =     1¹⁄₃₆

Denario infra hanc lineam 62 grana, compendii numerique rotundandi
gratia tribuimus. Qui accuratiora volunt ⁴⁄₇ illud Grævii in valorem per
denariorum columnam ducant, et nostris superaddant.

Sed post tot annorum lapsum, quomodo ista pondera ad nostra Trojana
referamus? Diligentia antiquariorum illud perfacile effecit. Inclytus
enim _J. Grævesius_ Angliæ decus, pondus _Denarii_, per plurima
exemplarium centena, in Italicis aliisque cimeliis conservata, ipsa
statera trutinavit: et pondus omnium meliorum denariorum ad grana
Trojana 62⁴⁄₇ librare reperit. Sed cognito denarii, qui veteribus non
tantum nummus fuit, sed ponderis rerum arbiter, pondere, ceterarum
denominationum valorem calculo simplicissimo, in granis Trojanis habebis.


_Tabula Ponderum ac Mensurarum relationis quas passim Celsus usurpavit._

                                    Septunx.
                               Semis.    Bes.
                           Quincunx.           Dodarans.
                       Triens.                       Dextans.
                   Quadrans.                                Deunx.
               Sextans.                                            Quævis
  Unc.                                                             unctar.
   1 Uncia 1 = ½ = ⅓ = ¼ = ⅕ = ⅙ = ⅐   = ⅛   = ⅑   = ⅒   = ¹⁄₁₁  = ¹⁄₁₂
   2 Sextans   1 = ⅔ = ½ = ⅖ = ⅓ = ²⁄₇ = ¼   = ²⁄₉ = ⅕    = ²⁄₁₁  = ⅙
   3 Quadrans      1 = ¾ = ⅗ = ½ = ³⁄₇ = ⅜   = ⅓   = ³⁄₁₀ = ³⁄₁₁  = ¼
   4 Triens            1 = ⅘ = ⅔ = ⁴⁄₇ = ½   = ⁴⁄₉ = ⅖    = ⁴⁄₁₁  = ⅓
   5 Quincunx              1 = ⅚ = ⁵⁄₇ = ⅝   = ⁵⁄₉ = ½    = ⁵⁄₁₁  = ⁵⁄₁₂
   6 Semis                     1 = ⁶⁄₇ = ²⁄₄ = ⅔   = ⅗    = ⁶⁄₁₁  = ½
   7 Septunx                       1   = ⅞   = ⁷⁄₉ = ⁷⁄₁₀ = ⁷⁄₁₁  = ⁷⁄₁₂
   8 Bes                                 1   = ⁸⁄₉ = ⅘    = ⁸⁄₁₁  = ⅔
   8 Octunx                              1   = ⁸⁄₉ = ⅘    = ⁸⁄₁₁  = ⅔
   9 Dodrans                                   1   = ⁸⁄₁₀ = ⁹⁄₁₁  = ¾
  10 Dextans                                         1    = ¹⁰⁄₁₁ = ⅚
  11 Deunx                                                  1     = ¹¹⁄₁₂

  Unc.        |Characteres.
   1 Uncia    | ⊥
   2 Sextans  | 𐆐, Z
   3 Quadrans | 𐆐 𐆑
   4 Triens   | 𐆐 𐆐
   5 Quincunx | 𐆐 𐆑 𐆐
   6 Semis    | S. S.ʺ
   7 Septunx  | V.
   8 Bes      | 𐆑 S. 𐆑
   8 Octunx   | 𐆑 S 𐆑
   9 Dodrans  | S 𐆐 𐆑
  10 Dextans  | S 𐆐 𐆐
  11 Deunx    | S 𐆐 𐆑 𐆐

His cujusvis unitatis, libræ, unciæ, denarii, congii, partes duodecimæ,
hoc est unciæ, distributæ erant.


Extracts from Dr. ARBUTHNOT’S Tables of Ancient Coins, Weights, and
Measures.


1. _Roman Measures of Capacity for things Liquid._

                                                     English Wine Measure.
                                                   Gall. Pints. Sol. Inc.
                                                                  Dec.

   Ligula                                              0  0¹⁄₄₈  0·117⁵⁄₁₂
  +-----+
  |    4| Cyathus                                      0  0¹⁄₁₂  0·469⅔
  +-----+------+
  |    6|    1½| Acetabulum                            0  0⅛     0·704½
  +-----+------+----+
  |   12|    3 |   2| Quartarius                       0  0¼     1·409
  +-----+------+----+----+
  |   24|    6 |   4|   2| Hemina                      0  0½     2·818
  +-----+------+----+----+----+
  |   48|   12 |   8|   4|   2| Sextarius              0  1      5·636
  +-----+------+----+----+----+---+
  |  288|   72 |  48|  24|  12|  6| Congius            0  7      4·942
  +-----+------+----+----+----+---+---+
  | 1152|  288 | 192|  96|  48| 24|  4| Urna           3  4½     5·33
  +-----+------+----+----+----+---+---+--+
  | 2304|  576 | 384| 192|  96| 48|  8| 2| Amphora     7  1     10·66
  +-----+------+----+----+----+---+---+--+--+
  |46080|11520 |7680|3840|1920|960|160|40|20| Culeus 143  3     11·095
  +-----+------+----+----+----+---+---+--+--+-----------------------------


2. _Attic Measures of Capacity for things Liquid._

                                                     English Wine Measure.
                                                   Gall. Pints. Sol. Inc.
                                                                  Dec.

   Κοχλιάριον                                             0  ¹⁄₁₂₀  0·0356
  +------+
  |   2  | Χήμη                                           0  ¹⁄₆₀   0·0712
  +------+------+
  |   2½ |   1¼ | Μύστρον                                 0  ¹⁄₄₈   0·089
  +------+------+----+
  |   5  |   2½ |   2| Κόγχη                              0  ¹⁄₂₄   0·178
  +------+------+----+----+
  |  10  |   5  |   4|   2| Κύαθος                        0  ¹⁄₁₂   0·356
  +------+------+----+----+-----+
  |  15  |   7½ |   6|   3|  1½ | Ὀξύβαφον                0  ⅛      0·535
  +------+------+----+----+-----+---+
  |  60  |  30  |  24|  12|  6  |  4| Κοτύλη              0  ½      2·141
  +------+------+----+----+-----+---+---+
  | 120  |  60  |  48|  24| 12  |  8|  2| Ξέστης          0   1     4·283
  +------+------+----+----+-----+---+---+--+
  | 720  | 360  | 288| 144| 72  | 48| 12| 6| Χόυς         0   6    25·698
  +------+------+----+----+-----+---+---+--+--+
  |8640  |4320  |3456|1728|864  |576|144|72|12| Μετρητής 10   2    19·626
  +------+------+----+----+-----+---+---+--+--+---------------------------


3. _Attic Measures of Capacity for things Dry._

                                          English Corn Measure.
                                      Pecks. Gals. Pints. Sol. Inch.

   Κοχλιάριον                            0     0     0      0·276
  +----+
  |  10| Κύαθος                          0     0     0      2·763
  +----+-----+
  |  15|  1½ | Ὀξύβαφον                  0     0     0      4·144
  +----+-----+---+
  |  60|  6  |  4| Κοτύλη                0     0     0     16·579
  +----+-----+---+---+
  | 120| 12  |  8|  2| Ξέστης            0     0     0     33·158
  +----+-----+---+---+----+
  | 180| 18  | 12|  3| 1½ | Χοῖνιξ       0     0     1     15·705
  +----+-----+---+---+----+--+
  |8640|864  |576|144|72  |48| Μέδιμνος  4     0     6      3·501
  +----+-----+---+---+----+--+---------------------------------------

N.B. Besides this _Medimnus_, which is the _Medicus_, there was a
_Medimnus Georgius_, equal to 6 Roman Modii.


4. _Less ancient Grecian and Roman Weights reduced to English Troy
Weight._

                                                 Lb. Oz. Dwts.  Grs.

   Lentes                                         0   0   0    0⁸⁵⁄₁₁₂
  +----+
  |   4| Siliquæ                                  0   0   0    3¹⁄₂₈
  +----+----+
  |  12|   3| Obolus                              0   0   0    9³⁄₂₈
  +----+----+---+
  |  24|   6|  2| Scrupulum                       0   0   0   18³⁄₁₄
  +----+----+---+---+
  |  72|  18|  6|  3| Drachma                     0   0   2    6⁹⁄₁₄
  +----+----+---+---+----+
  |  96|  24|  8|  4| 1⅓ | Sextula                0   0   3    6⁶⁄₇
  +----+----+---+---+---------+
  | 144|  36| 12|  6| 2  | 1½ | Sicilicus         0   0   4   13²⁄₇
  +----+----+---+---+----+----+----+
  | 192|  48| 16|  8| 2⅔ | 2  | 1⅓ | Duella       0   0   6    1⁵⁄₇
  +----+----+---+---+----+----+----+--+
  | 576| 144| 48| 24| 8  | 6  | 4  | 3| Uncia     0   0  18    5⅐
  +----+----+---+---+----+----+----+--+--+
  |6912|1725|576|288|96  |72  |48  |36|12| Libra  0  10  18   13⁵⁄₇
  +----+----+---+---+----+----+----+--+--+---------------------------

N.B. The Roman ounce is the English avoirdupois ounce which they divided
into 7 denarii as well as 8 drachms; and since they reckoned their
denarius equal to the Attic drachm, this will make the Attic weights ⅛
heavier than the correspondent Roman weights.


The above Tables are thus given by CONGER.


I. _Roman Measures of Capacity._

For Liquids (Unit: Amphora = 5⁷⁄₁₀ gallons).

                                                   Cub. inch.|Gal.   Pints.
                                                             |   Qts.
   Ligula                                                0·69|        0·02
  +-----+                                                    |
  |    4| Cyathus                                        2·74|        0·08
  +-----+------+                                             |
  |    6     1½| Acetabulum                              4·12|        0·12
  +------------+---+                                         |
  |   12     3    2| Quartarius                          8·23|        0·24
  +----------------+----+                                    |
  |   24     6    4    2| Hemina                        16·47|        0·48
  +---------------------+----+                               |
  |   48    12    8    4    2| Sextarius                32·93|        0·95
  +--------------------------+---+                           |
  |  288    72   48   24   12   6| Congius             197·59|     2  1·70
  +------------------------------+---+                       |
  | 1152   288  192   96   48  24   4| Urna            799·38|  2  3  0·82
  +----------------------------------+--+                    |
  | 2304   576  384  192   96  48   8  2| Amphora     1580·75|  5  2  1·64
  +-------------------------------------+--+                 |
  |46080 11520 7680 3840 1920 960 160 40 20| Culeus  31615·01|114  0  0·80
  +----------------------------------------+-----------------+-------------


II. _Grecian Measures of Capacity._

For Liquids (Unit. Μετρητής = 8½ gallons).

                                                        Cub. inch.|
                                                                  |
   Κοχλιάριον                                                 0·27|
  +-----+                                                         |
  |   2 | Χήμη                                                0·55|
  +-----+----+                                                    |
  |   2½   1¼| Μύστρον                                        0·69|
  +----------+---+                                                |
  |   5    2½   2| Κόγχη                                      1·37|
  +--------------+----+                                           |
  |  10    5    4    2| Κύαθος                                2·74|
  +-------------------+----+                                      |
  |  15    7½   6    3   1½| Ὀξύβαφον                         4·12|
  +------------------------+--+                                   |
  |  30   15   12    6   3   2| Τέταρτον                      8·23|
  +---------------------------+---+                               |
  |  60   30   24   12   6   4   2| Κοτύλη                   16·47|
  +-------------------------------+---+                           |
  | 120   60   48   24  12   8   4   2| Ξέστης               32·93|
  +-----------------------------------+--+                        |
  | 720  360  288  144  72  48  24  12  6| Χοῦς             197·59|
  +--------------------------------------+--+                     |
  |4320 2160 1782  864 432 288 144  72 36  6| Διώτη        1185·56|
  +-----------------------------------------+-+      Cub. ft.     |
  |8640 4320 3456 1728 864 576 288 144 72 12 2|Μετρητής  1  643·13|
  +-------------------------------------------+    10   13 1247·26|
                                              |   100  137  375·60|
                                              |  1000 1372  310·  |
                                              +-------------------+

                                                    |Gal. Qts. Pints.
                                                    |
   Κοχλιάριον                                       |         0·008
  +-----+                                           |
  |   2 | Χήμη                                      |         0·016
  +-----+----+                                      |
  |   2½   1¼| Μύστρον                              |         0·02
  +----------+---+                                  |
  |   5    2½   2| Κόγχη                            |         0·04
  +--------------+----+                             |
  |  10    5    4    2| Κύαθος                      |         0·08
  +-------------------+----+                        |
  |  15    7½   6    3   1½| Ὀξύβαφον               |         0·12
  +------------------------+--+                     |
  |  30   15   12    6   3   2| Τέταρτον            |         0·24
  +---------------------------+---+                 |
  |  60   30   24   12   6   4   2| Κοτύλη          |         0·48
  +-------------------------------+---+             |
  | 120   60   48   24  12   8   4   2| Ξέστης      |         0·95
  +-----------------------------------+--+          |
  | 720  360  288  144  72  48  24  12  6| Χοῦς     |      2  1·70
  +--------------------------------------+--+       |
  |4320 2160 1782  864 432 288 144  72 36  6| Διώτη |   4  1  0·23
  +-----------------------------------------+-+     |
  |8640 4320 3456 1728 864 576 288 144 72 12 2|     |   8  2  0·46
  +-------------------------------------------+     |  85  2  0·60
                                              |     | 855  2  1·97
                                              |     |8557  1  1·70
                                              +-----+--------------


III. _Grecian Measures of Capacity._

For things Dry (Unit. Μεδιμνος = 1½ bushels).

                                             Cub. inch.|Bus. Pks. Qts.
                                                       |             Pints.
   Κοχλιάριον                                      0·22|             ·008
  +-----+                                              |
  |   10| Κύαθος                                   2·74|             ·079
  +-----+-----+                                        |
  |   15    1½| Ὀχύβαφον                           4·12|             ·12
  +-----------+--+                                     |
  |   60    6   4| Κοτύλη                         16·47|             ·48
  +--------------+---+                                 |
  |  120   12   8   2| Ξέστης                     32·93|             ·95
  +------------------+--+                              |
  |  240   24  16   4  2| Χοῖνιξ                  65·86|            1·90
  +---------------------+--+                           |
  |  960   96  64  16  8  4| Ἡμίεκτον            263·46|         3  1·61
  +------------------------+--+                        |
  | 1920  192 128  32 16  8  2| Ἑκτος            526·92|         7  1·21
  +---------------------------+-+                      |
  | 3840  384 256  64 32 16  4 2| Τριτὸς        1053·83|      1  7  0·43
  +-----------------------------+-+        Cub. ft.    |
  |11520 1152 768 192 96 48 12 6 3|Μέδιμνος   1  143·35|   1  1  5  1·28
  +-------------------------------+     10   18  511·  |  14  1  0  0·8
                                  |    100  182 1654·  | 142  2  3  2·
                                  |   1000 1829  989·  |1426  0  7  2·
                                  +--------------------+-------------------


IV. _Roman Weights._

(Unit: Libra = 10 oz. 10 dwts. 9·5 grs. Troy weight.)

                                                        Troy weight.   |
                                                                       |
                                                                       |
                                                     Lb. Oz. Dwts. Grs.|
                                                                       |
   Siliqua                                                          2·9|
  +------+                                                             |
  |     3| Obolus                                                   8·8|
  +------+-----+                                                       |
  |     6     2| Scrupulum                                         17·5|
  +------------+-----+                                                 |
  |    12     4     2| Semisextula                               1 11·1|
  +------------------+-----+                                           |
  |    24     8     4     2| Sextula                             2 22·1|
  +------------------------+-----+                                     |
  |    36    12     6     3    1½| Siciliquus                    4  9·2|
  +------------------------------+----+                                |
  |    48    16     8     4    2    1⅓| Duella                   5 20·3|
  +-----------------------------------+----+                           |
  |    72    24    12     6    3    2    1½| Semiuncia           8 18·4|
  +----------------------------------------+---+                       |
  |   144    48    24    12    6    4    3    2| Uncia          17 12·8|
  +--------------------------------------------+----+                  |
  |  1728   576   288   144   72   48   36   24   12| Libra  10 10  9·5|
  +-------------------------------------------------+---+              |
  |                                                     |Cent.         |
  |                                                     |pod.          |
  |172800 57600 28800 14400 7200 4800 3600 2400 1200 100| 87  7 19 17·1|
  +-----------------------------------------------------+--------------+

                                                             | Avoirdupois
                                                             |   weight.
                                                             |
                                                             |Lb. Oz. Dwts.
                                                             |
   Siliqua                                                   |      0·11
  +------+                                                   |
  |     3| Obolus                                            |      0·32
  +------+-----+                                             |
  |     6     2| Scrupulum                                   |      0·64
  +------------+-----+                                       |
  |    12     4     2| Semisextula                           |      1·28
  +------------------+-----+                                 |
  |    24     8     4     2| Sextula                         |      2·56
  +------------------------+-----+                           |
  |    36    12     6     3    1½| Siciliquus                |      3·85
  +------------------------------+----+                      |
  |    48    16     8     4    2    1⅓| Duella               |      5·13
  +-----------------------------------+----+                 |
  |    72    24    12     6    3    2    1½| Semiuncia       |      7·69
  +----------------------------------------+---+             |
  |   144    48    24    12    6    4    3    2| Uncia       |     15·39
  +--------------------------------------------+----+        |
  |  1728   576   288   144   72   48   36   24   12| Libra  |   11 8·67
  +-------------------------------------------------+---+    |
  |172800 57600 28800 14400 7200 4800 3600 2400 1200 100|    |72  2 2·85
  +-----------------------------------------------------+----+-----------

The denarius was the chief silver coin among the Romans. As a weight it
was the 7th part of a Roman ounce. It is from this standard that both the
value of the Roman weights and coins are deduced.

The industrious, learned, and honest Mr. Greaves affirms that having in
Italy and elsewhere perused many hundred _Denarii consulares_, he found,
by frequent and exact trial, the best of them to amount to 62 grains
English.

The Roman ounce is certainly our avoirdupois ounce; but I must own that I
have differed in a small matter from Mr. Greaves in settling the quantity
of Troy grains contained in an ounce avoirdupois. The denarius, according
to my supposition, will come out 62²²⁄₄₉ grains.

That the denarius was the 7th part of the Roman ounce is clear from
multitudes of passages. Celsus (v, 17): Sed et antea sciri volo in uncia
pondus denariorum esse septem.

Celsus divided the denarius into six parts, which he called, unciæ; uncia
being a general word for the division of any integer. This was done
in imitation of the Greek physicians, who, after the manner of their
country, divided their drachma into 6 oboli.

The common mark of the denarius was an X or 𐆖, in imitation of which,
among the Latin physicians, it grew to an *.

_Of the Roman Pondo._ The pondo argenti, amongst the Romans, is a sort
of numeral expression of sums of money, and is different from the common
libra which consisted only of 84 denarii, or 96 drachms, for _as_, _æs_,
_pondo_, and _mina_, amongst ancient authors generally pass for the same.

_Pondo_ is an indeclinable word, and when it is joined with numbers it
signifies _libra_; but when it is joined to other weights, it stands for
the same thing as σταθμῆ, or ὅλκη in the Greek, signifying the same with
pondus, or weight in general.

_Of Roman Weights._ The Romans used the libra, which they divided into 12
unciæ, or ounces, and the later Greeks, in imitation of them, had their
_litra_, which they divided after the same manner.

They divided their ounce into 3 _duellæ_, and likewise into 6 _sextulæ_
(sextula among the Greeks was called ἑξάγιον, and corruptly, στάιγιον).
Another division of their ounce was into 4 _sicilici_. They likewise
divided their ounce into 7 _denarii_. Then they divided it into 8
_drachms_. The 12th part of an ounce they called _dimidia sextula_. It
was likewise divided into 24 _scrupula_, or rather _scriptula_, called by
the Greeks, γράμματα.

The denarius was divided into 2 _victoriati_, not only as a piece of
money but as a weight. The denarius was also divided into 6 _sextantes_,
in imitation of the 6 oboli of a drachm; according to which division a
_sextans_ would contain, in English Troy weight, about 6⅓ grains. Celsus
mentions the quadrans denarii and the triens denarii.

The value of the Roman pound is determined, as in the tables, from the
value of the denarius, viz. 5245⁵⁄₇ Troy grains; according to the common
reckoning it is 5256; this small difference proceeds from assuming the
avoirdupois ounce to the Troy ounce precisely as 51 to 56.

_Greek Weights._ The _talent_ was the greatest weight as well as the
greatest sum of money among the Greeks. And this ponderal talent was
divided, as the nummary talent, into 60 _minæ_, and every mina into 100
_drachmæ_.

A _drachma_ was ⅛ of the ounce and ¹⁄₁₀₀ part of a mina. The Greeks used
the expression τρίτον ἡμιδράχμον to signify 2½ drachms. The old division
of drachma was into 6 _oboli_.

An _obolus_ contained 6 χαλκὸι, or, as the Latins call them, _æreoli_.

An ἡμιώβολον, or _semiobolus_, contains 1 siliqua and a half, and 4
_æreoli_, according to Cleopatra, but 3 only according to Diodorus (Ap.
Suidam.)

Χαλκὸς, or æreolus contained the 6th part of an obolus, and 7 λεπτὰ,
according to Suidas.

The Λεπτὸν was the 7th part of an æreolus, and was called by the Latins
_minuta_, and sometimes _minutia_, and is not divided into any lesser
weight.

The Greeks used the ὀυγγία, and divided it as the Romans did. They used
the κεράτιον, in Latin, _siliqua_, which was the ¹⁄₁₈ of a drachma.

The medical weights were the _mina_, of 16 Roman ounces, as appears
from Dioscorides and Galen, and Cleopatra (in Cosmeticis) who tells you
that mina, as a weight, contains 16 ounces, 128 drachms, 384 scriptula,
768 oboli, 1052 lupini, 2304 siliquæ, 6144 æreoli. But when Celsus and
Scribonius Largus make use of a denarius of about 62²²⁄₄₉ grains, the
drachma being supposed equal to that; 100 such drachmæ must have made a
mina of 6222²²⁄₄₉ grains, whereas, a mina of 16 ounces is about 7000 Troy
grains, or our avoirdupois pound.

The physicians likewise made use of the _litra_ of 96 drachms. The
ὀυγγία, or uncia, being divided as usually. The κεράτιον, or _siliqua_,
as mentioned before, was likewise a common weight among the physicians;
and the σιτάριον, or grain, ¼ of the siliqua.

The Romans dividing their ounce into 7 _denarii_, and likewise into 8
_drachms_; the Greeks of later ages dividing likewise their ounce into
8 drachms, and the Roman denarius being supposed equal to the Greek
drachma, have occasioned great confusion in the expressions of authors
about the weights of both nations. It is evident there was an Attic mina
of 16 Roman ounces, namely, the more ancient one, and another of 12½
ounces. By ounces is here meant Roman ounces, which is our avoirdupois
ounce. So that the most ancient _mina Attica_ was exactly our avoirdupois
pound. Cleopatra speaks of the two different minæ, the first of 16 and
the other of 12½ ounces. Dioscorides mentions only that of 16 ounces; and
though it is mentioned by the physicians, it is not what they prescribed
by, but perhaps like our avoirdupois weight, what their gross drugs were
at first bought and sold by.

_Of Arabian Weights._ The Arabian weights used by their physicians,
Serapion, Rhases, and Avicenna, are a mixture of the Greek and Roman
weights, and derived from them. Their _manes_ is a corruption of the
Hebrew _maneh_, or the Greek _mina_: there were two of them, one of 20
ounces, and another of 16.


_The ancient Arabian weights reduced to Troy weights._

                                                         Lb. Oz. Dwts. Grs.

   Kestuf                                                   0  0  0  1²⁹⁄₅₆
  +-----+
  |   2 | Kirat                                             0  0  0  3¹⁄₂₈
  +-----+-----+
  |   4 |   2 | Danich                                      0  0  0  6¹⁄₁₄
  +-----+-----+-----+
  |   6 |   3 |   1½| Onolossat                             0  0  0  9³⁄₂₈
  +-----+-----+-----+----+
  |  12 |   6 |   3 |  2 | Garme                            0  0  0 18³⁄₁₄
  +-----+-----+-----+----+----+
  |  36 |  18 |   9 |  6 |  3 | Darchimi                    0  0  2  6⁹⁄₁₄
  +-----+-----+-----+----+----+---+
  |  41⅐|20⁴⁄₇|10²⁄₇|6⁶⁄₇|3³⁄₇| 1⅐| Denarius                0  0  2 14²²⁄₄₉
  +-----+-----+-----+----+----+---+----+
  | 144 |  72 |  36 | 24 | 12 | 4 |  3½| Sextarium          0  0  9  2⁴⁄₇
  +-----+-----+-----+----+----+---+----+--+
  | 288 | 144 |  72 | 48 | 24 | 8 |  7 | 2| Sacros          0  0 18  5⅐
  +-----+-----+-----+----+----+---+----+--+--+
  |3456 |1728 | 864 |576 |288 | 96| 84 |24|12| Ratel        0 10 18 13⁵⁄₇
  +-----+-----+-----+----+----+---+----+--+--+---+
  |     |     |     |    |    |   |    |  |  |   |Manes
  |4608 |2304 |1152 |768 |384 |128|112 |36|16| 1⅓|Alicatica 1  2 11 10²⁄₇
  +-----+-----+-----+----+----+---+----+--+--+---+-------------------------

_Greek Measures of Capacity._ In reducing the Greek solid measures to
the English, I shall make use of the χοῦς, which made in weight 720
drachms, according to all authors; suppose of rain-water, the ancients
making no difference betwixt the weight of that and of wine. Taking the
heaviest Attic drachm, which is the 100th part of the old Attic mina,
or our avoirdupois pound, and neglecting the small difference in the
tables, I shall state it at 70 grains Troy. According to this drachm, the
weight of the Attic χοῦς must be 50,400 grains. There are in a solid foot
1728 solid inches, weighing 76 pounds of rain water: by this experiment
760 grains make 3 solid inches; therefore, 50,400 make 198·94737 solid
inches, the number of the solid inches in the χοῦς; which is 6 pints,
25,698 solid inches, somewhat less than the Roman congius, though the
Greek χοῦς and Roman congius are used indifferently as the same measure
by ancient authors; as likewise are the 6th part of them, the ξέστης
and sextarius, and the 12th the κοτύλη and the hemina. There is great
probability that the Greeks measured the capacity of their vessels by
the weight of oil, the product of their country. For the physicians,
speaking of these measures, always mention their weight in oil; and
Galen, speaking of the cotyla, saith that Heras understood the cotyla
to be of 60 drachms reducing the weight to oil. I find likewise that it
is a general supposition among the ancients that the weight of oil was
to that of wine, as 9 to 10; so 72 pounds of oil is made equal in bulk
to 80 pounds of wine, 9 pounds of oil to 10 of wine, and so everywhere.
According to our experiments, the weight of oil is to that of wine or
fresh-water, as 476 to 527, which is very near, as 9 to 9·96. So small
a difference may be accounted for by the oil weighing less in a warm
country than in ours.

The largest Greek measure for things liquid was the Attic μετρητής, which
contained 12 _choes_. It is also called ἀμφορεὺς, κάδος, κεράμιον.

The χοῦς, or χοεὺς contained 12 cotylæ. It is also called λάγυνος, or
λάγυνον, λάγηνον, or lagena. The Greek physicians sometimes use χοῦς for
the Roman _congius_, the difference being but small. The Grecians in
later times borrow the ξέστης from the Roman sextarius. It was the 6th
part of the χοῦς.

The Attic κοτύλη was one half of the ξέστης. It is also called τρύβλιον.

The ὀξύβαφον was a measure answering to the Roman _acetabulum_. Pliny
saith it was the 4th part of the hemina. (H. N. xv, c. ult.) Hesychius
saith it was called ἄις, ἄλις, βάφιον, and γάβενον.

Κύαθος was the 12th part of the ξέστης.

Κόγχη was so called from a shell. There were a greater and a less. The
greater was equal to the _oxybaphum_, and the lesser to one half of the
_cyathus_.

Μύστρον, or μύστλον, so called from μῦς. Of this measure there were two
kinds, the greater of which was the 16th part of the cotyla, and the
lesser the 4th part of the cyathus. The mystrum is called βάρβος by
Hesychius.

Χήμη was so named from a shell-fish. There was a greater or _rustic
cheme_, the 20th part of the cotyla; but the lesser, which the physicians
used, was the 30th part of the cotyla.

The κοχλιάριον, in Latin, cochlear, was the smallest measure for liquids:
it is equal to one half of the cheme. See the Table.

_Greek Measures of things Dry._ Μέδιμνος, or μέδιμνον, was a measure
for dry things, such as wheat, barley, flour, &c., and contained 48
_chœnices_.

Χοῖνιξ is a dry measure containing 3 cotylæ, and so was 1½ of the ξέστης:
κοτύλη, ὀξύβαφον, κύαθος, and κοχλιάριον were also used as measures for
things dry. Their capacity and proportion to one another is the same as
when they are measures for liquids, which have been shown already.

_The Roman Measures of Capacity._ The _amphora_, which contained 8
congii, was the cube of a pes, or foot. The congius itself, the cube
of ½ foot. The pes being settled, as equal to 11·604 inches, its cube
1562·5112, gives the contents of the amphora in solid inches; and divided
by 8, gives 195·3139 inches for that of the congius.

The greatest measure among the Romans of liquid things, was the _culeus_,
or _culleus_, containing 20 amphoræ. A culeus also contains 40 _urns_,
the urn being half the amphora.

The _amphora_ is otherwise called quadrantal, ceramium, cadus, and
μετρητὴς Ιταλικὸς. The _urna_ is the 40th part of the culeus, and the
half of the amphora.

The _congius_ was the 8th part of the amphora, and the 4th of the urna:
it contained 6 sextarii. The congius in English measure contains 207·0676
solid inches, that is, 7 pints 4·942 solid inches.

The _sextarius urbicus_ was the 6th part of the congius. This sextarius
is divided into two _heminæ_, or _cotylæ_. It is also divided into four
quartarii which are the half of a hemina. A sextarius is also divided
into 8 acetabula. The parts of the sextarius were like those of the as,
uncia, sextans, quadrans, triens, quincunx, semis, septunx, bes, dodrans,
dextans, deunx, by which words a certain number of cyathi is meant, a
cyathus being the 12th part of the sextarius. The _sextarius castrensis_
was double of the urbicus.

_Hemina_, the half of the sextarius, contains 2 quartarii, 4 acetabula, 6
cyathi, 24 ligulæ.

_Quartarius_, as we have said, was the fourth part of the sextarius.

The _acetabulum_ was the half of the quartarius.

_Cyathus_ was the 12th part of the sextarius.

The _ligula_, or _lingua_, contained one 48th of the sextarius.

_Cochlear_, _cochleare_, and _cochlearium_, often denote a spoon, and
sometimes a measure equal to the ligula.

There was also among the Romans a _libra mensuralis_, which the Greeks
called λίτρα μετρικὴ, and distinguished from the λίτρα σταθμικὴ, or libra
ponderalis. This consisted of 12 ounces, and was divided as the _as_. It
was made commonly of horn, and divided by 12 lines, marking the ounces.
This _libra mensuralis_ weighed 10 ounces of oil, and of wine, 11 oz.
2 scr., 1 obolus, and 1 siliqua, according to the ponderal libra. The
ancients all along supposed the weight of oil to be, to that of wine, as
9 to 10. This proportion of the specific gravity of these two liquors
holds in this computation; for 11 oz., 2 scr. 1 ob. 1 sil., make 1600
siliquæ; and 10 ounces make 1440 siliquæ; and dividing both by 160, makes
it as 9 to 10. According to this weight of wine assigned by Galen, the
_libra mensuralis_ contained 19·085 solid inches, somewhat less than ¾ of
our pint, wine measure. But the Roman measures varying, in all appearance
this originally was designed to contain 12 ponderal ounces of water,
according to which weight it would be equal to 20·612 solid inches, the
difference between the two being only 1·527 solid inches.

_Roman Measures of Capacity for things dry._ The _modius_ was the
third part of the _amphora_, or _quadrantal_, which was one half of
the _medimnus_. The _semimodius_ contained 8 sextarii. _Sextarius_ and
_hemina_ are also measures of dry things, as so also _quartarius_,
_acetabulum_, _cyathus_ and _concha_.


_Table of the Roman Measures of capacity for things Dry._

                                    English Corn Measure.
                                Pecks. Gals. Pints. Sol. Inch.

   Ligula                          0     0     ¹⁄₄₈     0·01
  +---+
  |  4| Cyathus                    0     0     ¹⁄₁₂     0·04
  +---+----+
  |  6|  1½| Acetabulum            0     0       ⅛      0·06
  +---+----+---+
  | 24|  6 |  4| Hemina            0     0       ½      0·24
  +---+----+---+--+
  | 48| 12 |  8| 2| Sextarius      0     0      1       0·48
  +---+----+---+--+--+
  |384| 96 | 64|16| 8| Semimodius  0     1      0       3·84
  +---+----+---+--+--+--+
  |768|192 |128|32|16| 2| Modius   1     0      0       7·68
  +---+----+---+--+--+--+---------------------------------------

_Of the Arabian Measures._ The knowledge of the Arabian measures is
necessary for those who read the Arabian physicians, such as Avicenna,
Rhases, Serapion, Mesue, and Haly Abbas.

_Dorach_, equal to the Roman amphora.

_Aldorach_, equal to 2 xestæ.

_Johem_, equal to the congius of the Romans.

_Kist_, equal to a Roman sextarius.

_Korboni_, equal to the hemina.

_Kiliathi_, equal to one half of the cotyla.

_Kestuf_, equal to the acetabulum.

_Cuathum_, equal to the cyathus.

_Falgerin_, equal to the cochleare parvum.

_Briala_, a measure of uncertain capacity.

_Mustarum_, the greater equal to ⅓ hemina, the lesser equal to ½ cyathus.
A corruption of the Greek μύστρον.


_Decimal Tables._

Roman Measures for things Dry.

  Hemina          0·5074  pint.
  Sextarius       1·0148  pints.
  Modius          1·0141  pecks.


Attic Measures for things Dry.

  Ξέστης          0·9903  pint.
  Χοῖνιξ          1·486   pints.
  Μέδιμνος        1·0906  bushels.


Roman Measures for things Liquid.

  Hemina          0·59759 pint.
  Sextarius       1·19518 pints.
  Congius         7·1712  pints.
  Urna            3·5857  gallons.
  Amphora         7·1712  gallons.
  Culeus          2·27    hogsheads.


Attic Measures for things Liquid.

  Κοτύλη          0·5742  pint.
  Ξέστης          1·1483  pints.
  Χοῦς            6·8900  pints.
  Μετρητής       10·335   gallons.


A Table of the more usual Characters of Weights and Measures used by the
Greek and Roman Authors. From Paucton, ‘Métralogie,’ p. 95.


_NOTES pondérales des Romains._

[Illustration]


_NOTES pondérales des Grecs._

[Illustration]


_NOTES mensurales des Romains._

[Illustration]


_NOTES mensurales des Grecs._

[Illustration]


_The end of the Commentary on PAULUS ÆGINETA._




GENERAL INDEX.


  Abrong, an article in the Arabian Materia Medica, vol. iii, p. 471.

  Abrotanum, see Southernwood.

  Abscess, on the nature and general treatment of, ii, 54-9;
    surgical treatment of, 305-8;
    of the womb, and treatment thereof, 385-6.

  Absinthium, varieties of, and their uses in medicine, iii, 63, 64.

  Acacia, its medicinal properties, iii, 26.

  Acallis, its properties in medicine, iii, 26.

  Acanthium, its medicinal properties, iii, 28.

  Acanthus, its medicinal properties, iii, 27.

  Acarus, its medicinal properties, iii, 29.

  Acetabulum, one of the ancient measures. See Measures.

  Achates, or Agate, its medicinal powers, iii, 221, 223.

  Achores, an eruptive disease of the scalp, i, 346, 348.

  Acinus, account of, and its properties as a medicine, iii, 28.

  Aconite, symptoms and treatment of poisoning by, ii, 220;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 29.

  Acopa, or Restorative Ointments, on the composition of, iii, 581-9.

  Acorns, sometimes used as articles of food by the ancients, i, 137.

  Acrochordones, description and general treatment of, ii, 48;
    surgical treatment of, 276.

  Actual cautery, application of, to the head, ii, 248, 250.

  Adarce, probably a species of zoophyte, iii, 22;
    its uses in medicine, ibid.

  Adhesion of the eyelids, surgical treatment of, ii, 273, 274.

  Ægilops, symptoms and nature of the disease, with general treatment,
        i, 413, 427;
    surgical treatment of, ii, 285-8;
    an article in the Mat. Med., iii, 24.

  Ærugo, or Verdigris, nature of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 142.

  Æs, or Copper, see Copper.

  Æthiopis, its properties as a medicine, iii, 25.

  Affusion of cold water, its use in tetanus, i, 404, 406, 407.

  Agallochum, its properties as a medicine, iii, 18.

  Agaric, its uses in medicine, iii, 19.

  Ageratum, its uses in medicine, iii, 20.

  Agglutinants, list of used in the treatment of ulcers, ii, 101 et seq.

  Agrostis, or Grass, its properties as a medicine, iii, 20.

  Airs, on the different kinds of, i, 161.

  Alauda, or Lark, its uses in medicine, iii, 190.

  Albaras, a term used by the Arabians for Lepra, ii, 21.

  Alchemy, the ancient writers on medicine make no allusions to, iii,
        17;
    Firmicus the earliest writer on, ibid.

  Alcæa, or Vervain-mallow, its medicinal uses, iii, 33.

  Alcyonia, on the varieties of, and their medicinal properties, iii,
        33, 34.

  Ale, see Zythus.

  Alica, a preparation from spelt, nearly the same as chondrus, i, 123.

  Alkalies, their use in pneumonia, i, 481;
    general properties in medicine, iii, 185. See further Lixivial.

  Almonds, description of their dietetical properties, i, 136;
    their uses in medicine, iii, 41.

  Alabastrites, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 226.

  Aloe, varieties of, and their medicinal properties, iii, 34.

  Alopecia, see under Hair.

  Alphos, description of, ii, 16, &c., 33-5;
    the Lepra alphoides of modern nosologists, 23.

  Alsine, or Chickweed, its medicinal properties, iii, 35.

  Alsander, see under Smyrnium.

  Althæa, or Marshmallow, its medicinal properties, iii, 32.

  Alum, different kinds of, known to the ancients, and their uses, iii,
        360, 361.

  Alvine discharges, their characters in fevers, i, 222.

  Alypon, its medicinal properties, iii, 35.

  Alysson, or Madwort, its medicinal properties, iii, 36.

  Amaracus, or Marjoram, its uses in medicine, iii, 36.

  Amaranth, its medicinal properties, iii, 37.

  Amaurosis, symptoms and treatment of, i, 421, 434.

  Amber, see under Electrum, Ambergris, and Karabe.

  Ambergris, its medicinal properties as given by the Arabians, iii,
        426;
    unknown to the Greeks and Romans, ibid.

  Ambrosia, account of its medicinal properties, iii, 27.

  Amenorrhœa, treatment of, i, 609-14.

  Amethyst, account of the gem, and its medicinal properties, iii, 224.

  Amiantus, its uses in medicine, iii, 228.

  Aminæan Wine, used in the treatment of lientery, i, 521.

  Ammi, or Bishop’s Weed, its medicinal properties, iii, 38.

  Ammoniac, description of the different kinds of, and their uses, iii,
        38, 39.

  Amomum, discussion on the ancient, and its medicinal properties, iii,
        42;
    amomum grana paradisi, known to Ebn Baithar, 436.

  Ampeloprasum, its uses in medicine, iii, 40.

  Amphisbæna, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 180, 181.

  Amphora, see under Weights.

  Amputation of the extremities, ii, 409-414.

  Amulets, their use in quartans, i, 248;
    in epilepsy, 378, 381;
    in gout, 670.

  Amurca, or Lees of Oil, its medicinal properties, iii, 39.

  Amygdalæ, see Almonds.

  Amylum, or Starch, its medicinal uses, iii, 41.

  Anabrochismus, description of the operation, ii, 270.

  Anacardium, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 242;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 450.

  Anagallis, or Pimpernel, its uses in medicine, iii, 43.

  Anagyrus, its medicinal uses, iii, 43.

  Anchusæ, or Alkanets, their varieties and medicinal properties, iii,
        21.

  Anethum, or Dill, its medicinal properties, iii, 46.

  Aneurism, surgical treatment of, ii, 312-6.

  Angina, see Quinsy.

  Angiology, description of the operation, ii, 254-6.

  Animals, parts of, used as articles of food, i, 149.

  Anisum, or Anise, its uses in medicine, iii, 46.

  Ankle, on dislocations at, ii, 506-8.

  Anonis, Ononis, or Rest-harrow, its uses in medicine, iii, 47.

  Antirrinon, or Snapdragon, its medicinal uses, iii, 47.

  Anthrax, or Carbuncle, treatment of the disease, ii, 78, 79;
    the gem, its uses in medicine, iii, 221, 224.

  Anthyllis, its medicinal powers, iii, 46.

  Antiades, or Indurated Tonsils, treatment of, ii, 299.

  Antimony, account of its medicinal uses, iii, 356.

  Anus, on Imperforate, and the treatment thereof, ii, 405;
    on fistulæ of, and their treatment, 399;
    general diseases of, i, 600, 605.

  Aphace, or Wild Vetch, its medicinal uses, iii, 62.

  Aphronitrum, account of it, and its powers in medicine, iii, 62.

  Apochyma, or Old Pitch, its medicinal uses, iii, 48.

  Apocynum, its deleterious effects, ii, 242. See also Brassica canina.

  Apolinose, application of it to fistulæ and hemorrhoids, ii, 401, 403.

  Apoplexy, symptoms and treatment of, i, 392.

  Appetite, loss of, in fevers, and treatment thereof, i, 311.

  Apples, their characters as articles of food, i, 134;
    their uses in medicine, iii, 250.

  Apricot, its characters as an article of food, i, 133.

  Arabs, eulogium on the ancient, by Beckmann, iii, 479.

  Arabian Stone, account of, and its powers in medicine, iii, 225.

  Arbute, its characters in medicine, iii, 184.

  Arcion, or Burdock, its medicinal powers, iii, 51.

  Arctium, its medicinal powers, iii, 51.

  Ardent Fevers, symptoms and treatment of, i, 260 et seq.

  Arena, or Sand, its uses in medicine, iii, 38.

  Argemone, or Prickly Poppy, its medicinal powers, iii, 49.

  Arisarum, or Friar’s Cowl, its uses in medicine, iii, 49.

  Aristolochia, or Birthwort, varieties of, and their medicinal powers,
        iii, 50.

  Armeniacum, or Armenium, account of, and its uses, iii, 52.

  Arm, on fractures of, and their treatment, ii, 456-64.

  Armpits, of fetid smells in the, i, 506.

  Arnabo, difficulty of determining what it was, iii, 52.

  Arsenic, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 235, 236;
    kinds known to the ancients, 236; iii, 54;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 53, 54. See also Sandarach.

  Artamita, its virtues in medicine, iii, 457.

  Artemisia, or Mugwort, its medicinal powers, iii, 52.

  Arteriacs, on the nature and composition of, i, 473.

  Arteriotomy, description of the operation, ii, 253.

  Arthritis, symptoms and treatment of, i, 657 et seq.

  Artichoke, not described by any of the ancients but Columella, i, 114.

  Artologani, a species of bread, i, 122.

  Arum, a plant resembling the dragon-herb, i, 114.

  Arum, or Wakerobin, its medicinal powers, iii, 53.

  Asarabacca, its properties as a medicine, iii, 55.

  Asclepias, or Swallow-wort, its medicinal powers, iii, 56.

  Ascyrron, a species of hypericum, its medicinal uses, iii, 57.

  Ash, its virtues as a medicine, iii, 247.

  Ashes, nature of the ancient, and their medicinal powers, iii, 372.

  Asian Stone, its medicinal powers, iii, 221, 224.

  Asp, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 187, &c.;
    a variety of the common viper, 189.

  Aspalathus, its medicinal powers, iii, 57. See Rosewood.

  Asparagi, the young shoots of plants, i, 116;
    uses of asparagus in medicine, iii, 58.

  Asphaltos, or Bitumen, its medicinal powers, iii, 60.

  Asphodel, or Kingspear, its uses in medicine, iii, 61.

  Asplenium, or Spleenwort, its medicinal powers, iii, 58.

  Ass, flesh of the wild, sometimes used as an article of food, i, 149.

  Aster Atticus, account of, and its virtues in medicine, iii, 59.

  Asthma, symptoms and treatment of, i, 475, &c.

  Astragalus, or Wild Liquorice, its virtues in medicine, iii, 60.

  Astragalus, on dislocations of the bone, ii, 507, 508.

  Atheroma, description and general treatment of, ii, 94, 95;
    surgical treatment of, 311, 312.

  Atractylis, or Distaff-thistle, its uses in medicine, iii, 61.

  Atramentum sutorium, sometimes used as a poison, ii, 242;
    account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 402.

  Atriplex, or Orache, its medicinal powers, iii, 61.

  Autopyrus, a coarse kind of bread, i, 122.

  Azederach, introduced into the practice of medicine by the Arabs,
        iii, 449.


  Baccharis, or Ploughman’s Spikenard, its uses in medicine, iii, 66.

  Baldness, treatment of, see under Hair.

  Balaustium, or Flower of Pomegranate, its uses in medicine, iii, 66.

  Balote, or Base Horehouud, its medicinal uses, iii, 67.

  Balsamum, or Balsam-tree, its uses in medicine, iii, 67.

  Bamboo-cane, sugar procured from, i, 319. See Sugar.

  Barb, the fish, described by Ausonius, i, 161.

  Barley, its character as an article of food, i, 123;
    its medicinal uses, iii, 195.

  Basil, as an article of food, i, 115;
    its virtues in medicine, iii, 423.

  Basilisk, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 189 et seq.

  Bass, the fish, its characters as an article of food, i, 161.

  Bastard Saffron, see Cnicus.

  Baths, description of the ancient, i, 67-73;
    public, of the Romans, 68;
    mode in which the ancients took them, 68;
    natural baths or spas, 71.

  Batos, or Bramble, its medicinal uses, iii, 68.

  Baum, its medicinal uses, iii, 248.

  Bay-tree, its uses in medicine, iii, 93, 94.

  Bdellium, account of, iii, 70, 439.

  Bean, characters of the different varieties of, i, 126;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 199.

  Bear’s Grease, its use in the cure of baldness, i, 342.

  Bear’s Breech, see Acanthus.

  Beasts, general characters of their flesh as food, i, 145;
    formed the principal part of man’s food in the heroic age, ibid.

  Beccafigo, the ficedula of the Romans, i, 142.

  Bee-glue, see Propolis.

  Beef, its characters as an article of food, i, 148.

  Beet, used as an article of food, i, 112;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 371.

  Behen, dissertation upon, iii, 478.

  Benet noctis, see Epinyctis.

  Ben-nut, or Nut-ben, its medicinal powers, iii, 65.

  Berberis, or Berberry, its introduction into medicine, iii, 438.

  Berengemish, or Ozimum Gariofilatum, iii, 477.

  Bettonica, or Bettony, on its characters as a medicine, iii, 71.

  Bezoar, account of its introduction into medicine, iii, 426.

  Bindweed, its medicinal powers, iii, 283.

  Bird-lime, see Viscum.

  Birthwort, see Aristolochia.

  Bishop’s Weed, see Ammi.

  Bitumen, see Asphaltos.

  Blatta Pistrina, its uses in medicine, iii, 337.

  Blitum, or Blite, its properties as a pot-herb, i, 114;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 72.

  Blood, medicinal properties of the various kinds of, iii, 25.

  Bones, their medicinal uses, iii, 287.

  Borax, or Tincar, account of, iii, 476.

  Bothrion, see Ulcers of the Eyes.

  Botrys, or Goose-foot, its medicinal uses, iii, 73.

  Brain, ancient physiology of the, i, 83;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 99.

  Bramble, see Batos.

  Bran, see Crimnon.

  Bread, description of the varieties of, known to the ancients, i, 122;
    prepared with leaven or yeast, 123;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 55.

  Breasts, on the diseases of, i, 504;
    male, morbidly resembling female, ii, 336.

  Brine, see Muria.

  Britannica, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 77, 78.

  Brocoli, its dietetical characters according to Rhases, i, 113.

  Bronchocele, surgical treatment of, ii, 316.

  Bronchotomy, said to have been performed by Hippocrates in quinsy, i,
        166. For a description of the operation, see Laryngotomy.

  Broom, its uses in medicine, iii, 351.

  Broth, account of its medicinal uses, iii, 126.

  Bruised nail, on the treatment of, ii, 415.

  Bryon, or Lichen, its medicinal uses, iii, 78.

  Bryony, its uses in medicine, iii, 79.

  Bubo, nature and treatment of, ii, 71-3.

  Bubonocele, general account of, and its treatment, i, 589;
    surgical treatment of, ii, 377-9.

  Bubonium, see Aster Atticus.

  Buccellatum, the name of a sort of bread, i, 125.

  Buccellatus, a compound purgative medicine, iii, 494.

  Buccinæ, their uses in medicine, iii, 170.

  Buckthorn-plantain, see Coronopus.

  Buckthorn, see Rhamnus.

  Bugs, see Cimices.

  Buglossum, used as an article of food, i, 115;
    its medicinal powers, iii, 77.

  Bulbi, the esculent, difficult to determine exactly, i, 118;
    medicinal powers of the esculent and emetic, iii, 73.

  Bulimia, or Bulimos, treatment of, in fevers, i, 313.

  Bullæ, see Phlyctænæ.

  Bull’s-blood, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 230, 231.

  Bunium, or Earth-nut, its medicinal powers, iii, 74.

  Buphthalmum, or Ox-eye, its medicinal powers, iii, 76.

  Buprestis, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 203;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 74.

  Burncow, see Buprestis.

  Burns, on the treatment of, ii, 42-5.

  Burning, or application of the Cautery to, the eyelids, ii, 265;
    the armpits, 330;
    for empyema, 332;
    over the liver, 335;
    over the spleen, 336;
    over the stomach, 336;
    over the hip-joints, 394.

  Bustard, or Otis, a delicious article of food, i, 142.

  Butcher’s-broom, its medicinal powers, iii, 94.

  Butter, its uses by the ancients in food and medicine, iii, 74-6.

  Buzeiden, probably the Orchis morio, iii, 459;
    its uses in medicine, ibid.


  Cabbage, its properties as a pot-herb, i, 113;
    taken to prevent intoxication, 176;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 193.

  Cacalia, see Cacanus.

  Cacanus, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 148.

  Cachexia, nature and treatment of, i, 568.

  Cactos, nature of, and its effects as a poison, ii, 240, 241.

  Cadmia, or Calamine, its uses in medicine, iii, 149.

  Cæliac affection, symptoms and treatment of, i, 520.

  Calais, account of, as a medicine, iii, 228.

  Calamagrostis, or Bull-reed, its medicinal powers, iii, 151.

  Calaminth, its uses in medicine, iii, 151.

  Calamus aromaticus, or Sweet-cane, its medicinal powers, iii, 152.

  Calculus, see Lithotomy;
    general treatment of, i, 541;
    of the uterus, 632.

  Callus, treatment of redundant, in fractures, ii, 476;
    of distortion from, 477;
    on bones which have not united for want of, 477.

  Camphora, its characters as given by the Arabians, iii, 427.

  Canals, nature of these surgical instruments, ii, 471.

  Cancers, symptoms and general treatment of, ii, 79-83;
    surgical treatment of, ii, 334-336.

  Canine appetite, in fevers, treatment of, i, 314.

  Canker-worms of Pines, their uses in medicine, iii, 302.

  Cannabis, or Hemp, its uses in medicine, iii, 155.

  Canopum, or Elder, see under Elder.

  Cantharis, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 201 et seq;
    uses of in medicine, iii, 153.

  Caparis, or Caper-tree, its uses in medicine, iii, 155.

  Carbuncle of the eyelids, treatment of, i, 419, 432;
    general nature and treatment of, ii, 75, 79;
    the gem scarcely used as a medicine, iii, 224.

  Carcinoma, of the eyelids, i, 419, 432.

  Cardamom, its medicinal properties, iii, 157.

  Cardiac disease, account of from Celsus, C. Aurelianus, and Aretæus,
        i, 292 et seq.

  Carline Thistle, its characters as an article of food, i, 113.

  Carobs, or Siliquæ, an inferior article of food, i, 137.

  Carious Wood, its uses in medicine, iii, 326.

  Carpesia, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 218.

  Carpesium, falsely taken for cubebs, its uses in medicine, iii, 159.

  Carrot, or Staphylinus, its characters as an article of food, i, 118.

  Cartilaginous fishes, their characters as articles of food, i, 169 et
        seq.

  Carum, or Caraway, its virtues as a medicine, iii, 158.

  Carus, symptoms and treatment of the disease, i, 372.

  Caryophyllon, or Cloves, its properties as a medicine, iii, 160.

  Cassamum, the fruit of the Balsam-tree, iii, 161.

  Cassia, its virtues as a medicine, iii, 161.

  Cassia fistula, its medicinal characters as given by the Arabians,
        iii, 429-31;
    of the Greeks a very different substance, iii, 161.

  Cassia lignea, same as the Cassia bark of the moderns, iii, 161.

  Castor, supposed by the ancient authorities the testicles of the
        beaver, iii, 162;
    its characters as a medicine, 163.

  Castor-oil Plant, its characters as a medicine, iii, 170, 171. See
        Ricinus.

  Castration, description of the operation, iii, 379.

  Catalepsy, symptoms and treatment of, i, 369, &c.

  Cataphora, treatment of in fevers, i, 301.

  Cataract, surgical treatment of, ii, 280-5.

  Caterpillar, or Eruca, its properties as a medicine, iii, 153.

  Catarrh, symptoms and treatment of, i, 469.

  Caucalis, or Wild Carrot, its uses in medicine, iii, 163.

  Cauda pudendi, symptoms and treatment of the disease, ii, 381-382.

  Causus, see Ardent Fevers.

  Catheterism, description of the operation, ii, 351.

  Cedrus, or Juniper, its medicinal uses, iii, 164.

  Celandine, or Chelidonium, its uses in medicine, iii, 412.

  Cenchrinus, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 186.

  Centaury, its uses in medicine, iii, 165.

  Cepæa, its uses in medicine, iii, 169.

  Cephalalgia, symptoms and treatment of, i, 350.

  Cephalæa, symptoms and treatment of, i, 355.

  Cera, or Wax, its uses in medicine, iii, 169.

  Cerastes, a variety of the Egyptian viper, ii, 189;
    treatment of persons stung by, 187-9.

  Cerasia, or Cherries, history of, as an article of food, i, 132, 133;
    their uses in medicine, iii, 167.

  Ceratonia, see Carob-tree.

  Ceruse, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 234;
    nature of, 235;
    its characters as a medicine, iii, 420.

  Cetacea, or Large Fishes, account of, i, 170.

  Ceterach, see Asplenium.

  Chalazia of the eyelid, surgical treatment of, ii, 275.

  Chalcanthos, disquisition on, iii, 402. See Atramentum sutorium.

  Chalcitis, disquisition on the nature of, iii, 399-401.

  Chamæleon, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 208;
    its characters as a medicine, iii, 407.

  Chamædrops, its characters as a medicine, iii, 410.

  Chamædrys, or Germander, its uses in medicine, iii, 406.

  Chamæleuce, or Ground Poplar, its uses in medicine, iii, 407.

  Chamæmelum, or Chamomile, its uses in medicine, iii, 408.

  Chamæpitys, or Ground Pine, its virtues in medicine, iii, 409.

  Chamæsyce, or Ground Fig, its virtues in medicine, iii, 410.

  Chamelæa, its characters in medicine, iii, 410, 412. See Mezereon.

  Characters for the different weights and measures, iii, 626-28.

  Chaste-tree, see Vitex.

  Cheese, varieties of, and their characters in dietetics, i, 155, 156;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 382.

  Chemosis, symptoms and treatment of, i, 412, 425.

  Cherry, see Cerasion.

  Chesnuts, their characters as articles of food, i, 138.

  Chickweed, see Alsine.

  Chickpea, see Cicer.

  Chilblains, treatment of, i, 676.

  Chironian Ulcers, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 114.

  Cholagogues, nature of, and list according to Mesue, iii, 489;
    to Margravius, 490.

  Cholera, symptoms and treatment of, i, 515 et seq.

  Chondrile, or Gum Succory, its characters as a medicine, iii, 414.

  Chondrus or Farro, is a sort of shelled grain prepared from spelt, i,
        123;
    used as a medicine, iii, 415.

  Cicada or Tree-hopper, its uses in medicine, iii, 390.

  Cicatrices of the eyes, treatment of, i, 418;
    treatment of black, ii, 118.

  Cicer, or Chickpea, its uses as a medicine, iii, 112.

  Cichorium, or Succory, its medicinal powers, iii, 176.

  Cider, ancients well acquainted with the preparation of, i, 134.

  Cimices, or Bugs, their medicinal powers, iii, 188.

  Cinara, difficulty of determining what it was, i, 113.

  Cinnabaris or Sanguis Draconis, its uses in medicine, iii, 171.

  Cinnamon, its medicinal powers, iii, 172.

  Cinquefoil, see Quinquefolium.

  Circæa, or Enchanter’s Nightshade, its medicinal powers, iii, 173.

  Circumcision, description of the operation, ii, 349, 350.

  Circocele, surgical treatment of, ii, 370, 372.

  Cistus or Rock-rose, its virtues as a medicine, iii, 174.

  Citron, its characters as an article of food, i, 137.

  Clavus, or Corns, on the treatment of, i, 678;
    of the feet, treatment of, ii, 416, 417.

  Clavicle, on fractures of, ii, 447, 450;
    on dislocations of, ii, 482, 484.

  Clematis, or Virgin’s Bower, its medicinal uses, iii, 177.

  Clinopodium or Field-basil, its medicinal uses, iii, 178.

  Clitoris, surgical treatment of enlarged, ii, 381, 382.

  Clysters, description of the ancient, i, 57.

  Cnicus, or Bastard Saffron, its powers as a medicine, iii, 178;
    used as an antidote to poisons, ibid.;
    its general uses in medicine, iii, 175.

  Coagulated Milk, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 231.

  Cocoa-nut, its characters as a medicine, iii, 438.

  Cochleæ, or White Snails, esteemed as a delicacy by the Romans, i,
        168;
    uses of, in medicine, iii, 192.

  Cockle, see Ægilops.

  Coeloma, see Ulcers.

  Cold, treatment of persons injured by, i, 49.

  Collyria, varieties of, and their composition, iii, 548, 558.

  Colic, symptoms and treatment of, i, 531, &c.

  Coltsfoot, its medicinal uses, iii, 72.

  Colocynth, description of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 183.

  Comfrey, see Symphytum.

  Conchylia, their uses in medicine, iii, 178.

  Condisi, poisonous substance treated of by the Arabians, ii, 242.

  Condyloma of the Uterus, treatment of, iii, 382, 383;
    of the anus, treatment of, 405.

  Congius, see Weights.

  Contagion, history of ancient opinions on, i, 284, 288.

  Continued or Synochous Fevers, symptoms and treatment of, i, 256.

  Contusion of the Ears, treatment of, i, 440, 445.

  Conyza, or Fleabane, its medicinal uses, iii, 185.

  Copper, the ancient varieties of, and their uses in medicine, iii,
        404, 406.

  Copperas, see under Chalcanthos.

  Corallium, or Coral, its medicinal uses, iii, 187.

  Cordial Medicines, Arabian doctrines regarding the nature of, iii,
        473.

  Coriander, its medicinal properties, iii, 189.

  Coris, its uses in medicine, iii, 189.

  Cork, its uses in medicine, iii, 393.

  Cornus, or Cornel, its medicinal uses, iii, 193.

  Corns, see Clavus.

  Coronopodium, probably the same as the Coronopus, i, 670;
    its purgative powers, iii, 495.

  Coronopus, or Buckthorn-plantain, its characters as a medicine, iii,
        190.

  Cos, or Whetstone, account of, iii, 227.

  Cosmetics of the ancients, see under Hair.

  Costus, account of, and its properties in medicine, iii, 190, 192.

  Cotton, the Horon, or Bombax of the Arabians, iii, 464, 465.

  Cotton-thistle, see Acanthium.

  Cotyledon, or Navel-wort, its uses in medicine, iii, 192.

  Cough, treatment of, i, 309, 470, &c.

  Counter-fissure, ancient opinions regarding, ii, 440.

  Crab, its uses in medicine, iii, 158.

  Crab-tree, see Epimelis.

  Crane, a nutritious but indigestible article of food, i, 143.

  Crane-bill, see Geranium.

  Cratæogonon, its medicinal uses, iii, 194.

  Cress, used as a seasoner by the ancient Persians, i, 114.

  Crimnon, or Bran, its medicinal uses, iii, 196.

  Crises in Fevers, account of, i, 198, &c.

  Critical Days, ancient opinions regarding, i, 190, &c.

  Crithmon, or Samphire, its uses in medicine, iii, 195.

  Crocodiles, treatment of persons bitten by, ii, 193.

  Crocodilium, its medicinal uses, iii, 197.

  Crocomagma, composition of, iii, 531, 593.

  Crustacea, their characters as articles of food, i, 170.

  Crocus, or Saffron, its uses in medicine, iii, 198.

  Cubebs, introduced into medicine by the Arabians, iii, 463.

  Cucumber, its characters as an article of food, i, 128, 129;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 335.

  Cucurbita, see Gourd.

  Cudweed, see Gnaphalium.

  Culeus, see Weights.

  Cumin, its uses in medicine, iii, 203.

  Cupping, ancient modes of performing, iii, 326, 330.

  Curds and Whey, the Schiston of the ancients, i, 155.

  Cuttle-fish, see under Sepia.

  Cyanus, account of, and its medicinal uses, iii, 200.

  Cyathus, see under Weights.

  Cynanche, see under Quinsy.

  Cyperus, its uses in medicine, iii, 204.

  Cyphi, composition of, iii, 599, 600.

  Cypress, its uses in medicine, iii, 204.

  Cytisus, its medicinal uses, iii, 206.


  Daffodil, or Narcissus, its medicinal uses, iii, 266.

  Damascenes, their characters in dietetics, i, 136.

  Darnel, its medicinal virtues, iii, 26.

  Date, used in various ways as an article of food, i, 135;
    wine prepared from, ibid.

  Daucus, see Carrot.

  Defluxion on the Eyes, treatment of, i, 411.

  Deliquium Animi, treatment of, in fevers, i, 327;
    distinction between it and syncope, 328.

  Delirium Tremens, case of, related by Hippocrates, i, 407.

  Demoniacs, what the persons so designated in Scripture probably were,
        i, 383.

  Dende of the Arabians, either the lignum colabrinum or croton
        tiglium, iii, 448.

  Dentifrices, list of, and their uses, i, 455.

  Depilatories, composition of, and their uses, i, 342, 588.

  Dessert, or Mensa secunda, articles served at the, i, 131.

  Diabetes, symptoms and treatment of, i, 547.

  Diarrhœa, general treatment of, i, 520;
    colliquative in fevers, i, 298, 299.

  Dictamnus, or Dittany, its uses in medicine, iii, 95.

  Dietetics, ancient authorities on, i, 107.

  Diets, or Meals, of the ancients, i, 108.

  Difficult Labour, treatment of, i, 646 et seq.

  Dill, see Anethum.

  DIOCLES, epistle of, to Antigonus, i, 183;
    remarks on, 186.

  Diospolites, composition of, iii, 519.

  Diphryges, or Husk of Brass, its uses in medicine, iii, 95.

  Dipsacus, or Teasel, its medicinal powers, iii, 95.

  Disorder of the Eye, treatment of, i, 423.

  Distaff-thistle, see Atractylis.

  Dislocations, see Luxations.

  Dittany, see Dictamnus.

  Diudar, an Indian pine described by the Arabians, iii, 450, 451.

  Diuretics, officinal, for persons in health, i, 54.

  Dock, or Rumex, noticed as an article of food, i, 115. See Lapathum.

  Dogsbane, or Brassica canina, its medicinal properties, iii, 48.

  Dog-rose, or Hip-tree, its uses in medicine, iii, 203.

  Dorcas, the Gazelle, its flesh reckoned wholesome and delicious, i,
        148;
    pulse named from, i, 212, 216, 221.

  Dorycnium, modern opinions regarding, ii, 225;
    its medicinal uses, iii, 96.

  Dracunculus, or Dragon-herb, its characters as a pot-herb, i, 114;
    its medicinal virtues, iii, 97.

  Drachm, see Weights.

  Dropaces, or Calefacient Plasters, composition of, iii, 581, 587.

  Dropsy, treatment of, i, 569 et seq.;
    surgical treatment of, see Paracentesis.

  Dross of Silver, its uses in medicine, iii, 106.

  Dryinus, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 181, 182.

  Dryopteris, or Oak-fern, its medicinal virtues, iii, 97.

  Duck, its characters as an article of food, i, 143.

  Duella, see Weights.

  Dung, its uses in medicine, iii, 186.

  Dyspepsia, symptoms and treatment of, i, 513, &c.

  Dysentery, symptoms and treatment of, i, 505, &c.

  Dysuria, treatment of, i, 517.


  Ear, on the diseases of, i, 437 et seq.

  Eagle-stone, or Ætites, its uses in medicine, iii, 227.

  Earths, the medicinal, of the ancients, iii, 83, 85.

  Earthworms, the uses of, in medicine, iii, 85.

  Ebeny, its medicinal powers, iii, 98, 99.

  Ecchymosis, treatment of, ii, 87.

  Echidna, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 177-180.

  Echinos, different kinds of, and their uses in medicine, iii, 121.

  Echium, or Viper’s Bugloss, its medicinal properties, iii, 122.

  Ecpiesmus, a disease of the eye, treatment of, i, 422, 436.

  Ectropion, symptoms and general treatment of, i, 413, 427;
    surgical treatment of, ii, 427.

  Eel, its characters as an article of food, i, 160.

  Eggs, their characters as given by the dietetical authorities, i, 144;
    how the ancients preserved them, ibid.;
    their uses in medicine, iii, 422.

  Elaphoboscus, its medicinal powers, iii, 104.

  Elaterium, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 239, 240;
    its medicinal powers, iii, 102, 103.

  Elatine, or Toadflax, its medicinal powers, iii, 104.

  Elbow, on dislocations at the, ii, 489-492.

  Elder, two species of, and their uses in medicine, iii, 30.

  Elæomeli, nature of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 102.

  Electrum, or Amber, its medicinal uses, iii, 129.

  Elecampane, its uses in medicine, iii, 105.

  Elephant, use of its hoofs in medicine, iii, 106.

  Elephantiasis, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 1-14;
    probably the original of syphilis, 14;
    still prevalent in certain countries, 15.

  Elechrysum, or Shrubby Everlasting, its uses in medicine, iii, 109.

  Elm, its medicinal powers, iii, 312.

  Emaciation, on the treatment of, i, 82-84.

  Embryotomy, or Embryulcia, description of the operation, ii, 387-392.

  Emery, description of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 226.

  Emetics, on the administration of, iii, 503-510.

  Emmenagogues, account of, i, 612, &c. See Menstrual Discharge.

  Emphysema, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 84, 86;
    of the eyes, i, 412, 426.

  Empetrum, or Black-berried Heath, its uses in medicine, iii, 100.

  Emplastic medicines, description of, iii, 7.

  Encanthis, symptoms and treatment of, i, 430, &c.;
    surgical treatment of, ii, 276.

  Endive, its characters as an article of food, ii, 113;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 319.

  Enterocele, description and general treatment of, i, 589;
    surgical treatment of, ii, 372, 377.

  Ephemeral Fevers, symptoms and treatment of, i, 225, 235.

  Ephemeron, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 222;
    same as the colchicum and hermodactylus;
    its medicinal powers, iii, 119.

  Epidemic diseases, account of, i, 273, &c.

  Epimedium, or Barrenwort, its uses in medicine, iii, 111.

  Epimelis, or Crab-tree, its medicinal uses, iii, 112.

  Epinyctis, symptoms and treatment of the disease, ii, 39, 40.

  Epistaxis, general treatment of, i, 457;
    in fevers, treatment of, i, 325.

  Epipactis, or Bastard Hellebore, its uses in medicine, iii, 112.

  Epithymum, or Dodder of Thyme, its uses in medicine, iii, 111.

  Epulis, surgical treatment of, ii, 294.

  Erica, see Heath.

  Erinos, or Water-basil, its medicinal powers, iii, 114.

  Eruca, or Rocket, its virtues in medicine, iii, 118.

  Eryngo, its medicinal uses, iii, 132.

  Erysipelas, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 65-70;
    on the use of liquid applications for, 70;
    of the brain, i, 365;
    of the anus, i, 602.

  Erysipelatous Fevers, on the treatment of, i, 269 et seq.

  Erysimum, or Hedge-mustard, its medicinal uses, iii, 117.

  Erythrodanum, or Madder, its medicinal uses, iii, 116.

  Euphorbium, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 241;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 119.

  Eupatorium, doubts respecting, and its uses in medicine, iii, 118.

  Exanthemata of the head, and treatment of, i, 345;
    symptoms and treatment of, ii, 37-39.

  Excoriations, treatment of, ii, 47.

  Exercises, description of those used by the ancients, i, 20-27.

  Exomphalos, or Umbilical Hernia, treatment of, ii, 340-342.

  Eye, on the general diseases of, i, 409 et seq.


  Face, on the affections of, i, 452.

  Facies Hippocratica, description of, i, 190, 191.

  Fagara or Fagre, a medicinal substance described by the Arabians,
        iii, 456.

  Far, or Spelt, its dietetical characters, i, 123;
    its virtues in medicine, iii, 123.

  Farro, see Chondrus.

  Fats, their uses in medicine, iii, 354, 355.

  Faufel, an Arabic medicine, probably areca catechu, iii, 454.

  Favi, nature and treatment of, ii, 97-99.

  Fel, an Arabic medicine not well understood, iii, 448.

  Female Flux, symptoms and treatment of, i, 617 et seq.

  Fennel, its uses in medicine, iii, 242.

  Fennel, Giant, its uses in medicine, iii, 265.

  Fenugreek, its medicinal powers, iii, 373.

  Fermentum, or Leaven, its uses in medicine, iii, 126.

  Fern, its uses in medicine, iii, 312.

  Fevers, symptoms and treatment of, i, 187-335;
    ancient authorities upon, 187.

  Fici, symptoms and treatment of, i, 347.

  Field-basil, see Clinopodium.

  Fig, its characters as an article of food, i, 129, 132;
    green figs, their medicinal uses, iii, 272;
    ripe figs, 362, 363.

  Filix, or Female Fern, its uses in medicine, iii, 136.

  Fingers, surgical treatment of preternatural, ii, 331.

  Fir-tree, its medicinal powers, iii, 103, 104.

  Fistula, general treatment of, ii, 129, &c.;
    surgical treatment of, 396-399.

  Fistula Lachrymalis, see Ægilops.

  Fishes, their characters as articles of food, i, 157 et seq.

  Fissures of the uterus, i, 645, &c.;
    of the feet, 176;
    of the anus, ii, 405.

  Flamingo, its tongue reckoned a great delicacy, i, 143.

  Fleawort, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 211.

  Foot, on the fractures at the, ii, 470.

  Forceps, in midwifery known to Avicenna, i, 650;
    one found in the house of an obstetrix at Pompei, 652.

  Fowls, account of as articles of food, i, 139, &c.

  Fox, see Vulpes.

  Fractures, account of, and their differences, ii, 427-478;
    of the skull, 429;
    complicated with a wound, 472.

  Frankincense, its medicinal uses, iii, 217.

  Freckles on the face, remedies for, i, 452.

  Friar’s Cowl, see Arisarum.

  Friction, the preparatory described, i, 19;
    different kinds of, 28.

  Frog, not used as an article of food by the ancients, i, 166
        (misspelt _rog_);
    uses in medicine, see Rana.

  Fructus horæi, or Summer Fruits, their characters, i, 128.

  Frumentacea, their characters as articles of food, i, 120, &c.

  Fucus marinus, or Sea-weed, its uses in medicine, iii, 397.

  Fuligo, or Soot, its medicinal powers, iii, 56.

  Fumaria, or Fumitory, its medicinal uses, iii, 159.

  Furunculus, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 73-75.


  Gagate, or Jet, used as a test of epilepsy, i, 380;
    its virtues in medicine, iii, 225.

  Galactites, account of, and its medicinal powers, iii, 222.

  Galangal, or Galanga, account of its introduction into medicine, iii,
        433.

  Galbanum, its uses in medicine, iii, 398.

  Galiopsis, its medicinal uses, iii, 81.

  Galium, its medicinal uses, iii, 80.

  Gall, or Bile, its uses in medicine, iii, 413.

  Gallæ, or Galls, their medicinal uses, iii, 168.

  Gall-stones, noticed by Alexander Trallian, i, 566;
    by Haly Abbas, and others, 586.

  Ganglion, nature and treatment of, ii, 50, 51;
    surgical treatment of, 317, 318.

  Gangrene, or Sphacelus, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 59-61.

  Garlic, its uses in medicine, iii, 345.

  Gastroraphe, description of the operation, ii, 342-345.

  Gazelle, or Dorcas, used for food, i, 148.

  Genital organs, on the diseases of, i, 600;
    Celsus the best authority on, 604.

  Gentian, its uses in medicine, iii, 82.

  Geodes, account of, iii, 226.

  Geranium, or Cranebill, its medicinal uses, iii, 83.

  Germander, or Chamædrys, its uses in medicine, iii, 406.

  Gilbenee, or Cerbera manghas, its introduction into medicine, iii,
        467.

  Gilt-head, its characters as an article of food, i, 165.

  Ginger, see Zingiber.

  Gingidium, or Toothpick Fennel, used as a pot-herb, i, 113;
    its medicinal uses, iii, 86.

  Gith, or Nigella, its uses in medicine, iii, 245.

  Glass, account of the ancient, and its uses in medicine, iii, 383,
        384.

  Glaucium, or Horned Poppy, its medicinal uses, iii, 87.

  Glaucoma, account of the disease, i, 421-434.

  Glaux, or Milkwort, its medicinal uses, iii, 87.

  Gluten, or Glue, its uses in medicine, iii, 181.

  Glycyrrhiza, or Liquorice, its medicinal uses, iii, 88.

  Gnaphalium, or Cudweed, its medicinal powers, iii, 89.

  Goat’s-flesh, its characters as an article of food, i, 148.

  Goat’s-horn, its uses in medicine, iii, 166.

  Godwit, probably the attagen of the ancients, i, 140;
    much sought after as an article of food, ibid.

  Gongylis, or Turnip, its medicinal uses, iii, 90. See Turnip.

  Gonorrhœa, symptoms and treatment of, i, 593.

  Goose, characters of as an article of food, i, 143.

  Goose-foot, see Botrys.

  Gordylium, see Tordylium.

  Gourd, use of as an article of food, i, 127, 128;
    its medicinal uses, iii, 182.

  Gout, varieties and treatment of, i, 657-676.

  Gramen, or Grass, see Agrostis.

  Granum Gnidium, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 179.

  Granum tinctorum, iii, 180.

  Granum Kelkel, iii, 466.

  Grape, account of its qualities as an article of food, i, 132.

  Grape-stones, their uses in medicine, iii, 86.

  Gromwel, see Lithospermum.

  Ground-ivy, or Chamæcissos, its uses in medicine, iii, 407.

  Ground-poplar, or Chamæleuce, its uses in medicine, iii, 407.

  Groundsel, see Senecio.

  Gudgeon, used as an article of food, i, 163.

  Gum, its medicinal powers, iii, 184.

  Gypsum, or Mineral White, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 233;
    modern writers on toxicology have overlooked, 234;
    its characters as a medicine, iii, 91.

  Gyris, or Pollen, its medicinal powers, iii, 91.


  Hæmatite, or Bloodstone, its use in hæmoptysis, i, 489;
    its general uses in medicine, iii, 200, 222.

  Hæmatemesis, described by Actuarius, i, 515.

  Hæmorrhus, on the treatment of persons stung by, ii, 183-185;
    a variety of the viper, 185.

  Hager Albuzedi, an Arabian medicine, iii, 476.

  Hager Alcazaha, an Arabian medicine, iii, 477.

  Hager Salachil, or Lapis corneolus, account of, iii, 476.

  Haggis, see Isicia.

  Hair, on the diseases of, i, 337, &c.;
    compositions for dyeing, 342;
    hair and nails said to grow after death, 345;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 380.

  Hake, the fish, noticed by several ancient writers, i, 165.

  Halimus, or Sea-purslane, used as an article of food, i, 113;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 32.

  Hand and Fingers, on fractures of the bones of, ii, 465, 466.

  Hare, characters of as an article of food, i, 149.

  Hartshorn, its uses in medicine, iii, 166.

  Heads, their medicinal uses, iii, 167.

  Headache, treatment of in fevers, ii, 301;
    general treatment of, 350.

  Heart, temperaments and physiology of, i, 94 et seq.;
    on the affections of, 501.

  Hearing, difficult, treatment of, i, 440.

  Heath, its medicinal powers, i, 113.

  Hectic Fevers, symptoms and treatment of, i, 266, &c.

  Hedera, or Ivy, its uses in medicine, iii, 175.

  Hedge-mustard, see Erysimum.

  Hedychroum, on the composition of, iii, 510.

  Hellebore, the White and the Black, on poisoning by the White, ii,
        239;
    their uses in medicine, iii, 107;
    modes of administering the White, 503 et seq.;
    Bastard, see Epipactis.

  Heliotropium, or Sunflower, its medicinal uses, iii, 128.

  Hemlock, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 211, &c.;
    effects of in the case of Socrates, 212;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 206.

  Hemina, see Weights.

  Hemerocallis, or Lily of the Valley, its uses in medicine, iii, 131.

  Hemicrania, symptoms and treatment of, i, 355, &c.

  Hemionitis, or Moonfern, its medicinal uses, iii, 131.

  Hemiplegia, see Apoplexy.

  Hemorrhage, ancient modes of treating, i, 448, and ii, 127, &c.;
    from the nose in fevers, i, 326.

  Hemorrhoids of the Womb, general treatment of, i, 603;
    surgical treatment of, ii, 382, 383;
    of the anus, treatment of, 403.

  Henbane, varieties of, and their uses in medicine, iii, 386.

  Hepialus, a species of quotidian, i, 251, 252.

  Hermodactylus, its use in gout, i, 660, &c.;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 114;
    preparation of, 494.

  Hermaphrodites, account of, and their treatment, ii, 381.

  Hernia, different species of, i, 589, &c.

  Herpes, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 61.

  Hiccup, treatment of in fevers, i, 321.

  Hieræ, on the composition of, iii, 500-3.

  Hieracites, description of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 227.

  Hip-joint, symptoms and treatment of dislocations at, ii, 498-504;
    on fractures of its bones, ii, 454, 455.

  Hippocampus, its medicinal powers, iii, 143.

  Hippolapathum, its uses in medicine, iii, 143.

  Hippomarathrum, or Horse-fennel, its uses in medicine, iii, 143.

  Hippophaes, its medicinal uses, iii, 144.

  Hippopotamus, or Sea-horse, its medicinal uses, iii, 144.

  Hipposelinum, or Horse-parsley, its medicinal uses, iii, 144.

  Hippuris, or Horse’s-tail, its uses in medicine, iii, 144.

  Holostium, its medicinal powers, iii, 274.

  Honey, its uses as an article of food, i, 178;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 246.

  Honeysuckle, French, its medicinal powers, iii, 128.

  Hops, or humulus lupulus, its medicinal powers, as stated by Mesue,
        iii, 471.

  Hordeolum, or Stye, symptoms and treatment of, i, 414, 427.

  Horehound, see Marrubium.

  Horon, or Bombax, disquisition on, iii, 471. See also Cotton.

  Horned Poppy, see Glaucium.

  Husk of Brass, its medicinal uses, iii, 95. See Diphryges.

  Hyacinth, the herb, its uses in medicine, iii, 382, 383;
    the gem, its uses in medicine, 475.

  Hydatids, described by Aretæus, Galen, and Rhases, i, 574;
    by Hippocrates, 564;
    of the eyelids, operation for the removal of, ii, 271.

  Hydragogues, list of, and their action, iii, 492.

  Hydrargyrus, see Mercury.

  Hydrocephalus, surgical treatment of, ii, 250-253.

  Hydromel, account of its uses and modes of preparing, i, 179.

  Hydrops uteri, described by Hippocrates, i, 573. See Dropsy.

  Hydrocele, description of the operation for, ii, 365-368.

  Hydrophobia, history of and modes of treatment, ii, 127 et seq.

  Hydropiper, its uses in medicine, iii, 385.

  Hydrus, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 185, 186.

  Hypecoum, its uses in medicine, iii, 388.

  Hypercatharsis, treatment of, iii, 499.

  Hypericum, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 388.

  Hypocistis, its uses in medicine, iii, 389.

  Hypoglossum, its uses in medicine, iii, 389.

  Hypopia, or Bruised Spots, treatment of, i, 452.

  Hypopyon of the eye, general treatment of, i, 417, &c.;
    surgical treatment of, ii, 279, 280.

  Hypospadiæum, or Imperforate Glans, treatment of, ii, 347.

  Hypospathismus, description of the operation, ii, 256-258.

  Hyposphagma of the eyes, treatment of, i, 412, &c.


  Ichthyocolla, its medicinal uses, iii, 148.

  Icterus, etymology of the term, i, 582. See Jaundice.

  Idæan root, inquiry what it was, and its uses in medicine, iii, 140.

  Ignis Persicus, inquiry what disease it was, ii, 70-78.

  Ignis sacer, inquiry what disease it was, ii, 68.

  Ileus, symptoms and treatment of, i, 539, &c.

  Imagination, influence of, in pregnant women, on the fœtus, i, 2, 3.

  Imperforate meatus auditorius, treatment of, ii, 288;
    pudendum, treatment of, 383, 384;
    anus, treatment of, 405.

  Impetigo, term used by Celsus, ii, 19;
    misapplied by the Arabians, 21, &c.

  Impotence, means for removing, i, 46, 599.

  Impostors in the profession, account of, ii, 245.

  Incubus, symptoms and treatment of, i, 388, &c.

  Indigestion, on the treatment of, i, 44.

  Infancy, diseases of, i, 10-12.

  Infants, on the management of, i, 8 et seq.

  Inflammation of the eyes, treatment of, i, 410 et seq.

  Inflation of the stomach, symptoms and treatment of, i, 514;
    of the womb, treatment of, 632.

  Ink, description of the ancient, iii, 243-4.

  Inspectiones cadaverum, practised by the ancients, i, 503, 567.

  Instruments for operations on the skull, ii, 434.

  Intemperaments, description and treatment of, i, 101.

  Intercurrent pulse, characters of, i, 220.

  Intermitting pulse, characters of, ibid.

  Intoxication, on the treatment of, i, 43.

  Inula, see Elecampane.

  Iris, varieties of, and their uses in medicine, iii, 145-6.

  Iron, its uses in medicine, iii, 334.

  Isatis or Woad, its medicinal uses, iii, 146.

  Ischiatic disease, symptoms and treatment of, i, 682, &c.

  Isicia, an account of, and their composition, i, 171.

  Isinglass-fish, not used as an article of food, i, 162.

  Isopyrum or Bogbean, account of, and its virtues in medicine, iii,
        146-7.

  Ixia, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 221;
    probably was the Carlina acaulis, ibid.


  Jasper, its uses in medicine, iii, 221, 223.

  Jaundice, symptoms and treatment of, i, 580.

  Jaw, on fractures of the lower, ii, 445, 447;
    on dislocations of, 479, &c.

  Jesemin, probably a species of jasminum, iii, 458.

  Judaic Stone, its medicinal powers, iii, 221, 223.

  Jujubes, their characters as articles of food, i, 137;
    are the serica of Galen, ibid.

  Juniper, varieties of used in medicine, iii, 50, 164.

  Jusculum, or Broth, its medicinal properties, iii, 126.


  Kadi, an Arabian medicine, account of, iii, 460.

  Karabe, disquisition on the, iii, 453-4;
    probably not amber as generally supposed, ibid.

  Kidneys, on the diseases of the, i, 541, &c.;
    hemorrhage of, 546, 555;
    hardness of, 546, 556.

  Kingspear, see Asphodelus.

  Knapweed, see Stœbe.

  Kustberkush, an Arabian medicine; the Tamarix orientalis, iii, 467.


  Lactuca, or Lettuce, used in insomnolency by Galen, i, 182, 183;
    its medicinal uses, iii, 137, 138.

  Ladanum, its uses in medicine, iii, 208.

  Lagophthalmos, or Hare-eye, treatment of, ii, 266.

  Lagopus, its uses in medicine, iii, 208.

  Lampsana, or Nipplewort, its medicinal powers, iii, 209.

  Lamprey, account of as an article of food, i, 165.

  Lana, or Wool, its medicinal uses, iii, 113.

  Lapathum, or Dock, its medicinal uses, iii, 210.

  Lapis Lazuli, its medicinal uses, iii, 477. See Cyanus.

  Lapis Lyncurius, account of, iii, 227.

  Lapis Specularis, account of, iii, 351.

  Lappa, or Cleavers, its characters as a medicine, iii, 47.

  Lark, sometimes used as an article of food, i, 141;
    its medicinal uses, iii, 193.

  Laryngotomy, description of the operation, ii, 303-5.

  Lassitude, varieties of, and their treatment, i, 30-6.

  Lathyris, a species of spurge, its uses, iii, 209.

  Laurus, see Bay-tree.

  Laurus Herba, see Butcher’s Broom.

  Laxatives to persons in health, i, 54.

  Lead, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 237;
    ancients well acquainted with its deleterious qualities, 237, 238;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 255.

  Leaf, the Malabathrum, or Cassia-leaf, iii, 397.

  Leaven, see Fermentum.

  Leeches, treatment of persons who have swallowed, ii, 207, &c.;
    on bleeding by means of, 328, &c.

  Leek, see Porrum.

  Lees of Wine, their uses in medicine, iii, 380.

  Leg, on fractures of the, ii, 469.

  Lehibach, probably the Mussaenda frondosa, iii, 467.

  Lemon, said to have been noticed by Avicenna, i, 137—statement
        corrected;
    described by Ebn Baithar, iii, 472.

  Lentes, see Weights.

  Lentils, used as articles of food, especially by the Egyptians, i,
        126;
    their uses in medicine, iii, 392.

  Lentiscus, or Lentisk, its medicinal uses, iii, 365.

  Leontopetalon, or Lion’s Leaf, its uses in medicine, iii, 212.

  Lepidium, or Pepperwort, its uses in medicine, iii, 212.

  Lepra, or Leprosy, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 16, &c.;
    term lepra not used by Celsus, 19.

  Lethargy, symptoms and treatment of, i, 366, &c.

  Leucas, its medicinal powers, iii, 215.

  Leucacantha, or White-thorn, its uses in medicine, iii, 214.

  Leuce, description of the disease, ii, 31, 32;
    the snow-white leprosy of the Jews, 32;
    mixed with elephantiasis, 33.

  Leucoma, symptoms and treatment of, i, 418, 431.

  Lichen, description of the disease, ii, 24, &c.;
    tendency to pass into lepra and scabies, 25, 26;
    described by the Arabians under the term impetigo, 26;
    tropicus, by what ancient authors described, ibid.

  Lichen, the vegetable, its uses in medicine, iii, 211.

  Lientery, symptoms and treatment of, i, 520, &c.

  Ligature, use of in wounds of arteries, ii, 130.

  Lily, its uses in medicine, iii, 196. See under Nymphæa.

  Lime, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 235, 236;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 380.

  Limpets, see Tellinæ.

  Limonium, or Sea Lavender, its uses in medicine, iii, 211.

  Liniments, composition of, iii, 581-7;
    to the anus and navel, 502, 503;
    to the mouth and throat, 541, 544.

  Linseed, sometimes used as an article of food, i, 127;
    its characters as a medicine, iii, 230.

  Lipyria, account of the fever, iii, 252.

  Liquorice, see Glycyrrhiza.

  Litharge, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 236, 237;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 219.

  Lithontriptics, ancient views regarding, i, 549 et seq.

  Lithospermum, or Gromwel, its characters as a medicine, iii, 229.

  Lithotomy, history of ancient opinions on, ii, 354-63.

  Liver, physiology of, i, 98;
    affections of, 560 et seq.;
    of animals used as an article of food, 151;
    its properties and uses as a medicine, iii, 131.

  Lividity, on the treatment of, i, 39.

  Lixivia, or Lyes, account of the ancient, and their uses, iii, 184.

  Lizard, its uses in medicine, iii, 328.

  Locust, used as an article of food, i, 143;
    used in medicine, iii, 30.

  Lolium, see Darnel.

  Lonchitis, or Rough Spleenwort, its uses in medicine, iii, 233.

  Looseness of the bowels, treatment of in fevers, i, 324.

  Lotus-tree, account of as an article of food, i, 138;
    the medicinal powers of the herb, iii, 236.

  Lovage, its characters as a medicine, iii, 219.

  Love, symptoms and treatment of, i, 391.

  Lungs, temperaments and physiology of, i, 83 et seq.;
    their uses in medicine, iii, 304.

  Lupine, an inferior article of food, i, 127;
    its characters as given by Galen, ibid.;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 136.

  Luxations, account of, ii, 478 et seq.;
    of the lower jaw, 479-82;
    sometimes fatal, 481, 482;
    complicated with a wound, 509;
    a fracture, 510, 511.

  Lycanthropia, description of the disease, i, 389;
    Burton and Mead’s opinions respecting, 390.

  Lycium, account of, and its virtues in medicine, iii, 234.

  Lychnis, or Campion, its uses in medicine, iii, 235.

  Lycopsis, or Hound’s-tongue, its uses in medicine, iii, 234.

  Lydian Stone, its uses in medicine, iii, 327.

  Lyes, see Lixivia.

  Lysimachium, its medicinal powers, iii, 235.


  Mace, improperly identified with Macer, iii, 436;
    its uses in medicine, 436-38.

  Macer, conjectures respecting, iii, 237.

  Mackerel, account of its qualities from Xenocrates, i, 162.

  Mad Dogs, see Hydrophobia.

  Madarosis, or Milphosis, treatment of, i, 415, 429.

  Madder, see Erythrodanum.

  Madwort, see Alysson.

  Magnet, ancient opinions regarding the, and its uses in medicine, i,
        225.

  Mahaleb, what it probably was, iii, 458.

  Maiden-hair, its properties as a medicine, iii, 22.

  Maimed parts, treatment of, iii, 294.

  Malabathrum, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 237.

  Malingerers, on the detection of, ii, 244.

  Mallows, characters as a potherb, i, 112;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 238.

  Mamira, account of, iii, 239.

  Mandragora, or Mandrake, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 218, 219;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 240.

  Mania, symptoms and treatment of, i, 383 et seq.

  Manna Thuris, description of, i, 451, and iii, 125;
    account of the different kinds of manna, iii, 443-45.

  Margaritæ, or Pearls, their uses in medicine, iii, 473.

  Marjoram, see Amaracus.

  Marrow, its uses in medicine, iii, 257.

  Marrubium, or Horehound, its characters in medicine, iii, 309.

  Masticatories, on the composition of, i, 59, 60.

  Mastich, its uses in medicine, iii, 423.

  Masucha, composition of, iii, 601.

  Maudlin, see Ageratum.

  Materia Medica, list of ancient authorities upon, iii, 3.

  Maza, how prepared, i, 124.

  Meadow Rue, see Thalictrum.

  Meadow Saffron, see Hermodactylus.

  Meals of the ancients, i, 108. See Diets.

  Measles, ancient history of, i, 330.

  Measures, full account of those used by the ancients, iii, 609-27.

  Meatus auditorius, imperforate, ii, 288;
    extraction of bodies from, 289-91.

  Meconium, account of, iii, 250.

  Medium, its characters as a medicine, iii, 249.

  Medlars, their characters as an article of food, i, 135.

  Meisce, or Mes, account of, iii, 464.

  Meizaragi, the Cocculus Indicus, its uses in medicine, iii, 460.

  Melas, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 16;
    the Lepra nigricans of Willan, 23, &c.

  Melancholy, symptoms and treatment of, i, 380, &c.

  Melæna, noticed by Actuarius, i, 515.

  Melca, a preparation from milk, i, 155.

  Melanogogues, list of, and their action, iii, 491.

  Melanteria, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 244.

  Melilot, its characters as a medicine, iii, 247.

  Melititis, or Honey Stone, its uses in medicine, iii, 220, 222.

  Meliceris, treatment of, ii, 94, 96.

  Melon and Melopepon, account of, i, 129.

  Memory, supposed to be connected with the posterior part of the
        brain, i, 90, 373;
    on the loss of, and of reason, 372.

  Memphites, account of, iii, 228.

  Men, on the bite of, ii, 193.

  Mentagra, account of the disease, ii, 27.

  Mentha, or Mint, its medicinal powers, iii, 127.

  Menstrual Discharge, ancient theories regarding, i, 608;
    retention of, 609 et seq.

  Mercury, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 238;
    knowledge of, possessed by the ancients, 239;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 385.

  Merle, the fish, used as an article of food, i, 164.

  Metasyncritica, or Alteratives, account of, i, 353.

  Mezereon, see Chamelæa.

  Mial, or Storax humida, probably the Liquidambar orientale, iii, 460;
    its uses in ancient medicine, ibid.

  Milk, its characters as an article of food, i, 150 et seq.;
    methods of preparing and using it, 154 et seq.;
    characters of good milk in a nurse, and mode of correcting bad, 6,
        7;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 79.

  Milkwort, see Glaux.

  Millet, its characters as an article of food, i, 124;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 163.

  Millefoil, its medicinal powers, iii, 260.

  Millepedes, or Slaters, their medicinal uses, iii, 276.

  Misy, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 253.

  Mole, two species of, in the uterus described, i, 630.

  Mollusca, account of the articles belonging to this class, i, 169.

  Moly, or Wild Garlic, its uses in medicine, iii, 262.

  Moonfern, see Hemionitis.

  Morphea, use of the term by the Arabians, ii, 23;
    by modern authorities, 35.

  Morochthus, its medicinal uses, iii, 221, 223.

  Mouth, on the diseases of the, i, 454.

  Mugwort, see Artemisia.

  Mulberry, its characters when used for food, i, 132;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 256.

  Muluchia, or Jews’ Mallow, its virtues, iii, 468.

  Murena, much esteemed as an article of food, i, 162;
    treatment of persons stung by, ii, 191.

  Muria, or Brine, its medicinal powers, iii, 34.

  Mus Araneus, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 175, 176.

  Musa, the Musa paradisiaca, virtues of, iii, 473.

  Mushrooms, their properties, as given by the dietetical writers, i,
        119;
    treatment of persons poisoned by, ii, 228 et seq.;
    kinds of, known to the ancients, ii, 229;
    their uses in medicine, iii, 250.

  Muscles, their uses in medicine, iii, 257.

  Musk, its virtues, as stated by the Arabian authorities, iii, 468-70.

  Must, account of, i, 177.

  Mustard, its characters when used as an article of food, i, 115;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 263.

  Mustela, or Weasel, its uses in medicine, iii, 8.

  Mutton, its characters as an article of food, i, 148.

  Myagrum, or Gold of Paradise, its uses in medicine, iii, 257.

  Mydriasis, or Dilatation of the Pupil, treatment of, i, 133.

  Myopia, treatment of, i, 422, 436.

  Myrmecia, description and treatment of, ii, 48, 49;
    surgical treatment of, 417.

  Myrobalans, description of, and their uses in medicine, iii, 440-3.

  Myrrh, or Myrrhis, its uses in medicine, iii, 260, 261.

  Myrrh, or Myrrha, the gum-resin, its uses in medicine, iii, 348.

  Myrtle, its uses in medicine, iii, 261.


  Nails, on the diseases of the, i, 680 et seq.

  Nard, different species of, and their uses, in medicine, iii, 264, &c.

  Nasturtium, its uses in medicine, iii, 156.

  Nausea, in fevers, on the treatment of, i, 319.

  Navel, protrusion of, and its treatment, i, 587.

  Nefrin, or Nerfin, probably the Narcissus orientalis, its virtues,
        iii, 467.

  Nerium, or Oleander, poisoning by, ii, 242;
    its virtues as a medicine, iii, 268.

  Nerves, of motion and sensation distinct, i, 398;
    on wounds of, ii, 133 et seq.

  Nettle, noticed as a potherb by Theophrastus, i, 113;
    its medicinal properties, iii, 27.

  Neuras, what it probably was, and its uses in medicine, iii, 267.

  Nightmare, see Incubus.

  Nightingale, used as an article of food, i, 141.

  Nipplewort, see Lampsana.

  Nitre, nature of the ancient, and its medicinal powers, iii, 231.

  Nitri spuma, description of, iii, 62, 63.

  Noises in the ears, treatment of, i, 433, 439.

  Nose, on diseases of the, i, 446;
    on fractures of the, ii, 443.

  Nutmeg, see Mace.

  Nurse, on the choice of, i, 3, 4.

  Nux Henden, or Banden, account of, iii, 463.

  Nux Mechil, account of, iii, 463.

  Nux Methel, account of, iii, 462.

  Nux Vomica, disquisition on, iii, 461.

  Nux Juglans and Avellana, their uses in medicine, iii, 159.

  Nyctalopia, symptoms and treatment of, i, 420, 433.

  Nymphæa, or Water-lily, its uses in medicine, iii, 268, 269.


  Oak, medicinal powers of the different kinds of, iii, 98.

  Oak-fern, see Dryopteris.

  Oats, their character as an article of food, i, 124.

  Obesity, on the treatment of, i, 80.

  Obolus, see Weights.

  Ocimoides, its uses in medicine, iii, 424.

  Ocymum, or Basil, not esteemed as a potherb, i, 115.

  Œdema, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 83, 84.

  Œnanthe, its medicinal powers, iii, 271.

  Œnantharia, description of, iii, 598, 599.

  Œsypum, or Unscoured Wool, its uses in medicine, iii, 272.

  Oils, on the composition of, iii, 589-98;
    their medicinal powers, 100, &c.

  Ointments, composition of, iii, 589-98.

  Old age, regimen suitable for, i, 36, 37.

  Oleander, its effects as a poison, ii, 242;
    its uses in medicine, see Nerium.

  Olive, greatly esteemed by the ancients, i, 135;
    its medicinal uses, iii, 99, 100.

  Olyra, see Spelt.

  Omphacium, or Juice of the Unripe Grape, its uses in medicine, iii,
        274.

  Onagra, or Tree Primrose, its medicinal uses, iii, 275.

  Oneirogmon, symptoms and treatment of, i, 594.

  Onion, its dietetical qualities as given by various authorities, i,
        118;
    its medicinal virtues, iii, 199.

  Onobrychis, or Cockshead, its uses in medicine, iii, 276.

  Ononis, or Restharrow, its medicinal powers, iii, 278.

  Onosma, its uses in medicine, iii, 275.

  Onyx, what it was, and its uses in medicine, iii, 277.

  Operative surgery, ancient writers upon, ii, 247.

  Ophthalmy, symptoms and treatment of, i, 409, &c., 423.

  Ophites, description of, and its powers in medicine, iii, 226.

  Ophiasis, see Hair.

  Opium, see Poppy, disquisition on its action, ii, 215;
    particular account of its uses in medicine, iii, 279-83.

  Orache, its characters as a potherb, i, 114.

  Orange, not noticed by any ancient author, i, 134—this statement
        corrected;
    described by the Arabians, iii, 472.

  Orchis, its medicinal properties, iii, 286.

  Orobanche, or Holly-rose, its medicinal virtues, iii, 285.

  Orpine, see Telephium.

  Orthopnœa, see Asthma.

  Os Sacrum, on ulceration over, in fevers, i, 329;
    on fractures of, ii, 455, 456.

  Osiris, or Toad-flax, its uses in medicine, iii, 287.

  Ostracites, its uses in medicine, iii, 226.

  Othonna, or African Marygold, its medicinal uses, iii, 271.

  Oxyacantha, its uses in medicine, iii, 279.

  Oxygal, a preparation from milk, i, 155.

  Oxylipus, a species of bread described by Galen, i, 123.

  Oxymel of Julian, composition of, iii, 493.

  Oysters, British, highly esteemed, i, 169;
    their uses in medicine, iii, 288.

  Ozæna, symptoms and treatment of, i, 447-50.


  Pain, the different kinds of, and their treatment in fevers, i, 296
        et seq.

  Paleness, how to be remedied, i, 39.

  Paliurus, description of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 290.

  Palm-tree, characters of its fruit, i, 135.

  Palpitation of the heart, nature and treatment of, i, 502.

  Panaces, or All-heal, the medicinal uses of its different varieties,
        iii, 290-92.

  Pancratium, or Sea-daffodil, its uses in medicine, iii, 290.

  Panchrestos, a collyrium of Erasistratus, i, 413.

  Panic, a variety of Millet, which see;
    its medicinal uses, iii, 110.

  Pap, description of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 23.

  Papyrus, its uses in medicine, iii, 292.

  Paracentesis abdominis, description of, ii, 337.

  Paralysis, treatment of, i, 392 et seq.;
    of the bladder, 548.

  Paraphimosis, description and treatment of, ii, 348.

  Parget, see Gypsum.

  Paronychia, or see Whitlow.

  Paronychia, or Whitlow Grass, its uses in medicine, iii, 292.

  Parotis, treatment of the disease, i, 441-45.

  Parsley, Marsh, its medicinal powers, iii, 106;
    mountain, 284;
    stone, 298.

  Partridge, its characters as an article of food, i, 140.

  Parulis, or Gum-boil, treatment of, i, 455;
    surgical treatment of, ii, 294.

  Pastinaca marina, its uses in medicine, iii, 380.

  Patella, on the fractures of, ii, 468.

  Pea, characters and varieties of, i, 127.

  Peacock, first used as an article of food by Q. Hortensius, i, 141.

  Peach, doubtful if the Persica of the ancients, i, 132.

  Pear, its character as an article of food, i, 134.

  Pear-quinces, or Struthia, uses in medicine, iii, 251.

  Pediculi of the head, treatment of, i, 349;
    of the eyebrows, treatment of, 414, 429.

  Pellis, or Skin, its medicinal uses, iii, 94.

  Pennyroyal, see Pulegium.

  Peplus and Peplium, their medicinal uses, iii, 294.

  Pepper, ancient opinions regarding corrected;
    its uses, iii, 294, 295.

  Peppermint, see Lepidium.

  Perch, its characters as an article of food, i, 163.

  Perfumes, account of, iii, 599, 600.

  Periclymenon, its uses in medicine, iii, 296.

  Periscyphismus, description of the operation, ii, 259;
    similar to “the long issue of the scalp,” ibid.

  Perry, well known to the ancients, i, 134.

  Persica, account of as an article of food, i, 133.

  Perspiration, how to render fragrant, i, 38.

  Pessaries, description of, iii, 601, 602.

  Petroselinon, see Parsley.

  Peucedanum, or Hog’s Fennel, its uses in medicine, iii, 298.

  Phalangia, or Venomous Spiders, symptoms and treatment of persons
        stung by, ii, 169, 170.

  Phalangites or Spiderwort, its uses in medicine, iii, 393.

  Phalaris, its uses in medicine, iii, 393.

  Pharicum, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 226;
    opinions regarding this poison, 227.

  Pharynx, treatment of substances fixed in, ii, 302.

  Pheasants, characters of their flesh when used for food, i, 141.

  Phillyrea, or Mock Privet, its uses in medicine, iii, 394.

  PHILO, antidote of, iii, 515.

  Phimosis, surgical treatment of, ii, 347.

  Phimus of the womb, treatment of, ii, 383, 384.

  Phlegm, collections of in the stomach, i, 51.

  Phlegmagogues, list of, and their action, iii, 49.

  Phlegmon of the brain, treatment of, i, 364.

  Phlyctænæ, ii, 41.

  Phœnix, the herb and tree, account of, iii, 393.

  Phormium, account of, iii, 396.

  Phrenitis, symptoms and treatment of, i, 359 et seq.

  Phrygian Stone, its medicinal powers, iii, 221, 223.

  Phthisis, symptoms and treatment of, i, 493;
    of the eyes, i, 420.

  Phthiriasis, description of the disease, i, 30.

  Phyllites, its uses in medicine, iii, 398.

  Pica, a disease of pregnancy, i, 2, 3.

  Pickled Fishes, account of, i, 171.

  Pickles, their uses in medicine, iii, 368.

  Picra of Galen, account of, iii, 520.

  Pigeon, its characters as an article of food, i, 140.

  Pike, the lucius of Ausonius, its characters, iii, 161.

  Piles, see Hemorrhoids.

  Pimpernel, see Anagallis.

  Pine, fruit of, used as an article of food, i, 132;
    medicinal qualities of the wild, iii, 207.

  Pintada, or Guinea-fowl, the Afra avis of Horace, and the meleagris
        of Ælian, i, 142.

  Pistachio-nut, its characters as an article of food, i, 136.

  Pitch-tree, its uses in medicine, iii, 299, 300.

  Pityusa, its medicinal powers, iii, 303.

  Pityocampa, or Pine Caterpillar, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 205.

  Pityriasis, symptoms and treatment of, i, 345 et seq.

  Placenta, treatment of retention of, ii, 392-94.

  Plague, symptoms of, from Ruffus, i, 277;
    ancient history of the, i, 280 et seq.

  Plane-tree, its uses in medicine, iii, 303.

  Plantain, or Plantago, its medicinal uses, iii, 52.

  Plasters, composition of, iii, 558-76;
    emollient, composition of, 576-81.

  Pleurisy, symptoms and treatment of, i, 496 et seq.

  Plumbago, its medicinal powers, iii, 254.

  Pneumatic sect, in medicine; Aretæus belonged to the, i, 467.

  Pneumatocele, surgical treatment of, ii, 370-2.

  Pneumonia, symptoms and treatment of, i, 480.

  Poisons, preservatives from, ii, 193;
    general treatment of, 196 et seq.;
    catalogue of, 200.

  Polenta, a sort of malt prepared from barley, i, 123.

  Poley, its uses in medicine, iii, 204.

  Polycnemon, its medicinal powers, iii, 307.

  Polygalon, or Milkwort, its medicinal powers, iii, 305.

  Polygonaton, or Solomon’s Seal, its medicinal powers, iii, 305.

  Polygonum, or Knot-grass, its medicinal powers, iii, 306.

  Polypody, its medicinal powers, iii, 307.

  Polypus, or Sarcoma of the Nose, treatment of, i, 447-9;
    surgical treatment of, 291-4.

  Pomegranate, its characters as given by the dietetical authorities,
        i, 134.

  Pompion, its characters as an article of food, i, 127;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 195.

  Pompholyx, description of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 308.

  Pondo, on the meaning of the term, iii, 614, 619.

  Poplar, the White, its medicinal uses, iii, 206.

  Poppy-juice, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 213 et seq.;
    poisoning by horned poppy, 226.

  Poppies, their uses in medicine, iii, 249.

  Pork, greatly esteemed by the ancients as an article of food, i, 147;
    Arabian authorities prejudiced against, ibid.

  Porrum, or Leek, its characters as an article of food, i, 118;
    as a medicine, iii, 310.

  Potamogiton, or Pondweed, its medicinal powers, iii, 309.

  Poterrhium, its medicinal powers, iii, 309.

  Potherbs, used by the ancients, i, 110-15.

  Potions, officinal, on the composition of, iii, 544-7.

  Powders, preparations of, iii, 536-41.

  Powder of Iollas (misspelt _gollas_), iii, 541.

  Prepuce, treatment of deficiency of the, ii, 346;
    adhesion to the glans, 349.

  Priapism, symptoms and treatment of, i, 597 et seq.

  Prickly Poppy, see Argemone.

  Privet, its uses in medicine, ii, 205.

  Procidentia oculi, symptoms and treatment of, i, 417-30.

  Procidentia ani, symptoms and treatment of, 604.

  Prognostics, Hippocrates the great master of, i, 190;
    of fevers, 191 et seq.

  Prunus, or Plum, its characters as a medicine, iii, 186.

  Pruritus, or Prurigo, description and treatment of, ii, 27 et seq.

  Propolis, or Bee-glue, its uses in medicine, iii, 311.

  Propoma, account of, iii, 546.

  Pseudo-bunium, or Bastard Rape, its uses in medicine, iii, 419.

  Pseudo-dictamnus, or Bastard Dittany, its uses in medicine, ibid.

  Psora, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 16 et seq.

  Psoricum, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 421.

  Psorophthalmia, symptoms and treatment of, i, 413-26.

  Psydracia, description of, i, 345.

  Psyllium, on poisoning by, ii, 211;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 420, 421.

  Ptarmica, or Sneezewort, its uses in medicine, iii, 311.

  Pterygia of the eyes, symptoms and treatment of, i, 418 et seq.;
    of the nails, treatment of, 680-3;
    surgical treatment of, ii, 275.

  Ptillosis, symptoms and treatment of, i, 415.

  Ptisan, preparation and uses of, i, 123, 124.

  Pubes, on fractures of the bones of the, ii, 454.

  Pulegium, or Pennyroyal, its medicinal uses, iii, 87.

  Pulse, or Legumen, varieties of, and their characters as articles of
        food, i, 125 et seq.

  Pulse, arterial, abstract of Galen’s system of the, i, 202 et seq.

  Pumex, or Pumice-stone, its medicinal uses, iii, 173.

  Purgatives, simple, account of, iii, 480-93;
    compound, account of, 493 et seq.;
    modus operandi of, according to the ancient authorities, 485-88;
    modern opinions on, 488;
    management of those who have taken, 497.

  Purpuræ, their uses in medicine, iii, 308.

  Putrid Fevers, symptoms and treatment of, i, 235-7.

  Pycnocomon, its medicinal powers, iii, 313.

  Pyrethrum, or Pellitory, its medicinal powers, ibid.

  Pyrites, its uses in medicine, iii, 221, 223.

  Pyrum, or Pear, characters of the fruit as an article of food, i, 134;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 48.

  Pyrum sylvestre, its uses in medicine, iii, 63.


  Quails, characters of their flesh as an article of food, i, 141.

  Quartans, symptoms and treatment of, i, 249 et seq.

  Quartarius, see Weights.

  Quercus, see Oak.

  Quince, in great repute as an article of food, i, 134.

  Quinquefolium, or Cinquefoil, its uses in medicine, iii, 293.

  Quinsy, symptoms and treatment of, i, 464 et seq.


  Rabbit, little used by the ancients as an article of food, i, 149.

  Radish, its characters as an article of food, i, 118;
    its characters as a medicine, iii, 315.

  Rags, the uses of in medicine, ibid.

  Raisins, their uses in medicine, iii, 59.

  Râle, remarks on the ancient terms for, i, 482.

  Ranæ, see Frogs.

  Ranula, symptoms and treatment of, i, 456-61.

  Ranunculus, or Crowfoot, its uses in medicine, iii, 69.

  Rapum, see Turnip.

  Recrementum, or Dross, different kinds of, and their medicinal uses,
        iii, 347.

  Regimen, rules regarding, i, 73-84.

  Regius morbus, the same as jaundice, i, 584.

  Rell-mouse, the glis of the Romans, used for food, i, 149.

  Rennets, the uses of in medicine, iii, 314.

  Repletion, nature and treatment of, i, 41, 42.

  Resinæ, or Resins, their uses in medicine, iii, 317.

  Restharrow, see Onions.

  Rhabarbarum, or Rhubarb, account of its introduction into medicine,
        iii, 478, 479.

  Rhacosis of the scrotum, surgical treatment of, ii, 479.

  Rhagadia, or Fissures of the Anus, i, 607.

  Rhamnus, or Buckthorn, its uses in medicine, iii, 315.

  Rhaphanus, see Radish.

  Rheum, discussion on the ancient plant; and its uses in medicine,
        iii, 317.

  Rheumatism, see Arthritis.

  Rhodomel, purgative medicine from, iii, 493.

  Rhus Coriaria, or Sumach, its uses in medicine, iii, 321.

  Rhyas, symptoms and treatment of, i, 416.

  Ribes, what plant it was, and its characters in medicine, iii, 472.

  Ribs, fractures of, and their treatment, ii, 452, 454.

  Rice reckoned an astringent article of food, i, 124.

  Ricinus, or Palma Christi, its medicinal uses, iii, 170.

  Rigors in fevers, treatment of, i, 305, 306.

  Rocket, see Eruca.

  Rock-rose, see Cistus.

  Roe, characters of its flesh as an article of food, i, 149.

  Roses, their uses in medicine, iii, 318.

  Rosea radix, or Rosewood, its uses in medicine, iii, 319.

  Rosemary, its uses in medicine, iii, 216.

  Roughness of the tongue in fevers, treatment of, i, 318.

  Rupture of the flesh, treatment of, ii, 86.

  Ruta, or Rue, its medicinal uses, iii, 300.

  Rush, varieties of, and their uses in medicine, iii, 366.


  Sabina, or Savin, its uses in medicine, iii, 77.

  Saffron, see Crocus.

  Sagapen, its medicinal uses, iii, 322.

  Sage, or Salvia, its medicinal uses, iii, 104.

  Salamander, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 204;
    its characters in medicine, iii, 323.

  Sales, or Salts, their medicinal characters, iii, 31.

  Salix, or Willow, its medicinal uses, iii, 147.

  Salmon, not noticed by any Greek writer, i, 164;
    description of, from Ausonius, ibid.

  Salts, see Sales.

  Salvia, see Sage.

  Sambucus, see Elder.

  Samphire, or Crethmum, its uses in medicine, iii, 195.

  Sampsuchum, its uses in medicine, iii, 324.

  Sandal-wood, its uses in medicine, iii, 488.

  Sand, see Arena.

  Sandarach, or Realgar, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 235, 236;
    its medicinal uses, iii, 324.

  Sandarach, or Gum-vernix, account of, iii, 451.

  Sandyx, its uses in medicine, iii, 325.

  Sanguis Draconis, see Cinnabaris.

  Sapphire of the ancients, what it probably was, iii, 228.

  Sarcocele, surgical treatment of, ii, 369.

  Sarcocol, its characters in medicine, iii, 327.

  Sardonian Herb, what it was, and treatment of poisoning by, ii, 225,
        226.

  Satyriasis, symptoms and treatment of, i, 596 et seq.

  Satyrion, its medicinal uses, iii, 327.

  Saxifrage, its uses in medicine, iii, 327.

  Scabies, disease not unknown to the ancients, ii, 23.

  Scammony, its uses in medicine, iii, 341.

  Scapula, on fractures of, ii, 450, 451.

  Scandix, or Shepherd’s Needle, in little repute as a potherb, i, 114;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 342.

  Scarus and Sparus, their characters as articles of food, i, 165.

  Scirrhus, of the uterus, i, 629;
    symptoms and general treatment of, ii, 89, 90.

  Schœnanth, or Lemon-grass, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii,
        366.

  Sclerophthalmia, symptoms and treatment of, i, 413, 426.

  Scolopendra, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 174;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 344.

  Scolopendrium, its uses in medicine, iii, 344.

  Scolymus, used as a potherb, the Scolymus Hispanicus, i, 114;
    its uses as a medicine, iii, 341.

  Scordium, or Water Germander, its uses in medicine, iii, 345.

  Scordoprason, or Garlick-leek, its uses in medicine, iii, 346.

  Scorpioides, its uses in medicine, iii, 346.

  Scorpion, on persons stung by, ii, 171, 172.

  Scourges, treatment of persons beaten with, ii, 45.

  Scrofula, symptoms and general treatment of, ii, 91-94;
    surgical treatment of, 309, 310.

  Scrupulum, see Weights.

  Scurvy, supposed to be alluded to by Hippocrates, i, 579.

  Scytala, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 180, 181.

  Sea-dragon, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 191.

  Sea-hare, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 205.

  Sea-scorpion, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 192.

  Sea-tortoise, or Turtle, preparation from the blood of, ii, 192.

  Seasons, regimen befitting the different, i, 73.

  Sea-water, its medicinal uses, i, 133.

  Sebesten-plum, its uses in medicine, iii, 258.

  Secacul, a species of pastinaca, its virtues in medicine, iii, 459.

  Secundines, see Placenta.

  Selenite, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 229.

  Semen, on redundance of, i, 48.

  Semi-tertians, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 271.

  Sempervivum, or Wall-pepper, its uses in medicine, iii, 23.

  Senecio, or Groundsel, its uses in medicine, iii, 132.

  Senna, account of its medicinal uses, from the Arabians, iii, 431.

  Sepia, or Cuttlefish, its uses in medicine, iii, 331.

  Seps, or Chalcidic Lizard, its uses in medicine, iii, 332.

  Service, its characters as an article of food, i, 135;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 270.

  Seriphon, what it was, and its virtues in medicine, iii, 329.

  Serpyllum, or Wild Thyme, its uses in medicine, iii, 116.

  Serran, a fish used as an article of food, i, 164.

  Sesame, a heavy article of food, i, 127;
    its characters in medicine, iii, 331.

  Sesamoides, its characters as a medicine, iii, 331.

  Seseli, or Hartwort, its medicinal uses, iii, 330.

  Sextarius, see Weights.

  Sextula, see Weights.

  Shad-fish, or Silurus, its uses in medicine, iii, 337.

  Shells, their medicinal uses, iii, 288.

  Shoulder, on dislocations at the, ii, 484-9.

  Sicilicus, see Weights.

  Sideritis, or Ironwort, its virtues in medicine, iii, 333.

  Sight, on dimness of, i, 40.

  Siligo, a variety of the ancient flour, i, 120, 121.

  Siliqua, see Weights.

  Silk, medicinal virtues attributed to by the Arabians, iii, 474.

  Silphium, or Laserwort, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii,
        337.

  Similago, a variety of the ancient flour, i, 120, 121.

  Simples, number of, described by Ebn Baithar, iii, 4;
    by Avicenna, iii, 5;
    by Rhases, iii, 5;
    by Dioscorides, iii, 5;
    in the Edinburgh Dispensatory, iii, 5.

  Sinapisms, account of, and their uses, iii, 582, 588.

  Sinuous Ulcers, description of, ii, 119.

  Siriasis, a disease of infancy, i, 16.

  Sirsen frigidum, the Arabian name for lethargy, i, 369.

  Sisarum, or Garden Parsnip, its virtues in medicine, iii, 340.

  Sison, or Bastard Stone-parsley, its uses in medicine, iii, 339.

  Sisymbrium, its uses in medicine, iii, 340.

  Sium, or Water Parsnip, its uses in medicine, iii, 339.

  Skink, its uses in medicine, iii, 342.

  Skull, fractures of, and their treatment, ii, 429-42.

  Sleep, on the philosophy of, and its application to medicine, i, 181.

  Slough of a serpent, its medicinal uses, iii, 85.

  Smaragdus, or Emerald, little used in the practice of medicine, iii,
        229.

  Smallpox and Measles, history of ancient opinions upon, i, 320 et seq.

  Smilax, see Yew.

  Smegmata, nature and varieties of, iii, 540, 541.

  Smyrnium, its characters as a potherb, i, 114;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 349.

  Snail, its uses as an article of food, i, 168.

  Snap-dragon, see Antirrhinum.

  Sneezing, treatment of in fevers, i, 300.

  Sneezewort, see Ptarmica.

  Soap, account of the ancient, and its uses in medicine, iii, 326.

  Soda, an Arabico-barbaric term for cephalæa, i, 355.

  Somnolency, see Cataphora.

  Sonchus, or Sow-thistle, its uses in medicine, iii, 350.

  Soot, see Fuligo.

  Sordes balneorum, its uses in medicines, iii, 88;
    palestræ, its uses in medicine, 322;
    gymnasiorum, its uses in medicine, ibid.

  Sori, disquisition on the nature of, and its uses in medicine, iii,
        367.

  Sotera, antidote of, iii, 517.

  Southernwood, its properties as a medicine, iii, 17.

  Sow-bread, its effects as a poison, ii, 242;
    its medicinal uses, iii, 201.

  Sparganium, its uses in medicine, iii, 350.

  Spasms, symptoms and treatment of, i, 401.

  Specillum, description of the instrument, ii, 273, 402.

  Spelt, its characters as an article of food, i, 123;
    its medicinal uses, iii, 123.

  Specularis, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 229.

  Sphacelus of the Brain, treatment of, i, 315.

  Sphondylium, or Sow-parsnip, its medicinal uses, iii, 365.

  Spider, treatment of persons stung by the, ii, 171;
    and Spider’s-web, their uses in medicine, iii, 49.

  Spignel, or Meum, its properties as a medicine, iii, 252.

  Spikenard, its uses in medicine, iii, 264.

  Spina alba, see Thorn.

  Spina ventosa, description of the disease, ii, 497.

  Spine, see Vertebræ.

  Spinach, a wholesome and laxative pot-herb, according to Rhases and
        Haly Abbas, i, 113;
    the Greeks and Romans unacquainted with, ibid.;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 478.

  Spitting of blood, symptoms and treatment of, i, 483 et seq.

  Spleen, on the diseases of, i, 577.

  Spleenwort, see Asplenium.

  Spodium, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 352.

  Sponge, the medicinal uses of, iii, 351.

  Spontaneous generation, ancient opinions upon, ii, 145, 149.

  Sprains, on the treatment of, ii, 86.

  Spurges, variety of, and their uses in medicine, iii, 374.

  Sputa, characters of in fevers, i, 228.

  Spurge Olive, see Chamelæa.

  Squama æris and Squama ferri, their uses in medicine, iii, 213, 214;
    squama æris resembles æs ustum (misspelt astum), ibid.

  Squash, whether or not the melopepon of the ancients, i, 129.

  Squill, or Scilla, its medicinal uses, iii, 157;
    vinegar of squills, 514;
    oxymel of squills, 515;
    Galen’s medicine from, ibid.

  Stachys, or Base Horehound, its uses in medicine, iii, 354.

  Stag, see Roe.

  Starch, its characters as an article of food, i, 123;
    its uses in medicine, see Amylum.

  Staphylinus, probably included both the carrot and parsnip, i, 118;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 353.

  Starling, its flesh used as an article of food, i, 140.

  Staphyloma, surgical treatment of, ii, 278, 279.

  Steatoma, general treatment of, ii, 94-96;
    surgical treatment of, 311, 312.

  Stellio, symptoms and treatment of poisoning by, ii, 175;
    its properties as a medicine, iii, 56.

  Stercus, see Dung.

  Sterility, causes and treatment of, i, 641.

  Sternutatories, list of, and modes of using, i, 447-51.

  Sternum, on fractures of, ii, 451, 452.

  Stock Gillyflower, its uses in medicine, iii, 215.

  Stœbe, or Knapweed, its uses in medicine, iii, 356.

  Stœchas, or Cassidony, its uses in medicine, iii, 357.

  Stomach affections, physiology of, i, 90;
    treatment of, 303, 507 et seq.

  Stones, account of those used in medicine by the ancients, iii, 220
        et seq.

  Stones in sponges, account of, iii, 226.

  Storax, its uses in medicine, iii, 362.

  Stork, sometimes used as an article of food, i, 143.

  Strabismus, or Squinting, treatment of, i, 422-35.

  Strawberries, noticed by Virgil and Ovid, i, 138.

  Strychnos, or Nightshade, its uses in medicine, iii, 358;
    varieties of, 359.

  Struthium, account of, in medicine and otherwise, iii, 357.

  Stucco, see Gypsum.

  Sturgeon, its characters as an article of food, i, 165.

  Succedanea, list of in medicine, iii, 604 et seq.

  Succus Cyrenaicus, Medicus, and Syriacus, nature and uses of, iii,
        283.

  Succory, its characters as an article of food, i, 112;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 176, 177.

  Sudor, or Sweat, its medicinal uses, iii, 140.

  Sudorifics, on the nature of, i, 61.

  Suffusion, symptoms and treatment of, i, 420.

  Sugar, anciently procured from the bamboo-cane, i, 179;
    its virtues in medicine, iii, 246, 247.

  Sun, treatment of persons injured by the, i, 52.

  Sunflower, see Heliotropium.

  Sulphur, varieties of, and their uses in medicine, iii, 135, 136.

  Suppositories, composition of, i, 58.

  Surmullet, its characters as an article of food, i, 162. See Trigla.

  Swallows, their uses in medicine, iii, 413.

  Swallow-wort, see Asclepias.

  Swan sometimes used at the table, i, 143.

  Sweat, see Sudor.

  Swine’s flesh, see Pork.

  Sycamores used as an article of food, i, 137;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 363.

  Symphytum, or Comfrey, its uses in medicine, iii, 364.

  Synchysis of the eyes, treatment of, i, 422, 436.

  Syncope, treatment of in fevers, i, 288.

  Synochous fevers, treatment of, i, 256.

  Syphilis probably a modification of elephantiasis, ii, 14.


  Tamarinds, their characters in medicine, iii, 439, 440.

  Tamarisk, its medicinal uses, iii, 259.

  Tar-water, its uses in medicine, iii, 301.

  Tastes, definitions of the different kinds of, iii, 6-16.

  Taurocolla, its uses in medicine, iii, 369.

  Teasel, see Dipsacus.

  Tedæ, or Dead Pines, their uses in medicine, iii, 91, 92.

  Teeth, preservatives of, i, 39;
    treatment of diseases of the, i, 454 et seq.;
    extraction of, ii, 296, 297.

  Telephium, or Orpine, its uses in medicine, iii, 373.

  Telephian ulcers, description of, ii, 114 et seq.

  Tellinæ, or Limpets, uses of in medicine, iii, 369.

  Tembul, the piper betel, its uses in medicine, iii, 454, 455.

  Temperaments, account of the, i, 84 et seq.

  Tench, described by Ausonius, and probably by the Greeks, i, 165.

  Tenesmus, symptoms and treatment of, iii, 523 et seq.

  Tertian fevers, symptoms and treatment of, ii, 238.

  Terminthus, nature and treatment of, ii, 75;
    a species of ecthyma, ibid.

  Testacea, or Shell-fish, i, 166, &c.

  Testicle, on the physiology of the, i, 100;
    of the diseases of the, 591.

  Tetanus, account of the symptoms and treatment of, i, 403.

  Teucrium, or Tree-germander, its uses in medicine, iii, 371.

  Thalictrum, or Meadow-rue, its medicinal uses, iii, 134.

  Thapsia, or Deadly Carrot, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 239, 240;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 134.

  THEODORETUS, antidote of, iii, 520.

  Therapeutics, the Galenic system of, as given by Aëtius, iii, 6-16.

  Theriac trochisks, composition of, iii, 511;
    salts, composition of, 512;
    general history of the theriac of Andromachus, 525-28.

  Thigh, on the fractures of the, ii, 466, 467.

  Thirst, treatment of in fevers, i, 316.

  Thorn, White, its uses in medicine, iii, 28.

  Thrush, much esteemed by the ancients as an article of food, i, 140.

  Thyites, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 228.

  Thymbra, or Savoury, its uses in medicine, iii, 139.

  Thymelæa, or Spurge-flax, its medicinal uses, iii, 139.

  Thymi, on the penis, treatment of, ii, 350;
    womb, treatment of, 382, 383.

  Thymus, or Thyme, its uses in medicine, iii, 138.

  Tinea, a term used in the Arabian translations, i, 349.

  Toad, treatment of poisoning by the, ii, 206.

  Tongue-tied, surgical treatment of infants so affected, ii, 297, 298.

  Tonsils, on inflammation of the, i, 457, 462;
    indurated, surgical treatment of, ii, 299.

  Toothpick Fennel, see Gingidium.

  Tophi, or Chalk-stones, account of, i, 664.

  Tordylium, probably a species of seseli, iii, 90, 91.

  Torpedo, its application in medicine, i, 359, and iii, 266.

  Toxicology, ancient authorities upon, ii, 156.

  Toxicum, symptoms and treatment of poisoning by, ii, 227, 228;
    uncertainty regarding the nature of, ibid.

  Trachoma, symptoms and treatment of, i, 414-28.

  Tragum, or Stinking St. John’s Wort, its medicinal characters, iii,
        377.

  Tragoriganum, its uses in medicine, iii, 377.

  Tragus, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 378.

  Travellers, proper regimen for, i, 76.

  Tremblings, symptoms and treatment of, i, 407 et seq.

  Tribulus, or Caltrops, its medicinal characters, iii, 378.

  Trichiasis, description and general treatment of, i, 415, 430;
    surgical operation for, ii, 259-65.

  Trigla, or Surmullet, its uses in medicine, iii, 379.

  Tripolium, its uses in medicine, iii, 379.

  Trochisks, the composition of, iii, 528-536.

  Truffle, its characters as an article of food, i, 119;
    Romans passionately fond of, 120;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 385.

  Turbot, what species of the rhombus it was, and its dietetical
        characters, i, 161.

  Turnip, varieties of, cultivated by the Romans, i, 117;
    its dietetical characters, ibid.;
    its medicinal characters, iii, 90.

  Turpentine, its uses in medicine, iii, 369.

  Turpeth, one of the medicines introduced by the Arabians, iii, 369.

  Turtle, the Land, its dietetical characters, i, 141.

  Turtle, or Sea-tortoise, sometimes used as food by the ancients, i,
        168.

  Tussilago, see Coltsfoot.

  Tutia, see under Pompholyx.

  Typhus, original meaning of the term, i, 253.


  Ulceration, over the os sacrum in fevers, i, 329.

  Ulcers, of the eyes, treatment of, i, 416-430;
    of the ears, 439-43;
    of the nose, 447-50;
    of the uterus, 628;
    list of ancient authorities upon, ii, 99;
    treatment of, in general, 99 et seq.

  Ulna and Radius, on the fractures of the, ii, 464.

  Umber, much esteemed as a pickle, i, 164.

  Urchin, the Sea, its characters as an article of food, i, 168.

  Urine, characters of, i, 224;
    ancient authorities upon, 225;
    unpublished MSS upon, 228;
    incontinence of, 548;
    its properties in medicine, iii, 289.

  Urna, see Weights.

  Urtica, see Nettle.

  Usnen, probably the Salsola fruticosa, its medicinal uses, iii, 456.

  Uterine hemorrhage, treatment of, i, 615 et seq.

  Uterine inflammation, treatment of, 620 et seq.

  Uterus, ancient descriptions of, i, 623;
    abscess of the, 623 et seq.;
    ulcers of the, 625 et seq.;
    cancers of the, 627 et seq.;
    scirrhus and scleroma of the, 629 et seq.;
    mole of the, see Mole;
    inflation of the, 632;
    suffocation of the, 633;
    prolapsus of the, 638 et seq.

  Uva of the tonsils, treatment of, ii, 300, 302.

  Uvula, on the diseases of the, i, 457.


  Valerian, Greek, its uses in medicine, iii, 304;
    common, its uses in medicine, 396.

  Varices, excision of, ii, 406-10.

  Vari, on the treatment of, on the face, i, 452, 453.

  Venery, on the effects of, i, 44.

  Venesection, description of the operation, ii, 318-26.

  Venomous animals, preservatives from, ii, 155;
    treatment of persons stung by, 157.

  Venter, or Stomach, uses of the different kinds of, i, 179.

  Verbascum, or Petty Mullein, its uses in medicine, iii, 394.

  Verdigris, see Ærugo.

  Vermes in the ears, treatment of, i, 439-444.

  Vermilion, see Granum Tinctorum.

  Vertebræ, on fractures of the, and their treatment, ii, 455;
    on luxations of the, 493.

  Vertigo, symptoms and treatment of, i, 374 et seq.

  Vertz, disquisition on the nature of, iii, 457.

  Vervain, or Verbenum, its uses in medicine, iii, 296.

  Vervain Mallow, see Alcæa.

  Vetch, varieties of, and characters as an article of food, i, 127.

  Vinegar, its uses in medicine, iii, 278.

  Vinous tinctures of the ancients, iii, 546, 547.

  Violet, its medicinal characters, iii, 142.

  Viper, treatment of persons stung by the, ii, 177-80;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 120.

  Viper’s Bugloss, see Echium.

  Virgin’s Bower, see Clematis.

  Viscum, or Birdlime, its medicinal uses, iii, 141.

  Vitex, its properties as a medicine, iii, 20.

  Vitis sylvestris, or Wild Vine, its medicinal characters, iii, 40.

  Vociferation, description of the ancient mode of performing, i, 29.

  Volubilis, account of the different articles described under this
        name, iii, 470.

  Vulpes, or Fox, its uses in medicine, iii, 36.


  Wakerobin, see Arum.

  Walnuts and Filberts, their dietetical characters, i, 136.

  Wall-pepper, its properties as a medicine, iii, 23.

  Wasps and Bees, treatment of persons stung by, ii, 168, 169.

  Watchfulness, causes and cure of, i, 152;
    treatment of in fevers, i, 299, 300.

  Water, its uses in medicine, iii, 386.

  Waters, on the different kinds of, and their qualities, i, 64-7.

  Water-basil, see Erinos.

  Water-pepper, its uses in medicine, iii, 385.

  Water, or Wine, dangerous effects of a large draught of, ii, 243.

  Wax, see Cera.

  Weapons of war, treatment of wounds inflicted by, ii, 418-27.

  Weasel, see Mustela.

  Weights, full account of those used by the ancients, iii, 609-27.

  Wheat, full account of its dietetical characters, i, 121;
    its uses in medicine, iii, 314.

  Whites, see Female Flux.

  Whitlow, on the treatment of, i, 678.

  Wild Thyme, see Serpyllum.

  Willow, see Salix.

  Wine, dietetical characters of, i, 172 et seq.;
    ancient mode of forcing by heat, 174;
    of cooling with ice, ibid.;
    its medicinal uses, iii, 272.

  Woad, see Isatis.

  Wolfsbane, see Aconite.

  Womb of a sow reckoned a delicate article of food, i, 151.

  Wool, see Lana;
    scourings of, used in medicine, iii, 272.

  Worms, intestinal, description of, and their treatment, ii, 139 et
        seq.;
    list of ancient writers on, 145;
    earth, in ulcers, treatment of, ii, 107;
    their uses in medicine, iii, 85.

  Wren, recommended in calculus, i, 542.

  Wrinkles, how to be treated, i, 37.

  Wrist, on dislocations at the, ii, 492, 493.


  Xanthium, or Clutburr, its uses in medicine, iii, 269.

  Xerophthalmia, symptoms and treatment of, i, 413, 426.

  Xiphium, or Bulbous Iris, its uses in medicine, iii, 270.

  Xyris, or Wild Cornflag, its uses in medicine, iii, 269.


  Yarrow, or Achillea, uses of in medicine, iii, 358.

  Yew, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 223, 224.


  Zambach, a species of jasminum, first described by the Arabians, iii,
        458.

  Zeduary, account of, and its uses in medicine, iii, 434, 436.

  Zerumbet, see under Zeduary.

  Zingiber, or Ginger, uses of in medicine, iii, 123.

  Zythus, or Ale, medicinal uses of, iii, 124.

                                 THE END.

                       C. AND J. ADLARD, PRINTERS,
                            BARTHOLOMEW CLOSE.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVEN BOOKS OF PAULUS ÆGINETA, VOLUME 3 (OF 3) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


