The Project Gutenberg eBook of The girlhood of Queen Victoria, vol. 1 (of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The girlhood of Queen Victoria, vol. 1 (of 2)
        A selection from Her Majesty's diaries between the years 1832 and 1840

Author: Queen of Great Britain Victoria

Editor: Viscount Reginald Baliol Brett Esher

Release date: January 18, 2025 [eBook #75138]

Language: English

Original publication: London: John Murray, 1912

Credits: Robert Tonsing and The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIRLHOOD OF QUEEN VICTORIA, VOL. 1 (OF 2) ***





                             THE GIRLHOOD OF
                             QUEEN VICTORIA



                             THE GIRLHOOD OF
                             QUEEN VICTORIA

                     A SELECTION FROM HER MAJESTY’S
                        DIARIES BETWEEN THE YEARS
                              1832 AND 1840

                        PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF
                          HIS MAJESTY THE KING

               EDITED BY VISCOUNT ESHER, G.C.B., G.C.V.O.


                             IN TWO VOLUMES

                                 VOL. I


                                 LONDON
                    JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.
                                  1912




In the preparation of this book much is due to the ungrudging help
given to the Editor by the late Mr. Hugh Childers in the tedious and
complicated task of tracing the numerous references to persons and
places mentioned in the Queen’s Journals.

Mr. Hugh Childers rendered valuable service to the Editors of _The
Letters of Queen Victoria_, and in the preparation of this book
his labour and trouble were no less freely expended under trying
circumstances of failing health. His loss is deeply regretted by the
Editor.


                          ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




                                PREFACE


These extracts from the early Journals of Queen Victoria have been
edited by command of her son, King Edward VII., and under the gracious
auspices of her grandson, King George V.

The Editor feels bound to express his humble gratitude to the King, and
his deep obligation to the Queen, for the encouragement and assistance
he has received from their Majesties in the preparation of these
volumes.

Without the Queen’s help and exact historical knowledge of the period
covered by the Journals, many imperfections in the editing of them
would have passed unnoticed.

The Editor must also return his warmest thanks to H.R.H. Princess
Christian of Schleswig-Holstein, whose retentive memory of the persons
mentioned in the text has been unreservedly and generously brought to
bear upon the notes to these volumes, and to H.R.H. Princess Henry of
Battenberg, to whose pious regard for her Mother’s memory, as Executrix
of Queen Victoria’s Will, the publication of the Journals may be
ascribed.

Furthermore, he is anxious to thank Lord Rosebery for his friendly
co-operation in having read the proofs, and for many valuable
suggestions.

And, finally, he cannot sufficiently acknowledge the care lavished upon
the publication of this book by his friend John Murray, junior, whose
inherited gifts have been placed unreservedly at the disposal of the
Editor.




                               CONTENTS


                                                                   PAGES

INTRODUCTION                                                        1–41


                               CHAPTER I
                                 1832

Journey by St. Albans, Dunstable, Coventry, and Birmingham
    to Welshpool — Arrival at Powis Castle — At Beaumaris —
    Visit to Baron Hill — Sir Richard and Lady Bulkeley — At
    Plas Newydd — Journey to Eaton — Visit to Lord and Lady
    Westminster — The Grosvenor family — Visit to Chatsworth
    — The Cavendish family — Expedition to Haddon Hall —
    Visit to Alton Towers — A hunting episode — Visit to
    Wytham Abbey — A day in Oxford — Back to Kensington —
    Christmas presents                                             42–62

                              CHAPTER II
                                 1833

Arrival of “Dash” — Various lessons — At the Opera —
    _Kenilworth_ ballet — Life at Kensington — Recreations
    — Dinner party for the King; and the guests — The Opera
    and Taglioni — Somerset House Exhibition — The Duke of
    Orleans — Fourteenth birthday — Presents — A birthday
    ball — Alexander and Ernest of Würtemberg — Paganini and
    Malibran — Journey to Portsmouth — At Norris Castle — On
    board the _Emerald_ — Visit to the _Victory_ — Journey
    to Plymouth — Presentation of Colours — The Queen of
    Portugal — Spanish affairs — At Drury Lane — A lecture on
    physics                                                        63–90


                              CHAPTER III
                                 1834

The Order of Maria Louisa — At the Opera — _Anna Boulena_ and
    _Othello_ — Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg — Feodore, Princess
    von Hohenlohe-Langenburg and her children — Visit to
    Windsor — The King and Queen — Portuguese affairs — At
    St. Leonards — A carriage accident — Death of the Duke of
    Gloucester — A fine sermon                                    91–106


                              CHAPTER IV
                                 1835

At St. Leonards — A shipwreck — Lessons — Back to Kensington
    — Death of the Duke of Leuchtenberg — Opera _Otello_
    — Visit to Windsor — A concert — Grisi, Lablache, and
    Tamburini — Sixteenth birthday — Presents — Eton Montem —
    At the opera — Death of Countess Mensdorff — Confirmation
    — Ceremony at St. James’s — First Communion — At
    Tunbridge Wells — Races — Reading — Back to Kensington
    — Duc de Nemours — Journey to Bishopthorpe — Harcourt
    family — York Minster — At Canterbury — Ramsgate — The
    King and Queen of the Belgians                               107–139


                               CHAPTER V
                                 1836

At Ramsgate — Back to Kensington — Change of rooms —
    Marriage of the Queen of Portugal — A dinner party — The
    theatre — Kemble and Macready — Helen Faucit — Charles
    Mathews — Visit to Windsor — State ball — Princes
    Ferdinand and Augustus — King Leopold’s _Directions_
    — Visit of Ernest and Albert of Saxe-Coburg — Their
    characteristics and charms — Seventeenth birthday — The
    British Gallery — The Victoria Asylum — Lablache — At
    Claremont — Portuguese revolution — Events in Lisbon
    — King Leopold and Belgium — Death of Malibran — At
    Ramsgate — Books read — A dinner party — Louis Napoleon
    at Strasburg — A stormy journey — Rochester — Back to
    Kensington — Claremont — A gipsy camp                        140–182


                              CHAPTER VI
                                 1837

Gipsies — M. Van de Weyer — Books read — Opera _I Puritani_ —
    Death of Lady de L’Isle — The Drawing-room — An address
    from Lincoln — Eighteenth birthday — Ball at St. James’s
    — Stockmar — The King’s illness and death — News of the
    Accession — The first Council — Lord Melbourne — The
    Proclamation — Official business — Visit to Windsor
    — Queen Adelaide — Addresses — Audiences — Household
    appointments — The King’s funeral — Conferring Orders
    — Leaving Kensington Palace — Settling into Buckingham
    Palace                                                       183–212


                              CHAPTER VII
                          1837 (_continued_)

Chapter of the Garter — Cabinet Council — Thalberg — State
    visit to House of Lords — Order of St. Catherine —
    Anxiety about elections — Trying horses — Windsor — The
    King of Würtemburg — Visit of King Leopold — Talks with
    Lord Melbourne — A game of chess — Departure of the
    King and Queen of the Belgians — A review at Windsor —
    Queen Adelaide — Perasi of Lord Melbourne — At Brighton
    — Unfortunate state of Portugal — Changes at Buckingham
    Palace — Lord Mayor’s Dinner — Popularity with the crowd
    — The Queen’s Speech — State visit to the House of Lords
    — Debates on the Address — Pensions — Lord Melbourne on
    Education — Landseer’s pictures — Conversations with Lord
    Melbourne — Lord Brougham’s attacks — Magnetism — The
    Privy Purse — Character formation — Windsor                  213–248


                             CHAPTER VIII
                     _January and February_, 1838

Lord Melbourne’s family — Riding — Canadian difficulties
    — The Secretary at War — Lord Melbourne on music —
    Lord Durham and Canada — The State of Greece — Lord
    Melbourne on various people — And on Wellington —
    Punishments — Army difficulties — The Waverley Novels
    — Sir John Colborne — The Fitzclarence pensions — Lady
    Falkland — Lord Melbourne on historics — Whig doctrine
    — Lord Melbourne on recommendations — Charles Kean in
    _Hamlet_ — Dolls — English Kings — Sheriff-pricking —
    Canada Government Bill — Shakespeare plays — Government
    difficulties — The Ballot question and Lord J. Russell
    — Wellington’s manner — Lord Tavistock — Troops in
    Canada — Lord Ellenborough — Peerage ceremonial —
    Princess Charlotte — Duchess of Sutherland — Public
    School education — Enthusiasm — William IV.’s dislikes —
    Ballot Question — Anecdote of George IV. — Children and
    relations — A Russian custom — A Levée — Pensions — Court
    etiquette — Lord Howe and Queen Adelaide — The question
    of Marriage                                                  249–290


                              CHAPTER IX
                     _March, April, and May_, 1838

Bulwer’s plays — Canadian prisoners — Jamaican slavery —
    An Investiture — Commission on Promotions — Portuguese
    affairs — A long ride — Lord and Lady Holland — Talk on
    railways — Lady Burghersh — Lord Byron — Duke and Duchess
    of Gloucester — Gallery of Portraits — Madame de Staël —
    Brougham’s oddities — Death of Louis — The Royal Family
    — Soult — Lady Charlotte Bury — The Hertford family —
    Carlton House and Court parties — Queen Anne — George
    IV.’s favourites — Artists — A State ball — The Church
    of Ireland — Useless motions — The Ponsonby family —
    Coronation preparations — Irish affairs — Government
    difficulties — Singing of birds — The Fitzclarence
    pensions — Election Committee Bill — Portugal and slavery
    — The Established Church — Parliamentary business —
    Audiences — Talleyrand’s death — Twentieth birthday — A
    State ball — Royal marriages — Eton customs — Coronation
    honours                                                      291–335


                               CHAPTER X
                    _June, July, and August_, 1838

Thunderstorms — Lord Durham — Don Giovanni — New Zealand
    — Eton Montem — Lord Barham — Miss Chaworth and Byron
    — Lord Melbourne’s household — Visit to Eton — King
    Leopold’s position — Lord Melbourne’s reminiscences —
    Public School education — Irish legal difficulties —
    O’Connell — Eton and Ascot — South Sea Co. — The Order
    of the Bath — Coronation Honours — Lord Melbourne and
    the Garter — Marshal Soult — Coronation Day — Procession
    to Westminster — The ceremony — The procession — After
    the Coronation — The peerage — Illuminations — Lord
    Melbourne on the ceremony — Kings and usurpers — Review
    in Hyde Park — Popularity of enemies — Soult at Eton —
    Family questions — Sir E. Lyons — Prince Royal of Bavaria
    — Dukedoms — The Sheridan family — Lady Seymour — Lord
    Shelburne’s marriage — A dinner party and reception —
    George III.’s sons — And his illnesses — Lady Sarah
    Lennox — Mehemet Ali — Lord Melbourne and King Leopold
    — Statues — The Queen’s Speech — Lord Melbourne on Lord
    Brougham — Wellington — Belgium and Holland dispute — The
    Irish — Persian affairs — Pozzo di Borgo — Lord Howick —
    Belgian affairs — Russian influence — Jewels — Duke of
    Sussex — Lord North — Mexican affairs — Concerning books
    — Lady Holland — George III.’s Prime Ministers — Colonial
    policy                                                       336–398

[Illustration: _H.R.H. Princess Victoria & “Dashy”_

  _from a picture by R. Westall R. A. at Windsor Castle_]




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

                                VOL. I


H.R.H. PRINCESS VICTORIA AND “DASHY.” _From a picture by R.
    Westall, R.A., at Windsor Castle_                     _Frontispiece_

                                                             FACING PAGE

VICTOIRE CONROY. _From a sketch by Princess Victoria_                 48

*H.R.H. PRINCESS SOPHIA. _From a portrait by Sir W. Ross_             62

*H.S.H. PRINCESS ADELAIDE OF HOHENLOHE-LANGENBURG. _From a
    portrait by Gutekunst_                                            96

*H.S.H. PRINCESS SOPHIA OF SAXE-COBURG, COUNTESS
    MENSDORFF-POUILLY. _From a portrait by Dickinson_                122

CHARLES MATHEWS. _From a sketch by Princess Victoria_                148

*H.S.H. PRINCE ALBERT OF SAXE-COBURG, AGED NINE. _From a
    portrait by Schneider, after Eckhardt_                           158

MADAME MALIBRAN. _From a sketch by Princess Victoria_                168

GIPSY WOMEN. _From a sketch by Princess Victoria_                    182

LUIGI LABLACHE. _From a sketch by Princess Victoria_                 190

*H.M. QUEEN ADELAIDE. _From a portrait by Sir W. Ross_               204

*H.R.H. PRINCESS VICTORIA. _From a portrait by R. J. Lane_,
                                                            1829     212

*H.S.H. CHARLES, PRINCE OF LEININGEN. _From a portrait by R. J.
    Lane_                                                            248

*H.R.H. THE DUCHESS OF KENT. _From a portrait by Stone_              290

H.S.H. PRINCE FERDINAND OF SAXE-COBURG, AFTERWARDS KING-CONSORT
    OF PORTUGAL. _From a sketch by Princess Victoria_     326

*H.S.H. FEODORA, PRINCESS OF HOHENLOHE-LANGENBURG. _From a
    portrait by Gutekunst_, 1830                                     362

*H.R.H. THE DUC DE NEMOURS. _From a portrait by Eugene Lami_         394

  NOTE.—The illustrations marked * are taken from the Queen’s private
  albums, in which she kept portraits of relations and friends,
  specially painted for her.




                             INTRODUCTION


                                   I

Apart from the onward surge of Empire during both epochs, apart from
the flow of scientific thought and the breeze of literary enthusiasm
characterising them, there is much in the atmosphere of Victoria’s
advent to the Throne, and her long and glorious tenure of it, to remind
us of the central figure of the Elizabethan age.

Both princesses were reared and educated, although for very different
reasons, in the uncertain glory of succession to the Throne. Both
mounted the Throne early in life alone and unprotected, at a moment of
reaction against the abuses of monarchy. Under George III. as under
Henry VIII. this country had been subjected to violent commotion
consequent on the struggle for national freedom against a foreign
power. The Reformation in England and the Napoleonic wars owed their
successful issue to the persistent determination of the English people
to be free. The hated marriage of Mary and the matrimonial scandals
of George IV. had cast a gloom over the temper of the nation. Even
the triumph of the popular cause, due to the grudging support given
by William IV. to his Whig Ministers, had not restored the forfeited
prestige of the Monarchy.

Reaction was the corollary against the fear inspired by Philip in the
one case and the humiliating memories of Queen Caroline in the other.
That reaction came in the shape of the popular enthusiasm inspired by a
young and attractive Tudor princess, who at Hatfield on a late November
afternoon in 1558 heard from Cecil that she was Queen of England. Three
centuries later a similar outburst followed the accession of another
youthful princess only just eighteen years old, looking scarcely
more than a child, when she received the homage of Lord Melbourne at
Kensington Palace on a June morning of 1837.

It is tempting to follow this seductive pathway through the devious
alleys of historical comparison and contrasts. The troubles of
Elizabeth’s childhood at Hunsdon, the pitiful laments of her excellent
governess at the poverty of her ward’s surroundings, and the hostile
atmosphere surrounding her person were reflected in a minor degree
within the precincts of Kensington during the early years of Princess
Victoria’s life.

Our concern, however, is not with Elizabeth but with Victoria, with the
England into which she was born, and with the influences which helped
to give her character and bearing a certain strength and dignity,
and attuned her heart, not perhaps to deep tenderness, but to much
compassion.

The pen recoils from an attempt to tell again the story of Princess
Victoria’s birth and early life, or to describe once more the political
events of her first years upon the Throne. Moreover, these volumes tell
their own tale. They set forth in the young Princess’s own artless
words the daily facts of her existence at Kensington, or when making
some provincial royal progress in the company of her mother.

The reader can catch many a glimpse here and there of the soul of a
Princess, proud and headstrong, affectionate and sometimes perverse,
seated on the lonely heights of the Throne. The portrait is here,
within these pages. It is not unskilfully drawn, when the youth of the
artist is borne in mind. At the time when the first entries in these
Journals were made, the writer was thirteen years old. The last page
was written on the day of her marriage. She had been two years a Queen,
and she was in her twenty-first year.

Princess Victoria, the only child of the Duke and Duchess of Kent,
and the ultimate heiress in direct succession of George III., was
born on May 24, 1819. In 1819 the aspect of English country life
was not very different from that of to-day; if the roads were not
so well surfaced, and if woodlands were rather more plentiful, the
fields and hedgerows, the farmsteads with cottages grouped around
them, the Tudor manor-houses, the Georgian villas, the church spires,
and the village greens have remained unchanged. Except for lines of
railway and telegraph poles, the hop-fields of Kent and the Surrey
commons have kept their shape and contours. So that, in spite of the
miracles wrought by machinery in the minutiæ of life, any one of our
grandparents cruising in an airship at an elevation of some hundreds of
feet over the lands where he hunted and shot, or even the great town
in which he spent his summer months, would probably be unconscious of
much distinctive change.

Young people, however, think it odd when they read that when Princess
Victoria was taken from Kensington to Claremont—a journey now
accomplished with as little thought as would then have been given to
a drive between the Palace and Hyde Park—it was considered a “family
removal” of such moment as to require all the provision and precautions
associated to-day with an autumn holiday.

To those still young, but old enough to remember Queen Victoria, it
may seem hardly credible that she was born into a world devoid of
all the marvels of steam and electric contrivance that appear to us
the necessities, and not merely the luxuries, of life. How much more
difficult it must be for them to realise that when the young Princess
(whom they remember a great and mysterious figure, welcoming back
only the other day her soldiers from South Africa, and rejoicing in
their victories) was carried into the saloon of Kensington Palace to
be received by Archbishop Manners Sutton into the Church of Christ,
the mighty spirit of Napoleon brooded still behind the palisades of
Longwood, and George III.’s white and weary head could still be seen at
the window of his library at Windsor!

The Victorian era covers the period of the expansion of England into
the British Empire. The soldier, still young to-day, who put the
coping-stone on the Empire in Africa in 1900 is linked by the life of
the Queen to his forbears, who, when she was born, were still nursing
the wounds gloriously earned four years before in laying its foundation
in a Belgian cornfield.

That year 1819, however, was a year of deep despondency in England. In
Europe it was the “glorious year of Metternich,” then at the height
of his maleficent power. Europe was quit of Napoleon, but had got
Metternich in exchange, and was ill pleased with the bargain. Great
Britain, it is true, was free, but our people were overwrought by
poverty and suffering. The storm-swell of the great Napoleonic wars
still disturbed the surface of English life, and few realised that they
were better off than they had been during the past decade.

At Holland House, its coteries thinner but still talking, Lady
Holland—old Madagascar—was still debating what inscription should
record the merits of Mr. Fox upon his monument in the Abbey for
the edification of future ages. In St. James’s Place Sam Rogers’s
breakfasts had not lost their vogue. Tommy Moore was still dining with
Horace Twiss, and meeting Kean, and Mrs. Siddons, “cold and queenlike,”
on her way to view Caroline of Brunswick’s “things” shortly to be sold
at Christie’s, or to criticise Miss O’Neill’s dress rehearsals. On the
very day that Princess Victoria was born, Byron was writing to John
Murray from Venice “in the agonies of a sirocco,” and clamouring for
the proofs of the first canto of _Don Juan_. In that year _Ivanhoe_
was finished, and in the hands of eager readers; whilst Scott was
receiving at Abbotsford a certain Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, uncle
of the baby at Kensington, destined thereafter to play a large part in
her early life. Keats had just published _Endymion_. It was his last
year in England before going south to die. And it was Shelley’s _annus
mirabilis_: the year in which he wrote _Prometheus_ and _The Cenci_—an
achievement, some have since said, unparalleled in English poetry since
Shakespeare lived and wrote.

_The Excursion_ had been published five years before, but Wordsworth
was at Rydal Mount completing _The White Doe of Rylston_. Southey
was Poet Laureate. Three years before, in the “wild and desolate
neighbourhood amid great tracts of bleak land enclosed by stone dykes
sweeping up Clayton heights,” Charlotte Brontë’s eyes had opened upon
her sad world. Carlyle, then a young teacher in Edinburgh, was passing
through that stormy period of the soul which comes sooner or later to
every one whose manhood is worth testing by God. And half-way between
Horncastle and Spilsby, on the lower slope of a Lincolnshire wold,
Alfred Tennyson was reading Pope’s _Iliad_ and himself “writing an
epic of 6,000 lines _à la_ Walter Scott.” At Shrewsbury School under
Dr. Butler, Charles Darwin, then a boy of ten, had already begun to
develop a taste for “collecting,” manifested in “franks” and seals and
coins. Robert Browning, a turbulent and destructive child of seven,
had already commenced making rhymes less complicated, but not less
ambitious, than those which puzzled his readers sixty years later.
Goethe, who had grown to manhood within earshot of Frederick the Great
and of the Empress Maria Theresa, was living at Weimar with many years
of life still before him, corresponding with the boy Mendelssohn, later
to be a welcome guest, at Windsor, of the little Princess, then in
her cradle in Kensington Palace. Mazzini, aged fourteen, was at the
University in Genoa, a rebellious lad, but already affecting the deep
mourning dress he never altered later in life. Cavour, aged nine, was
at school in Turin. Sir Thomas Lawrence was in that year engaged in
finishing his magnificent series of historical portraits afterwards to
find a home at Windsor Castle, illustrating for all time the Congress
of Vienna and the story of the Great Coalition against Napoleon.

Under this galaxy of stars, some slowly sinking below the horizon, and
others just rising above it, Princess Victoria was born.

In the year following, King George III. died. Historians, mostly
partisans of the Whig party, have not done this King justice. Of
all Sovereigns who have ever reigned in England, none so completely
represented the average man among his subjects. The King’s blameless
morals, his regular habits, his conservative instincts and narrow
obstinacy, were characteristics which he shared with the people he
ruled. Of the House of Hanover he was the first King born in England,
and he spoke his native tongue without a foreign accent. If he could
have reconciled it to the family tradition, he would have married an
English wife. He was essentially British in character and sentiment.
Had he not been overborne by his Ministers, he would have fought out
to a finish the war with America, and peace with Washington would not
have been concluded. He never for a moment contemplated abandoning the
struggle against Napoleon. No party whip could have taken more trouble
to keep his chief in office than did George III. to support Mr. Pitt
throughout that Minister’s first administration. He has been called
despotic, but that adjective can only be used, in speaking of him,
in the sense that he wished to see his views prevail. He was a good
partisan fighter, and this, in the main, his subjects never disliked.
A close and impartial examination of the character of George III.
discloses a temperament strongly resembling that which her Ministers
were destined in the middle and later years of her reign to find in
his granddaughter. Strong tenacity of view and of purpose, a vivid
sense of duty, a firm though unrevealed belief in the transcendental
right of the Sovereign to rule, a curious mingling of etiquette and
domestic simplicity, and a high standard of domestic virtue were marked
characteristics of George III. and of Queen Victoria. Both these
descendants of Princess Sophia had little in common with the Stewarts,
but, like Elizabeth and the Tudors, they had intense pride in England,
and they showed a firm resolve to cherish and keep intact their mighty
inheritance.

When George III. died at Windsor in 1820, and during the ten following
years, Princess Victoria’s uncle, George IV., reigned as King. For the
previous ten years he had reigned as Prince Regent. If his father has
been misjudged, this Sovereign too has been misrepresented by those
who have made it their business to write the political history of our
country. He is generally described as being wholly bad, and devoid of
any decent quality as a man and as a Sovereign. Decency perhaps was not
his strong point; but though it is not possible to esteem him as a man,
George IV. was not a bad King. In his youth, as Prince of Wales, in
spite of glaring follies and many vices, he possessed a certain charm.
When a boy he had broken loose from the over-strict and over-judicious
watchfulness of his parents. Kept in monotonous seclusion, cloistered
within the narrow confines of a Palace, fettered by an Oriental system
of domestic spies, cut off from intercourse with the intellectual
movement of the outer world, the royal children, warm-blooded and of
rebellious spirit, ran secret riot after a fashion which modern memoirs
have revealed in Borgian colours. It was a natural reaction of young
animal life against unnatural and unhealthy restraint. The Prince of
Wales, when he was eighteen years old, was unwillingly and perforce
liberated. It followed, simply enough, that he became a source of
constant grief and annoyance to his royal father. Not only were the
canons of morality violated by him with little regard for the outward
decorum due to his great position, but the young Prince plunged into a
turgid sea of politics, and it was not long before he stood forth as
the nominal head of a faction bitterly opposed to the King’s Ministers,
and the head and front of personal offence to the King himself.

In the eyes of high society he was a Prince Charming, vicious if you
will, a spendthrift and a rake, the embodiment of a reactionary spirit
against the dulness and monotonous respectability of the Court. He
was known to appreciate beautiful objects as well as beautiful faces.
He was not altogether without literary culture. He appeared to be
instinctively drawn to the arts and sciences with a full sense of the
joy of patronage, and he made it clear to every one that he welcomed
the free intercourse of men of all ranks, provided that they possessed
some originality of character or some distinction of mind. In Mr. Fox
he found a willing mentor and an irresistible boon companion. Among
that little group of Whigs, of whom Sheridan was the ornament and
the disgrace, he found precisely the atmosphere which suited him, so
completely was it the antithesis of that in which his boyhood had been
spent. As he grew older, the rose-tinted vices of his youth became grey
and unlovely, while the shortcomings of his mind and his heart were
more readily discerned; but much of his personal charm remained. In his
most degenerate days, in the years of his regency and kingship, when he
dragged into the public eye the indecencies of his domestic misfortunes
and paraded his mistresses before the world, he still managed to retain
a curious and genuine hold upon the affections of his Ministers.
Although he possessed none of their regard, he was not altogether
without some following among the people.

George IV.’s merits were a certain epicurean kindness of heart and a
not ungenerous desire to give pleasure, coupled with a true sense of
his constitutional position and a firm-drawn resolve to distinguish
between his private predilections and his public duty. The nation owes
him very little, but in any case it owes him this, that he was the
first Sovereign since Charles I. who showed a blundering reverence for
beautiful things. He enlarged and consolidated the artistic wealth of
the nation. A life-long patron of artists, he fostered the growth of
national art. He added largely to the splendid collections which now
adorn Windsor and the metropolis. Whatever the final judgment passed
upon him may be, both as a man and as a Sovereign, he must in strict
justice be spared the unqualified contempt with which superior spirits,
taking their cue from Thackeray, have treated him. It should weigh
with every man who reads _The Four Georges_ that King George IV. was
certainly liked, and was certainly not despised, by Sir Walter Scott.
In his later years the old King displayed some little kindness to his
niece, the young Princess Victoria, who had succeeded his own daughter
as prospective heiress of England. If he saw her but rarely, he now
and again betrayed knowledge of her existence, and once took her for a
drive in his pony-carriage. There are still extant some short letters
which she wrote to him in a large baby hand. In 1830 he died, and was
succeeded by his brother the Duke of Clarence.

William IV. was the most fortunate of the children of George III.
Thanks to his profession as a sea-officer, he escaped early from the
stifling atmosphere of the Court, and had the glorious privilege of
serving under the command of Hood and of Nelson. His sea service ended
when he was only twenty-five years old. It left the usual dominant
sea-mark upon his character. Like so many gallant sailors, his mind was
untrained and ill-disciplined. His sense of duty was strong, though
undiscerning. He was courageous and truthful. He had ten children by
Mrs. Jordan born out of wedlock, but they were all well cared for and
never disowned. He realised his constitutional duty sufficiently to
see that he must yield to the expressed will of the nation, but he
yielded so clumsily that all men believed him to be coerced. Wisely
anxious to be well known and popular among his subjects, he chose the
curious method of walking down St. James’s Street dressed in long
boots and spurs during the most crowded hour of the afternoon. His
predecessor had lived the last years of his life in seclusion and
silence; he determined therefore to give full scope to his naturally
garrulous disposition. He talked in season and out of season with an
irresponsibility which savoured of the quarter-deck, but wholly without
the salt of the sea. By his Ministers he was regarded with kindliness,
although it cannot be said, in spite of Lord Grey’s panegyric, that
they held him in much respect. By the middle classes he was looked upon
with amused and not unfriendly amazement. In the eyes of the masses he
was “Billy,” their sailor-King, and among monarchical safeguards there
are few stronger than a nickname and the aureole of the Navy.

William IV. married late in life Princess Adelaide of
Saxe-Coburg-Meiningen, but the fates left him with no surviving
children when he ascended the Throne in 1830. During his reign of seven
years the King showed much kindness to the little niece who was clearly
designated as his successor. Her mother, however, contrived to irritate
him by giving too much prominence to the obvious fact of her daughter’s
heirship to the Throne. By “progresses” made on different occasions and
undertaken with considerable ceremonial, the Duchess of Kent excited
the wrath of the King, who made no attempt to conceal his annoyance,
and took evident pleasure in the display of it at embarrassing moments
in public. It was partly owing to the friction between her mother and
King William and to the unpleasant atmosphere created in consequence of
these quarrels, and partly to the presence in her mother’s household
of Sir John Conroy and his family—persons very distasteful to the
young Princess—that Queen Victoria was in the habit of saying that her
childhood had been a sad one. These Journals, begun in her fourteenth
year, betray no sense of childish sorrow, and no reader can glean
from them any confirmation of her statement that her early life was
unhappy. It must be remembered, however, that this Journal was not
a sealed book. It was not privately put away under lock and key and
reserved only for the eye of the writer. The young Princess’s Journals
were commenced in a volume given to her by her mother for the express
purpose that she should record the facts of her daily life, and that
this record of facts and impressions should be open to the inspection
of the child’s governess as well as of her mother. It is natural,
therefore, that the earlier volumes should contain very little beyond
the obvious and simple things which any girl would be likely to write
down if she were attempting to describe her life from day to day. When
the Princess ascended the Throne and assumed her queenly independence,
the tone of the Journals changes at once. It becomes immediately
clear to the reader that while the Princess’s Journal was written for
her mother, the Queen’s Journal was written for herself. One of her
earliest entries after her succession was to state her intention of
invariably seeing her Ministers alone; and she might have added, had
she thought it worth stating, that her Journal also would in future be
seen by her alone.

Journals are often said to be useful to the historian. This theory
is based on the assumption, hardly borne out by experience, that he
who writes a journal writes what is true. A journal is supposed to
record events, great or small, which are happening at the moment,
and to convey impressions about personages with whom the writer
comes in contact, or who loom sufficiently large to justify their
being mentioned. When, however, it is remembered how inaccurate our
information generally is, and how mistaken we often are about the
character and motives even of those we know intimately, it is not
surprising that the most brilliant diarist should frequently state
facts which cannot be verified from other sources, and colour the
personality of his contemporaries in a manner quite unjustifiable
unless truth be deliberately sacrificed to the picturesque. The
Journal of Charles Greville, perhaps the most famous of English modern
journals, is full of gross inaccuracies in matters of fact and still
grosser distortions of character. It is, nevertheless, a striking
picture of the political and social world haunted by that persistent
eavesdropper, and, like any well-written journal, throws a vivid and
interesting light upon the character of the writer.

Similar criticisms apply to most famous memoirs, like Saint-Simon’s
or Lord Hervey’s, written with a view to serving the historian of the
future, and with the distinct purpose of giving bias to history.

They do not apply to these diaries of Queen Victoria. The Queen makes
no attempt to analyse character or the meaning of events. She never
strives after effect. Her statements are just homely descriptions
of everyday life and plain references to the people she meets at
Kensington or at Windsor. If the young Princess sees a play that
pleases her or hears a song that touches her, she says so. If the Queen
hears something said that strikes her as original or quaint, the saying
is put on record. She is not writing for the historian. She writes for
her own pleasure and amusement, although there is always present to her
mind a vague idea, common enough at the time, that to “keep a journal”
is in some undefined way an act of grace.

The reader should not lose sight of the fact that these Journals are
the simple impressions of a young girl, not twenty years old, about her
own life and about the people she met. This constitutes their charm.
She writes of her daily movements, and of the men and happenings that
gave her pleasure. Either by nature or design, she avoided the mention
of disagreeable things, so that these early Journals give one a notion
of a life happily and simply led.

If they throw no new light on the history of the period, they will give
to future generations an insight, of never-failing interest, into the
character of the young Queen.


                                  II

Princess Victoria’s first Journal was commenced on August 1, 1832.
She was thirteen years old. The first entry is made in a small octavo
volume half bound in red morocco, of a very unpretentious kind.[1]
On the first page there appear the words, “This book Mamma gave me,
that I might write the journal of my journey to Wales in it.—Victoria,
Kensington Palace, July 31.”

The Duchess of Kent was at this time forty-six years of age. She had
been a widow for twelve years. She was the fourth daughter of the
Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, and was first married to the Prince of
Leiningen-Dachburg-Hadenburg. He was twenty-three years her senior.
By him she had one son, Charles, often mentioned in these Journals,
and one daughter Feodorowna, subsequently married to Ernest, Prince of
Hohenlohe-Langenburg.

Two years after her second marriage, to the fourth son of George III.,
the Duchess of Kent was left a widow for the second time. Crippled by
the Duke’s debts, that she was quite unable to pay,[2] with three young
children on her hands, she was miserably poor. Her jointure yielded her
an income of under £300. Her brother Leopold, then living at Claremont,
came to her assistance, and made her an allowance of £3,000 a year.

In 1825, when it became evident that her daughter Princess Victoria
would in all probability succeed to the Throne of England, Parliament
voted an annuity of £6,000 to the Duchess, for the maintenance and
education of her child, and this was subsequently increased after the
accession of William IV.

The upbringing of her daughter became her absorbing occupation, and,
shutting herself up in Kensington Palace, she devoted herself to the
child’s education.

The lessons of Princess Victoria’s childhood were superintended by the
Dean of Chester. Her education, judged by the standards of to-day,
was not of an exceptionally high order. It would be interesting to
know what old Roger Ascham would have thought of the Dean of Chester’s
curriculum. So far as can be gathered from her own childish records
and from the correspondence and memoirs of those who had access to
Kensington, she was taught the ordinary things which children are
supposed to learn. Fortunately, perhaps, no effort of any special
kind was made to train her mind or mould her character, with a view
to the responsibilities which lay before her or to the position she
appeared destined to fill. When, at a later stage, the Bishops of
London and Lincoln were requested to draw up a report, for presentation
to Parliament, upon her moral and intellectual attainments, they
found no difficulty in giving credit to the Duchess of Kent for the
conscientious manner in which she had endeavoured to educate the
heiress to the Throne. We may, however, take leave to doubt whether
those entrusted with the Princess’s education were teachers endowed
with any special aptitudes; and it is certain that the outlook of
the Duchess herself, although practical and wise, was not of that
discerning character which enabled her to differentiate between a
commonplace education and its more subtle forms. It was precisely what
might have been expected from one whose youth had been spent in a small
German Court, and whose later opportunities had not brought her into
contact with highly trained and thoughtful minds.

A foreign observer and critic once suggested a doubt whether the Queen
could have maintained through life her admirable mental equilibrium if
education had developed in her high intellectual curiosity or fantastic
imagination. It is an interesting speculation. Soundness of judgment
possibly rests upon the receptive rather than upon the creative
faculties, and upon physical rather than upon intellectual activities.
It may, as has been said, require a rare type of intelligence—that of
Disraeli—to combine ideas and dreams with the realities of public life.
In the domain of learning, Queen Victoria had very little in common
with Elizabeth or with any Sovereign of the Renaissance. Her mother and
the worthy Dean, who watched over her youth, were content to foster the
quality of good sense, and to inculcate high standards of private and
public virtue. Her future subjects, could they have been consulted,
would have strongly approved. In after-years the English middle-class
recognised in the Queen a certain strain of German sentimentality which
they affectionately condoned, and a robust equilibrium of mind which
they thoroughly admired.

It is as well, therefore, that events took the shape they did, and
that the mind and character of the Princess were trained upon simple
lines in accordance with the practice of the average citizen families
subsequently to be her subjects. In years to come the Queen was perhaps
better able to look at events and persons from the point of view
of the majority of her people than would have been possible if her
education had given her a high place among the intellectuals. It was a
saving grace throughout her long reign that while she could recognise
intellect and capacity, her sympathies were with average people, whose
feelings and opinions she more readily understood and in reality
represented.

In these days, when Accomplishments, as they were called in the first
half of the nineteenth century, are no longer esteemed in young people,
and their place has been usurped by athletic exercises, it is difficult
to describe, in a way that appeals to the serious imagination, the
girlish tastes of Princess Victoria. Perhaps the world has not lost
much because young ladies to-day learn to play golf and have ceased to
sing duets.

In the thirties, music and painting and a knowledge of modern languages
were the necessary equipment of a girl destined to move in Society.
It mattered little how reedy and small the voice, she was expected to
vocalise like Grisi and to sing duets with Mario.

The Queen had been well trained musically, according to the lights
of those days. She could appreciate the simpler forms of melody,
especially Italian opera, while she could sing and play sufficiently
well to give much pleasure to herself and mild pleasure to others. As a
linguist, as a reader, and as a writer of letters and memoranda she had
no pretensions to pre-eminence; but she could speak modern languages as
well as any Queen is called upon to do, she could read and appreciate
high literature, although not without effort, and she could express
herself with pungency and vigour, although not with any marked literary
skill or distinction of style.

Her drawings and water-colour sketches were through life a constant
source of happiness to the Queen. There are at Windsor literally
hundreds of small sketch-books, containing reminiscences of her
journeys and sojournings in Scotland and in Italy, again not of high
artistic merit, but sufficiently vital to suggest the reflection that
a young lady of to-day is possibly no gainer by having substituted the
golf-club for the pencil.

The Queen’s teachers were excellent, commonplace people, and they
left precisely those traces on her mind that might have been expected.
Her character was another matter. They could not and did not influence
that, and it is the character of the Queen that places her in the small
category of rulers who have not only deserved well of their country,
but have left an indelible stamp upon the life of their people.


                                  III

These Journals were commenced in the year 1832, a year memorable in our
history for the fruition of hopes deeply cherished by the political
party that had arisen, under the auspices of Canning, after the close
of the struggle with Napoleon.

During the year when the first Reform Bill became the law of the land,
the passions of men had been deeply stirred throughout Great Britain.
The political struggle, begun seventeen years before, had come to a
head. The classes still paramount had found themselves face to face
with the desires and aspirations of classes hitherto subordinate to
have a share in the government of the country. These feelings had grown
fiercer year by year, and, encouraged by the Whig party headed by
Earl Grey, had found ultimate expression in the Reform Bill of 1832,
framed under the ægis of that Minister. All over Europe the stream of
change and reform, loosed by the French Revolution and subsequently
checked by the Congress of Vienna, began once more to flow. During the
sixteen years that followed Princess Victoria’s first entry in these
Journals, the waters of Revolution had flooded Europe. Thrones and
institutions in every European country were shaken, many of them to
their foundations, and some with disastrous results. Fortunately for
Great Britain, her statesmen had anticipated the events of 1848, and
the Reform Bill had so far satisfied the aspirations of the hitherto
unenfranchised classes as to render innocuous the frothing of agitators
during that tragic year of revolution. In aptitude for anticipating
social and political change and avoiding violent manifestations of
popular will, the English race stands pre-eminent. Our people as well
as our statesmen have from the earliest times proved themselves to
be experts in the art of government, and the history of Europe is a
commentary upon that gift of the British nation.

There have, of course, been moments when the atmosphere of politics
has been highly charged with electricity. Such a moment occurred in
1832. A storm broke with unusual violence over the head of William IV.
The House of Lords was bitterly hostile to a Bill, accepted by the
House of Commons and supported with enthusiasm by the majority of his
subjects. There was no machinery existing under the Constitution for
adjusting these differences except that of creating a sufficient number
of Peers to ensure the passage of the Reform Bill through the House of
Lords. The King therefore found himself in the unpleasant position of
having to place his prerogative of creating peers in the hands of his
Ministers, or else by his own act to dispense with their services.
The choice found him undecided and left him baffled. He was not acute
enough to see that in the existing state of public opinion he had no
choice. If he had possessed wit to read the signs of the times, it is
doubtful whether he would have had sufficient single-minded courage to
take immediate action in accordance with the opinion he had formed.
Penetrating vision the King lacked, and responsibility was distasteful
to him. Consequently he was not only weak, but he showed weakness.
It was clear that the Government of Lord Grey held unimpaired the
confidence of the House of Commons and possessed the full approval of
the country. Every intelligent observer realised that the Reform Bill,
in spite of its aristocratic foes, in spite of the prophets of evil,
and in spite of its inherent defects, was bound to be passed into law.
King William, however, conceived it to be his duty to endeavour to
find an alternative Government. It was as certain as anything could
be in politics, that Sir Robert Peel would not, and that the Duke of
Wellington could not, come to his assistance. There was something
pitiful about the spectacle of the old sailor-King casting about for a
safe anchorage, and finding one cable parting after another. Security
was only to be found in the Ministers who had advised him, in the last
resort, to use his prerogative for the purpose of swamping a majority
in the House of Lords that hesitated to bow to the will of the people.
Ultimately he was constrained to accept their advice, but it was only
after a loss of personal dignity and a distinct weakening of the
authority of the Crown. The King, men said, had touted about to find
Ministers to serve him, and had failed to find them. This humiliation,
at least, King William might have avoided, had he possessed a clearer
vision of possibilities and greater firmness of character.

The political storms of 1832 appear to have broken noiselessly against
the walls of Kensington Palace, for in the little Princess’s Journals
there is no sign that she was aware of them. The King’s worries,
however, so affected his temper, that it was impossible for the
Princess and her mother not to feel its reflex action. In the Journals
no mention is made of the domestic troubles which have been described
elsewhere, and we know, from expressions of Queen Victoria’s in later
years, that she had purposely refrained, in compiling her Journals,
from referring to her mother’s worries and her own.

During the four years that immediately preceded Princess Victoria’s
accession to the Throne, from 1832 to 1836, these Journals give us
the picture of a young life passed amid the tranquil surroundings of
Kensington Palace, its educational monotony only varied by attendance
at the opera or the theatre, by autumnal trips into the provinces,
or by welcome visits from foreign cousins. These autumnal trips were
the “royal progresses,” as he called them, against which King William
was wont to protest in vehement language. They evidently gave intense
pleasure to the Princess. Her Journals contain records of them all.
Some examples have been given, in these extracts, of her method of
describing her visits to provincial cities and towns, to seaside
summer resorts, and to a few of the great homes of those who were
afterwards to be her Ministers or subjects.

It was during this period that she got her first glimpse of the Isle
of Wight, where so much of her life was afterwards to be spent. The
fact that Sir John Conroy, whom she disliked, lived for many years
at Osborne Lodge seems not to have prevented her from subsequently
becoming deeply attached to that quiet home amid beautiful surroundings
created by her and Prince Albert upon the site where Osborne Lodge had
stood. Whippingham Church, to be so closely connected with her and her
children, was first visited in the year 1833.

Enough has been included in these extracts to show her liking for the
opera and for the theatre, her pleasure in music, her devotion to the
pursuit of riding, and that love for animals which characterised her
through life.

When she was sixteen she went to Ascot for the first time, and
figured in the royal procession. It began to be recognised that the
young Princess had passed the threshold of girlhood. In that year
her Confirmation took place at the Chapel Royal, St. James’s, and
Archbishop Howley, believed to be the last prelate who wore a wig,
officiated. During the autumn she visited Yorkshire and stayed with
Archbishop Harcourt at Bishopthorpe and with Lord Fitzwilliam at
Wentworth. Coming south, she was the guest of the Duke of Rutland at
Belvoir, of Lord Exeter at Burghley, and of Lord Leicester at Holkham.
In the following year, 1836, she met for the first time her cousin
Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg. He and his elder brother Ernest visited
Kensington Palace at the instance of her uncle Leopold. The fact that
Prince Albert had been thought of years before by the King of the
Belgians as a possible husband for Princess Victoria was sufficient
to set King William IV. against the match. The King, however, was not
uncivil to the brothers when they visited London, but he had ideas of
his own about the future of his niece, and he tried hard to lay the
foundations of an alliance between the young Princess and the younger
son of the Prince of Orange. Prince Albert on this occasion made no
deep impression upon Princess Victoria’s mind or heart, but her loyalty
to her uncle Leopold and her regard for his opinion led her to show
the graceful young Coburg Prince marked preference over the somewhat
ungainly candidate of King William. Her heart was clearly untouched,
but she was willing to be guided by the advice of that counsellor and
friend to whom in preference to every one she had already begun to
turn for help and guidance. As this became obvious to King William,
his jealousy and dislike for the Duchess of Kent increased; and in the
autumn of this year, 1836, having invited his sister-in-law to a state
banquet, he scandalised Society by delivering an after-dinner speech
charged with recrimination and insult to his guest.

This was the Princess’s penultimate year as a minor. King William had
for a long time been haunted with the fear that he would die before his
niece came of age, and that a regency would devolve upon his hated
sister-in-law. He was spared what he would have considered this final
humiliation, for on May 24, 1837, the young Princess came of age, just
a month before the King died at Windsor.

During the final years of her minority she was thrown freely into the
society of many of the eminent and distinguished persons soon to be her
subjects. The Duchess gave a series of entertainments at Kensington
Palace, and the Princess was brought into contact with her mother’s
guests. Accounts of these dinners and concerts, and full lists of the
guests, are all minutely recorded in the Journals. Comments, however,
beyond an occasional expression of delight at the music and admiration
for its performers, are excluded. Her life was still the life of a
child, and her days were mostly spent with her preceptors, under the
auspices of the Duchess of Northumberland, her official governess, and
of the Dean of Chester, her tutor.

She had been parted some years before from her half brother and sister
by the usual exigencies of time. Prince Charles of Leiningen had become
a sea-officer, and Princess Feodore was married. Into the inner orbit
of her young life there penetrated only Sir John Conroy, whose person
was odious to her, and Baroness Lehzen, the daughter of a Hanoverian
clergyman, who had been the Princess’s governess since 1824, and to
whom she was deeply attached. Lablache, her singing-master, a man of
some originality and charm, was a constant source of interest and
amusement to the young Princess, and she preferred his lessons to all
others.

It was during these last few years before her accession that the final
touches were given to her character by the subtle influences of her
environment. The position occupied by Sir John Conroy in her mother’s
house inspired and fortified her subsequent resolve to avoid intimacies
with members of her household. She became distant and reserved to
those about her, and her relations with her mother were chilled. Her
mind acquired an impression that family ties, however binding from the
point of view of duty, might be superseded by those of friendship. It
is undoubtedly the case that Baroness Lehzen occupied at this time
the first place in her pupil’s thoughts and affections; while the
dawning necessity felt by Princess Victoria for sympathy, and for those
intimate communings so attractive to sentimental natures, had a very
distinct influence upon the mind and conduct of the Queen in subsequent
years. Her Journals afford proof, if proof had been wanting, that, in
spite of the opinions of her attainments vouchsafed by eminent clerics,
the Princess had not been afforded an education specially designed to
fit her for the situation she was to occupy.

She was, at eighteen, as moderately and indifferently equipped as the
average girl of her age. If her conversation was not brilliant, her
heart was kindly and her judgment sound. She was shrewd and eminently
truthful. In spite of her small stature, she was curiously dignified
and impressive. Her voice was musical and carried far. And above all
things, her rectitude was unassailable, and her sense of duty so
keen and high that it supplied any lack of imagination or spiritual
deficiency. She was humble-minded, but not, perhaps, very tender. She
was passionate and imperious, but always faithful. She was supremely
conscious of the responsibilities and prerogatives of her calling,
which she was convinced, then and always, were her appanage by the gift
of God.

There is nothing in her Journals or elsewhere to show that before she
was eighteen years old she had ever talked seriously and at any length
to any man or woman of exceptional gifts. It was only when her uncle
King Leopold heard of the illness of William IV. that Stockmar was
instructed to speak with due gravity upon important matters to the
young girl whose accession to the Throne appeared imminent. Her mind
at that time was a blank page in so far as questions of high politics
or of administration were concerned. In point of fact, this was a
fortunate circumstance, and rendered easier the task of those who were
bound in the nature of things, and under the constitution of these
islands, to use this youthful Princess as one of the chief instruments
of government. Her mind was free from any political bias or complexion,
and ready to receive the impress of her constitutional Ministers. When,
within less than a month of her eighteenth birthday, King William
died, and when on June 20, 1837, the Queen found herself face to face
with those Whig statesmen in whose hands the destinies of the country
had been placed for the time being, their task was unhampered by
preconceived ideas or by foregone prejudice in their pupil. For the
Queen a new chapter of life was opened. She at once threw off the
trammels of pupilage. Not only was she able immediately and without
effort to shake herself clear of the domestic influences she had
resented and disliked, but for the first time she was enabled to meet
and to question distinguished men, with whose names she was familiar,
but whose standards of thought and conversation were far higher than
any to which she had been accustomed.


                                  IV

It was “in a palace in a garden, meet scene for youth and innocence,”
as one in later years to be her favoured Minister wrote, that Princess
Victoria received the news of her accession to a Throne overlooking
“every sea and nations in every zone.” The scene and the circumstances
in which her accession was announced to her by the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Lord Conynghame are described by the Queen in her
Journal. She has also recorded her impressions of what followed when
for the first time she met the Privy Council. What the Queen has not
described is the effect produced upon those present by her personality,
her youthful charm, her self-possession and perfect modesty, in such
strong contrast to everything which her Privy Councillors had been
accustomed to find in their former Sovereigns. The Queen was not
aware of the interest and curiosity she then excited in the minds of
her subjects. She had been brought up in such comparative seclusion,
that both to “Society” and to the great world outside her character
was an enigma and even her appearance very little known. Her sex and
youth rendered her personality exciting to a public satiated with the
elderly vagaries of her uncles. It was noticed at her first Council
that her manner was very graceful and engaging. It was particularly
observed that after she had read her speech in a clear and singularly
firm voice, when the two surviving sons of George III., the Dukes of
Cumberland and Sussex, knelt before her, swearing allegiance, she
blushed up to the eyes as if she felt the contrast between their public
and private relations, between their august age and her inexperienced
youth. It was also noticed that she spoke to no one, and that not the
smallest difference in her manner could be detected, even by sharp
watching eyes, between her attitude towards Lord Melbourne and the
Ministers on the one hand, and towards the Duke of Wellington and Sir
Robert Peel on the other. The Queen does not mention, for she was not
then aware of it, that Lord Melbourne was charmed and Sir Robert Peel
amazed at her demeanour. They spoke afterwards with emotion of her
modesty, firmness, and evident deep sense of her situation. She did not
know then, although she knew later, that the Duke of Wellington said
that had she been his own daughter he could not have desired to see her
perform her part better.

These Journals only accentuate what is already known from many
sources, that the Queen showed in difficult circumstances not only
good taste and good feeling, but admirable good sense. Her attention
to details, which some might consider trifles, but which differentiate
the careful from the thoughtless mind, was noticed with approval and
surprise by her Ministers. She exhibited caution in her treatment of
those persons who had been about her since childhood, and she made
no appeal to any of them for advice or guidance. Nor did she permit
advice to be proffered. Sir John Conroy was dismissed at once from
her surroundings. Baroness Lehzen she retained, as before, about
her person, and she speaks of her, throughout these Journals, with
deep feeling. It was noticed, whenever she was asked to decide some
difficult matter, her customary reply was that she would think it over,
and give her answer on the morrow. Onlookers, knowing that she relied
on the advice of Lord Melbourne, generally assumed that she referred
to him in the interval. He, however, declared that to many of his
questions a similar reply was given. In point of fact, she was obeying
one of the precepts of her uncle, the King of the Belgians.

It will be obvious to the readers of this book that a potent influence
over the mind and actions of the young Queen was exercised by Lord
Melbourne. It was the natural outcome of the business relation between
a very charming and experienced man of the world who happened to be
her Prime Minister and a very young girl isolated in the solitary
atmosphere of the Throne. From the Queen’s accession to the day of
her marriage the table-talk of Lord Melbourne fills the largest space
in her journals. Her description of their intercourse confirms what we
know from other sources, that Lord Melbourne became absorbed by the
novel and striking duty that had fallen to his lot. His temperament and
his antecedents rendered him peculiarly sensitive to the fascinating
influences of the strange relation in which he stood to this young
Queen. Lord Melbourne’s life had been chequered by curious experiences,
and his mind had been thoroughly well trained, for a man of his
station, according to the lights of those days. A classical education,
the privilege from youth upwards of free intercourse with every one
worth knowing, the best Whig connection, and an inherited capacity for
governing men under oligarchic institutions, had equipped his intellect
and judgment with everything that was necessary to enable him carefully
to watch and safeguard the blossoming of the character of the girl who
was both his pupil and his Sovereign.

He was no longer young, but he was not old. His person was attractive.
According to Leslie, no mean judge, his head was a truly noble one,
and he was a fine specimen of manly beauty in the meridian of life.
Not only were his features handsome, but his expression was in the
highest degree intellectual. His laugh was frequent and the most joyous
possible, his voice so deep and musical that to hear him say the most
ordinary thing was a pleasure; and his frankness, his freedom from
affectation, and his peculiar humour rendered almost everything he
said, however easy and natural, quite original. Chantrey’s bust and
the well-known portraits of Melbourne corroborate the descriptions
given by his contemporaries.

The Queen’s Journals afford us some illustrations of the extent of
his memory and reading. In his knowledge of political history he was
unsurpassed by any living Englishman, and among the statesmen of that
day there were none by age, character, and experience so well qualified
for the task of making the Queen acquainted with the art of government,
or better able to give her a correct interpretation of the laws and
spirit of the constitution. He understood perfectly the importance
of training her to work straightforwardly but secretly with that
small committee of active politicians, representing the parliamentary
majority of the day, which goes by the name of the Cabinet. Sir Robert
Peel and the Duke of Wellington, the Leaders of the Opposition, felt
and admitted that for her initiation into the mysteries of Kingcraft,
the Queen could not have been in wiser hands. It will be obvious from
these Journals that the Queen drifted into political partisanship.
She lived in dread of losing her Whig Ministers, and she got “to
hate” the Tories. This only meant—and under all the circumstances it
was natural—that she ardently desired to retain her mentor at her
side. It is to the credit of Lord Melbourne that he was constantly
discouraging his Sovereign’s bias towards the Whig Party, of which he
was the head, and that he never lost an opportunity of smoothing the
way for the advent of Sir Robert Peel which he knew to be inevitable.
He was, not inaptly, called a Regius Professor with no professorial
disqualifications, and it was precisely from this point of view that
the Tory leaders recognised the indispensable nature of his task, and
approved his manner of performing it. He was a Whig no doubt, says his
biographer, but at any rate he was an honest-hearted Englishman, and,
in no merely conventional sense, a gentleman on whose perfect honour no
one hesitated to place reliance.

He treated the Queen with unbounded consideration and respect, yet he
did not hesitate to administer reproof. He consulted her tastes and her
wishes, but he checked her inclination to be headstrong and arbitrary.
He knew well how to chide with parental firmness, but he did so with a
deference that could not fail to fascinate any young girl in a man of
his age and attainments. The Queen was completely under his charm. The
ease of his frank and natural manners, his quaint epigrams and humorous
paradox, his romantic bias and worldly shrewdness, were magnified by
her into the noblest manly virtues.

He saw her every day, but never appeared to weary of her society.
She certainly never tired of his. Yet he was fifty-eight years old,
a time-worn politician, and she was a girl of eighteen. He was her
confidential servant and at the same time her guardian. She was his
ward and at the same time his Sovereign. The situation was full of the
possibilities of drama, yet nothing can be more delightful than the
high comedy revealed in the passages of the Journals that refer to Lord
Melbourne. That he should have happened to be First Minister of the
Crown when King William died was a rare piece of good fortune for the
new Sovereign and for the country. With all the immense powers of head
and heart which the Queen came later to discover in Sir Robert Peel,
we may take leave to doubt if he could so lightly and so wisely have
assumed and fulfilled the duties imposed upon his predecessor.

It is impossible to exaggerate the effect produced upon the mind and
character of the Queen by the apostolic letters of her uncle. Even the
sound constitutional dogma of Stockmar might have failed to influence
one naturally inclined to be autocratic. Those, however, who were to
reap the profit in later years of the shrewd daily culture of the
Queen’s mind, of the skilful pruning away of ideas dangerous in a
British Sovereign, of the respectful explanation of her duties, of the
humorous rallying upon slight weaknesses which might have developed
into awkward habits, were deeply indebted, as these Journals show, to
the sagacity of Lord Melbourne.


                                   V

Two Queens Regnant, Queen Mary and Queen Anne, both of Stewart blood,
lived much at Kensington Palace, and both died there. As a place of
residence it had no attractions for the Sovereigns of the House of
Hanover. Queen Victoria was fond of the old wing in which her youth had
been spent, and which was subsequently occupied for many years by the
Duchess of Teck and her children. Built on piles, those portions of the
Palace that were uninhabited, and therefore indifferently looked after,
had towards the end of the Queen’s reign fallen into such disrepair
that their demolition had been decided by the Treasury. The Queen
disliked intensely the idea of removing any part of the old building.
Ultimately a bargain was made with the Chancellor of the Exchequer of
the day. It involved a certain exchange of houses in the gift of the
Crown and some shifting of financial responsibility. Kensington Palace
was saved, and a considerable sum was voted by Parliament for its
restoration, on condition that the public should be admitted to certain
rooms of historic interest.

King George’s dream, and no one knows better its visionary character,
is to pull down Buckingham Palace, to round off St. James’s and the
Green Parks at Constitution Hill and Buckingham Gate, and then, with
the money obtained by the sale of the Gardens of Buckingham Palace, to
reconstruct Kensington Palace as the town residence of the Sovereign.

For Queen Mary the place is full of memories and, because of her keen
historic sense, full of interest.

Compared with most of the great European capitals, London is poor in
palaces. The homes of the Tudor Sovereigns in and near the metropolis,
Nonsuch, Greenwich, and Whitehall, have disappeared. London contains
no single palace residentially associated with our long line of
Sovereigns. The Court of St. James was housed, in the eighteenth
century, in the Palace of that name. It seems to have been adequate
for the needs of the Hanoverian Princes, who had none of the amplitude
of the Tudors or the fine taste of the Stewarts.

The memories of Windsor, however, are long memories. Although Queen
Victoria never liked Windsor, perhaps because she was never in good
health there, it is with Windsor Castle that the principal events
of her reign are associated. The thoughts of the few, the very few,
comparatively speaking, of her subjects who were admitted to the
seclusion of Court life during two-thirds of the Queen’s reign may
carry them back to quiet days at Balmoral or Osborne, but it was round
Windsor that the political interest of the Victorian era centred. There
the links of the chain have remained unsevered between the Sovereigns
of Great Britain to-day and their Plantagenet ancestors.

If the Queen’s attachment to Windsor was not deep, she was more
indifferent still to Buckingham Palace. There is not a word in her
Diaries or correspondence to show that she in any way looked upon it as
a home or even a residence in any degree interesting or attractive. No
attempt was made, after the death of the Prince Consort, to improve or
beautify it. The magnificent objects of art and the splendid collection
of pictures were badly displayed and quite unappreciated. Few, outside
the circle of the Court, knew of their existence. The Palace was judged
by its mean façade, and the nation was rather shamefaced about the home
of its Sovereign, and certainly took no credit for the really noble
rooms and their contents which Buckingham Palace contains.

Yet, through the picture-gallery of this Palace hung with masterpieces
of the Dutch School, through the throne-room and the drawing-room
resplendent with the royal portraits of Reynolds and Gainsborough, or
through the matchless corridor at Windsor, have passed nearly all the
great figures of the nineteenth century, practically the whole of which
was spanned by the life of the Queen.

It is an imposing array, worthy of its setting. Heroes and statesmen,
men of science and letters, artists and scholars, all moved, with
a feeling of awe, into the presence of the Queen whose girlhood is
recounted by herself in these pages.

To those accustomed to the easier manners of more recent times it is
difficult to convey a sense of the atmosphere of Windsor during the
reign of the Queen. Her extraordinary aloofness was its determining
cause, but the effect was that of a shrine. Grave men walked softly
through the rooms of the Castle, and no voice was ever raised. The
presence of the Sovereign brooded, so to speak, over the Palace and
its environment. The desire to be negligently at ease never entered
the mind. The air was rarefied by a feeling that somewhere, in a
region unvisited by any but the most highly privileged, was seated,
not in an ordinary arm-chair, but on a throne, the awe-inspiring
and ever-dignified figure of the Sovereign. The proud intellect of
Gladstone and the rugged self-sufficiency of Bright bent before the
small, homely figure in widow’s weeds. In spite of this homeliness of
appearance, notwithstanding her love of simplicity and her dislike of
tawdriness and display, her spirit never put aside the regal habit.
How rarely the Queen extended her hand! It was a great privilege, and
only on special occasions vouchsafed to her Ministers. Men and women
bent very low to kiss that hand. This was not due to her small stature,
but to the curious, indefinable awe that she undoubtedly inspired
during the later portion of her life in all who approached her. Will
the reader find, in these records of her girlhood, intimations of that
moral ascendency she afterwards acquired over her subjects?

It was unquestionably a triumph of character. Even now to attempt a
serious estimate of the intellectual capacity of Queen Victoria is a
difficult task. There are too many still among us the greater part of
whose lives were spent under her sway. It is a fault in nearly all
recent biographies that they attempt appreciations which only the lapse
of time can enable a writer to draw in true perspective.

A venerable Sovereign, in full possession of his great powers of
intellect and character, who was almost an exact contemporary, still
rules a European people as proud of him as were her subjects of the
Queen. At least one of her faithful servants, who was present at
her Coronation seventy-four years ago and at every great ceremonial
throughout her reign, is still alive and full of manly vigour. Her
children are in the prime of life, and her favourite grandson is the
beloved Sovereign of the people she governed. Unqualified praise is
always distasteful, and critical analysis may easily prove to be in
singularly bad taste. Queen Victoria’s womanly and royal virtues are
written in golden letters upon the face of the vast Empire over which
she reigned. Her faults may well lie buried, for some time yet, in her
grave under the shadow of Windsor.

In the muniment-room of the Castle are preserved the private records of
her life-work. Over a thousand bound volumes of letters, from and to
the Queen upon all subjects, public and domestic, are there; and over a
hundred volumes of her Journals written in her own hand.

It is a unique record. The private papers of George III. have
disappeared. Of those of George IV. and William IV., only a few are in
existence. Selections from the correspondence of the Queen up to 1861
were published by permission of King Edward. These selections from her
early Journals have been made by the gracious leave of King George. It
may be many years before it would be wise or prudent to make public
any more of the private history of Queen Victoria’s reign. Those who,
by good fortune, have had access to these records can, however, safely
predict that whatever hereafter leaps to light, the Queen never can be
shamed.




                    INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO CHAPTER I

  When the Queen’s Journal opens she was thirteen years and two
  months old. When she was four years younger Sir Walter Scott was
  presented to the little Princess Victoria and noted that she was
  “educating with much care.” At that time she was supposed not to
  know that she was the “heir of England,” but Scott thought that
  if the little heart could be dissected it would be found that
  some little bird had carried the matter. According to Baroness
  Lehzen, the truth was not revealed until a year before the Princess
  commenced to write her first Journal. There was a picture painted
  of her about this time, and it corroborates Lord Albemarle’s
  description of the little girl of extreme fairness whom he watched
  watering, at Kensington, a child’s garden, wearing a large straw
  hat and a suit of white cotton, her only ornament being a coloured
  fichu round the neck.

  The Princess was guarded with extreme care. Leigh Hunt noticed that
  she was invariably followed, when walking, by a footman in gorgeous
  raiment. She told her daughters many years later that she was so
  carefully tended until the day of her accession, that she had never
  been permitted to walk downstairs without someone holding her hand.

  The Princess’s journey commenced August 1, 1832, although the first
  part of what her Uncle, King William, called her Royal Progresses
  was not her first trip into the country. With her mother she paid
  several visits to Ramsgate and Broadstairs. She had stayed with
  Lord Winchelsea at Eastwell, near Ashford, and she had visited
  George IV. at the Royal Lodge in Windsor Park. She had spent an
  autumn at Norris Castle, Isle of Wight, and had been to Bath and
  Malvern.

  Sir Walter Scott expressed a hope that she would not retain the
  name of Victoria, and when upon the accession of William IV. extra
  provision was demanded of Parliament for the little Princess
  Alexandrina Victoria of Kent, who then became heir-presumptive to
  the Crown, Sir Matthew White Ridley and Sir Robert Inglis desired
  to make the Parliamentary grant contingent upon the Princess, as
  Queen, assuming the style of Elizabeth II., on the ground that the
  name Victoria did not accord with the feelings of the people. The
  name Victoria, however, was destined to acquire lustre not inferior
  to that of Elizabeth.

  The Princess’s first Progress is minutely described in the first
  volume of her Journal. Before it ended, Robert Lowe, afterwards
  her Chancellor of the Exchequer, caught a glimpse of the child as
  she passed from the Bodleian to lunch with the Vice-Chancellor at
  Oxford. Her foot was on the threshold of public life.


                               CHAPTER I

                                 1832

_Wednesday, August 1st._ We left K.P.[3] at 6 minutes past 7 and went
through the Lower-field gate to the right. We went on, & turned to the
left by the new road to Regent’s Park. The road & scenery is beautiful.
20 minutes to 9. We have just changed horses at Barnet, a very pretty
little town. 5 minutes past ½ past 9. We have just changed horses
at St. Albans. The situation is very pretty & there is a beautiful
old abbey there. 5 minutes past 10. The country is beautiful here:
they have began to cut the corn; it is so golden & fine that I think
they will have a very good harvest, at least here. There are also
pretty hills & trees. 20 minutes past ten. We have just passed a most
beautiful old house in a fine park with splendid trees. A ¼ to 11. We
have just changed horses at Dunstable; there was a fair there; the
booths filled with fruit, ribbons, &c. looked very pretty. The town
seems old & there is a fine abbey before it. The country is very bleak
& chalky. 12 minutes to 12. We have just changed horses at Brickhill.
The country is very beautiful about here. 19 minutes to 1. We have
just changed horses at Stony Stratford. The country is very pretty.
About ½ past 1 o’clock we arrived at Towcester & lunched there. At 14
minutes past two we left it. A ¼ past 3. We have just changed horses
at Daventry. The road continues to be very dusty. 1 minute past ½ past
3. We have just[4] passed through Braunston where there is a curious
spire. The Oxford canal is close to the town. 1 minute to 4. We have
just changed horses at Dunchurch & it is raining.

For some time past already, and now, our road is entirely up an avenue
of trees going on and on, it is quite delightful but it still rains.
Just now we go at a _tremendous_ rate. 4 minutes to 5. We have just
changed horses at Coventry, a large town where there is a very old
church (in appearance at least). At ½ past 5 we arrived at Meridon; and
we are now going to dress for dinner. ½ past 8. I am undressing to go
to bed. Mamma is not well and is lying on the sofa in the next room. I
was asleep in a minute in my own little bed which travels always with
me.

_Thursday, 2d August._—I got up after a very good night at 5 o’clock
this morning. Mamma is much better I am happy to say, and I am now
dressing to go to breakfast. 6 minutes to ½ past 7. We have just left
Meridon, a very clean inn. It is a very bad day. 10 minutes to 9. We
have just changed horses at Birmingham where I was two years ago and
we visited the manufactories which are very curious. It rains very
hard. We just passed through a town where all coal mines are and you
see the fire glimmer at a distance in the engines in many places. The
men, women, children, country and houses are all black. But I can
not by any description give an idea of its strange and extraordinary
appearance. The country is very desolate every where; there are coals
about, and the grass is quite blasted and black. I just now see an
extraordinary building flaming with fire. The country continues black,
engines flaming, coals, in abundance, every where, smoking and burning
coal heaps, intermingled with wretched huts and carts and little ragged
children....

I received from the mayor an oaken box with a silver top and filled
with the famous Shrewsbury cakes. We lunched there. We left it at a ¼
to 3. As we passed along the streets a poor unhappy hen, frightened
by the noise flew on the carriage but she was taken off. We had our
horses watered half way. When we arrived at the outskirts of Welshpool
we were met by a troop of Yeomanry who escorted us for a long time and
the little town was ornamented with arches, flowers, branches, flags,
ribbons, &c., &c. The guns fired as we came up the park and the band
played before Powis Castle; Lord Powis[5] and Mr. Clive met us at the
door of his beautiful old Castle and Lady Lucy and Lady Harriet Clive
were in the gallery. The Castle is very old and beautiful; the little
old windows jutting in and out and a fine gallery with a dry-rubbed
floor and some beautiful busts. I am now dressing for dinner....

_Thursday, 9th August._—I awoke at ½ past 6 and got up at 7. I am
now dressing. A little after 8 I went out in the garden, and at
about ¼ to 9 we took breakfast. I began to write a letter after
breakfast, and then dressed. At ½ past 10 Mamma received an address
from the Mayor and Corporation of Beaumaris, and another from the
gentlemen inhabitants, and visitors of the town. At ½ past 11 we got
into our carriages with my Cousins on the box of ours. In passing
the Menai-bridge, we received a salute, and on entering the town
of Carnarvon, we were met, not only by an immense crowd, who were
extremely kind, and pleased, but by the Corporation also, who walked
before the carriage, while a salute was firing. We then arrived at
the inn, where Mamma received an address. The address being over we
took luncheon, and after that was over, we went to see the ruins of
the Castle, which are beautiful, while a salute was fired, from the
rampart. We then got into the _Emerald_, where we were several times
saluted, at the last being nearly becalmed, we were towed by a steam
packet, called _Paul Pry_, which saluted us 4 times in the day. We
arrived at home at ¼ to 7, and dined at ½ past 7. We drank Uncle
Leopold’s health in honour of his marriage that day. I stayed up till ½
past 9. I went to bed soon after, and was soon asleep....

_Wednesday, 29th August._—I awoke at ½ past 6 and got up at 7. It is
now 6 minutes past 8 & I am quite ready dressed. I then played. We
breakfasted at ½ past 8 but without Lady Catherine[6] who is very
unwell. I then did my lessons & then played. At ½ past 12 I went
out walking. We lunched at 1. At ½ past 3 went to Baron Hill Sir R.
Bulkeley’s[7] place. We arrived there at a little after 4. We were
received at the door by Sir Richard & farther on by Lady Bulkeley whose
dress I shall describe. It was a white satin trimmed with blonde, short
sleeves & a necklace, ear-rings and sévigné of perridos & diamonds with
a wreath of orange-flowers in her hair. We then went upon the terrace
& the band of the Anglesea Militia played “God save the King.” We
then presented all the bards & poets with medals. We then [went] into
the drawing-room and remained there till dinner. In the drawing-room
there were a great many other people. At 5 we went to dinner, which
was in a temporary building which was lined in the inside with pink
and white linen. The dinner was splendidly served & the china was rich
and beautiful. The fruit was magnificent. After dessert was over Sir
Richard made a speech and brought out a toast in honor of Mamma & me.
We then left the room & went into the drawing-room. We went upstairs
into Lady Bulkeley’s pretty little dressing-room. Her toilet table was
pink with white muslin over it trimmed with beautiful lace & her things
on the toilet table were gold. We then went downstairs and took coffee
and the famous dog of Lady Williams,[8] Cabriolle, played tricks. At
about 7 we left Baron Hill & proceeded homewards. Poor Lady Catherine
who was not able to go was in the evening much better. We arrived at
home at about a ¼ past 8. I then went downstairs & stayed up till near
9. I was soon in bed and asleep....

_Monday, 17th September._—I awoke at about 8, & got up at near ½ past
8. We breakfasted at 9 downstairs. I then played and did other things.
At 1 we lunched. I then played on the piano, & at a little before 3
played at billiards downstairs, with Victoire,[9] & then went out
walking. When I came home I first worked & then we blew soap-bubbles.

_Sunday, 14th October._—I awoke at 7 and got up at ½ past 7. At ½ past
8 we breakfasted. I then wrote my Journal and some music and at 11 we
went to chapel for the last time and the sailors likewise for the last
time. The service was performed as usual by Mr. W. Jones. It was over
at ¼ past 12. I then walked out with Lehzen[10] and Victoire. At 1 we
lunched. At 3 we went out riding, and as we passed through the Park
gate the old woman at the lodge came out as usual, to open the gate and
she thanked Mamma for what she had given her. We galloped over a green
field which we had already done several times. Rosa went an enormous
rate; she literally _flew_. We then went on towards the Menai bridge
but turned back under the hill. We cantered a great deal and Rosa went
the whole time beautifully. It was a delightful ride. When we came home
Mamma got on Rosa and I got on Thomas and cantered him. We came in at ½
past 4. Alas! it was our last ride at _dear_ Plas Newydd. I then walked
on the terrace for a short time. At 7 we dined and I stayed up till ½
past 8. I was soon in bed and asleep.

_Monday, 15th October._—I awoke at ½ past 5 and got up at 6. At 7 we
breakfasted with all the family; and a most beautiful falcon which
Sir John Williams[11] sent me was brought in that I might see it. The
sailors were so busy and so useful for I saw Kew and Sparks going to
and fro. At a ¼ to 8 we got into our carriages and drove out amidst
the shouts of the sailors of the _Emerald_, who were standing on the
rigging two by two on the rope-ladders, till the last man was at the
very top of all. I looked out of the carriage window that I might get a
last look of the _dear Emerald_ and her _excellent crew_. As we passed
along the road we saw Mr. Griffith and Mr. W. Jones and his family....

[Illustration: VICTOIRE CONROY.

  From a sketch by Princess Victoria.]

10 minutes to 4.—We have just passed through Northop. At about ½
past 4 we went through the Park of Mr. Granville up to his castle.
Lord Grosvenor met us there at the head of his Cavalry. And Lord
Westminster[12] sent his own fine horses, which were put to our
carriage. At about ½ past 5 we arrived at Eaton Hall. We were received
at the door by Lord and Lady Westminster, Lady Grosvenor and Lady
Wilton. The house is magnificent. You drive up to the door under a
lofty vaulted portico with a flight of steps under it, and it takes
you to the hall, which is beautiful. The floor is inlaid with various
marbles, and arches spring from the sides. Then you enter a beautiful
drawing-room; the ceiling joins in a round gilt, with great taste and
richness, while the sides arch towards the top. An organ on the right
as you enter the room and a large fireplace on the left with stained
glass windows. Then Lady Westminster after we had been downstairs a
little, showed us our apartments, which are indeed beautiful. I was in
bed at ½ past 8.

_Tuesday, 16th October._—I awoke at 6 and got up at 7. I then dressed
and took some tea. At ½ past 9 we breakfasted. The breakfast-room is
magnificent. There are 4 fireplaces; and the windows are of stained
glass very beautifully done. A massive lustre of gold with an eagle
likewise in gold hangs from the ceiling in the middle of the room.
Pillars arching to the top and gilt in parts rise from the sides.
Several tables of oak and elm stand in the windows, and the breakfast
was served in handsome silver tea and coffee pots; a crown of gold with
precious stones contained the bread. Besides Lady Grosvenor and Lady
Wilton, there were also Lady Egerton,[13] Mrs. Lane and Miss Bagot.
After breakfast Lady Grosvenor brought her 4 children. We then went
into our own rooms and I wrote my journal. At 12 Mamma went into the
great saloon where all the ladies were and an address from the mayor
and corporation of Chester arrived and then another from the gentlemen
and inhabitants of Chester, presented by Lord Robert.[14] After this
we looked about the room which is indeed beautiful. The ceiling is
done in the same splendid manner and a magnificent lustre of gold
and glass with a coronet of velvet and pearls hung from the ceiling
in the room. Two windows of stained glass, very handsomely done, are
on different sides. A superb chimney-place with beautiful furniture
and rich carpets, complete the room. 4 beautiful pictures painted by
different artists are likewise in the room. We then walked out with
most of the people; I walking in front with the eldest and third little
girl, the second not being well. We walked about the garden and looked
at an aloe which flowers only once in 100 years. We came in at ½ past
1, and lunched at 2. At ½ past 2 we went out driving; Lady Westminster
and little Elinor,[15] the eldest child, were in our carriage; she
is a delightful child. Lady Catherine and Lehzen followed in another
carriage. We drove about the park which is beautiful. When we came
home we walked in the kitchen gardens which are indeed very pretty. At
½ past 4 we came home and I worked. At 7 we dined. The dining-room is
a fine room beautifully worked at the ceiling. Four large statues of
Maltese stone occupy 4 corners, very beautifully executed; one with a
helmet is Sir Gilbert le Grosvenor,[16] and the lady[17] next by him
is the heiress of Eaton; on the opposite side the man is Sir Robert le
Grosvenor, distinguished in the battle of Cressy; the lady near him is
a Miss Davis who by intermarrying brought the possessions in town, as
Grosvenor Square, Belgrave Square, etc., etc.[18] The window is stained
glass with the figure of Hugh Lupus on it. The dinner was served on
plate, and the plateau was very handsome with gilt cups on it. The
side table was covered with gold plate. After dinner we played at a
game of letters and then I sang and Mamma and Lady Catherine sang and
afterwards Lady Westminster played on the organ. I stayed up till 10....

_Thursday, 18th October._—When we went out after luncheon we went in
the garden first and saw a Roman altar which had been dug up near
Chester. At 7 we dined. The breakfast-room had been arranged for this
purpose. A temporary floor had been arranged at the top of the room,
for our table (for all the company who had come to the bow-meeting
dined here), and the other four were lower. After the dinner (we being
still at table) was over some glee-singers from Chester came and sang
the grace in Latin. Then Lord Westminster gave out some toasts; amongst
others, “The King,” “The Queen,” Mamma and me; which were received
extremely well. After dinner was over, I gave the children, who had
come when dinner was over, a little remembrance. I then took leave of
the whole family and went to bed. I stayed up till 10.

_Friday, 19th October._— ... ½ past 4. We have just changed horses at
Buxton, which is a pretty place. The houses are well built and form a
crescent. The country about here is very pretty, high rocks covered
with trees. There are all about here little rivulets and fountains,
rippling over stones. At ½ past 6 we arrived at Chatsworth, which is
a beautiful house. It was quite dark. It is built in the shape of a
square joined by an arch under which one must drive. We were met at the
door by the Duke of Devonshire[19] who conducted us up the staircase,
which is made of wood, to our apartments which are indeed beautiful. In
the corridor there are some beautiful statues. I dined by myself in my
own room with Lehzen. I stayed up till ½ past 8. I was soon in bed and
asleep.

_Saturday, 20th October._—I awoke at ½ past 7 and got up at 8. At a
little past 9 we breakfasted, us 5 by ourselves in a lovely room giving
on the park and garden where one could see a cascade which ran all the
way down. The room is small; the ceiling is painted and represents some
mythology, with books round the room and a splendid carpet. At about 11
we went over the house with the company, which consisted of Lord and
Lady Cavendish,[20] Lord and Lady Newburgh,[21] Mr. and Lady Caroline
Lascelles,[22] Count Karoly, Mrs. Arkwright, Lady Clifford, Lord and
Lady Wharncliffe,[23] Mrs. Talbot, Lord Morpeth,[24] Mr. Cooper, Mr.
Henry Greville, and Miss Fanny Cavendish.[25] It would take me days,
were I to describe minutely the whole. We went all over the house,
and the carving of the frame-work of some looking-glasses was quite
beautiful; they are carved in the shape of birds, the plumage being so
exquisite that if it was not of the colour of wood one might take them
for feathers. It not only surrounds the mirrors but the ceilings of
some of the rooms. We saw Lady Cavendish’s little boy who is 10 months
old, a beautiful child. We likewise saw the kitchen which is superb for
its size and cleanliness; and the confectionary which is as pretty and
neat. The Duke’s own apartments contain some superb statues of Canova
and others; likewise a beautiful collection of minerals. We saw the
library and dining-room which are all beautiful. The library’s ceiling
is painted in figures; and the carpet is beautiful. The conservatory
which leads from the dining-room is very pretty. We then walked out in
the garden, I went into another conservatory which contains a rockery
with water falling from it. There are some curious plants there,
amongst others two which are worthy of remark; the one is called the
pitcher-plant because at the end of each leaf hangs a little bag or
pitcher which fills with the dew and supplies the plant when it wants
water; the other is called the fly-catcher plant, because whenever a
fly touches it, it closes. From the conservatory we went and looked at
a monkey which is in the garden, chained. We then went to the cascade
and saw some other fountains very curious and pretty. When we had come
on the terrace the Duke wished us to plant two trees down under the
terrace. So we did, I planted an oak and Mamma a Spanish chesnut. After
that we went upon the terrace again and went up a platform which had
been arranged with carpets, to view the cricket-match below; the Buxton
band playing “God save the King” and the people hurraying and others
under tents looked very pretty. From there we went to the stables where
we saw some pretty ponies and a Russian coachman in his full dress, and
the only Russian horse which remained reared at his command; there were
3 other horses, English ones, but trained like the other. At about ½
past 1 we came home and lunched with the whole party. At ½ past 2 we
went in a carriage and 6 with the Duke and Mrs. Cavendish, to Haddon
Hall, a very old and singular place. The old tapestry still remaining
and iron hooks to keep it back. We then went to the Rookery, a small
cottage belonging to the Duke on the banks of the river Wye, very
pretty and cool. From there we walked to the Marble Mills and saw how
they sawed and polished the marble. There was a little cottage where
they sold Derbyshire spar in different little shapes and forms, and
some pieces of marble too. We then drove home after having bought a
good many things. We came in at 5. At 7 we dined and after dinner at
about ½ past 9 we looked at the cascade illuminated, which looked very
pretty, and the fountains, blue lights, red lights, rockets, etc. At
about 10 the charade began in 3 syllables and 4 scenes. The first act
was a scene out of _Bluebeard_; Lady Caroline Lascelles and Miss F.
Cavendish acting the ladies, and Count Karoly as Bluebeard, with Lord
Newburgh and Mr. Lascelles as their friends. The next act was a scene
of carrying offerings to Father Nile; Mrs. Talbot, Lady Cavendish,
Lady Clifford, Miss Cavendish, and the two Miss Smiths as the vestals;
and Lord Morpeth, Lord Newburgh, Count Karoly, Mr. Greville, Sir A.
Clifford,[26] Mr Cooper, and Mr. Lascelles as the men. Mr. Beaumont was
Father Nile. The third act was a scene of _Tom Thumb_; Lord Morpeth
as Tom Thumb, and Lord Newburgh as the nurse. The fourth act was a
scene out of _Kenilworth_ (which was the word); Mrs. Talbot as Queen
Elizabeth, Lady Cavendish as Amy, Lady Caroline and Miss Cavendish
(who danced the menuet with Count Karoly) as her attendants; little
Georgina Lascelles[27] as page to bear the Queen’s train, Lord Morpeth
as Lord Leicester, Lord Newburgh as an attendant, Count Karoly as Lord
Shrewsbury, Mr. Cooper as Sir Walter Raleigh, and Lord Waterpark[28]
and Mr. Greville as two more men of the Queen’s, not to omit Lady
Clifford as the Queen’s lady, and Sir Augustus as a gentleman of the
Queen. They were all in regular costumes. When it was over, which was
at ¼ to 12, I went to bed....

_Wednesday, 24th October._— ... At 1 we arrived at Alton Towers, the
seat of Lord Shrewsbury.[29] This is an extraordinary house. On
arriving one goes into a sort of gallery filled with armour, guns,
swords, pistols, models, flags, etc., etc., then into a gallery filled
with beautiful pictures and then into a conservatory with birds. We
lunched there and the luncheon was served on splendid gold plate. We
then walked in the gardens. At ½ past 2 we left it....

_Wednesday, 31st October._—I awoke at 7 and got up at ½ past 7. At ½
past 9 we breakfasted in the drawing-room, for the gentlemen who were
going to hunt breakfasted in the other room, all the ladies and Sir
John breakfasting with us. After breakfast at about ½ past 10 we went
into the room where they were, and they gave us a toast with many
cheers. After that we walked out to see the hunt. We saw them set off.
It was an immense field of horsemen, who in their red jackets and black
hats looked lively and gave an animating appearance to the whole. They
had a large pack of hounds and three huntsmen or Whippers-in. They drew
a covert near here in hopes of finding a fox, but as they did not they
returned and we got into the carriage with Lady Selina[30] and Lehzen
while all the huntsmen and the hounds followed. When we came to a
field, they drew another covert and succeeded; we saw the fox dash past
and all the people and hounds after him, the hounds in full cry. The
hounds killed him in a wood quite close by. The huntsman then brought
him out and cutting off the brush Sir Edward Smith (to whom the hounds
belong) brought it to me. Then the huntsmen cut off for themselves
the ears and 4 paws, and lastly they threw it to the dogs, who tore
it from side to side till there was nothing left. We then went home.
At 1 we lunched, and at 2, I, Lady Selina, Lady Louisa[31] and dear
Lehzen went out walking, towards a farm of Lord Liverpool’s, and when
we had passed the farm and were going to return by the village, we
heard the blast of a horn and we looked and saw the hounds and hunters
going full gallop along a field which was below the field in which we
were walking. They came and crossed the field in which we were and we
saw all the riders leap over a ditch. We went back the same way that
we might see them. When we came near home we saw them go home by the
house. At ½ past 3 we came home. At ½ past 6 we dined, and I received
my brush which had been fixed on a stick by the huntsman; it is a
beautiful one. Amongst the people who were here, those who remain are
Mr., Mrs., and Miss Corbett, Mr., Mrs., and Miss Child. After dinner
the young ladies played some pretty things from the _Pirata_ and from
_Fra Diavolo_. I stayed up till near 10....

_Wednesday, 7th November._— ... ¼ to 4. We have just changed horses
at Woodstock, and another detachment of Yeomanry commanded by Lord
Churchill[32] ride with us now. We passed through Oxford on our way.
At about a little past 5 we arrived at Wytham Abbey, the seat of Lord
Abingdon.[33] We were received at the door by Lord and Lady Abingdon,
Lady Charlotte Bertie and Lady Emily Bathurst, their daughters. The
house is very comfortable; in the drawing-room there is a lovely
picture by Angelica Kauffman, Penelope. After staying a few minutes
downstairs we went upstairs to our rooms which are very pretty and
comfortable. At a little past 7 we dined with several other people. I
stayed up till a little past 9.

_Thursday, 8th November._—I awoke at a little to 8 and got up at 8. At
a little past 9 we breakfasted with the whole party. At 10 o’clock we
set out for Oxford in a close carriage and 4 with Lord Abingdon and
Lady Charlotte Bertie; the other ladies going in carriages before us.
We got out first at the Divinity College, and walked from thence to
the theatre, which was built by Sir Christopher Wren. The ceiling is
painted with allegorical figures. The galleries are ornamented with
carving enriched with gold. It was filled to excess. We were most
WARMLY and ENTHUSIASTICALLY received. They hurrayed and applauded
us immensely for there were all the students there; all in their
gowns and caps. Mamma received an address which was presented by the
Vice-Chancellor, Dr. Rowly, and Mamma answered it as usual. Then
Sir John[34] was made a Doctor of Civil Law. After that was over,
we returned through Divinity College and proceeded in our carriages
to the Council Chamber where Mamma received an address there, from
the corporation of Oxford, and Sir John the freedom of the City of
Oxford. We then went to Christ Church, which is very fine, viewed the
hall and chapel and library. Dr. Gaisford[35] is the Dean of Christ
Church and is at the head of that college. From there we went to the
Bodleian library which is immense. Amongst other curiosities there is
Queen Elizabeth’s Latin exercise book when she was of my age (13). We
went through Mr. Sneed’s house to our carriages. From there to All
Souls’ College where Mr. Sneed is the warden. It is not a college for
education, but after they have taken their degree. We saw the library
and chapel which is very beautiful. We then went to University College
of which the Vice-chancellor is the head. We lunched there and saw
the chapel which is very fine. From there we went to New College of
which Dr. Shuttleworth[36] is the head. We saw the chapel and hall.
From there to the Clarendon printing-press which is very amusing but
would take up too much space and time to describe. We then went home.
We arrived at home at ½ past 3. At 7 we dined with some other people
who were Lord Cantelupe,[37] Lord Folkestone,[38] Lord Loftus,[39] Mr.
Gage,[40] Mr. Canning,[41] Lord Thomas Clinton,[42] Mr. L. Gower,[43]
Lord Boscawen,[44] etc. etc. After dinner the young ladies sang to
the guitar which one of them played. We then sang and Lord Abingdon. I
stayed up till 10.

_Friday, 9th November._— ... At about ½ past 5 we arrived at Kensington
Palace. We resumed our old rooms. At 7 we dined with Jane and Victoire
Conroy, Lord Liverpool and Sir John. My aunt Sophia[45] came after
dinner. I stayed up till a ¼ to 9.

_Monday, 24th December._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. At 9 we
breakfasted. At ½ past 9 came the Dean,[46] and I gave him Mamma’s
and my Christmas box. He stayed till ½ past 11. In the course of the
morning I gave Mrs. Brock a Christmas box and all our people. At ½ past
1 we lunched. At ½ past 2 came Mr. Westall[47] till ½ past 3. At 4 came
Mr. Sale[48] till 5. At a ¼ to 7 we dined with the whole Conroy family
and Mr. Hore downstairs, as our Christmas tables were arranged in our
dining-room. After dinner we went upstairs. I then saw Flora, the dog
which Sir John was going to give Mamma. Aunt Sophia came also. We then
went into the drawing-room near the dining-room. After Mamma had rung
a bell three times we went in. There were two large round tables on
which were placed two trees hung with lights and sugar ornaments. All
the presents being placed round the tree. I had one table for myself
and the Conroy family had the other together. Lehzen had likewise a
little table. Mamma gave me a little lovely pink bag which she had
worked with a little sachet likewise done by her; a beautiful little
opal brooch and earrings, books, some lovely prints, a pink satin dress
and a cloak lined with fur. Aunt Sophia gave me a dress which she
worked herself, and Aunt Mary[49] a pair of amethyst earrings. Lehzen
a lovely music-book. Victoire a _very_ pretty white bag worked by
herself, and Sir John a silver brush. I gave Lehzen some little things
and Mamma gave her a writing table. We then went to my room where I had
arranged Mamma’s table. I gave Mamma a white bag which I had worked,
a collar and a steel chain for Flora, and an Annual; Aunt Sophia a
pair of turquoise earrings; Lehzen a little white and gold pincushion
and a pin with two little gold hearts hanging to it; Sir John, Flora,
a book-holder and an Annual. Mamma then took me up into my bedroom
with all the ladies. There was my new toilet table with a white muslin
cover over pink, and all my silver things standing on it with a fine
new looking-glass. I stayed up till ½ past 9. The dog went away again
to the doctor for her leg. I saw good Louis[50] for an instant and she
gave me a lovely little wooden box with bottles.

[Illustration: H.R.H. PRINCESS SOPHIA.

  From a portrait by Sir W. Ross.]




                    INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO CHAPTER II

  When the Princess was fourteen years old she obtained her first
  sight of Osborne, that future home in the Isle of Wight where
  she was destined to spend so many happy years, and which was
  associated with the closing scenes of her life. Osborne Lodge was
  the residence of Sir John Conroy. It occupied the site of Osborne
  Cottage, now the residence of the Queen’s youngest daughter,
  Princess Henry of Battenberg. In spite of the changes made in the
  appearance of Osborne by the erection of Osborne House and the
  laying-out of the grounds round it, that portion of the estate
  where Osborne Cottage stands, and Whippingham Church, with its
  manifold associations, have much the same aspect as they had when
  first explored by Princess Victoria in 1833.

  On her birthday, King William gave a children’s party at St.
  James’s in his niece’s honour, and the ball was opened by the
  little Princess and her cousin Prince George of Cambridge, then a
  boy of fourteen, who was afterwards to be the Commander-in-Chief of
  her armies. The Princess speaks of the ball-room. It is difficult
  to be sure which room is meant by this. The eastern end of St.
  James’s Palace had been destroyed by fire in 1809, and had only
  recently been rebuilt. The Palace was occupied by William IV. and
  Queen Adelaide, the Queen’s rooms being in that portion which is
  now called Clarence House, and the King’s apartments occupying
  the western end of what is now St. James’s Palace proper. It was
  probably the room hung with yellow silk, next but one to the
  Throne-room, so familiar to those who attend the King’s Levées,
  that the little Princess opened her first ball.

  This was not her first introduction into Society. Three years
  before she had been seen at Court, and in 1831 she had attended a
  Drawing-room.

  The Princess now acquired a habit (which she practised for many
  years) of making sketches from memory of the artists and scenes
  that struck her imagination during her visits to the theatre.
  There are many volumes at Windsor Castle full of the Princess’s
  recollections of the theatre, drawn in pencil or in water-colour.
  Although the technique may be faulty, these sketches are full
  of movement and quaintly descriptive. They indicate an absorbed
  attention on her part, and a vivid memory. They suggest a power
  of concentration upon the thing she was about, which became in
  after-life a marked characteristic. From her journals and her
  sketches as a child of fourteen, an inference might be drawn that
  little escaped the acute observation of the little Princess. There
  are many who remember how in later life very little escaped the
  observation of the Queen.


                              CHAPTER II

                                 1833

_Tuesday, 15th January._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. At 10 minutes to
9 we breakfasted. At ½ past 9 came the Dean till ½ past 11. Just before
we went out, Mamma’s little dog, a beautiful spaniel of King Charles’s
breed, called Dash, and which Sir John gave her yesterday, came and
will now remain here. At a ¼ past 12 Lehzen and I went out walking in
the park. We met Mrs. Talbot. When we came home I fed dear Rosy who was
_so_ greedy. At ½ past 1 we lunched. At 3 came Mr. Steward[51] till 4.
At 4 came Mons. Grandineau[52] till 5. Little Dash is _perfection_, he
is already much attached to Mamma and lies always at her feet. At 7 we
dined. Aunt Sophia came at 8. Sir John dined here. I stayed up till ½
past 8....

_Thursday, 31st January._—At 1 we lunched. At 2 I sat to Mr. Hayter[53]
till 10 minutes to 4. At 5 we dined. Sir John dined here. At ½ past 6
we went with Lady Conroy, Jane and Victoire to the play to Drury Lane.
It was the opera of _The Barber of Seville_. It is so well known that
I need not describe it. The principal characters were Count Almaviva,
Mr. Wood, who looked, sang, and acted _extremely_ well; Rosina, Mrs.
Wood; Figaro, Mr. Philipps, who sung very well; Dr. Bartolo, Mr.
Seguin, who acted very well. It was in 3 acts and I was very _much
amused_. The after piece called _The Nervous Man_ is only amusing in
parts, for Mr. Farren[54] and Mr. Power, two excellent comic actors. We
did not see the end of it. We came home at 12....

_Saturday, 9th February._—I awoke at 7 and got up at ½ past 7. At
½ past 8 we breakfasted. At ½ past 9 came the Dean till 11. At ½
past 12 we lunched. At I we paid a visit to my aunt the Duchess of
Gloucester.[55] When we came home I fed dear little Rosa, and little
Isabell. At ½ past 2 came Mr. Westall[56] till ½ past 3. At a ¼ past
5 we dined. Sir John dined here. At ½ past 6 we went to the play
with Lady Conroy, Victoire and Lehzen as usual. It was the ballet
of _Kenilworth_. The subject is taken from the novel by Sir Walter
Scott, which being so well known I shall not describe. The principal
characters were, Lord Leicester, Mons. Theodore Guerinot, who danced
beautifully; Amy Robsart, Mdlle. Pauline Leroux, who danced and
acted _beautifully_ and looked _quite_ lovely; Jenny, Madame Proche
Giubilei, who acted very well and looked very pretty; Queen Elizabeth,
Mrs. Vining; Varney, Mr. W. H. Payne; Earl of Sussex, Signor Rossi;
Lord Shrewsbury, Mr. Bertram. Besides these, Mdlle. Adele and Mdlle.
Chavigny danced a pas de trois with Mons. Theodore Guerinot. They
danced very well. At 20 minutes past 9 we came home. I then took tea....

_Friday, 5th April._—To-day is Good Friday. At 10 we went to prayers.
Jane and Victoire also. The service was performed by the Dean, who
gave us likewise a very good sermon. It was taken from the 8th chapter
of the Acts of the Apostles, 30th verse. At a ¼ past 12 we went out
walking. When we came home I fed sweet Rosy. At ½ past I we lunched. At
3 came Victoire till 5. At 7 we dined. At 8 came Aunt Sophia. I stayed
up till ½ past 8....

_Saturday, 13th April._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. At a ¼ to 9 we
breakfasted. At ½ past 9 came the Dean till ½ past 11. The Duchess of
Northumberland[57] was present. At 12 we went out riding in the park
with Victoire, Lehzen and Sir John. It was a _delightful_ ride. We
cantered a good deal. SWEET LITTLE ROSY went BEAUTIFULLY!! We came home
at a ¼ past 1. At ½ past 1 we lunched. Neither of my masters came. At 6
we dined. The Duchess of Northumberland, Lady Charlotte St. Maur,[58]
and Sir John dined here. At 20 minutes to 7 we went out with them
to the Opera. We were very much _disappointed_ for Taglioni did not
make her début, nor Rubini. We had only one scene of _Il Barbière di
Siviglia_, in which Signor Tambourini, who is a _beautiful_ singer and
actor, appeared, and Donizelli. After waiting for half an hour Laporte
(the manager) was called out, and he said that Mlle. Taglioni was very
unwell in bed, and Mad. Méric was likewise ill, so that _Il Pirato_
could not be performed, but that Rubini would be there directly. After
one act of _Fidelio_, which was _shockingly_ performed, Rubini came on
and sang a song out of _Anna Boulena_ _quite beautifully_. After that
there was the ballet of _La Somnambula_. The principal characters were
Mdlle. Pauline Leroux, who looked QUITE LOVELY and acted prettily;
Mdlle. Adele; Madame Proche Giubelei who looked _very pretty_; Messrs.
Albert and Coulon. We only saw part of it. We came home at ½ past 11....

_Tuesday, 23rd April._—I awoke at 7 and got up at ½ past 7. At 9 we
breakfasted. At ½ past 9 came the Dean till ½ past 11. The Duchess of
Northumberland was present. At a ¼ past 12 we went out riding with Lady
Conroy, Victoire, Lehzen, and Sir John. We rode a little way in the
park, but the fog was so thick that we turned round and rode down by
Gloucester Road, and turned up by Phillimore Place, where it was very
fine and not at all foggy. _Dear_ Rosa went _beautifully_. We came home
at ½ past 1. At ½ past 1 we lunched. At 3 came Mr. Steward till 4. At
4 came Mons. Grandineau till 5. At a ¼ to 7 we dined. Sir John dined
here, and I dressed DEAR SWEET LITTLE DASH for the second time after
dinner in a scarlet jacket and blue trousers. At 20 minutes past 8
Mamma went with Jane and Sir John to the Opera. I stayed up till ½ past
8.

_Wednesday, 24th April._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. At 9 we
breakfasted. At ½ past 9 came the Dean till ½ past 11. At ½ past 1 we
lunched. At 3 came Mons. Grandineau till 4. Madame Bourdin[59] did not
come. At ½ past 6 Lehzen and I dined. At 7 I and Lehzen went into the
large saloon, for Mamma gave a dinner to the King. There dined here,
the King (the Queen being too unwell to come), the Duke of Cumberland,
the Duke of Gloucester, the Archbishop of Canterbury,[60] the Lord
Chancellor,[61] the Duke of Devonshire,[62] the Duke of Norfolk,[63]
the Duke of Somerset,[64] the Duke and Duchess of Gordon,[65] the
Duke of Rutland,[66] the Duchess of Northumberland, the Duchess
of Sutherland,[67] the Duke of Cleveland,[68] the Marchioness of
Westminster,[69] the Earl of Liverpool, the Earl and Countess Grey,[70]
Lord Hill,[71] Lady Dover,[72] the Earl of Uxbridge,[73] the Earl
of Albemarle,[74] Lord Amherst,[75] Lady Charlotte St. Maur, Lady
Catherine Jenkinson, Lady Cust,[76] Lady Conroy, Sir George Anson,[77]
Sir Frederick Wetherall,[78] and Sir John. At about 8 I went to my room
with Lehzen. At 20 minutes past 9 I went into the saloon with her to
meet the company. The Grenadier Guards’ band played after dinner. I saw
all the company go. I stayed up till 11....

_Saturday, 27th April._—I awoke at 7 and got up at a ¼ to 8. At a ¼ to
9 we breakfasted. At ½ past 9 came the Dean till 11. The Duchess of
Northumberland was present. At 12 we went out walking. When we came
home I fed dear little Rosa. At a ¼ past 1 we lunched. At ½ past 2 came
Mr. Westall till ½ past 3. At 20 minutes to 3 I sat to Mr. Wyon[79]
to have my profile taken for a medal, till 10 minutes to 5. At 6 we
dined. Sir John dined here. At a ¼ past 7 we went with Lady Conroy and
Lehzen, as usual, to the Opera. It was the opera of _Cenerentola_ by
Rossini. The principal characters were the Prince, by Signor Donizelli;
the Prince’s servant, Signor Tambourini who sung QUITE BEAUTIFULLY;
the father of Cenerentola, Signor Zuchelli, who acted _uncommonly
well_; Cenerentola, Madame Cinti Damoreau; she sang QUITE BEAUTIFULLY,
so round, so softly, and so correctly. It was her first appearance
this season and she was called out. The sisters were two FRIGHTFUL
creatures. The ballet which followed was _Flore et Zephir_. Mdlle.
Taglioni[80] made her first appearance this season. She is grown very
thin, but danced _beautifully_, so lightly and _gracefully_, and each
step so finished! She took the part of Flore, and was very prettily
dressed in a plain gauze dress, trimmed with flowers across her skirt;
a wreath of flowers round her head, and her hair quite flat. Pearls
round her neck and arms. She looked _lovely_, for she is all-ways
smiling. We went away soon. We came home at 12....

_Friday, 3rd May._—At 12 we went with the Duchess of Northumberland,
Lady Charlotte St. Maur, Lady Catherine Jenkinson, Lady Cust, Lady
Conroy, Lehzen, Sir George Anson, and Sir John, to the Exhibition
at Somerset House. We were met there by Sir Martin Shee[81] (the
President), Mr. Westall, Mr. Howard[82] (the Treasurer), Mr. Daniel,
and Sir William Beechy.[83] It was a very good exhibition. There were
several very fine pictures by Sir Martin Shee. Seven by Mr. Westall.
They were 4 landscapes, a drawing of Christ in the arms of Simeon in
the temple; a sleeping Cupid, and the death of James 2nd. All very
fine. There were 5 of G. Hayter’s but I only saw 3, which were my
picture,[84] Lady Lichfield, and Mad. de Delmar’s. There were 3 of
Wilkie’s, a portrait of the King, a very beautiful portrait of the
Duke of Sussex, and Spanish monks, a scene witnessed in a capuchin
convent at Toledo. There were several very fine ones of Howard,
Daniel, Eastlake,[85] Landseer,[86] Calcott,[87] Pickersgill,[88]
Hilton,[89] etc., etc. We came home at ½ past 2. At ½ past 4 we went
out driving in the barouche, but we also walked. We came home at 5....

_Wednesday, 8th May._—At ½ past 2 came Mons. Grandineau till ½ past
3. At a ¼ past 4 we walked through the gardens, and then drove in
the barouche in the park. We came home at 5. At ½ past 6 Lehzen and
I dined. At a little past 7 Lehzen and I went into the saloon, for
Mamma gave a dinner. There dined here, H.R.H. the Duke of Orleans,[90]
who I was very glad to see, for I had not seen him since nearly 4
years; he brought Mamma a letter from his Mother, the Queen of the
French, with a beautiful _déjeuner_ of Sévres china; a letter from
Aunt Louisa[91] (his sister), and a beautiful bracelet with her hair
in it; for me a letter from Aunt Louisa and a beautiful bracelet with
her picture. Prince Talleyrand,[92] the Duchess de Dino,[93] the Duc
de Valençay (her son), the Marquess and Marchioness of Lansdowne,[94]
the Marquess and Marchioness of Stafford,[95] the Earl and Countess
of Tankerville,[96] the Earl and Countess of Sefton,[97] the Earl
and Countess Grosvenor,[98] the Earl of Lichfield,[99] the Earl and
Countess Granville,[100] Lord Palmerston,[101] Lord Morpeth,[102]
Lord Duncannon,[103] Lord Ebrington,[104] Mr. Van de Weyer,[105] Mr.
and Mrs. Stanley,[106] Mr. Ellice,[107] Mr. Abercromby,[108] the
Aide-de-Camp in Waiting on H.R.H. the Duke of Orleans, Mr. Taylor,
Lady Charlotte St. Maur, Lady Conroy, Sir George Anson, and Sir John.
At about 8 I went with Lehzen away. The band of the Coldstream Guards
played at dinner as well as after dinner, as it had the preceding
night. At 20 minutes after 9 Lehzen and I went into the saloon. We met
Aunt Sophia there....

_Saturday, 11th May._—At a ¼ to 7 we dined. Sir John dined here. At a
little after 8 we went to the Opera with Victoire, Lehzen, and Charles.
We came in at the end of the first act of _Medea_. Madame Pasta sang,
and acted beautifully, as did also Rubini and Donizelli. The ballet
was excessively pretty. It is called _Nathalie_. The principal dancers
were Mdlle. Taglioni, who danced and acted QUITE BEAUTIFULLY!! She
looked _very_ pretty. Her dress was very pretty. It was a sort of Swiss
dress; she first appeared in a petticoat of brown and yellow, with a
blue and white apron, a body of black velvet ornamented with silver,
pointed upwards and downwards, over a light tucker drawn to her neck,
with a black ribbon round it, a pair of small white sleeves, a little
Swiss straw hat, with long plaits of her hair hanging down, completed
her first dress. Her second dress was a petticoat of scarlet and yellow
silk, with a white apron, the same body and sleeves, with a wreath of
flowers on her head. Mdlles. Thérèse and Fanny Elsler; they are good
dancers, but have neither grace nor lightness. Messrs. Albert, Coulon,
and Daumont. In the middle of the ballet the Duke of Orleans came into
our box for a little while. We saw most of the ballet. I was _very
much_ amused....

_Friday, 24th May._—To-day is my birthday. I am to-day fourteen years
old! How _very old_!! I awoke at ½ _past_ 5 and got up at ½ past 7.
I received from Mamma a lovely hyacinth brooch and a china pen tray.
From Uncle Leopold a very kind letter, also one from Aunt Louisa and
sister Feodora. I gave Mamma a little ring. From Lehzen I got a pretty
little china figure, and a lovely little china basket. I gave her a
golden chain and Mamma gave her a pair of earrings to match. From my
maids, Frances and Caroline, I also got little trifles of their own
work. At ½ past 8 we breakfasted. After breakfast we went into the
room where my table was arranged. Mamma gave me a lovely bag of her
own work, a beautiful bracelet, two lovely féronières, one of pink
topaz, the other turquoises; two dresses, some prints, some books,
some handkerchiefs, and an apron. From Lehzen, a beautiful print of
the Russell Trial. From Späth,[109] a glass and plate of Bohemian
glass. From Sir Robert Gardiner,[110] a china plate with fruit.
From Victoria and Emily Gardiner, two screens and a drawing done by
them. From the Dean, some books. My brother Charles’s present was
not ready. At about ½ past 10 came Sir John and his three sons. From
Sir John I received a very pretty picture of Dash, very like, the
size of life. From Jane, Victoire, Edward, Stephen, and Henry, a very
pretty enamel watch-chain. From Lady Conroy a sandalwood pincushion
and needle-case. From Victoire alone, a pair of enamel earrings. The
Duchess of Gordon sent me a lovely little crown of precious stones,
which plays “God save the King,” and a china basket. At 12 came the
Duchess of Northumberland (who gave me an ivory basket filled with
the work of her nieces), Lady Charlotte St. Maur a beautiful album
with a painting on it; Lady Catherine Jenkinson a pretty night-lamp.
Lady Cust, a tray of Staffordshire china. Sir Frederick Wetherall,
two china vases from Paris. Doctor Maton,[111] a small cedar basket.
Lady Conroy, Jane, Victoire, Sir George Anson, Sir John, and the
Dean came also. Lady Conroy brought Bijou (her little dog) with her,
and she gave me a little sweet smelling box. They stayed till ½ past
12. Victoire remained with us. I gave her a portrait of Isabel, her
horse. At 1 we lunched. Victoire stayed till ½ past 2. At ½ past 2
came the Royal Family. The Queen gave me a pair of diamond earrings
from the King. She gave me herself a brooch of turquoises and gold in
the form of a bow. Aunt Augusta gave me a box of sandal-wood. From
Aunt Gloucester, Aunt Sophia, and Uncle Sussex, a féronière of pearls.
From Aunt Sophia alone, a bag worked by herself. From the Duke of
Gloucester, a gold inkstand. From the Duke and Duchess of Cumberland,
a bracelet of turquoise; and the Duchess brought me a turquoise pin
from my cousin George Cumberland. From Princess Sophia Mathilda, a blue
topaz watch-hook. From George Cambridge,[112] a brooch in the shape
of a lily of the valley. Lady Mayo,[113] who was in waiting on the
Queen, gave me a glass bottle. They stayed till ½ past 3 and then went
away. I had seen in the course of the day, Sarah, my former maid, and
Mrs. Brock. Ladies Emma and Georgiana Herbert[114] sent me a sachet
for handkerchiefs worked by themselves. Ladies Sarah and Clementina
Villiers[115] sent me some flowers as combs and a brooch. Mr. Collen
sent me a little painting for my album. At a ¼ to 6 we dined. At ½ past
7 we went with Charles, the Duchess of Northumberland, Lady Catherine
Jenkinson, Lehzen, Sir George Anson, and Sir John, to a Juvenile Ball
that was given in honour of my birthday at St. James’s by the King and
Queen. We went into the Closet. Soon after, the doors were opened, and
the King leading me went into the ball-room. Madame Bourdin was there
as dancing-mistress. Victoire was also there, as well as _many_ other
children whom I knew. Dancing began soon after. I danced first with my
cousin George Cambridge, then with Prince George Lieven,[116] then with
Lord Brook,[117] then Lord March,[118] then with Lord Athlone,[119]
then with Lord Fitzroy Lennox,[120] then with Lord Emlyn.[121] We then
went to supper. It was ½ past 11; the King leading me again. I sat
between the King and Queen. We left supper soon. My health was drunk.
I then danced one more quadrille with Lord Paget. I danced in all _8_
quadrilles. We came home at ½ past 12. I was VERY much amused....

_Sunday, 16th June._—I awoke at 7 and got up at ½ past 7. At a ¼ to
9 we breakfasted. At 10 we went to prayers. At 10 came Victoire and
went to prayers with us. The service was performed by Mr. Pittman, as
the poor Dean had the misfortune to lose his little girl Charlotte, of
the scarlet fever, which I was very sorry for. Mr. Pittman gave us a
beautiful sermon. It was taken from the 11th chapter of the Gospel of
St. Luke, 1st verse. At 1 we lunched. Victoire stayed till ½ past 2.
At 3 arrived my two cousins, Princes Alexander and Ernst Würtemberg,
sons of Mamma’s sister, my Aunt Antoinette.[122] They are both
_extremely tall_. Alexander is _very handsome_ and Ernst has a _very
kind expression_. They are both EXTREMELY _amiable_. At 4 we went out
driving in the open carriage. We paid a visit to Aunt Gloucester, and
then drove home through the park. We came home at a ¼ to 6. At a ¼ past
7 we dined. Besides Alexander, Ernst and Charles, Prince Reuss[123] and
Sir John dined here....

_Thursday, 27th June._—At ½ past 9 we went to the Exhibition of the
water-colours, with Alexander and Lehzen in our carriage, and Sir John
in another. We met the Duchess of Northumberland there. It is a VERY
FINE exhibition. From there we went to the British Gallery, where
the works of Sir Joshua Reynolds, West, and Sir Thomas Lawrence are
exhibiting. We came home at ½ past 11. At 1 we lunched. At 2 came Lady
Stafford with her two little girls, Elizabeth[124] and Evelyn,[125]
and Lady Caroline[126] with her little Georgiana. All beautiful
children. At ½ past 4 we drove out in the park, and walked home through
the gardens. We came home at ½ past 5. At 7 we all dined. Sir John
dined here. At a little after 9 we went, with Alexander and Lehzen
in our carriage, and Ernst, Charles and Sir John in another carriage
following, to the Opera. We came in at the beginning of the 2nd act
of _Norma_, in which Madame Pasta sung BEAUTIFULLY. After that Signor
Paganini played by himself some variations, most WONDERFULLY; he is
himself a _curiosity_. After that was given the last act of _Otello_;
Desdemona, Madame Malibran,[127] who sang and acted BEAUTIFULLY. After
that was performed _La Sylphide_; Taglioni danced BEAUTIFULLY and
looked LOVELY. Fanny Elsler danced also _very well_. We saw the whole
of the 1st act and half of the second. It was Laporte’s benefit. I
was VERY MUCH AMUSED. We came home at ½ past 1. I was soon in bed and
asleep....

_Monday, 1st July._—I awoke at ½ past 4 and got up at a ¼ past 5. At a
¼ past 6 we all breakfasted. At 7 o’clock we left Kensington Palace,
Sir John going in a post-chaise before us, then our post-chaise, then
Lehzen’s landau, then my Cousins’ carriage, then Charles’s, then Lady
Conroy’s, and then our maids’. It is a lovely morning. 5 minutes past
8—we have just changed horses at Esher. Lynedoch Gardiner[128] brought
us a basket full of beautiful flowers. 10 o’clock; we have just changed
horses at Guildford. POOR DEAR LITTLE Dashy could not go with us as he
was not quite well, so he is gone with Mason with the horses. 4 minutes
past 1; we have just left Liphook where we took our luncheon. 5 minutes
to 2, we have just changed horses at Petersfield. 5 minutes to 3, we
have just changed horses at Horndean. At 4 we arrived at Portsmouth.
The streets were lined with soldiers, and Sir Colin Campbell[129] rode
by the carriage. Sir Thomas Williams,[130] the Admiral, took us in his
barge, on board the _dear Emerald_. The Admiral presented some of
the officers to us. We stayed about ½ an hour waiting for the baggage
to be put on board the steamer, which was to tow us. We then set off
and arrived at Cowes at about 7. We were most civilly received. Cowes
Castle, the yacht-club, yachts, &c., &c., saluting us. We saw Lord
Durham[131] who is staying at Cowes. We drove up in a fly to Norris
Castle, where we lodged two years ago, and where we are again living.
My cousins and my brother were _delighted_ with it. At about ½ past 7
we all dined. Lady Conroy and her family went to their cottage after
dinner....

_Monday, 8th July._—At about 10 we went on board the _Emerald_ with
Alexander, Ernst, Lady Charlotte, Lady Conroy, Jane, Victoire, Sir
John and Henry. We were towed up to Southampton by the _Medina_
steam-packet. It rained several times very hard, and we were obliged
to go down into the cabin very often. When we arrived at Southampton,
Mamma received an address on board from the Corporation. We then got
into the barge and rowed up to the new pier. The crowd was tremendous.
We went into a tent erected on the pier, and I was very much frightened
for fear my cousins and the rest of our party should get knocked about;
however they at last got in. We then got into our barge and went on
board the _Emerald_ where we took our luncheon. We stayed a little
while to see the regatta, which was going on, and then sailed home. It
was a very wet afternoon. We came home at ½ past 5. At 7 we dined. Lady
Conroy, Jane, Victoire, Sir John, and Henry dined here....

_Friday, 12th July._—I awoke at 6 and got up at ½ past 6. At 7 we
breakfasted. It was a _sad_ breakfast, for us indeed, as my dear
cousins were going so soon. At about a ¼ to 8 we walked down our
pier with them and there took leave of them, which made us both VERY
UNHAPPY. We saw them get into the barge, and watched them sailing away
for some time on the beach. They were so amiable and so pleasant to
have in the house; they were _always satisfied, always good humoured_;
Alexander took such care of me in getting out of the boat, and rode
next to me; so did Ernst. They talked about _such interesting things_,
about their Turkish Campaign, about Russia, &c., &c. We shall miss
them at _breakfast_, at _luncheon_, at _dinner_, _riding_, _sailing_,
_driving_, _walking_, in _fact everywhere_.

About two hours after my cousins had gone, Mamma received the
distressing news that my cousins’ father, the Duke Alexander of
Würtemberg,[132] who had been ill for some time, was dead. I was
extremely sorry for them. Mamma immediately dispatched an estafette
after them to Dover with the news. At 1 we lunched. It was a dull
luncheon. At 4 we went out riding with Lady Charlotte, Lady Conroy,
Jane, Victoire, Sir John and Henry. Victoire rode Alice, and Lehzen
Isabel. The ride would have appeared to me much pleasanter had
Alexander and Ernst been there. We came home at 6. We heard from a
servant of ours, who had crossed over with them to Portsmouth, that
they had had a very quick and good passage and that they had not been
at all sick. At 7 we dined. Lady Conroy, Jane, Victoire, Sir John,
Edward, and Henry dined here. Here again they were missing....

_Thursday, 18th July._—At a ¼ to 10 we went on board the _Emerald_ with
Lady Charlotte, Lady Conroy, Jane, Victoire, Lehzen, and Sir John,
and were towed by the _Messenger_ steam-packet up to Portsmouth. We
then got into the Admiral’s barge, and landed in the docks. We then
saw from an elevation, the launch of the _Racer_, a sloop of war. We
then re-entered the Admiral’s barge and went to the _Victory_, his
flag-ship. We there received the salute on board. We saw the spot where
Nelson fell, and which is covered up with a brazen plate and his motto
is inscribed on it, “Every Englishman is expected to do his duty.” We
went down as low as the tanks, and there tasted the water which had
been in there for two years, and which was excellent. We also saw the
place where Nelson died. The whole ship is remarkable for its neatness
and order. We tasted some of the men’s beef and potatoes, which were
excellent, and likewise some grog. The company consisted of Lady
Williams, the Admiral’s lady, Sir Graham and Lady Moore,[133] Mr. and
Mrs. Ricardo, Sir Frederick and Lady Maitland,[134] etc., etc. We then
partook of a luncheon at the Admiral’s House and then returned on board
the _Emerald_. We got home by 5. We both wished so much that _dear_
Alexander and _dear_ Ernest had been there, I think it would have
amused them....

_Friday, 2nd August._—I awoke at about a ¼ to 6 and got up at ½
past 7. At ½ past 8 we all breakfasted. We then saw several ladies
and gentlemen. At about ½ past 9 we went on board the _dear little
Emerald_. We were to be towed up to Plymouth. Mamma and Lehzen were
very sick, and I was sick for about ½ an hour. At 1 I had a hot
mutton chop on deck. We passed Dartmouth. At about 4 we approached
Plymouth Harbour. It is a magnificent place and the breakwater is
wonderful indeed. You pass Mount Edgecumbe, the seat of Lord Mount
Edgecumbe.[135] It is beautifully situated. The Admiral, Sir William
Hargood,[136] Captain Falkland his flag-captain, and Mr. Yorke[137]
came on board. Captain Brown, who is on board the _Caledonia_, and
Captain Macay, on board the _Revenge_, also came on board. As we
entered the harbour, our dear little _Emerald_ ran foul of a hulk, her
mast broke and we were in the _greatest danger_. Thank God! the mast
did not fall and no one was hurt. But I was _dreadfully_ frightened
for _Mamma_ and for _all_. The poor dear _Emerald_ is very much hurt
I fear. Saunders was not at all in fault; he saved us by pulling the
rope which fixed us to the steamer. We arrived at Plymouth at 5. It is
a beautiful town and we were very well received. _Sweet Dash_ was under
Saunders’s arm the whole time, but he never let him drop in all the
danger. At 7 we dined. The hotel is very fine indeed. After dinner Sir
John saw Saunders, who said that the mast of the _Emerald_ was broken
in two places, and that we had had the _narrowest escape possible_;
but that she would be repaired and ready for us to go back in her on
Tuesday.

_Saturday, 3rd August._—At 10 came Sir John Cameron,[138] the Governor,
and his officers. At ½ past 10 came Sir William Hargood and his
officers and captains. Soon after came Lord Hill, who is over here to
inspect the troops, and Sir John Macdonald,[139] Sir Richard Jackson,
and Captain Hill. At ½ past 11 Mamma received an address from the
Mayor and Corporation of Plymouth, downstairs in a large room full of
people. At 12 we went with all our own party to a review of the 89th,
the 22nd, and the 84th regiments. Mamma made a speech, and I then gave
the colours to the 89th regiment. The names of the two Ensigns to whom
I gave the colours are Miles and Egerton. We then saw them march by in
line. We then went to the Admiral’s house where we had our luncheon,
and then proceeded to the docks. We went in the Admiral’s barge on
board the Admiral’s flag-ship, the _St. Joseph_, taken by Lord Nelson
from the Spanish, in the battle of St. Vincent. We received a salute on
board. She is a magnificent vessel of 120 guns. We saw her lower decks
and cabins, which are extremely light, airy, roomy and clean. We then
returned in the Admiral’s barge, rowed round the _Caledonia_ 120 guns,
and the _Revenge_ 76 guns. We landed at the Dockyard and went home. At
7 we dined....

End of my third Journal-book. Norris Castle, August 11th, 1833....

_Monday, 16th September._—At 10 we went on board the _Emerald_ with
Lady Catherine, Lady Conroy, Jane, Lehzen, Victoire, and Sir John,
and sailed to Portsmouth, where we were going to pay a visit to their
Majesties the Queen of Portugal[140] and the Duchess of Braganza (her
step-mother). We got there at ½ past 11. We entered the Admiral’s
barge with Lady Catherine, Lady Conroy, Lehzen, and Sir John, and were
rowed ashore. We landed at the stairs in the dockyard. Mamma and I got
into a close carriage, and our ladies followed in an open carriage.
The whole way from the dock-yard to the Admiral’s house, where their
Majesties reside, was lined with troops and various bands were placed
at different distances. We were received at the door by the gentlemen
and ladies of the court. Inside the hall we were met by the Queen and
the Duchess. The Queen led Mamma, and the Duchess followed leading
me into the room. The Queen was in England 4 years ago; she is only
a month older than I am and is very kind to me. She was then already
very tall for her age, but had a very beautiful figure; she is grown
very tall but also very stout. She has a beautiful complexion, and is
very sweet and friendly. She wore her hair in two large curls in front
and a thick fine plait turned up behind. The Empress (or Duchess as
she is now called) was never before in England. She is only 21 and is
very pleasing. She has beautiful blue eyes, and has a fine tall figure.
She has black hair and wore ringlets in front and a plait behind. She
was simply dressed in a grey watered moire trimmed with blonde. Their
Majesties arrived at Portsmouth from Havre on the morning of the 8th
of September; and proceeded to Windsor on the 10th, on a visit to the
King and Queen, from whence they returned last Saturday, and they
intend leaving Portsmouth to-day at 2 o’clock for Lisbon. The Queen and
Duchess having desired us to sit down, talked some time with us. The
Duchess then went and fetched her little girl, a child of 21 months
old. We soon after went, the Queen leading Mamma and the Duchess me in
the same manner as before. We returned in the same way. We lunched on
board the _Emerald_ and then were towed by the _Messenger_ home. We
came home at 3....

_Monday, 14th October._— ... Ferdinand the 7th of Spain[141] died
on the 29th of September, and his young and lovely Queen Christina
instantly became Regent for the infant Queen Isabella the 2nd, her
daughter, and who is only 3 years old. The Queen has a powerful enemy
in Don Carlos and his wife, but she is very courageous and very clever.
It is a singular coincidence that there should be a young Queen in
Spain as well as in Portugal. At 7 we 4 dined. I stayed up till 9....

_Monday, 9th December._—At 5 we dined. Sir John dined here. At ½ past
6 we went to the play to Drury Lane with Lady Conroy, Lehzen, and
Sir John. It was Shakespear’s tragedy of _King John_. The principal
characters were: King John, Mr. Macready,[142] who acted _beautifully_;
Prince Arthur, Miss Poole, who acted delightfully; Hubert, Mr. Bennett
who acted well; Faulconbridge, Mr. Cooper, who also acted well; Philip
King of France, Mr. Diddear; Louis the Dauphin, Mr. Brendal; Archduke
of Austria, Mr. Thompson; Queen Elinor, Mrs. Faucit[143]; the Lady
Constance, Mrs. Sloman; Blanche of Castile, Miss Murray. The second
piece was the melo-drama of _The Innkeeper’s Daughter_, which is very
horrible but _extremely interesting_, but it would take me too much
time to relate the story of it. The characters were: Richard, Mr.
Cooper, who acted _very well_; Frankland, Mr. Ayliffe; Monkton, Mr.
Thompson; Langley, Mr. Tayleure; Harrop, Mr. Webster,[144] who looked
_horrid_ but acted well; he was one of the leading characters in
the play; Edward Harrop, Mr. Richardson; Wentworth, Mr. Baker; Hans
Ketzler, Mr. T. P. Cooke, who acted very well; Tricksey, Mr. Hughes;
William, Mr. Howell; White, Mr. East; Smith, Mr. Henry; Allsop, Mr. S.
Jones; Mary, Miss Kelly,[145] who acted _quite beautifully_; she is
quite mature. Marian, Mrs. Broad. We came to the very beginning and
stayed to the very end. We came home at 10 minutes past 12. I was VERY
MUCH AMUSED....

_Thursday, 26th December._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. At 9 we
breakfasted. At 1 we lunched. At ½ past 2 came Captain Burnes who
has lately travelled over Northern East India. He gave us some very
interesting accounts. He likewise brought with him to show us, his
servant, a native of Cabul, dressed in his native dress. He is called
Gulam Hussein; is of a dark olive complexion and had a dress of real
Cashmere made in the beautiful valley of Cashmere.

_Friday, 27th December._—At ½ past 2 came Mr. T. Griffiths to lecture
on Physics. The plan of the lecture was: Introductory—Objects of
Alchymy, viz. Transmutation of Metals, the Elixir of Life, and the
Universal Solvent;—Objects of Chemistry, viz. the investigation of
every substance in nature—Chemistry a science of experiment—Results of
chemical action—Arts and Manufactures dependent on chemistry—Importance
of Heat as a chemical agent—Its action on various substances—Conductors
and Non-conductors of Heat—Nature of Flame. All these different
subjects were illustrated by very curious and interesting experiments.
It was over at ½ past 3. Lehzen, Lady Conroy, Victoire, the Dean, and
Sir John were likewise present. I was _very much amused_....

_Monday, 30th December._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. At 9 we
breakfasted. At 1 we lunched. At ½ past 2 came Mr. Walker to
lecture. The plan of the lecture was: Properties of Matter—Particles
infinitely small, divisible, and hard—Cohesion—Capillary attraction,
Magnetic attraction, &c., &c.—Repulsion exhibited in various ways,
as counteracting the preceding influences—Recapitulation—Mechanics:
Gravity considered, its effects on descending and projected
bodies—National weights and measures—Vis inertia, momentum,
what—Mechanical Powers, explained by various machines, applications,
&c. &c.—Draft of horses—Defect of wheel carriages, road, &c. pointed
out—Some improvements suggested—Removal of Great Stone of St.
Petersburg. The lecture lasted till a ¼ to 4. Lehzen, Lady Conroy,
the Dean, and Sir John were present besides ourselves. At a ¼ to 7 we
dined. Sir John dined here. At a ¼ past 8 we went with Lehzen, Lady
Conroy, and Sir John to the play to Covent Garden. We came in for the
last scene of _Gustavus_, the Masqued Ball, and stayed the whole of
the pantomime, which is called “_Old Mother Hubbard and her Dog; or
Harlequin and Tales of the Nursery_.” The scenery was very pretty and
the principal characters were: Venus, Miss Lee; Cupid, Miss Poole who
appeared in three other dresses: as a peasant boy, as a drummer, and
as Mother Hubbard, and she looked _very_ pretty and acted very well
indeed. Old Mother Hubbard, Mr. Wieland; Schock (her dog), Master
W. Mitchinson. The Duchess Griffinwinkle Blowsabella (afterwards
Pantaloon), Mr. Barnes. King Rundytundy O (afterwards Dandy Lover),
Mr. W. H. Payne. The Princess Graciosa (afterwards Columbine), a very
pretty person, Miss Foster. Prince Percineth (afterwards Harlequin) Mr.
Ellar. Head Cook (afterwards Clown) Mr. T. Mathews. The panorama at the
end was also pretty.




                   INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO CHAPTER III

  The year 1834 was spent very quietly by Princess Victoria. Her
  education progressed in simple and placid grooves, but her visits
  to the opera and the theatre became more frequent. She became
  devoted to Italian opera, and formed an attachment to music of the
  Italian school from which even Prince Albert, steeped as he was in
  German music, never contrived to wean her. She accepted then, and
  ever afterwards, Giulia Grisi as the supreme singer and artist.
  From the month of June, when she was present at a Festival in
  Westminster Abbey, to the end of the autumn, she devoted herself,
  at St. Leonards and at Tunbridge Wells, to the study of music and
  singing and to practising upon the harp.

  This year the Whig Ministry of Lord Grey tottered and fell. In July
  King William, much to the surprise of politicians on both sides,
  entrusted Lord Melbourne with the formation of a Government. The
  King wanted a coalition and made a tentative effort to achieve it,
  but he did not succeed in obtaining the co-operation of either
  Party. It was not anticipated that Lord Melbourne’s Government
  could last. In the month of November Lord Spencer died, and Lord
  Althorp, his son, who was Chancellor of the Exchequer, seized with
  unrestrained delight the opportunity to retire from public life.
  Lord Melbourne thereupon resigned, and Sir Robert Peel, returning
  hurriedly from Rome, formed an administration likewise destined to
  be short-lived.

  If King William had some difficulty in finding a stable Ministry,
  his brother-monarch across the Channel was in no better plight.
  The Parliamentary difficulties in France reached a stage of such
  complexity, that it looked for a moment as if the French monarchy
  itself might succumb to the vehemence of political and partisan
  strife. The Citizen-King found it necessary to employ 100,000
  troops to keep in awe the three cities of Paris, Marseilles, and
  Lyons. At this moment died Lafayette, one of the last links between
  the opening and concluding discords of the French Revolution. It
  was during this year that two foreigners of eminence, long resident
  in England, finally disappeared from London society. Princess
  Lieven left the Russian, and Talleyrand the French Embassy.

  This year, too, saw the destruction, by fire, of the old Houses
  of Parliament, associated with so many historic memories. None of
  these events, however, caused a ripple upon the surface of the
  little Princess’s secluded life at Kensington.


                              CHAPTER III

                                 1834

_Thursday, 16th January._—About a fortnight or three weeks ago I
received the Order of Maria Louisa, accompanied by a very flattering
letter from Her Majesty the Queen Regent of Spain, in the name of her
daughter Queen Isabel the 2nd. Having some time ago asked for the
handwriting of Her Majesty for my collection, the Queen hearing of it,
sent me the Order accompanied by a very gracious letter. The Order is a
violet and white ribbon, to which is suspended (en négligé) an enamel
sort of star, and in high dress one superbly studded with diamonds.[146]

_Sunday, 13th April._—At 10 we went to prayers with Lady Theresa[147]
and Lehzen. The service was performed by the Dean, who gave us likewise
a very good sermon. It was taken from the 3rd chapter of Acts, 23rd
verse: “For Moses truly said unto the fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord
your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye
hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come
to pass, that every soul, which will not hear that prophet, shall be
destroyed from among the people.” At 1 we lunched. At 7 we 3 and Lady
Theresa also dined. After dinner came Aunt Sophia. I stayed up till a ¼
to 9.

_Monday, 14th April._—I awoke at 7 and got up at ½ past 7. At ½ past 8
we all breakfasted. As I am now about to return to my usual studies, I
must not omit to mention how very anxious my dear Mamma was throughout
my indisposition, and how unceasing _dear_ Lehzen was in her attentions
and care to me....

_Saturday, 19th April._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. At 9 we
breakfasted. At ½ past 9 came the Dean till ½ past 10. At 12 we
went out walking. At 1 we lunched. At ½ past 2 came the Duchess of
Northumberland. At 3 came Lady Robert Grosvenor[148] with her little
girl Victoria. She is a dear little child, so clever and intelligent.
At 4 came Mrs. Anderson till 5. At 6 we dined. At a ¼ past 7 we went
with Lady Conroy, Lehzen and Sir John to the Opera. We came in just at
the beginning of the Opera of _Anna Boulena_. The characters were: Anna
Boulena, Mdlle. Guiletta Grisi.[149] She is a most beautiful singer and
actress and is likewise very young and pretty. She sang _beautifully_
throughout but particularly in the last scene when she is mad, which
she _acted_ likewise _beautifully_. Giovanna Seymour, Mrs. E. Seguin,
who sings very well. Enrico, Signor Tambourini, who sang beautifully.
Ricardo Percy, M. Ivanhoff, who sings very well. He has a very
pleasing though not a very strong voice. Between the acts there was a
divertissement, in which Mdlle. Theresa Elsler danced a pas de deux
with Mons. T. Guerinot, and Mdlle. Fanny Elsler with M. Perrot. Mdlle.
Fanny danced beautifully; she ran up the stage on the tips of her toes
in a most extraordinary manner. She likewise made many other pretty
little steps. M. Perrot (whom I had never seen before) danced likewise
quite beautifully. We went away as soon as the 2nd act of the opera was
over. We came home at 12. I was VERY MUCH AMUSED INDEED!...

_Saturday, 26th April._—I awoke at 7 and got up at a ¼ to 8. At 9
we breakfasted. At ½ past 9 came the Dean till 11. The Duchess of
Northumberland was present. At 12 we went to pay a visit to Aunt
Gloucester. At 1 we lunched. At 3 came Mr. Steward till 4. At 4 came
Mrs. Anderson till 5. At 6 we dined. Sir John dined here. At a ¼ past 7
we went with Lehzen and Sir John to the Opera. We came in just at the
beginning of the opera of _Otello_. The characters were: Otello, Signor
Rubini who sang quite beautifully and acted very well. Iago, Signor
Tambourini who sung likewise _beautifully_. Rodrigo, M. Ivanhoff who
sung _very well_.——Signor Zuchello. Desdemona, Signora Giuletta Grisi.
She _sang_ and _acted_ quite beautifully! and looked lovely. She acted
and sang _most sweetly and beautifully_ in the last scene; and also in
the two trios in the 1st and 2nd acts. When the opera was over she was
called for, and she came on, led by Rubini. At that moment a wreath of
roses with a small roll of paper inside was thrown on the stage; Rubini
picked it up and placed it on her head. They were very much applauded.
We came away directly after the opera. Lord Ilchester[150] and Lady
Theresa joined us there. We came home at a ¼ to 12. I was VERY MUCH
AMUSED INDEED!!!...

_Monday, 28th April._—I awoke at 7 and got up at a ¼ to 8. At a ¼ to 9
we breakfasted. At ½ past 9 came the Dean till a ¼ past 11. The Duchess
of Northumberland was present. At 12 Lehzen and I drove out. At 1 we
lunched. At 3 came Mr. Steward till 4. I then went to the painting
room. At 7 we dined. After dinner while we were playing on the piano,
arrived Uncle Ferdinand[151] and Charles.[152] Uncle Ferdinand is
Mamma’s second brother and she had not seen him for _16 years_! I have
now seen all my uncles, except Uncle Mensdorff[153] (Aunt Sophie’s
husband), for Mamma’s eldest brother, Uncle Ernest,[154] was here 3
years ago, the same year Uncle Leopold went to Belgium. Charles is
looking very well and is grown much fatter. Uncle Ferdinand is not at
all like my other Uncles. He is fair. It is a great pleasure for me to
see both Uncle Ferdinand and Charles. I stayed up till 9....

_Thursday, 5th June._—At 11 arrived my DEAREST sister Feodora whom I
had not seen for _6 years_. She is accompanied by Ernest, her husband,
and her two eldest children Charles and Eliza. Dear Feodora looks very
well but is grown much stouter since I saw her. She was married on the
18th of February 1828 and went away to Germany a week after and she
never came here again since. Hohenlohe looks also very well. As for
the children they are the DEAREST little loves I ever saw. Charles is
4 years and a half old. He is very tall and is a sweet good-tempered
little fellow. He is not handsome but he is a very nice-looking boy.
He has light blue eyes and fair hair. Eliza is 3 years and a half
old; she is also very tall and is a _perfect_ little beauty. She
has immense dark brown eyes and a very small mouth and light brown
hair. She is very clever and amusing. We then showed her their rooms,
and afterwards, at ½ past 12, we went to see the dear children take
their dinner. They took it with Mr. Rol, Charles’s tutor. At 1 we all
lunched, that is to say, Mamma, dear Feodore, Ernst Hohenlohe, Charly,
Lehzen, and I. After luncheon, Feodore and the others went upstairs. At
2 Charles and Eliza came down and stayed with us alone. They are _dear
sweet_ children; not at all shy and _so_ good; they never hurt or spoil
anything. At a little after 2 came Lady Westminster.[155] The _dear_
children behaved _so_ well. They are so very sensible. They staid till
after 3. Eliza speaks German and French very nicely. She has a French
Swiss bonne called Louise who speaks French with her. At ½ past 4 we
went out driving with _dear_ Feodore and Lehzen. We came home at 6. At
7 we dined. Besides dearest Feodore, Ernest, Charles and Lehzen, Sir J.
Conroy dined here. When the 2nd course was put on, Charles and Eliza
came in, and staid there. They were very funny and amusing and talked
immensely. They staid up till ½ past 8. At ½ past 9 we went to
the Opera with Ernst Hohenlohe, Charles, Lehzen, and Sir John Conroy,
poor _dear_ Feodora being too tired to go. We came in at about the
middle of the 2nd act of Rossini’s Opera of _L’Assiedo di Corrinto_.
It is in 3 acts. The principal characters are: Mahomet (Emperor of
the Turks), Signor Tamburini, who sang beautifully and looked _very
well_. Cleomene (Governor of Corrinto), Mons. Ivanoff who likewise sang
very well. Nioclene, Signor Rubini who also sang quite beautifully.
Pamira, Mdlle. Giuletta Grisi, who sang quite beautifully and acted
and looked _extremely well_. It was Laporte’s benefit, and the first
time this opera was ever performed in this country. Then followed the
2nd act of _La Sylphide_ in which Taglioni made her first appearance
since an absence of some months. She danced quite beautifully, quite
as if she flew in the air, so gracefully and lightly. She looked also
very well. There was also a Pas de Trois danced by Mdlles. Theresa and
Fanny Elsler and Mons. Theodore. Mdlle. Fanny danced _beautifully_. We
came home at 10 minutes to 1. There is only one thing wanting to my
happiness in being with my dear sister and her children, that is that I
cannot share that happiness with one whom I love so very dearly but who
is far far away—that is my _most dear_ Uncle Ferdinand....

[Illustration: _H.S.H. Princess Adelaide of Hohenlohe-Langenburg from a
  portrait by Gutekunst_]

_Wednesday, 11th June._—_Dear_ little Eliza and Charles came down to
breakfast. Eliza came into my room and staid with me for some time.
She is a dear good little girl. At 1 we lunched. Eliza came again
into my room and staid with me for nearly an hour. At 3 we went with
Lady Flora Hastings[156] and Lehzen to Windsor on a visit to their
Majesties. We were very sorry to leave the dear children. At a ¼
past 5 we arrived at Windsor. The Queen, _dear_ Feodore, Ernest and
several ladies and gentlemen of the court, received us at the door
and conducted us upstairs to the Queen’s room, where the King was. I
was very happy to see my _dear_ sister again. Some time afterwards
the Queen conducted us to our rooms which are very handsome. At 7 we
dined. Besides the King and Queen, Feodore and Ernest, Mamma and I,
Lady Flora and Lehzen, there dined there: George Cambridge, the Duke
and Duchess of Richmond,[157] the Duchess of Northumberland, the Duke
of Grafton,[158] the Duke of Dorset,[159] the Duke of Cleveland,[160]
the Marquis and Marchioness of Conyngham,[161] Lady Clinton (Lady of
the Bedchamber in Waiting), Lord and Lady Frederick Fitzclarence,[162]
Lord Denbigh,[163] Lady Sophia Sidney,[164] Miss Eden,[165] Miss Hope
Johnston, Miss Wilson, Lord Albemarle,[166] Sir Frederick Watson,
Colonel Lygon,[167] Mr. Wood,[168] &c., &c. The Queen went first with
Ernest, then came the King who led Mamma and I in, and then came
Feodore with the Duke of Richmond. The rest I do not recollect. I sat
between the King and the Duke of Dorset. I stayed up till ½ past 9.

_Thursday, 12th June._—I awoke at 7 and got up at a ¼ to 8. At ½ past
9 we breakfasted, with the King, the Queen, Feodore, Ernest, George
Cambridge, the Duchess of Northumberland, and Lady Clinton. All the
other ladies breakfasted together. We then went into the Queen’s room.
At a ¼ past 12 we went to Ascot Races with the whole company in 9
carriages. In the first went the King, the Queen, Mamma and I. In the
second Feodore, the Duchess of Richmond, the Duchess of Northumberland
and Lady Clinton. In the third Lady Flora, Lady Sophia Sydney, the Duke
of Richmond, and the Duke of Cleveland. In the fourth Lehzen, Miss
Hope Johnston, the Duke of Grafton, and the Duke of Dorset. How all the
others went I do not know. At about 1 we arrived on the race course and
entered the King’s stand with all our party. The races were very good
and there was an immense concourse of people there of all ranks. At
about ½ past 2 we had luncheon. At a little after 6 we left the stand
and returned to the castle in the same way as we came except that, as
it rained very hard, we came home in shut carriages. At 7 we arrived at
the castle. At ½ past 7 we dined. The company at dinner were the same
as yesterday with the exception of Lord and Lady Conyngham not dining
here, and a few other gentlemen having dined here. We went in in the
same way. I sat between the King and the Duke of Cleveland. I stayed up
till a ¼ to 11. I was very much amused indeed at the races....

_Sunday, 27th July._—At 9 we breakfasted. How sad I felt at breakfast
not to see the door open and DEAR Feodore come in smiling and leading
her dear little girl; and not to get the accustomed morning kiss
from her. At 11 we went to the chapel with Lehzen, Lady Conroy, and
Victoire. The Bishop of London preached a very fine sermon. Victoire
Conroy stayed till ½ past 2. At 1 we lunched. I missed dear Feodore
here again terribly. I miss her so much to-day. She used to be with
me so much on Sunday always. We used to talk together so pleasantly.
Last Sunday afternoon she painted in my room. At ½ past 3 we went with
Lehzen to visit Aunt Gloucester, and then drove home through the park.
How dull that drive appeared to me without dear Feodore. We came home
at ½ past 5. At 7 we dined. After dinner came Aunt Sophia. We passed a
sad dull evening. I stayed up till a ¼ to 9....

_Sunday, 5th October._— ... The news were received a few days ago that
Dom Pedro, Regent of Portugal,[169] was dead. He expired on the 24th
instant, at the age of 35. His daughter, Donna Maria, the young Queen,
though only 15, is declared of age and able to govern by herself. The
lovely young Empress is left a widow at the age of 22 only. It is a sad
situation both for the young Queen and the poor Empress, in whom both I
take the greatest interest as I know them personally. I saw Dom Pedro
when he was in England about 3 years ago. At 11 we went to church. At 1
we lunched. At ½ past 3 we went out driving with Lady Flora and Lehzen,
in the pony-carriage. We came home in the large carriage at 6. At 7 we
dined. Lady Conroy, Jane, Victoire, Sir J., Messrs. E., S., and H. C.
dined here. I stayed up till ½ past 9....

ST. LEONARDS, _Wednesday, 4th November_.—I said in my last journal
book that I would describe in this book all what passed yesterday. We
reached Battle Abbey at about a ¼ to 1. We were received at the door by
Lady Webster.[170] Battle Abbey was built by King William the Conqueror
and stands on the site where the famous battle of Hastings was fought.
The place is still preserved where Harold fell. She showed us first
into a large hall supposed to be the highest in England. There are
portraits of King Charles the 2nd, King William the 3rd, and Queen
Anne in it, &c. &c. There is also a very large picture of the battle of
Hastings. Some old suits of armour are also in the hall. We saw also
what were the cloisters now turned into a room. We saw the Beggars’
Hall, a curious walk of the monks, and the garden. We lastly partook of
some refreshment in a very pretty room in which there was a picture of
the Emperor Napoleon, not full length, only to the waist; which is said
to be very like. The outside of the abbey is very fine too. We left it
again at ½ past 1. The tenants again accompanied us till Broadeslowe.
There some gentlemen from Hastings met us and accompanied us to St.
Leonards. We passed under an arch formed of laurels and decorated with
flowers and inscriptions. As soon as we passed the 2nd arch the Mayor
got out of his carriage and came to our door asking leave to precede
us in his carriage. An immense concourse of people walking with the
carriage. The mayor and aldermen preceding us in carriages as also
a band of music. Throughout Hastings the houses were decorated with
flowers, ribands and inscriptions, and arches of flowers and laurels.
Ladies and children waving handkerchiefs and laurels on the balconies
and at the windows. Cries of “Welcome, welcome, Royal visitors,” were
constantly heard. We reached Hastings at ½ past 2, and it was 4 o’clock
before we arrived at our house at St. Leonards. It was indeed a most
splendid reception. We stepped out on the balcony and were loudly
cheered. One sight was extremely pretty. Six fishermen in rough blue
jackets, red caps and coarse white aprons, preceded by a band, bore a
basket ornamented with flowers, full of fish as a present for us. We
found _dear_ Dashy in perfect health. Our house is very comfortable.
At 6 we dined. Lady Conroy, Jane, Victoire, Messrs. E., S., H., and Sir
J. C. dined here. After 8 the fireworks began and lasted till 9. They
were very fine. I stayed up till 9.

_Thursday, 5th November._—I awoke this morning at 7 and got up at ½
past 7. At 9 we breakfasted. At 12 Mamma received an address from the
Mayor, Corporation, and Inhabitants of Hastings and St. Leonards. After
1 we lunched. At 7 we dined. Lady Conroy, Jane, Victoire, Messrs. E.,
S., and Sir J. C. dined here.

_Tuesday, 11th November._— ... At ½ past 11 we went out driving in the
barouche with Lady Flora and Lehzen. We got out and walked and sent the
barouche home. We afterwards got into the close landau with a postilion
and horse in hand. As we came to the commencement of the town where a
seminary is to be built, the hand-horse kicked up and getting entangled
in the traces fell down, pulling the other with it; the horse with the
postilion however instantly recovered itself but the other remained on
the ground kicking and struggling most violently. Two gentlemen very
civilly came and held the horse’s head down while we all got out as
fast as possible. I called for poor dear little Dashy who was in the
rumble; Wood (our footman) took him down and I ran on with him in my
arms calling Mamma to follow, Lehzen and Lady Flora followed us also.
They then cut the traces, the horse still struggling violently. The
other horse which had been quite quiet, being frightened by the other’s
kicking, backed and fell over into a foundation pit, while Wood held
him, and he (Wood) with difficulty prevented himself from falling; the
horse recovering himself ran after us and we instantly ran behind a
low stone wall; but the horse went along the road, and a workman took
him and gave him to Wood. The other horse had ceased kicking and got
up. We ought to be _most grateful_ to Almighty God for His merciful
providence in thus preserving us, for it was a _very narrow escape_.
Both Wood and Bacleberry behaved very well indeed. The names of the two
gentlemen who held the horse’s head are Rev. Mr. Gould and Mr. Peckham
Micklethwaite.[171] The latter I am sorry to say was hurt, but not very
materially. The poor horse is cut from head to foot; but the other is
not at all hurt only very much frightened. We walked home....

_Sunday, 30th November._— ... We went to church with Lady Flora and
Lehzen. Mr. Randolph preached a most beautiful sermon. It was taken
from the 6th chapter of St. Paul’s 2nd Epistle to the Corinthians, 1st
and 2nd verses. “We then, as workers together with Him, beseech you
also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain. For He saith, I
have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I
succoured thee: behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the
day of salvation.” At 1 we lunched. At 3 came Victoire Conroy till a ¼
past 6. At 7 we dined. Jane, Victoire, Messrs. E., H., and Sir J. C.
dined here.

_Tuesday, 2nd December._—I awoke at 7 and got up at ½ past 7. We
received this morning the news that my poor Uncle, the Duke of
Gloucester,[172] was dead. He expired on Sunday evening, the 30th of
November, 1834, at 20 minutes to 7. I am very sorry that we have lost
him as he was always a _most affectionate_ and _kind_ Uncle to me. Aunt
Mary, I hear, bears her loss wonderfully. Poor Aunt Sophia Matilda,
his only sister and who was excessively fond of him, is dreadfully
distressed at losing her only brother. But her piety will enable her to
bear this great loss. He was so kind to think of us the morning before
he died. Aunt S. Matilda told him that we had asked how he was, upon
which he answered, “Tell them that I say, God bless them, and that I
love them.” This kind message proved the quiet state of mind he was in.
He showed such piety, such peace and resignation, that that proved a
great comfort to his poor sister. He was in his 59th year....

_Tuesday, 23rd December._— ... I received from _dear_ Uncle Leopold
this morning some most interesting autographs which are: Louis Seize’s,
Marie Antoinette’s, Henri IV.’s, the Duke of Marlborough’s, the Empress
Maria Theresa’s and her husband’s, and Lafayette’s....

_Sunday, 28th December._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 20 minutes to
8. At 9 we breakfasted. At 11 we went to church with Lady Flora and
Lehzen. Mr. Randolph preached a very fine sermon. It was taken from the
1st chapter of St. Matthew, 21st verse: “And she shall bring forth a
Son, and thou shalt call His name Jesus: for He shall save His people
from their sins.” At ½ past 1 we lunched. I forgot to mention that I
received this morning a very kind letter from dear Uncle Leopold,
accompanied by a beautiful shawl and the autographs of Louis XV., his
Queen, Marie Leczinska, and the Dauphin, father to Louis XVI. At ½ past
2 we went out with Lady Flora and Lehzen and came home after 3....




                    INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO CHAPTER IV

  The Princess attached importance to this year of her life. It
  appeared to her that she benefited more fully by her lessons,
  and began to realise their importance. About a month after her
  birthday she was confirmed at the Chapel Royal, St. James’s, by the
  Archbishop of Canterbury. She was impressed by the solemnity of
  the occasion and frightened by the austerity of Archbishop Howley.
  This year marked an epoch in ways other than spiritual. She was
  allowed more freely to mix with her mother’s guests. Personages of
  distinction were asked to meet her, and she had an opportunity of
  seeing some of the more eminent of those who were to be her future
  subjects, although she had scant opportunity of getting to know
  them well.

  She went to Ascot this year in the Royal Procession, and then,
  in the autumn, her mother arranged for her a Progress on the
  lines of that which is recorded in her Journals of 1832. There
  is nothing, however, to show that she was alive to the trend of
  public events. The existence of Lord Melbourne’s second Ministry
  was precarious. It was said that Lord Melbourne had against him the
  King, the Church, the Bar, the Agricultural and Monied interest,
  and a large minority in the House of Commons; whereas he only
  had in his favour a small majority in the House of Commons, the
  manufacturing towns, and a portion of the rabble. This was the Tory
  analysis of the political situation in 1835. “Threatened men and
  threatened Ministries enjoy a long life,” and Lord Melbourne’s was
  no exception.

  The Princess was in frequent communication by letter with her
  Uncle, King Leopold. He sent her many interesting autographs for
  the collection she at that time was forming. They corresponded
  about books. It was he who recommended her Sully’s _Memoirs_,
  which, as her Journals show, she assiduously read, and he now
  and then referred in admonitory terms to her future regal
  responsibilities and duties.

  On one occasion he sent her an extract from a French Memoir
  containing a severe criticism on the political character of Queen
  Anne, to which she replied that as he had endeavoured to point out
  to her what a Queen “ought not to be,” she hoped he would give her
  some idea of what a Queen “ought to be.” Those who are familiar
  with the character and disposition of King Leopold can imagine that
  he responded willingly to the invitation. It was upon this note
  that the year 1835 came to an end.


                              CHAPTER IV

                                 1835

_Monday, 5th January._—I quite forgot to mention that on the morning
of the 20th of November a ship laden with either coal or chalk sank,
but all the crew came off safe. Lieutenant Gilley and five men put off
in a boat from the 3rd Martello Tower, in hopes of being able to save
some of the goods of the sunken ship. The sea was very high, the boat
slight and over-loaded, and they had scarcely left the shore when the
boat was upset and they were _all six drowned_! The poor sister of the
Lieutenant is residing here. Three of the poor men were married and
left their poor widows (all young) plunged in the greatest grief. The
body of Weeks, one of the married men and who had 3 children, was found
two days after, at Pevensey. The poor Lieutenant’s body was only found
last Sunday, the 28th December, quite near here; and one of the other
married men, called Conely, who had 4 children, was found the next
morning near Hastings; and Andrews, the last married man, who had only
been married a very short time, was found on Wednesday night, the 31st
December, in the same place. It was a great gratification to the poor
widows that their husbands’ bodies have been found. We saw two of them
at a distance the other day. They are all very decent-looking, tidy
and nice people. At a ¼ to 12 we went out walking with Lehzen till 1.
As we walked along by the towers we met Mrs. Weeks, one of the widows,
with her little girl. She had a widow-cap and bonnet on, and a Scotch
cloak. She looks as pale as death but has a mild sweet expression....

_Saturday, 24th January._—I awoke at 7 and got up at a ¼ past 8. At ½
past 9 we breakfasted. At 10 came the Dean till 20 minutes to 11. It
was yesterday _15 years_ that it pleased God to take my _most beloved_
Papa from us. Alas! _I_ was but 6 months when this affliction came upon
us; and I therefore never had the happiness to know him....

_Tuesday, 27th January._—I awoke at ½ past 7, got up at a ¼ past 8. At
½ past 9 we breakfasted. At 1 we lunched. I ought to have mentioned
that besides my lessons with the Dean (and also when my other masters
come) I have many occupations with Lehzen. And now, though we are
all in the bustle of packing, I am constantly employed by myself in
various ways; and I read French History to Lehzen, and one of Racine’s
tragedies with her in the afternoons which I delight in. I _love_ to be
_employed_; I _hate_ to be _idle_....

_Thursday, 29th January._—I awoke at ½ past 5 and got up at 7. At 8
we all breakfasted. At a ¼ to 9 we left St. Leonards. Dear Lehzen,
Lady Flora, Lady Conroy &c. following in another carriage. All
our acquaintances were out to see us go (except Mr. and Lady Mary
Dundas).... For some reasons I am sorry we have left St. Leonards,
which are, the nice walks, the absence of fogs, and looking out of my
window and seeing the people walk on the esplanade, and seeing the sun
rise and set, which was quite beautiful. The rising began by the sky
being quite pink and blending softly into a bright blue, and the sun
rose by degrees from a little red streak to a ball of red copper. The
setting began by the whole horizon being orange, crimson and blue, and
the sun sunk down a ball of fiery gold dyeing the sands crimson. But
then again my reasons for _not_ being sorry to go are, my not sleeping
well there, my not having been well, and the roaring of the sea. We
changed horses first at Battle, then at Stony Crouch, then at Woodgate,
which was quite near _dear_ Tunbridge, then at Sevenoaks, and lastly at
Bromley. We reached Kensington Palace at 5. My room is very prettily
newly papered, newly furnished, and has a new carpet, and looks very
pretty indeed. Our bedroom also newly papered and furnished and looks
very nice and clean. Pedro and my dear little wax-bills came quite
safe. Dear Dashy was in our carriage and behaved like a darling....

_Monday, 6th April._—The melancholy news were received yesterday of the
death of the Prince Augustus, Duke of Leuchtenberg,[173] which happened
on the 28th of March. It is a _most lamentable_ and dreadful event.
His Royal Highness was in his 25th year, and in the flower of his age.
Young, amiable, good and well-meaning; for since his arrival at Lisbon
he had won the hearts of many by his affability and good-nature. He
caught a cold, which he neglected and it ended in the quinsy. It is
really quite dreadful for the poor young Queen, who is now left a widow
at the early age of 16! Her Majesty completed her 16th year on the 4th
of this month. It is likewise dreadful for his amiable and accomplished
sister the young Empress-widow, who is still in mourning for her
husband, Dom Pedro; and also dreadful for his mother, the Duchess of
Leuchtenberg. Not two months ago he was seen leading his young bride
from the altar, and now all that prospect of happiness is cut off!...

_Saturday, 2nd May._— ... At 6 we dined. Lady Flora dined here. At
a ¼ past 7 we went to the opera with dear Lehzen and Lady Flora. It
was Rossini’s opera seria of _Otello_ in 3 acts. The characters were:
Desdemona, Mdlle. Grisi, who looked BEAUTIFUL and sung MOST EXQUISITELY
and acted BEAUTIFULLY. She personates the meek and ill-treated
Desdemona in a most _perfect_ and _touching_ manner. Elmiro (a Venetian
patrician and father to Desdemona), Signor Lablache who sang and acted
beautifully.... The finest parts are: the song which Otello sings in
the 1st scene of the 1st act, and which Rubini sang beautifully. The
duet between Iago and Roderigo in the 1st act which Tamburini and
Ivanoff sang beautifully together. The song which Desdemona sings
when she first comes on in the first act, which begins “Stanca di più
combattere,” and which Grisi sung _most exquisitely_! (It is not by
Rossini; it is composed expressly for Grisi by Marliani.) The Finale
to the 1st act which commences with that beautiful trio, “Ti parli
l’amore,” between Elmiro, Roderigo, and Desdemona, which Lablache,
Ivanoff and Grisi sang most beautifully. It was enchored. And when
Otello comes on and declares her to be his wife and Elmiro in his rage
exclaims: “Empia! ti maledico!” and which Lablache did in a manner
_most splendid_ while Desdemona falls at his feet. The Duet between
Iago and Otello in the 2nd act which Tamburini and Rubini sang most
beautifully. The duet between Roderigo and Otello which follows it and
which was likewise beautifully sung. When Desdemona enquires from the
people if Otello (who had fought with Roderigo) still lives, and when
she exclaims in delight: “Altro non chiede il cor,” and which Grisi
did in a most splendid manner; and when at the end of the 3rd act she
kneels before her father and says, “L’error d’un infelice pietoso in me
perdona: Se il padre m’abbandona, da chi sperar pieta?” which she did
in a most touching manner. The song in the 3rd act with the harp which
Grisi sung most _beautifully_, as also the prayer; and when Otello
comes on to stab her and she reproaches him exclaiming: “Uccidimi se
vuoi, perfido, ingrato”; which Grisi did in such a mild and pathetic
manner. He then stabs her and immediately afterwards himself. Grisi and
Rubini were called out and were loudly applauded. We came in before the
overture was begun and came away directly after the opera was over. It
is a beautiful opera and I like it much better than _Anna Boulena_....

_Wednesday, 6th May._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. At a ¼ past 9 we
breakfasted. At 11 we set off with Lady Flora and Lehzen for Windsor
Castle, where we arrived at ½ past 1. At 2 we all lunched; that is
to say, besides the Queen, the Landgravine,[174] and us two,—the
Duchess of Northumberland, Lady Brownlow,[175] Lady Sophia Cust,
Lady De Lisle,[176] Lady Falkland,[177] Lady Flora, Lehzen, the
Baroness de Stein, Miss Mitchel, Miss Hudson, Lord Howe,[178] and Lord
Denbigh.[179] At ½ past 2 we went out walking with the Queen, the
Duchess of Northumberland, Lady Flora, Lady Sophia Cust, Lehzen, Miss
Mitchel and Miss Hudson, Lord Howe, Lord Denbigh, Lord Brownlow, and
Sir Andrew Bernard. We walked to Adelaide Cottage[180] and all got into
carriages except the gentlemen who rode. The Queen, Mamma, the Duchess
and I were in one carriage, and all the rest followed in others. We
came home at 6. At ½ past 7 we dined....

_Thursday, 7th May._— ... At 12 we went all over the Castle with the
King, the Queen, the Landgravine, the Duchess, Lady Brownlow, Lady
Flora, Lehzen, Miss Mitchel, Lord Howe, Lord Denbigh, Lord Brownlow,
and Sir Andrew Bernard....

_Friday, 8th May._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. At ½ past 8 we
breakfasted. The Queen came and sat with us at breakfast. At ½ past 9
we left Windsor with Lady Flora and Lehzen. I was very much pleased
there, as both my Uncle and Aunt are _so very kind_ to me....

_Monday, 18th May._— ... At 7 we 3 dined. ½ past 9 we went into the
first large room (as in the preceding parties) and received the company
(the list of which is adjoined). The singers which were Grisi, Rubini,
Ivanoff, Tamburini, Lablache,[181] and Costa[182] for the piano, had
just arrived. Our people were the same as the other day. When all the
company had arrived which was at ½ past 10, we all went into the other
room which was arranged with chairs all across the room for the people
to sit on. We were in the first row with Aunt Sophia and the Duchess
of Cambridge and quite close to the piano. Grisi is _quite beautiful_
off the stage. She is not tall, and rather pale; and she has such
a lovely mild expression in her face. Her face and neck has such a
beautiful soft shape. She has such beautiful dark eyes with fine long
eyelashes, a fine nose, and very sweet mouth. She was dressed in a
white flowered silk, with blonde trimmings about the body and sleeves
which reached to the elbows. Her beautiful dark hair was as usual quite
flat in front with an amethyst bandeau round it, and a fine plait at
the very back of her head. She is very quiet, ladylike and unaffected
in her manners. I spoke to her, and she answered in a very pleasing
manner. She has a very pretty expression when she speaks. Rubini is
short and not good-looking. Ivanoff is also very short and has a very
singular Calmuck face. Tamburini is short but very good-looking and
gentlemanlike. Lablache does not look so tall off the stage as he
does on it, and is likewise very gentlemanlike. The concert began
with a trio from _L’Assiedo di Corrinto_, “Destin terribile”; Grisi,
Rubini and Ivanoff sang beautifully. Then Tamburini sang “Sorgete”
from _L’Assiedo_ beautifully. After this Lablache sang “Dove vai?”
from _Guillaume Tell_ beautifully. Then Grisi sang “Tanti affetti,”
an aria from the _Donna del Lago_, most beautifully. Her _lovely_
voice sounds beautiful in a room. Lablache and Tamburini then sang “Il
rival salvar tu dei” most beautifully. It is from _I Puritani_. They
sing beautifully together. Their two fine voices go so well together.
Lablache’s voice is immensely powerful but not too much so (for my
taste), _even_ in a room. Tamburini’s too is most splendid. He is even
a more skilful and finished singer than Lablache. Then came a trio
“Allor che Scorre” from _Guillaume Tell_, between Rubini, Tamburini
and Lablache, which they sang likewise extremely well. This ended the
1st act. Near the end of the 1st act Mme. Malibran arrived. She was
dressed in white satin with a scarlet hat and feathers. She is shorter
than Grisi and _not near so pretty_. We went into the refreshment room
between the acts. We then sat down again and the 2nd act began with a
_most lovely_ polonaise, “Son Vergin vezzosa” from _I Puritani_, which
Grisi sang most exquisitely, accompanied by all the singers except
Malibran. Then Grisi and Tamburini sang “Che veggo oh Ciel,” from
_L’Assiedo_ most beautifully together. Malibran then sang a song by
Persiani very well. Her low notes are _beautiful_, but her high notes
are thick and not clear. _I_ like _Grisi by far better_ than her.
Then Grisi and Rubini sang a beautiful duet “Artuor dove sai” from _I
Puritani_ by Bellini, _beautifully_. His voice is delightful in a
room. It is so sweet and so full of expression. Malibran and Lablache
then sang a buffa duet “Con pazienza supportiamo,” by Fioravente,
beautifully. Lablache is _so_ funny and _so_ amusing. Lablache then
sang a Neapolitan air (a buffa song) of his own composition and
accompanying himself, _delightfully_. Then came a quartet “A te oh
caro!” from the _Puritani_, which Grisi, Rubini, Tamburini, and
Lablache sung beautifully. This ended the _most delightful concert I
ever heard_. Aunt Sophia, who had _never_ heard any of these singers
before, was delighted; but no one could be _more enchanted_ than _I_
was. I shall never forget it. It was Mamma’s birthday present for me!
Costa accompanied on the piano beautifully. I stayed up till 20 minutes
past 1. I was MOST EXCEEDINGLY delighted....

_Sunday, 24th May._—Today is my 16TH birthday! How very old that
sounds; but I feel that the two years to come till I attain my 18th are
the most important of any almost. I now only begin to appreciate my
lessons, and hope from this time on, to make great progress. I awoke
at ½ past 6. Mamma got up soon after and gave me a lovely brooch made
of her own hair, a letter from herself, one from dearest Feodore with
a nosegay, and a drawing and a pair of slippers done by her. I gave
her a drawing I had done. Dear Lehzen gave me a lovely little leather
box with knives, pencils &c. in it, two small dictionaries and a very
pretty print of Mdlle. Taglioni. Mamma gave her a pair of amethyst
earrings and I gave her a penholder and a drawing done by myself.
My maids Frances and Caroline gave me a pincushion done by Frances
and a portefolio done by Caroline. Anne Mason (Lehzen’s maid) gave
a small flower vase with flowers. _Dashy_ gave an ivory basket with
barley-sugar and chocolate. At 9 we breakfasted. I then received my
table. From my DEAR Mamma I received a lovely enamel bracelet with her
hair, a pair of fine china vases, a lovely shawl and some English and
Italian books. From dearest Feodore a lovely enamel bracelet with hers
and the children’s hair; from Charles some pretty prints; from Späth
a very pretty case for handkerchiefs embroidered in silver; from Sir
Robert and Lady Gardiner a very pretty sort of china vase; from Sir
J. Conroy a writing-case; from the whole Conroy family some prints;
and from Mr. George Hayter a beautiful drawing done by him. I quite
forgot to say that I received a beautiful pair of sapphire and diamond
earrings from the King and a beautiful prayer-book and very kind letter
from the Queen. I also received a prayer-book from a bookseller of
the name of Hatchard. At 10 we went down to prayers with Lehzen and
Charles. The service was performed by the Dean who gave us likewise
a _very_ good sermon. It was taken from the 24th chapter of Joshua,
15th verse: “And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose ye
this day whom ye will serve; but as for me and my house we will serve
the Lord.” After church, I received a Bible from Sir F. Trench[183]
with a picture of Norris Castle painted on the margin; and also two
small oil pictures from an old Mrs. Pakenham, done by a Mr. King. I
also saw Mrs. Brock, Sarah (my former maid), and Mrs. Fletcher (our
former housekeeper). At a ¼ to 1 came Aunt Sophia who gave me with Aunt
Gloucester a very pretty diamond brooch. At 1 we lunched. At ½ past 2
came the Duchess of Northumberland, who gave me a very fine fillagree
ornament in the shape of a flower, and another little fillagree
ornament from Miss Wynn. Lady Flora, who gave me a pretty paper-knife
and penholder of jasper from Arthur’s Seat, the rock which overhangs
Edinburgh. Lady Theresa, who gave me a small pocket-book of her own
work. Lady Catherine, who gave me a very fine velvet Music-book.
Lady Cust, who gave me a very fine japanned box. Sir G. Anson who
gave me a print; Sir Frederick Wetherall, who gave me a little china
scent-bottle. Lady Conroy, Jane, and Victoire. At 3 came the Duke of
Sussex, who gave me a gold bracelet with turquoises; and soon after
Lady Charlotte St. Maur who gave me a purse of her own work. At a ¼
past 3 came the Landgravine who gave me a head-ornament of emeralds,
and Aunt Augusta, who gave me a chrisoprase bracelet. At 4 came the
Duchess of Cambridge,[184] who brought me a lovely turquoise bracelet
from Uncle Cambridge, and gave me a box with sandal-wood instruments in
it; Augusta who gave me a small turquoise ring; and George who gave me
an album with a drawing of his in it. At 20 minutes to 5 we drove out
with Lehzen and Charles. At 7 we dined, Lady Flora, Lady Conroy, Jane,
Victoire, Messrs E. and H., and Sir J. Conroy dined here. After dinner
came Aunt Sophia. Mdlle. David (sister to Mme. Dulcken) played on the
piano. I stayed up till ½ past 9. My _dear_ Mamma’s great present was
that delicious concert which I shall _never forget_....

_Tuesday, 9th June._—I awoke at ½ past 8 and got up soon after. At ½
past 9 we breakfasted with the King, the Queen, Charles, the Duchess
of Northumberland, Lady Brownlow, Lady Catherine, and Lehzen. At ½
past 10 we went with the whole party to Eton College to see Eton
Montem. In the first carriage were the King, the Duke of Cumberland,
the Duke of Cambridge, and George, who had all 3 just arrived; in
the 2nd, the Queen, Mamma, I, and Charles; in the 3rd, the Duke and
Duchess of Northumberland and Lady Brownlow; in the 4th Lord and Lady
Denbigh; in the 5th Lady Sophia Cust, Lady De Lisle, Miss Eden, and
Mr. Schiffner; in the 6th Lord and Lady Frederick Fitzclarence and
their daughter; in the 7th Lehzen, Miss Hudson, and Miss Wilson. All
the other gentlemen rode. This is as near as I can remember. We were
received by the Provost[185] and Dr. Hawtrey.[186] We then went into
the yard under a sort of veranda and saw all the boys pass by which was
a very pretty sight. Some of the costumes were very pretty. Some were
dressed like Greeks, some like archers, others like Scotchmen, &c. We
then went into the Provost’s house, and from thence saw the boy wave
the standard. We also saw the Library which is very curious and old.
Eton College was founded by King Henry the Sixth. We then re-entered
our carriages and drove to Salt Hill where we again saw the standard
waved by the boy. We then drove home. The heat the whole time was
TREMENDOUS. We came home at ½ past 1. At 2 we lunched with the King,
the Queen, the Dukes of Cumberland and Cambridge, George, the Duke
and Duchess of Northumberland, Lord and Lady Brownlow, Lady Denbigh,
Lady De Lisle, Lady Sophia Cust, Lady Frederick Fitzclarence, Lord
Howe, Lady Catherine, and Lehzen. At 4 we went out driving. The Queen,
Mamma, I and Charles were in the first carriage; the Duke and Duchess
of Northumberland and Lord and Lady Brownlow in the 2nd; Lord Denbigh
and Miss Eden in the 3rd; and Lady Catherine and Lehzen in the 4th. We
drove to the Virginia Waters. We went on the water there, and at a ¼ to
6 re-entered the carriages and reached home at 7. We went on the steps
before the Castle and saw all the boys and many other people walking
on the terrace. They cheered the King and Queen _very loudly_, and me
also. At 8 we dined. We went in to dinner in the same way as yesterday
and the dinner-party was the same, only that Lord and Lady Frederick
were not there. The Dukes of Cumberland and Cambridge and George had
left the Castle after luncheon. I stayed up till a ¼ past 10....

_Tuesday, 14th July._—At 11 came the Dean till 12. At 12 came Mr.
Westall till 1. At 1 we lunched. The Duchess of Northumberland was
present at the first lesson. At ½ past 2 I sat to Mr. Collen till ½
past 3. At a ¼ to 4 came the Dean till a ¼ past 4. At 5 we went out
with Lehzen and came home at 6. At a ¼ to 7 we dined. Lady Theresa
dined here. At 8 we went to the opera with Lady Theresa and Lehzen. It
was the _dear Puritani_. Grisi was in perfect voice and sang and acted
beautifully; but I must say that she shows her many fatigues in her
face, and she is certainly much thinner than when she arrived. It is
a great pity too that she now wears her front hair so much lower than
she did. It is no improvement to her appearance, though (do what she
may) _spoil_ her face she _never_ can, it is too lovely for that. And
besides, she forgot to change her dress when she came on to sing the
Polacca. In general she comes on to sing that as a bride, attired in a
white satin dress with a wreath of white roses round her head; instead
of which she remained in her first dress (likewise very pretty) of
blue satin with a little sort of handkerchief at the back of her head.
Lablache, Tamburini and Rubini were also all 3 in high good voice. The
exquisite quartet “A te o cara” and the lovely Polacca “Son vergin
vezzosa” were both encored as was also the _splendid_ duet “Il rival.”
After the opera was over, Grisi, Rubini, Lablache, and Tamburini came
out and were loudly applauded. The two last always make a separate bow
to our box, which is very amusing to see. We came away immediately
after the opera was over, for the ballet is not worth seeing since La
Déesse de la Danse has flown back to Paris again. She appeared for the
last time on Saturday the 4th of this month. We came home at 10 minutes
to 12. I was _highly amused_ and _pleased_! We came in while Tamburini
was singing his song, which is just before the lovely duet between
Grisi and Lablache....

[Illustration: _H.S.H. Princess Sophia of Saxe-Coburg Countess
  Mensdorff Pouilly_

  _from a portrait by Dickinson_.]

_Monday, 20th July._—I awoke at 7. Mamma told me this morning that
she had received the melancholy news last night of the death of my
dear Aunt Sophie, Countess Mensdorff,[187] who was here now nearly
two years ago. It is so sudden and unexpected that we were _very much
shocked_, _surprised_ and _distressed_ at the _sad_ news. My poor
dear Aunt had been for many years in very bad health, and when she
visited us she was unable to walk alone almost; but as we had not heard
that she was unwell even, it startled and shocked us very much. She
went from Prague, already very unwell, in spite of Uncle Mensdorff’s
efforts to prevent her, to visit her youngest son Arthur who was in his
garrison in a wretched little village in Bohemia, and it was there,
far from her relations (except Uncle Mensdorff and Arthur), without
any of the comforts which she was accustomed to, in a poor sort of
cottage, that she breathed her last! My poor dear Aunt, I feel this
loss _very_ deeply. The more so for having seen her here! At ½ past
9 we breakfasted. At 10 we walked out with Lehzen till ½ past 10.
The melancholy event happened on the 8th of this month! I feel the
loss of my dear Aunt _very deeply_! Though I should be equally sad at
losing her, had I _not_ known her, because all Mamma’s relations are
_dear_ to me; but having seen her, having lived with her in the
same house for more than a week, having been in her room and seen her
at her occupations, and having experienced her great kindness to me
personally, makes it more striking still, and makes me feel the weight
of the loss we have experienced more. At 1 we lunched. At 5 we drove
out in the country with Lehzen till 7. At ½ past 7 we dined. I stayed
up till a ¼ past 9. We passed a very sad evening....

_Thursday, 23rd July._— ... Mamma received this afternoon a letter from
Uncle Ernest enclosing the copy of one written by dear Uncle Mensdorff,
giving all the sad details about my poor _dear_ Aunt. I fear her
sufferings must have been very severe at first and during her illness;
but at the last she seems to have had no suffering, no struggle. Her
last moment was so quiet that Uncle Mensdorff thought she slept, and
when he rose at 4 o’clock in the morning, he was pleased to see her
sleep so quietly and said to his servant that he hoped the danger was
over. Alas! how different was it really! My Aunt’s maid went into the
room and perceiving she did not breathe, called my Uncle in, who then
saw the dreadful truth! She slept truly, but she slept never more to
wake! What dear Uncle’s feelings were at that moment, and what they
still are, may be well imagined! She has been placed temporarily in the
vault of the convent of the Elisabetherin Nuns, at Kaden in Bohemia.
The funeral was splendid. Thousands came from far and near and all her
former friends followed her to her last abode, where she will suffer no
more grief or pain! Two regiments with their bands playing the funereal
music followed and all the Nuns with burning tapers. They strewed the
coffin with flowers when it entered the convent, and ornamented the
vault in the same manner. It is a happiness to know that she was so
much beloved. My poor dear Aunt, I loved her _dearly_ and feel the loss
deeply. Time may weaken, but it can never never efface the recollection
of this loss. I shall always try to do what I can to please, and to
contribute to the happiness of _dear_ Uncle Mensdorff and my four
cousins. They say that a smile was imprinted on her countenance when
she died, and that she looked more friendly after her death than she
had done some time previous to it....

_Thursday, 30th July._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. I gave Mamma a
little pin and drawing done by me in recollection of today. I gave
Lehzen a ring, also in recollection of today. I forgot to say that
Mamma gave me 3 little books yesterday, two of which I have quite read
through and the third in part. They are _A Method of Preparation for
Confirmation_, by William Hale Hale; _An Address to the Candidates for
Confirmation_, by Dr. John Kaye, Bishop of Lincoln; and _An Address to
the Students of Eton College who are about to present themselves for
Confirmation in 1833_. They are all 3 very nice books. At a ¼ past 9
we breakfasted. I forgot to say that dear Lehzen gave me 4 very pretty
prints of religious subjects. At ½ past 11 we went with Lady Flora,
Lehzen, the Dean &c. to St. James’s where I was to be confirmed. I
felt that my confirmation was one of the most solemn and important
events and acts in my life; and that I trusted that it might have a
salutary effect on my mind. I felt deeply repentant for all what I
had done which was wrong and trusted in God Almighty to strengthen my
heart and mind; and to forsake all that is bad and follow all that is
virtuous and right. I went with the firm determination to become a
true Christian, to try and comfort my dear Mamma in all her griefs,
trials and anxieties, and to become a dutiful and affectionate daughter
to her. Also to be obedient to _dear_ Lehzen who has done so much for
me. I was dressed in a white lace dress, with a white crape bonnet
with a wreath of white roses round it. I went in the chariot with my
dear Mamma and the others followed in another carriage. We went into
the King’s Closet with Lady Flora and Lehzen, where we were received
by the King and Queen. The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, Aunt Sophia,
the Duke of Cumberland, the Duchess of Weimar,[188] the Duchess of
Northumberland, the Marquis of Conyngham, Earl Denbigh, Mr. Ashley, the
Duke of Northumberland &c., were also there. We then went with all into
the Royal Pew in the Chapel. The usual morning service was performed;
after which we all went down into the lower part of the Chapel. The
King went first leading me, the Queen followed leading Mamma, and all
the others followed after. I stood without the rail before the Altar,
between the King and my dear Mamma. The Queen and all the rest went
into pews on each side of the Altar. The Archbishop of Canterbury and
Bishop of London[189] stood on either side of the Altar. I took off my
bonnet. When the usual address had been read, I (as is usual for all to
do) replied “I do,” and then knelt down and received the benediction
from the Archbishop. The whole was performed by the Archbishop who
read also a very fine address to me, composed by him expressly for
the occasion. He did the whole very well, and I felt the whole _very
deeply_. My dear Mamma was very much affected by the whole. We went
away from the Altar in the same way as we came and then went into the
Closet again; where the King gave me a very handsome set of emeralds,
and the Queen a head-piece of the same kind. We then drove home. We
came home at a ¼ to 2. I was very much affected indeed when we came
home. My dear Mamma gave me a very lovely bracelet with her hair in
it, and a very pretty set of turquoises. She gave dear Lehzen a very
pretty bracelet. We received the joyful news this afternoon that my
dearest sister Feodore had been safely confined on the 20th instant
with a daughter[190] which is to be called Adelaide, Victoria, Mary,
Louisa, Amelia, Constance. I hope to God that both Mother and Child
will continue as well as they have hitherto been. At 6 we dined. At 7
we drove out with Lehzen till ½ past 8. The heat continues intense! I
stayed up till ½ past 9....

_Sunday, 2nd August._—I awoke after 7 and got up at ½ past 8. At ½
past 9 Lehzen and I breakfasted. At 11 we went to the Chapel with Lady
Flora and Lehzen. The Dean performed the service; and the Archbishop of
Canterbury preached a very fine sermon. The text was taken from the 5th
chapter of the 2nd epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, 10th verse:
“For we must all appear before the judgement seat of Christ; that every
one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he hath
done, whether it be good or bad.” After the sermon was over we took
the holy sacrament with Lady Flora, dear Lehzen, and Sir J. C. The
Archbishop and the Dean administered it to us. It was the first time
of taking it. It is a very solemn and impressive ceremony and when one
recollects and thinks that we take it in remembrance of the death of
our blessed Saviour, one _ought_, nay _must_ feel deeply impressed with
holy and pious feelings!...

TUNBRIDGE WELLS, _Wednesday, 19th August_.—Today is my _poor dear_ Aunt
Sophie’s birthday.... I read to Lehzen out of Sully’s Memoirs. It is
wonderful when one considers how many years ago they have been written.
Upwards of 300 years, and how modern and pure the style is! His account
of the horrible massacre of St. Bartholomew is highly interesting as
coming from the pen of an eye-witness! I then played on the piano with
Mamma and by myself. At ½ past 12 we lunched. At 1 we went to the races
with Lady Flora, Lehzen, and Sir G. Anson. It was very amusing. The day
was beautiful and we sat under a sort of covering of cloth decorated
with flowers, in our carriage. The Manor Stakes were won by a chesnut
mare called Tirara belonging to a Mr. James Bacon. The Give-and-Take
plate as it was entitled, was won by Mr. John Bacon’s chesnut mare
Malibran, and the Kent and Sussex stakes was won by Mr. Pegg’s horse
Little-thought-of. Amongst the numbers of beggars, itinerary musicians,
actors etc. of all sorts and kinds, was a boy of 14 years old who
called himself the son of an actor Williamson, very poorly dressed, who
declaimed by heart a part of Marmion and of Campbell’s poems with great
feeling and talent. We came home at 5. At a ¼ past 7 we dined. When we
came home I played on the piano and wrote my journal. Lady, the Misses,
and M. S. Conroy, and Mr. Palmer dined here. After dinner came Mme.
Dulcken. I stayed up till a ¼ past 9....

_Sunday, 23rd August._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. At a ¼ past 9
we breakfasted. After breakfast I wrote my journal and some extracts
from the Peerage. At 11 we went with Lady Flora and Lehzen to church.
Mr. Pope officiated and preached a sermon. The text was from the 6th
chapter of St. Matthew, 10th verse: “Thy kingdom come.” It was not one
of his best sermons and it was not according to my liking. He can and
has preached some very fine sermons. At 1 we lunched. After luncheon
I wrote extracts again. Lehzen then read to me out of the Sketch-book
while I worked. At ½ past 4 we drove out with Lady Flora and Lehzen and
came home at 6. I then wrote my journal. At a ¼ past 7 we dined. Sir
George, Mr. and Miss Anson, Lady and the Misses and Mr. S. Conroy dined
here. After dinner I took up Mrs. Butler’s Journal[191] and read a
little in it. It certainly is very pertly and oddly written. One would
imagine by the style that the authoress must be very pert, and not well
bred; for there are so many vulgar expressions in it. It is a great
pity that a person endowed with so much talent as Mrs. Butler really
is, should turn it to so little account and publish a book which is so
full of trash and nonsense which can only do her harm. I stayed up
till 20 minutes past 9....

_Tuesday, 25th August._— ... At ½ past 2 sat to M. Collen for my
picture till ½ past 3, while Lehzen read to me in Mme. de Sévigné’s
Letters. How truly elegant and natural her style is! It is so full of
naïveté, cleverness and grace. Then I played on the piano. At 4 we
walked out with Lady Flora and Lehzen and came home at 5 minutes to 5.
In our walk we met a man with beautiful parrots. Amongst them was one
dear little paroquet of a green colour with a pale brown head and so
very tame that Mamma took it on her finger and it would hardly leave
her. It talks also, the man says. It is not so remarkable for its fine
plumage than for its great tameness. Mamma bought the dear little
thing. It is now in Mamma’s room....

_Friday, 28th August._—At ½ past 11 came the Dean till 1. I read
first in the Old Testament, then in Clarendon, and finished with the
_Spectator_. At 1 we lunched. I read after luncheon in the Bishop of
Chester’s _Exposition of the Gospel of St. Matthew._ It is a very
fine book indeed. Just the sort of one I like; which is just plain
and comprehensible and full of truth and good feeling. It is not one
of those learned books in which you have to cavil at almost every
paragraph. Lehzen gave it me on the Sunday that I took the Sacrament. I
have given up reading Smith’s _Theology_. It is more a book to refer to
than to read all through....

_Tuesday, 1st September._—I awoke at 7 and got up at ½ past 7. At ½
past 8 we breakfasted. At ½ past 9 we left _dear_ Tunbridge Wells with
Lady Flora and Lehzen. I am _very_ sorry to leave the dear place. I am
so very fond of it. I liked Boyne House better a good deal than old
Mount Pleasant.... We changed horses first at Tunbridge Town, then at
Sevenoaks, and lastly at Bromley. We reached Kensington Palace at 2. At
a ¼ past 2 we lunched. Lady Flora went home after luncheon to her own
family. At 3 we went over to Aunt Sophia’s (all our carpets being taken
up), to receive the Duc de Nemours. Aunt Sophia of course was _not_
present. The Duc de Nemours is nearly 21. That is to say His Royal
Highness will complete his 21st year on the 25th of October. He is Aunt
Louisa’s 2nd brother. He is tall, has a very fine slender figure, and
is extremely fair. He is good-looking but not so much so as his brother
the Duke of Orleans. The Duc de Nemours is extremely pleasing but
rather timid. He brought Mamma a letter from his Mother, the Queen of
the French, and a beautiful set of instruments made of French pebbles
for me, from her. I wrote my journal then. We then saw Lady Catherine
Jenkinson, and afterwards my Uncle Sussex. I then wrote my journal and
did various other things. At a ¼ past 7 we dined. Lord Liverpool and
Lady Catherine dined here. After dinner came Princess Sophia. I stayed
up till ½ past 9....

_Friday, 4th September._—I awoke at 7 and got up at ½ past 7. At ½
past 8 we all breakfasted. At ½ past 9 we left Wansford. It is a very
nice clean Inn. We passed through Stamford, a large and populous town,
after having changed horses at Witham Common. We changed horses 2ndly
at Grantham, also a large town. These 3 are in Lincolnshire. 3rdly at
Newark, also a large town, and lastly at Scarthing Moor. The country
from Wansford to Scarthing Moor was like yesterday, extremely flat
and ugly. From Scarthing Moor to Barnby Moor, where we arrived at
5 o’clock, the country is rich and wooded, but very flat. This Inn
(Barnby Moor) is extremely clean and pretty. Newark, Scarthing Moor
and Barnby Moor are all in Nottinghamshire. I am struck by the number
of small villages in the counties which we passed through today, each
with their church. And what is likewise peculiar is, that the churches
have all steeples of a spiral shape. I read in the _Alhambra_ again
in the carriage. Finished the 1st vol. and began the 2nd. We all
walked in the little garden behind the house for a short time. When
we came in I wrote my journal. At a ¼ to 7 we all dined. After dinner
Lady Catherine played on the piano, for there was one in the Inn. She
played a variation of Herz’s, one of Hünten’s, and the Polacca; and she
accompanied us while we sang “Il rival.” I stayed up till 9.

_Saturday, 5th September._—I awoke at ½ past 6 and got up at 7. Read
in the _Exposition of St. Matt.’s Gospel_ while my hair was doing, and
also in the Venetian History. Last night I also read in the Gospel and
in Mme. de Sévigné. At a ¼ to 8 we all breakfasted. At a ¼ to 9 we
left Barnby Moor. It is a remarkably nice and clean Inn. We changed
horses 1st at Doncaster, a very pretty town, 2ndly at Ferry bridge
where there is a fine bridge, and lastly at Tadcaster. All these towns
are in Yorkshire. We reached Bishopthorpe (the Archbishop of York’s
Palace) at 2. It is 2 miles and a half from York. It is a very large
house and part of it is very old. Besides the Archbishop[192] and
Miss Harcourt (his daughter), the Duchess of Northumberland, Lady
Norreys,[193] Sir John and Lady Johnstone[194] (Lady Johnstone is the
Archbishop’s daughter), Mr. and Mrs. and Miss Granville Harcourt,[195]
Colonel Francis Harcourt,[5] Mr. Vernon, are staying in the house.
After half an hour we lunched in a large dining-room. We then went to
our rooms which are very nice. I finished the _Alhambra_. It is a most
entertaining book and has amused me very much. I wrote my journal when
I came into my room. Wrote a letter to Feodore and read in the Venetian
History. The country through which we travelled today is very flat and
ugly, but extremely rich. I find the air in Yorkshire cooler than in
Kent and the South of England. I read in Mrs. Butler’s journal which
amuses me. There are some very fine feelings in it. At a ¼ to 7 we
dined. Besides the people whom I mentioned, Mr. Charles Harcourt,[196]
Mr. William Harcourt, the Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress, Colonel York,
Colonel[197] and Mrs. Wildman, &c. After dinner Lady Norreys and her
cousin Miss Vernon sang a duet from _La Gazza Ladra_ beautifully, and
also “Suoni la tromba.” They are both extremely pretty. They are
pupils of Tamburini. We sang something then. I like Miss Vernon’s voice
the best of the two. We then went to prayers. After that, I sang the
Barcarola from _Faliero_, frightened to death. I stayed up till a ¼ to
11....

BISHOPTHORPE, _Wednesday, 9th September_.—... At a ¼ past 11 we went to
the York Minster with the same party as yesterday with the exception
of Lord and Lady Norreys and Mrs. Vernon, who remained at home. The
Minster was fuller than on the preceding day. It was Handel’s Oratorio
of _The Messiah_. It is considered very fine, but I must say that, with
the exception of a few Choruses and one or two songs, it is very heavy
and tiresome. It is in 3 parts. In the 1st part Grisi sang “Rejoice
greatly” _most beautifully_. She pronounces the English so _very well_,
and sang the whole in such excellent style.... The Hallelujah Chorus
at the end of the 2nd part and another at the end of the 3rd act are
the finest things besides “Rejoice greatly.” But I am not at all fond
of Handel’s music, I like the present Italian school such as Rossini,
Bellini, Donizetti &c., _much better_....

_Friday, 11th September._— ... Lablache and Rubini sang only once each.
Alas! it will be a long time before I shall hear their two fine voices
again. But time passes away quickly and April and the dear Opera will
soon return. I am to learn to sing next year. Mamma promised I should;
and I hope to learn of Lablache. What a delightful master he would be
to learn of! Grisi sang “Laudate Dominum,” by Mozart, accompanied by
Dr. Camidge[198] on the organ. She executed the delicate passages in
it _beautifully_. Between the two parts we lunched at the Deanery with
our party and many others. Grisi came in with her uncle while we were
at luncheon. She is extremely handsome, near-by, by day-light. Her
features are not small, but extremely fine, and her eyes are beautiful
as are also her teeth. She has such a sweet amiable expression when she
smiles, and has pleasing quiet manners. She had an ugly dingy foulard
dress on, with a large coloured handkerchief under a large muslin
collar. And she had a frightful little pink bonnet on, but in spite of
all her ugly attire she looked very handsome. She is a most fascinating
little creature.... Grisi sang the last air “Sing ye to the Lord.”
Never did I hear anything so beautiful. It was a complete triumph! and
was quite electrifying! Though a very little bit and with very little
accompaniment, the manner, the power with which she sang it, and the
emphasis which she put into it, was truly splendid. I shall just write
down the lines:

    Sing ye to the Lord, for He hath triumphed gloriously:
    The horse and his rider hath He thrown into the sea.

She pronounced it beautifully. When she had sung “The horse and his
rider hath He thrown” she paused a moment, and then came out most
emphatically with “_into the sea_!”...

_Saturday, 12th September._— ... At 11 we left Bishopthorpe, but not
without regret. They are a very amiable family. Miss Harcourt is a very
nice person. She ought by rights to be called Miss Georgiana Harcourt,
the Archbishop’s eldest daughter being unmarried, but as she never
goes out and does not make the _honneurs_ in the house, Miss Georgiana
is always called Miss Harcourt.[199] The Archbishop has _10_ sons, 5
of whom were at Bishopthorpe; 3 staying in the house, Mr. Granville
Harcourt, Colonel Harcourt,[200] and Mr. Egerton Harcourt, and two out
of the house, Mr. William Harcourt[201] and Mr. Charles Harcourt,[202]
staying at the residence. Mrs. William Harcourt is a very nice person.
We passed a pleasant time at Bishopthorpe in spite of fatigues which
were _not slight_ and which I begin to _feel_....

CANTERBURY, _Thursday, 29th September_.—I awoke at 6 and got up at ½
past 7. At ½ past 8 we all breakfasted. At ½ past 9 Mamma received an
address from the Mayor and Corporation here. We then saw some officers.
After this we left Canterbury. It is a very clean nice Inn. It was a
fine day. We reached Ramsgate at ½ past 12. The people received us in a
most friendly and kind way. The whole was very well conducted, and the
people were very orderly. The streets were ornamented with arches of
flowers and flags. The open, free, boundless (to the eye) ocean looked
very refreshing. There is nothing between us and France but the sea,
here. We have got a small but very nice house, overlooking the sea. At
a ¼ past 2 we walked down to the Albion Hotel to see the preparations
made for dear Uncle Leopold and dear Aunt Louisa. At a little past 4
we went down to the Hotel with Lady Flora, Lehzen and Lady Conroy, as
the steamer was in sight. With beating hearts and longing eyes we
sat at the window, anxiously watching the steamer’s progress. There
was an immense concourse of people on the pier to see them arrive.
After about half an hour’s time, the steamer entered the Harbour,
amidst loud cheering and the salute of guns from the pier, with the
Belgian flag on its mast. My _dearest_ Uncle Leopold, King of the
Belgians, and _dearest_ Aunt Louisa were very warmly received. It was
but the people’s duty to do so, as dear Uncle has lived for so long in
England and was so much beloved. After another ¼ of an hour of anxious
suspense, the waiter told us that “Their Majesties were coming.” We
hastened downstairs to receive them. There was an immense crowd before
the door. At length Uncle appeared, having Aunt Louisa at his arm. What
a happiness was it for me to throw myself in the arms of that _dearest_
of Uncles, who has always been to me like a father, and whom I love
so _very dearly_! I had not seen him for 4 years and 2 months. I was
also delighted to make the acquaintance of that dear Aunt who is such
a perfection and who has been always so kind to me, without knowing
me. We hastened upstairs, where Uncle Leopold and Aunt Louisa showed
themselves at the window and were loudly cheered; as they ought to be.
I do not find dear Uncle at all changed. On the contrary I think he
looks better than he did when I last saw him. Aunt Louisa is not quite
so tall as Mamma, and has a very pretty slight figure. Her hair is of
a lovely fair colour; her nose is aquiline, her eyes are quite lovely;
they are light blue and have such a charming expression. She has such a
sweet mouth and smile too. She is delightful, and was so affectionate
to me directly. She pronounces English extremely well and speaks it
very fluently. She almost always speaks it with Uncle. She was very
simply dressed in a light brown silk dress, with a sky-blue silk bonnet
and white veil. Uncle and Aunt are accompanied by Comtesse Henri de
Mérode (Dame d’Honneur to Aunt Louisa), and General Goblet.[203] M.
Van de Weyer is also here. We then left them and Lehzen and I drove
home and Mamma and the rest walked home. At a little after 7 we dined.
Dear Uncle Leopold, dear Aunt Louisa, the Duc de Nemours (who had only
arrived half an hour ago), Comtesse H. de Mérode, General Goblet,
General Baudrand,[204] M. Van de Weyer, Dr. Clark,[205] Mr. and Miss V.
Conroy, dined here. I sat between Uncle Leopold and the Duc de Nemours;
two _delightful_ neighbours. When I say _next_ to a person, as for
instance I said the other day, and many days, “I sat next to the Duc de
Nemours,” “I sat next to the Duke of Norfolk,” &c., &c., I mean, as I
did today, that I sat _between_ or _next_ to them at _dinner_. The Duc
de Nemours, now that I see him and Aunt Louisa together, is not like
her. He has such a _good_ kind expression in his face; and Aunt Louisa
has the most _delightful sweet_ expression I ever saw. She is quite
delightful and charming. She is so gay and merry too. She had a white
moiré dress on, and her fine hair was so well done, in a plait behind
and curls in front with a row of pearls and three black velvet bows
in it. After dinner came two other gentlemen of the Duc de Nemours,
Colonel Boyer and Monsieur Larnac. We passed a _most delightful_
evening....

_Thursday, 5th November._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. Dressed, walked
over to my room and breakfasted at 9. Read in the Exposition of St.
Matt.’s Gospel, and in the Venetian History while my hair was doing.
_Dear good_ Lehzen takes such care of me, and is so unceasing in her
attentions to me, that I shall never be able to repay her sufficiently
for it but by my love and gratitude. I never can sufficiently repay her
for all she has _borne_ and done for me. She is the _most affectionate,
devoted, attached_, and _disinterested_ friend I have, and I love her
most _dearly_....

_Wednesday, 2nd December._— ... We walked on the Pier which was
very amusing. There are a number of foreign ships in the harbour;
Portuguese, Finland, and a number of French fishing-boats. The dress
of the French fishermen is very picturesque. There were some Spanish
sailors playing on the pier, who looked very singular. Amongst others
there was a little French fisher-boy playing with another boy with a
pulley. He had a funny round rosy face, and was dressed in a loose blue
woven woolen jacket, with huge boots which reached to his knees, and
a red cap. Mamma asked him what he was doing, upon which he answered
with naïveté, “Nous sommes à jouer un peu.” She asked him where he came
from; “De Dunkirk,” was his reply. He said this all, and some other
things, in such a funny naif way, and with such a sly arch smile, that
it was quite amusing. He asked for a “sou,” and we gave him 6 pence,
which pleased him very much....




                    INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO CHAPTER V

  When the Princess was seventeen the shadow of coming events was
  cast over her placid life. Her Journals contain evidence of
  this. She became aware that her Uncle, King Leopold, had begun
  to think with grave anticipation of the high position she might
  before long have to occupy, and of the project of uniting her in
  marriage to some Prince worthy to share with her the anxieties and
  responsibilities of a Throne. She knew that he had fixed upon her
  cousin, Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg.

  In May of this year she saw the Prince for the first time. William
  IV. did not favour the views of King Leopold. His candidate was a
  younger son of the Prince of Orange. Both Princes were invited to
  London, and both were present at a ball given by the Duchess of
  Kent in honour of her daughter attaining the age of seventeen.

  The young Princess was not attracted by the Prince of Orange. It
  would be an exaggeration to say that she felt more than a sisterly
  affection for Prince Albert. She thought him good-looking and
  charming, and they sketched and sang together. He found her very
  amiable and astonishingly self-possessed. There is not a trace on
  either side of deeper sentiment. When the Prince left England, she
  wrote to her Uncle Leopold expressing anxiety to fall in with his
  wishes in respect of her future marriage as in everything else,
  but there is no indication that her heart was touched. The seed,
  however, was sown which was to ripen later, and ultimately to bear
  fruit, the sweetest she was destined to taste in her long life.

  The plans of King Leopold were an open secret, and roused
  considerable interest in all classes. On his return home Prince
  Albert was entertained in Paris at an official dinner given by Lord
  Granville, which was taken to mean that good progress had been made
  with the scheme of the projected marriage.

  In the course of this year the Princess resided at Claremont, then
  the property of King Leopold. Her life there was one of great
  simplicity. There were lately living a few old people in the
  village of Esher who remembered the little Princess attending the
  ancient church, now disused, dressed in spotted muslin with a large
  poke bonnet.

  Perhaps owing to the consciousness that his candidate had failed
  to create a favourable impression, King William during this year
  displayed more than usual hostility to his sister-in-law, the
  Duchess of Kent. The King’s behaviour to her mother undoubtedly
  saddened the life of the little Princess, more especially as it was
  in somewhat strong contrast to the kindness with which she herself
  was treated by King William and Queen Adelaide.

  Meanwhile, the stream of public events rolled smoothly along.


                               CHAPTER V

                                 1836

_Monday, 11th January._— ... We went out walking at a ¼ to 2 with
Lady Flora and Lehzen; it had cleared up and was quite mild and
bright. We walked on the pier and got into a boat. There was a good
deal of swell in the Harbour, and at the mouth of it our boat pitched
and rolled a good deal; Mamma began to look queerish, but I thought
it very pleasant. There were numbers of people on the pier. The 3
Portuguese vessels hoisted their Portuguese standards, as did also the
two Spaniards. We landed at the same stairs where we embarked. The
whole of Ramsgate seemed to be out on the pier. We walked to the head
of the pier and back again and got into the carriage. We drove to the
cliff where the stairs called “Jacob’s ladder” are. We got out there
and went down the stairs, and walked on the other side of the pier. We
took a parting look at the end of the pier, of all the ships, the pier
&c., for we go tomorrow. There were, I think, 7 French boats in the
Harbour; and there were numbers of little French boys on the pier; we
gave them something, but they (for the first time) proved dissatisfied
and rebellious. They quite attacked Lehzen, who always gives the money,
coming round her on all sides, stretching out their hands, saying
“Donnez-moi un sou,” “Je n’ai pas un,” “Madame, Madame, donnez-moi
un sou,” &c. Some little urchins were _rusés_ enough to say “C’est
pour nos matelots, nous allons à bord dans l’instant.” Lehzen threw
them a shilling, whereupon they all fell on the ground in one heap,
scrambling after it. They were quiet for a little while, but a few
little determined fellows came again and followed us for sometime. They
at length got something, and went away. Cela était fort amusant et très
ridicule à voir....

_Wednesday, 13th January._—I awoke at a little past 6 and got up
at 7. Dressed and had my hair done. We breakfasted at 8. We left
Sittingbourne at 9. It was a bitterly cold day, though bright and
clear. We changed horses at Rochester, 2ndly at Gravesend, and 3rdly
at Blackheath. We reached Kensington Palace at a little before 2. We
instantly went upstairs, that is to say, up _two_ staircases, to our
new sleeping and sitting apartments which are very lofty and handsome.
To describe them minutely and accurately would be impossible. Our
bedroom[206] is very large and lofty, and is very nicely furnished,
then comes a little room for the maid, and a dressing-room for Mamma;
then comes the old gallery which is partitioned into 3 large, lofty,
fine and cheerful rooms.[207] One only of these (the one near Mamma’s
dressing-room) is ready furnished; it is my sitting-room and is _very_
prettily furnished indeed. My pictures are not yet in it. The next is
my study, and the last is an anteroom; this last has no fireplace, but
the two others have, and my sitting-room is very warm and comfortable.
There is another room, belonging to me, on another side of the bed-room
(Lehzen’s former bed-room) which is not freshly furnished, but is a
passage &c. Lehzen is now in our former bed-room. When I went down into
my poor former sitting-room,[208] I could not help looking at it with
affection, and pleasant recollections, having passed so many days of my
life and many very pleasant ones there; but our new rooms are much more
airy and roomy....

_Thursday, 14th January._— ... Read out of Mme. de Sévigné while my
hair was doing to Lehzen. We all breakfasted at a ¼ past 9. Carried
things from my old room, upstairs to my new room, and put them into
the new presses. Wrote my journal. My pictures are being hung up and
my room is in a great confusion; the workmen in my study are making a
great noise, so that I am _un peu confuse_. Walked about. We lunched
at 1. Arranged things. Saw Dr. Clark at 2. Received a most kind and
long letter from dearest Aunt Louise in which she tells me that Uncle
Leopold and my little cousin are well, as also Uncle Ferdinand, who
is with them; and that the Duke of Orleans[209] (whom she calls
_Chartres_, as the whole family generally do) is better but not quite
well yet. She further adds, that the dear Queen of the French who had a
very bad cold, is better....

_Wednesday, 3rd February._—I awoke at 7 and got up at a ¼ to 8. Read
in the Irish History while my hair was doing. At 9 we breakfasted.
Pasted my name in some of my books. At 10 came the Dean till 11. Read
with him first in the Old Testament and then in Hume. Pasted my name in
some of my books. I have got all the same pictures I had in my former
room, hung up in my present room, with the exception of some old prints
and of the two ugly oil pictures of my Father and Mother, and with
the addition of Hayter’s drawing of Mamma and I. My fine casts of the
_dear_ French family are also hung up in my sitting-room; they only
came home today as the frame had to be mended. I am so fond of them.
Various prints are also being hung up in my study. Wrote my journal.
Drew....

_Saturday, 6th February._— ... I have quite forgotten to mention
that the young Queen of Portugal was married by proxy on the 1st of
January to—_my Cousin Ferdinand_, Uncle Ferdinand’s eldest son, and
who completed his 19th year on the 29th of last October.[210] The
negotiations to this purpose have been going on since last September,
and have only just now come to an end. Count Lavradio, whom we saw just
before we went to Ramsgate, went to Cobourg to meet Uncle Ferdinand and
my dear Cousins Ferdinand and Augustus, there. Dear Uncle Leopold has
managed a _great_ deal of the business; he is ever ready and ever _most
able_ to assist his family. Uncle Ferdinand has not long left Brussels,
where he came to settle and arrange about the marriage. Dear Uncle
Ferdinand is, of course, full of anxiety for the welfare and happiness
of his son. Ferdinand will soon come to Brussels with Augustus on his
way to Lisbon and they will also come here. I cannot say how happy I
am to become thus related to the Queen of Portugal, who has always
been so kind to me and for whom I have always had a great affection.
She is warm-hearted, honest and affectionate, and when she talks, is
very pleasing. We have known each other since our 8th year (for there
is only a month’s difference of age between us). She is far from plain
too; she has an exquisite complexion, a good nose and fine hair. I hear
that Ferdinand is full of good and excellent qualities, has a pure and
unsophisticated mind, and is very good-looking....

_Saturday, 20th February._— ... At ½ past 3 came the Dean till 4. Read
with him in Milton’s _Paradise Lost_. Practised on the piano for Mrs.
Anderson.[211] Drew while Lehzen read to me out of that Rapport about
Fieschi.[212] Practised again on the piano. At ½ past 7 we dined.
Aunt Gloucester, the Prince of Hesse-Philippsthal-Barchfeldt,[213]
the Archbishop of York and Miss Harcourt, the Duke of Wellington,
Count[214] and Countess Charles Pozzo di Borgo, the Earl and Countess
of Lincoln,[215] Viscount and Viscountess Beresford,[216] Lord Hill,
Lady Caroline Legge,[217] Lady Theresa Strangways, Sir Robert and Lady
Peel, General Upton and Sir Samuel Higgins dined here. I sat between
the Duke of Wellington and Count C. Pozzo di Borgo. The Count is a
very agreeable man. His wife, the dear little Countess, looked lovely;
she is such a charming person; she is the 3rd daughter of the Duc de
Crillon and is called Valentina. Lady Lincoln is also a very charming
young person; she was so pretty but she is very much changed as she
was very ill all last summer and is still very far from well. I sat a
good deal with her and the little Countess Pozzo, and found them very
amiable and cheerful....

_Saturday, 27th February._— ... It was Miss Joanna Baillie’s[218]
Tragedy of _The Separation_ in 5 acts, performed for the 2nd time.
The principal characters are: Garcio (an Italian Count), Mr. Charles
Kemble,[219] who acted finely in parts but is dreadfully changed;
Rovani (his friend), G. Bennett who acted disagreeably and affectedly;
the Marquis of Tortona, Mr. Pritchard, a poor odd-looking creature;
Margaret (wife to Garcio), Miss Helen Faucit,[220] who acted well in
the pathetic quiet parts. I had not seen Charles Kemble since 5 years,
and I did not quite recollect his countenance; those however who had
seen him in his good days, when he was an excellent actor and a very
handsome man, found the change _very great_. _I_, for _my_ part, like
Macready by far better. Kemble whines so much and drawls the words in
such a slow peculiar manner; his actions too (to me) are overdone and
affected, and his voice is not pleasant to me; he makes terrible faces
also which spoils his countenance and he looks old and does not carry
himself well. He was very fine, however, at the end of the 3rd act when
he snatches the picture out of his wife’s hand, and when he discovers
it to be that of her brother Ulrico whom he murdered,—the way in which
he throws the picture on the ground and sinks trembling and gasping
against the bed, while his countenance pourtrays the violent feelings
of remorse, horror and conscience this Kemble did _very finely_, and
also when he takes leave of Margaret. He _was_ undoubtedly a very fine
actor, nay, still _is_, but he is not natural enough for my taste. I
_do_ think Macready is so feeling and natural, particularly now; he
was perhaps formerly rather affected and violent at times. His voice
too I like so much and he does not drawl the words; I like him best
after Young, who was the _most beautiful_ actor I ever saw, or who
perhaps ever existed in this country, except Garrick and John Kemble
(Charles K.’s elder brother). I only saw Young twice but I shall never
forget it. I saw him 1st in _Macbeth_ and then I saw him take his
final leave of the stage in _Hamlet_. I must say a few words about
G. Bennett[221] and Miss Helen Faucit. Bennett, whom I have seen act
really extremely well in _The Miller and His Men_, in _Pizarro_, in
_King John_ as Hubert, &c., &c., was extremely disagreeable yesterday
as Rovani; he twisted his arms, hands, legs, back and even eyes in all
directions, and drawled his words in speaking most disagreeably. Miss
Faucit is plain and thin, and her voice is much against her, but when
she is gentle and pathetic she is far from disagreeable; she rants and
screams[222] too much also, but as she is very young, they say she may
_become_ a good actress. The Tragedy though well written is rather
unnatural and very heavy in parts; I must say _I_ greatly prefer _The
Provost of Bruges_ and think it by far more natural. Kemble and Miss
Faucit were called out and were much applauded....

[Illustration: _P.V. del. R.P. April 1837._

  _M^r. Charles Mathews as Dapperwit in The Rape of the Lock_

  CHARLES MATHEWS.

  From a sketch by Princess Victoria.]

_Monday, 29th February._— ... At ½ past 7 we went to the play to Mme.
Vestris’s[223] Olympic, with Lehzen and Sir J. C. I had never been
there before; it is a very small but pretty, clean little theatre.
It was the burletta of _One Hour_ or _The Carnival Ball_ in one
act. The principal characters are: Mr. Charles Swiftly, Mr. Charles
Mathews,[224] a most _delightful_ and _charming_ actor; he is son to
the celebrated old Mathews who died last year. He is quite a young man,
I should say not more than five or six and twenty.[225] His face is
not good-looking, but very clever and pleasing; he has a very slight,
pretty figure, with very small feet and is very graceful and immensely
active; he skips and runs about the stage in a most agile manner.
He is _so_ natural and amusing, and never vulgar but always very
gentlemanlike. He is a most charming actor....

Charles Mathews is the most delightful and amusing actor possible. He
is the only child of his parents and was intended for an architect and
studied in Greece and Italy for that purpose; but having a penchant for
the stage, he abandoned his profession and had become an actor; we see
how it has succeeded—_most perfectly_!...

_Wednesday, 2nd March._— ... Lady Burghersh[226] told me that she knew
Charles Mathews very well when she was in Florence, where he was come
for the purpose of studying architecture; she said she had often acted
with him in their private theatricals and that he always showed a
great talent for acting, and that he then performed as a gentleman; he
_now_ acts quite like a gentleman, and looks so too; he is a charming
performer I think. Lady Burghersh also said that he looks younger than
he is, for that he must be 3 or 4 and thirty. He told her when at
Florence that he had a great passion for the stage, but, as his father
was greatly averse to his son becoming an actor, he refrained from
doing it during his father’s lifetime....

_Thursday, 17th March._— ... We reached Windsor Castle at 6. We went
to the Queen’s room where Ferdinand and Augustus were presented to the
King. We then went to our rooms. At ½ past 7 we dined in St. George’s
Hall with an immense number of people. Ferdinand looked very well. He
wore the 3 Portuguese Orders in one ribbon, which he has the right of
doing as husband to the Queen of Portugal. Ferdinand led the Queen in
to dinner and the King led Mamma and I. I sat between the King and
George Cambridge and opposite dear Ferdinand. After dinner we went into
a beautiful new drawing-room[227] where we remained till the gentlemen
came from dinner. We then all went into the Waterloo Gallery where the
ball was. The King went in first, then the Queen and Mamma, and then
dear Ferdinand with me at his arm. I danced 3 quadrilles; 1st with dear
Ferdinand, then with George Cambridge, and lastly with dear Augustus.
During the evening dear Ferdinand came and sat near me and talked so
dearly and so sensibly. I do _so_ love him. Dear Augustus also sat near
me and talked with me and he is also a dear good young man, and is
very handsome. He is extremely quiet and silent, but there is a great
deal in him. I am so fond too of my Uncle Ferdinand. I stayed up till
1. I was much amused and pleased. Uncle Ferdinand brought me two kind
notes from Uncle Leopold and Aunt Louise. Ferdinand is so fond of Aunt
Louise. He told me: “Oh, je l’aime tant!” Both he and Augustus speak
French extremely well. This dinner and ball were in honour of dear
Ferdinand.

_Friday, 18th March._— ... At ½ past 9 we breakfasted with the King,
the Queen, dear Ferdinand (who came nearly at the end of the breakfast,
having slept a long while), dear Uncle Ferdinand, Augustus, Charles,
Prince Ernst of Hesse P.B.,[228] the Duchess of Northumberland, George
Cambridge, Lady Ely,[229] Lady Flora, and Lehzen. After breakfast Mamma
and I went into the Queen’s room and looked at some of her many pretty
things. Wrote my journal. At ½ past 11 we drove out with the Queen
and dear Ferdinand in our carriage, Ferdinand and I sitting on the
back seat and the Queen and Mamma on the front seat. Uncle Ferdinand,
Augustus, Charles and Prince Ernest of Hesse P.B. followed in another,
and all the rest in other carriages. We went to see a hunt and saw a
stag let out of a cart and all the horsemen followed in great numbers.
It was a very pretty sight, and a beautiful warm day. We were all in
open carriages. I talked a good deal with Ferdinand, and like him
_more_ and _more_; he is so sensible, so natural, so unaffected, and
unsophisticated and so _truly_ good. His tutor, who has been with
him 13 years, M. Dietz, and whom he told me he is very fond of, will
go with him to Lisbon as his “secrétaire intime,” he told me. He (M.
Dietz)[230] came with several other gentlemen to Kensington yesterday.
Ferdinand is so fond of Augustus; the separation will be dreadful for
the two brothers; and he is very fond of his sister Victoire. We came
home at ½ past 1. Wrote the _brouillon_ of a French letter to Aunt
Louise. At 2 we lunched with the whole party. I sat between the King
and Uncle Ferdinand. Wrote my letter to Aunt Louise. Wrote my journal.
Walked about. At about ½ past 5 dear Ferdinand, Uncle Ferdinand, and
dear Augustus came into our room for a little while. At ½ past 7 we
dined; again in St. George’s Hall and with the same large company as
the day before. Ferdinand went first (as he did also yesterday) with
the Queen; then came the King with us two. I sat between the King
and George Cambridge, and opposite dear Fernando. After dinner Uncle
Ferdinand and my Cousins came and sat near us every now and then. Dear
Ferdinand has elicited universal admiration from all parties; the King
is very much pleased with him, and the Queen is quite taken with him.
He is so very unaffected, and has such a distinguished appearance and
carriage. They are both very dear and charming young men; Augustus is
very amiable too, and when known, shows much good sense; he is very
quiet and gentle. There is such an innocence and simplicity in them,
and such a childish gaiety, and again they are very grown-up and nice
in their manners, which are very unaffected and pleasing. Stayed up
till ½ past 11....

_Friday, 1st April._—Today is Good Friday. At ½ past 9 we breakfasted
with dear Uncle Ferdinand, dear Augustus, Charles, Lady Flora and
Lehzen. I sat between dear Augustus and Charles. I stayed downstairs
till a ¼ past 10. Received the Order of Ste. Isabelle from my Cousin
Donna Maria. The ribbon is very pale pink and white. Went up stairs,
and wrote part of the _brouillon_ of a French letter to Aunt Louise.
Dear good Augustus came up at ½ past 10 and stayed till 11. These
visits please me very much; he is _so_ quiet, and goes about looking
at the things in the room, sits down and reads the newspapers, and
never is in the way. He is a dear boy, and is so extremely good, kind
and gentle; he has such a sweet expression and kind smile. I think
Ferdinand handsomer than Augustus, his eyes are so beautiful, and
he has such a lively, clever expression; _both_ have such a sweet
expression; Ferdinand has something _quite beautiful_ in his expression
when he speaks and smiles and he is _so_ good. They are both very
handsome and _very dear_! Ferdinand is superior to Augustus in various
ways, and is by far more forward for his age in his mind than the
latter. They have both learnt, and know, a great deal, and are both
very orderly and tidy. At 11 we went down to prayers with Charles,
Lehzen, Lady Flora &c. &c. The service was performed by the poor Dean
who gave us likewise a sermon. We saw him for an instant after the
service was over. He is very calm and resigned. We remained with Uncle
a little while downstairs. Finished my _brouillon_ of my French letter.
Began to copy it. Went downstairs to see some paintings done by a Mr.
Cowen.[231] They are very well done indeed. Augustus came in also and
looked at them for a moment. Came up to my room and went on writing my
letter to dear Aunt Louise. Dearest Uncle Ferdinand came up to me for
a few minutes and then went down again. Augustus came up and stayed a
little while, while I was writing my letter and then went down. I gave
him this morning a seal and some prints which pleased him very much.
Finished my letter to Aunt Louise and wrote my journal. At 25 minutes
to 4 _dear_ good Augustus came up and sat in my room looking at annuals
till 4. He assisted me in sealing my letters, and we both made a mess,
and he burnt a cover in sealing it, dear boy, for me, which made us
both laugh. He went down for 5 minutes, came up again, and Uncle, after
staying a few minutes, fetched him away to pay visits to the Duke of
Sussex and Princess Sophia. Played and sung. At 10 minutes to 6 came
Mrs. Wellesley[232] who is going tomorrow and will reach Stuttgardt on
Friday. Augustus came in and we stayed with Uncle and him a few minutes
downstairs. Oh! could I but have some more such days, with that dear
Uncle and dear Augustus, whom I love so much! I shall feel very lonely
and unhappy when they leave us....

_Sunday, 10th April._— ... Read to Lehzen part of _The Directions and
Advices_ which dearest Uncle Leopold has written down for Ferdinand,
most cleverly and beautifully done. They are written in French and are
divided into 3 parts. The part I have read is _Affaires Politiques_,
which is divided into headings of all the departments of the
Government. Dear Uncle has studied[233] the Portuguese Constitution,
Government, People, Country, &c., &c., so completely since the intended
marriage of Ferdinand with the Queen of Portugal, that he is as
familiar with the whole as though he were in the country. Dear Uncle
Leopold is so clever and so prudent and so kind; he has taken so much
pains and trouble about Ferdinand and I must say he is repaid for his
trouble by the affection and gratitude Ferdinand has for him; and
certainly he has _not_ thrown away his time in so doing, for Ferdinand
is not only _very good_, but _clever_, and therefore with Uncle’s
advice he will succeed, I am sure. Van de Weyer is a most trusty,
clever person, and as he has also copies of these papers, will be of
the greatest use to Ferdinand. I see by the part I have read, which
contains most valuable, important and sage advice, one thing which I
am very glad of, which is, that the Queen will associate Ferdinand
with her in the Council, &c., that he is always to be present at all
her Councils. Uncle advises him to listen and not to give his opinion
until he has become acquainted with the characters of the persons in
the Council, and then, after having well weighed what he means to say,
to give his opinion. There is so much of all the advice which I wish I
could insert here, but which I have no time to do.[234]

_Monday, 11th April._—Lehzen read to me while I was dressing and I read
to her while my hair was doing, one of the parts of the Directions
for Ferdinand, called _Observations Générales_, and began the last
one called _Note communiquée au Comte de Lavradio_. Dear Uncle
Leopold is so clever and governs Belgium so beautifully, that he is a
model for every Sovereign and will contribute to the happiness and
re-organisation of Portugal, as he has done to Belgium; for _that_
country owes _all_ its prosperity, happiness, everything, to dearest
Uncle Leopold; it was in a sad state when Uncle arrived, and by his
great prudence, sagacity, and extreme cleverness, Belgium is now one of
the most flourishing Kingdoms in Europe....

_Tuesday, 3rd May._— ... At 10 minutes past 11 came _Lablache_ till
10 minutes past 12. He complained much of the cold weather, and said
“qu’ils étaient tous enrhumés” and that they had all been very hoarse
last night at a concert, except Rubini. I like Lablache very much, he
is such a nice, good-natured, good-humoured man, and a very patient and
excellent master; he is so merry too.[235] _En profile_ he has a very
fine countenance, I think, an aquiline nose, dark arched eye-brows, and
fine long eyelashes, and a very clever expression. He has a profusion
of hair, which is very grey, and strangely mixed with some few black
locks here and there. I sung first the recitative of “Notte d’orrore,”
from _Marino Faliero_, several times over. Then Mamma and I sung
“Mira oh! Norma” and “Si fine al ore,” both twice over and “Qual cor
tradesti” twice over. Then I sang twice with Lablache “Io son ricco e
tu sei bella,” a very pretty little duo from _L’Elisire d’Amore_ by
Donizetti. He sang this delightfully, he has such a fine voice and
pronounces so distinctly and so well. _En conclusion_ I sang “Vivi tu.”
I liked my lesson extremely; I only wish I had one every _day_ instead
of one every _week_....

_Friday, 13th May._— ... Mme. Malibran de Bériot[236] (as she now
calls herself since her marriage with the eminent violinist de Bériot)
was in very fine voice and sang extremely well indeed, twice. She
sang first the prayer which Anna sings in her sleep in the 2nd act of
_La Sonnambula_, and “Ah! non giunge unam pensiero!” I prefer Grisi’s
singing of these very much to Malibran’s; there is a sweetness,
mildness and softness, accompanied with such beautifully clear
execution, in the _former_, which the _latter_ does _not_ possess in
the high notes. Malibran’s deep tones are beautiful, touching and
feeling, but her high notes are harsh, sharp and _voilée_. The 2nd
thing she sang was pretty and well adapted to her voice....

_Wednesday, 18th May._— ... At a ¼ to 2 we went down into the Hall, to
receive my Uncle Ernest, Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, and my Cousins,
Ernest and Albert, his sons. My Uncle was here, now 5 years ago, and is
looking extremely well. Ernest is as tall as Ferdinand and Augustus; he
has dark hair, and fine dark eyes and eyebrows, but the nose and mouth
are not good; he has a most kind, honest and intelligent expression
in his countenance, and has a very good figure. Albert, who is just
as tall as Ernest but stouter, is extremely handsome; his hair is
about the same colour as mine; his eyes are large and blue, and he
has a beautiful nose and a very sweet mouth with fine teeth; but the
charm of his countenance is his expression, which is most delightful;
_c’est à la fois_ full of goodness and sweetness, and very clever
and intelligent. We went upstairs with them, and after staying a few
minutes with them, I went up to my room. Played and sang. Drew. At a
little after 4 Uncle Ernest and my Cousins came up to us and stayed in
my room till 10 minutes past 5. Both my Cousins are so kind and good;
they are much more _formés_ and men of the world than Augustus; they
speak English very well, and I speak it with them. Ernest will be 18
years old on the 21st of June and Albert 17 on the 26th of August. Dear
Uncle Ernest made me the present of a most delightful _Lory_, which
is so tame that it remains on your hand, and you may put your finger
into its beak, or do anything with it, without its ever attempting to
bite. It is larger than Mamma’s grey Parrot, and has a most beautiful
plumage; it is scarlet, blue, brown, yellow, and purple. At 6 we went
with Lehzen, Lady Flora &c., to dine at the Archbishop of York’s, and I
was very sorry to leave my dear Uncle and Cousins behind us at home....

[Illustration: _H.S.H. Prince Albert of Saxe Coburg_

  _aged nine_

  _from a portrait by Schneider, after Eckhart._]

_Thursday, 19th May._—Read in the _Exposition_ while my hair was
doing. At 9 we breakfasted with Uncle Ernest, Ernest, Albert, Lehzen
and Charles. I sat between my dear Cousins. At ½ past 10 Lehzen and I
walked in the gardens and came home at ½ past 11. At a ¼ to 12 came
the Dean till ½ past 12. Read with him in the New Testament and in
Clarendon. At ½ past 12 came Mr. Steward till ½ past 1. Played and
sung. At a ¼ past 2 came the Dean till 3. Read with him in Paley. At 3
came Mrs. Anderson till 4. At a ¼ to 5 we walked in the gardens with
Lehzen till ½ past 5. Wrote my journal. At 7 we dined. Besides us 3 and
Uncle, my Cousins and Charles,—Count Kolowrat (one of Uncle Ernest’s
gentlemen), Lady Flora and the Miss Conroys &c., dined here. I sat
between dear Ernest and dear Albert. After dinner came Aunt Sophia.
Received a very kind letter from dear Aunt Louise and some ribbons.
Stayed up till ½ past 10. I like my Cousins extremely, they are so
kind, so good, and so merry....

_Saturday, 21st May._— ... At ½ past 7 we dined with Uncle Ernest,
Ernest, Albert, Charles, Lady Flora, Count Kolowrat, Baron Alvensleben,
&c. I sat between my dear Cousins. After dinner came Princess Sophia.
Baron de Hoggier, who had arrived from Lisbon the day before, came
after dinner, and took leave, on his way home. I sat between my dear
Cousins on the sofa and we looked at drawings. They both draw very
well, particularly Albert, and are both exceedingly fond of music;
they play very nicely on the piano. The more I see them the more I am
delighted with them, and the more I love them. They are so natural, so
kind, so _very_ good and so well instructed and informed; they are so
well bred, so truly merry and quite like children and yet very grown up
in their manners and conversation. It is delightful to be with them;
they are so fond of being occupied too; they are quite an example for
any young person....

_Sunday, 22nd May._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. Read in _Cornwallis
on the Sacrament_ while my hair was doing. At a ¼ past 9 we all
breakfasted. I sat between _i miei carissimi cugini_. At a ¼ past 10
dear Lehzen and I walked out in the gardens and came home at a ¼ to
11. Received the news of the death of my poor old Nurse, Mrs. Brock,
which took place the day before yesterday. She was not a pleasant
person, and undoubtedly had, as everybody has, her faults, but she
was extremely attached to and fond of me, having been with me from my
birth till my fifth year, therefore it is impossible, and it would be
very wrong, if I did not feel her death. My chief regret is, that she
did not live till I was my own mistress, and could make her quite
comfortable....[237]

_Tuesday, 24th May._—I awoke at 7. Today I complete my 17th year; a
very old person I am indeed! I am most thankful that I was brought
through this year safely, and I beseech my heavenly Father to extend
His benediction and blessing over me for this year and for many
others....

_Friday, 10th June._—At 9 we all breakfasted for the _last_ time
together! It was our last HAPPY HAPPY breakfast, with this dear Uncle
and those _dearest_, beloved Cousins, whom I _do_ love so VERY VERY
dearly; _much more dearly_ than any other Cousins in the _world_.
Dearly as I love Ferdinand, and also good Augustus, I love Ernest and
Albert _more_ than them, oh yes, MUCH _more_. Augustus was like a good,
affectionate child, quite unacquainted with the world, phlegmatic,
and talking but very little; but dearest Ernest and dearest Albert
are so grown-up in their manners, so gentle, so kind, so amiable, so
agreeable, so very sensible and reasonable, and so _really_ and truly
good and kind-hearted. They have both learnt a good deal, and are
very clever, naturally clever, particularly Albert, who is the most
reflecting of the two, and they like very much talking about serious
and instructive things and yet are so _very very_ merry and gay and
happy, like young people ought to be; Albert used always to have some
fun and some clever witty answer at breakfast and everywhere; he
used to play and fondle Dash so funnily too. Both he and Ernest are
extremely attentive to _whatever_ they hear and see, and take interest
in everything they see. They were much interested with the sight of St.
Paul’s yesterday. We remained down with them till 10. I then went up
to my room and came down again at a little after 10. We remained with
them again, Uncle Ernest going in and out of the room. I am so very
fond of _him_ too; now that I know him much better and have talked with
him, I love him as much as dear Uncle Ferdinand. He is so mild, so kind
and so good. Dearest Albert was playing on the piano when I came down.
At 11 dear Uncle, my _dearest beloved_ Cousins, and Charles, left us,
accompanied by Count Kolowrat. I embraced both my dearest Cousins most
warmly, as also my dear Uncle. I cried bitterly, very bitterly....

_Sunday, 31st July._—Read in _The Young Divine_ and began to read in
_Ikon Basilike_ in one vol., a book which came out a few days after
poor Charles I. had been beheaded; while my hair was doing. It is
said to have been written by him during his captivity, and contains
meditations and prayers; but the Dean, who gave it me a few days ago,
told me that great disputes have arisen as to whether it was really
written by Charles, or whether some friend of his had collected sayings
and meditations he might have heard the King make, and put them
together and that this point has not been settled yet. Whatever it may
be, and by whomever it may have been written or compiled, one thing is
certain, that it is a very good and pious book and is authentic as to
its contents....

_Wednesday, 3rd August._—Read in the _Exposition_ and in _The Conquest
of Granada_ while my hair was doing. At 9 we breakfasted. At a ¼ to 10
we went to the British Gallery with Lehzen to see the Exhibition by the
ancient Masters (all private property). Never did I see anything more
beautiful than this collection of the _immortal Masters’_ paintings,
for so I must call them as their names will never pass away. There
were such numbers of beautiful paintings, that I really know not which
to name in preference. Upon the whole, I think the finest were those
by Murillo and Guido. The finest by Murillo are “The Angels coming to
Abraham,” “The return of the Prodigal Son,” splendid both, belonging
to the Duke of Sutherland. “St. Joseph leading the infant Saviour who
carries a basket of carpenter’s tools,” quite in another style but
beautiful; “Santa Rosa, espousing the infant Saviour,” exquisite; and
“Portrait of Don Andres de Antrade and his favourite dog,” very fine.
The finest by Guido are, “The Assumption of the Virgin,” the expression
of the Virgin’s face is beautiful; two different heads of St. Peter,
both very fine. “The Magdalen,” beautiful. The finest by Vandyke are
“The Virgin and Infant Saviour,” very lovely.... At a ¼ to 4 we went
with Lehzen and Lady Flora to Chiswick, to the Victoria Asylum or
Children’s Friend Society. It is a most interesting and delightful
establishment, and has been founded almost entirely by Lady George[238]
and Miss Murray. It is for poor vagrant girls, who are received under
the age of 15; and Miss Murray says that they have never had a girl 6
months who did not become a perfectly good child. I forget how young
they receive children, but there are—[unintelligible] girls in all,
and they are divided, a few being in an infant school upstairs. When
they have become quite good and can read, write and do work of all
kinds necessary for a house, they are sent abroad, mostly to the Cape
of Good Hope, where they are apprenticed and become excellent servants.
Miss Murray told us many curious stories of the depraved and wretched
state in which many arrive, and how soon they become reformed and good.
There is one little girl in particular, a very pretty black-eyed girl,
11 years old, called Ellen Ford, who was received two months ago from
_Newgate_, and who boasted she could steal and tell lies better than
anybody. She had been but two or three days in the school, and she got
over 3 high walls, and stole a sheet; she was caught and brought back
again. Miss Murray spoke to her, and found that the poor girl had no
idea whatever of a _God_, and had a drunken father, a low Irishman;
this man had lost his 1st wife and married again, and this step-mother
taught the girl nothing but stealing and lying. Miss Murray told her
of God, and spoke to her very seriously; the girl was put in solitary
confinement for that night and was taken out the next morning; and ever
since she has been a perfectly good girl. There are many cases of the
same sort which Miss Murray said she could relate. Before I finish this
chapter I must mention the Matron, a most respectable excellent person,
called Mrs. Bowerhill; she is assisted by her two daughters, and by an
old woman for work; but besides this old woman, the children do all
the work themselves. We came home at ½ p. 6. I was very much pleased
indeed with all I saw. Miss Murray gave me a book into which she had
copied several of the letters of the children from abroad, and very
nice well-written letters they are. Miss Murray’s exertions are immense
and most praiseworthy for the Children’s Friend Society. There is a
Committee of Ladies who meet every other Tuesday I believe; but Lady
George and Miss Murray go down 3 times a week and oftener. At a ¼ p. 7
we dined. After dinner came Princess Sophia. Stayed up till 10 minutes
to 10....

_Monday, 8th August._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 8. At a ¼ past 9 we
breakfasted. At a ¼ to 10 Lehzen and I walked out till ½ past 10.
Arranged things for packing. At 11 came my good Lablache and stayed
till 20 minutes past 12. I sang 1st “Come per me sereno,” from _La
Sonnambula_. Then he sang with me “Claudio, Claudio, ritorna fra le
braccia paterne,” twice over; then he sang with me “Se un istante
all’ offerta d’un soglio,” also from _Elisa e Claudio_. The former
of these two was the one that I sang so very ill on Saturday, but
which Lablache did not mind at all. _He_ thought it went better
today; but he is too indulgent. _He_ was in delightful voice, and
sang _beautifully_. After this he sang “Non temer il mio bel cadetto”
from _Il Posto abbandonato_, by Mercadante, with me. His volubility
of tongue is wonderful; he can sing such quantities of words and at
such a rate. There are plenty in this Duo, and still more in “Quand
amore,” and in “Voglio dire,” both from _L’Elisire d’Amore_. Then he
sang my favourite “O amato zio” from my dear _Puritani_, with me. After
this he sang “O nume benefico” with us; then “Ridiamo, cantiamo,” and
then, _alas! per finire_, “Dopo due lustri ahi! misero,” from _Donna
Caritea_, by Mercadante. Lablache told me that he likes _Guillaume
Tell_ the best of _all_ Rossini’s operas, _Otello_ the best of his
Operas Seria, and _Il Barbiere_ the best of his buffa operas. _Ha
ragione._ His son (Lablache’s) is gone, he told me; he went yesterday,
as did also Rubini. I asked him if any other of his 8 children sang, or
were musical. He replied, “Non, ils sont trop jeunes; l’aîné n’a que
douze ans.” And the youngest of all, he says, is only _2_ years old.
There is an opera tomorrow, but the boxes &c., &c. are let, shocking to
say, at the play-house prices, and “C’est un pasticcio,” he said. It
is not in the regular number of nights. He said that I have improved
greatly in my singing since he has sung with me. After the last trio,
I took leave of _il mio buon e caro Maestro_ with _great_ regret. I
must repeat again that he is not only a most delightful, patient, and
agreeable master, but a most good-humoured, pleasing, agreeable and
honest man; his manners are very gentlemanly and quiet, and he has
something very frank, open and honest in his countenance; everybody
who knows him agrees in his being such a good man. I have had _26_
lessons of Lablache and shall think back with great delight on them;
and shall look forward with equal delight to next April, when I hope
Lablache will be here, so that I can resume them again. It was such a
pleasure to hear his fine voice and to sing with him. Everything that
is pleasant, alas! passes so quickly in this “wide world of troubles.”
How often I have experienced that, in greater pleasures, when my dear
relations have left me! But then there are the pleasant _recollections_
of all that is past, and one must be happy one has had them. I was
exceedingly delighted with this my _last_ lesson; the time seemed to
fly even faster than usual, for it always appeared to me that these
pleasant lessons were over in an instant. Lablache accompanied really
very fairly, and when he came to any difficult parts, he put in “des
accords,” which did just as well. I have already mentioned how very
obliging he is; he was always ready to sing anything I like and to stay
as long as I liked. He is extremely active for his size, which really
is very considerable. It amused me always to see him come in and go
out of my room; he walked so erect and made such a fine dignified bow.
So now all, all is over for this season, not only the Opera but my
favourite singing-lessons too....

_Wednesday, 10th August._— ... A propos, I shall never forget when, in
my first singing-lesson, I was so frightened to sing before Lablache,
he said in his good-natured way, “Personne n’a jamais eu peur de moi,”
which I am sure nobody can ever be who knows him....

CLAREMONT, _Friday, 16th September_.—At ½ past 9 we breakfasted, that
is to say, dearest Uncle, we two, Lehzen &c., Lady Catherine not being
well enough, and Uncle’s two gentlemen being gone to town. Went up to
my room and copied out music. At about a ¼ to 12 dearest Uncle came and
sat with me till ½ p. 12. He talked over many important things. He is
_so_ clever, _so_ mild, and _so_ prudent; _he_ alone can give me good
advice on _every_ thing. His advice is perfect. He is indeed “il mio
secondo padre” or rather “_solo_ padre”! for he is indeed like my real
father, as I have none, and he is so kind and so good to me, he has
ever been so to me. He has been and always is of such use to me and
does _so_ much good....

_Sunday, 18th September._—Baron Moncorvo brought yesterday the
distressing news that the same unfortunate revolution which took place
in Spain, has likewise taken place in Portugal, and that the Queen
was forced to proclaim the constitution of 1820 similar to the one of
1812.[239] It happened between Friday the 9th and Saturday the 10th, in
the night. I do so feel for poor dear Ferdinand in this trying moment,
as also for the poor good Queen. The difference between this and the
one in Spain was: that in _Portugal_ they behaved respectfully towards
dear Ferdinand and Donna Maria, and in Spain they almost insulted the
Queen Regent. In Portugal, thank God! no blood has been shed. As soon
as the Empress heard what had happened, or rather what would happen,
she hastened to the Palace de Necessidades, where Ferdinand and the
Queen were, arrived there at 3 o’clock in the night, and remained there
till all was over. The Princess Isabella, the Queen’s Aunt (and the
former Regent), also came and remained with them. Uncle Leopold was
much shocked and distressed when he heard it, as were we also, I am
sure.... Dear Uncle came up for a minute and brought us 3 letters which
Van de Weyer had written to him, giving a detailed account of these
horrid transactions at Lisbon. Van de Weyer’s conduct throughout this
dreadful business, when everybody else seems to have lost their heads
and senses, was most courageous, prudent and judicious; and if his and
Ferdinand’s advice had been followed, the Queen would _not_ have been
obliged to sign the Promulgation of the _Constitution_ of 1820. Van de
Weyer says that _all_ was given up “avec la plus affreuse lâcheté!”
without a struggle or attempt, when _all might yet have been saved_....

_Wednesday, 21st September._— ... Dear Uncle came up and fetched us
down to breakfast, as he has done already once before, and twice for
dinner. He always accompanied us upstairs when we went to bed. It was
our last breakfast with him; I sat, as usual, near him and General
Goblet.[240] To hear dear Uncle speak on any subject is like reading
a highly instructive book; his conversation is so enlightened, so
clear. He is universally admitted to be one of the first politicians
now extant. He speaks so mildly, yet firmly and impartially, about
Politics. Uncle tells me that Belgium is quite a pattern for its
organisation, industry and prosperity; the finances are in the greatest
perfection. Uncle is so beloved and revered by his Belgian subjects,
that it must be a great compensation for all his extreme trouble. He is
so mild, gentle and kind, and so clever and firm....

[Illustration: _Mᵐᵉ Malibran
  from recollection
  P.V. del. Bentest[?]
  Sept. 1836.

  MADAME MALIBRAN.
  From a sketch by Princess Victoria.]

_Monday, 26th September._— ... Read in the Morning Post of
today the melancholy and almost incredible news of the _death_
of—_Malibran_![241] which took place at Manchester on Friday night
at 12 o’clock, at the early age of 28. She had gone there for the
festival which took place the week before last, and only sang on
Tuesday the 13th instant, and tried to do so on the Wednesday but was
unable, after which she was taken so alarmingly ill that all singing
was over. On Saturday the account in the papers was that she was out
of danger, but the improvement was only transient and on Friday
night this wonderful singer and extraordinary person was no more. She
will be, and is, a very _great_ loss indeed; for, though I liked and
admired Grisi by far more than Malibran, I admired many parts of the
latter’s singing very much, in particular those touching and splendid
low notes which gave one quite a thrill. In point of cleverness and
genius there is not a doubt that Malibran far surpassed Grisi; for she
was not proficient alone in singing and acting, she knew Spanish (her
own language), Italian, French, English, and German perfectly, as also
various Italian _patois_. She composed very prettily, drew well, rode
well on horseback, danced beautifully, and enfin _climbed_ well, as
General Alava told us, who knew her very well; he said you could speak
with her on any subject and she was equally _à son aise_. She was born
in 1808 at Paris, and is the daughter of a famous Spanish singer called
_Garcia_; she married first an old French merchant called _Malibran_,
from whom she was divorced; and secondly this spring the incomparable
violinist De Bériot. Mamma saw her make her debut as _Maria Garcia_,
only 16 years old, in _Il Crociato_, at the Italian Opera in London,
as “un giovinetto Cavalier.” There is something peculiarly awful
and striking in the death of this great Cantatrice, undoubtedly the
_second in the world_, (Grisi being the _first_ in _my opinion_). To be
thus cut off in the bloom of her youth and the height of her career,
suddenly, is dreadful!...

_Wednesday, 28th September._— ... The news from Lisbon are far from
good, I am _sorry to say_. Mamma received a letter from Van de Weyer
this morning, dated 11th Sept., in which he said that there had
been another _émeute_ the afternoon before, which however had been
dissipated, and that both _dearest_ Ferdinand and Donna Maria showed
great calmness and dignity. It is a great trial for poor dear Ferdinand
and for the good Queen. Van de Weyer says they are all in a very
uncomfortable situation....

_Friday, 30th September._— ... Read in _The Times_ last night a
distressing account of the details of poor Malibran’s illness and
death. Poor young creature! she seems to have been neglected at a time
when her life might perhaps still have been saved; for she complained
of head-ache and shivering the same afternoon she arrived (Sunday
11th Sept.). On the Wednesday night after singing that fine but _now_
painful Duo “Vanne se alberghi in petto,” she was taken so very very
ill. Notwithstanding all this she got up on Thursday morning and
was dressed with the assistance of Mrs. Richardson, landlady of the
Mosely Arms Hotel at Manchester, for she had no female attendant, a
man-servant of De Bériot’s being (as is said in the newspapers, for all
what I have hitherto related about her illness and death is taken from
the newspapers) their only servant. In spite of every effort to prevent
her, the poor dying Malibran insisted upon going to the Oratorio that
morning, and was accordingly carried to her carriage; but being seized
with hysterics she was instantly taken back. She never left her room,
and scarcely her bed, from that time till her death. Dr. Belluomini,
her own Physician, only arrived on Sunday the 18th, though other
physicians had attended her (from Manchester) before. She was perfectly
insensible when she died; as also two or 3 days before her death. De
Bériot was distracted and overpowered on learning of her death, in
another room whither they had compelled him to retire when it was
drawing to a close. He never saw her afterwards, and left the place 2
hours after all was over. It is the most melancholy end that could be
imagined! To come to an inn in a foreign land with nobody to nurse her,
and _die_ there! What a sad and tragical end to her bright career! I
can still hardly believe it possible that she, whom I can see before
me as she was at our own concert, dressed in white satin, so merry and
lively, and whose pathetic voice when speaking I can hear, is now in
the silent tomb; for the funeral was to take place at 10 o’clock this
morning with great splendour. And so today, all, all is over with poor
Malibran!...

_Sunday, 9th October._— ... We went to the church at Ramsgate with
Lady Catherine and Lehzen. Mr. Harvey preached. The text was from the
5th chapter of the 2nd Epistle to Cor., 10th verse: “For we must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every man may receive
the things done in his body according to that he hath done, whether it
be good or bad.” Came home at 20 minutes to 1. Wrote my journal. Copied
out music. At a ¼ to 3 we went to the chapel with Lady Catherine and
dear Lehzen, &c. The service was read by Mr. Lewis, and Dr. Longley
(late Master of Harrow School) preached, and _most beautifully_; so
mildly and emphatically; his voice is very good, his pronunciation very
pure, his delivery calm and impressive, his language beautiful yet
simple, and his appearance very pleasing. He must be between 30 and 40,
I should say. The text was from the 3rd chapter of Daniel, 16th, 17th,
and 18th verses: “Shadrach, Meshech, and Abed-nego answered and said to
the King, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this
matter. If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from
the burning fiery furnace, and He will deliver us out of thine hand, O
King. But if not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve
thy gods nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.” It was a
most beautiful sermon in every way, and I was _very much_ pleased and
impressed with it. Dr. Longley is to be Bishop of Ripon....[242]

_Thursday, 27th October._— ... Read in _The Conquest of Granada_
while my hair was doing. At 9 we breakfasted. Wrote a letter to my
brother. At 10 came the Dean till ½ p. 11. Read with him in the
N.T., in _The Life of Colonel Hutchinson_, and in Paley. _The Life
of Colonel Hutchinson_ is written by his wife, who wrote it for her
children after their father’s death. Colonel Hutchinson lived in the
time of Charles I., the Commonwealth, and even of Charles II. He was
on the Puritanical side, and though a very good man, signed the King’s
death-warrant, being very _strong_ on his side, which is to be seen by
Mrs. Hutchinson’s writings; his and her feelings being totally opposite
to Clarendon’s, render it interesting, though it is more a private
account of his life than any public History of the Times, but of course
a good deal of history will be mixed up in it as Col. Hutchinson had
a good deal to do in the wars. Mrs. Hutchinson’s style is remarkably
quaint and ancient, indeed in some parts so much so as to render it
almost ridiculous, but there are again some very pretty feeling parts
in it (indeed feeling and pious throughout it), one of which, in which
she speaks of her husband and herself I shall quote; before I do so,
however, I must say that the editor, a descendant of the family, has
left the orthography just as she wrote it, which is very antiquated
and imperfect: “The greatest excellence she (Mrs. Hutchinson) had was
the power of apprehending and the vertue of loving his (Col. H.’s)
soe as his shadow, she waited on him every where, till he was taken
into that region of light, which admits of none, and then she vanisht
into nothing.” There is likewise another passage speaking of a son she
lost: “... call’d by his owne name John, who liv’d scarce six yeares,
and was a very hopefull child, full of his father’s vigor and spiritt,
but death soone nipt that blossome.” Lehzen of course still continues
reading to me while I dress, the delightful letters of Mme. de Sévigné;
we are now in the middle of the 10th vol., and I like them more and
more, they are so beautiful, so easy, they show the character of the
person who wrote them so perfectly, you become acquainted with her
and hers, and there are such tender and beautiful feelings expressed
in them, towards that daughter who was her all & all; and the style
is so elegant and so beautiful. I shall quote a passage relating to
a vexation she had about not procuring the “députation” for her son
M. de Sévigné: “Ne faut-il point être juste et se mettre à la place
des gens? c’est ce qu’on ne fait jamais.” How true this is. Then how
pretty this is, in writing to Mme. de Grignan: “Vous me louez trop
de la douce retraite que je fais ici; rien n’y est pénible que votre
absence.” There is certainly nothing so beautiful of the kind, in any
language as these letters. I shall just quote two passages from the
extracts in _The Edinburgh Review_ of Sir James Mackintosh’s life,
about Mme. de Sévigné: “In the midst of all the rage felt at Paris
against King William, the admirable good-sense and natural moderation
of Mme. de Sévigné catches a glimpse of his real character, through the
mists of Rome and Versailles: ‘Le prince n’a pas songé à faire périr
son beau-père. Il est à Londres, à la place du Roi, sans en prendre
le nom, ne voulant que rétablir une religion qu’il croit bonne, et
maintenir les loix du pays sans qu’il en coûte une goutte de sang....
Pour le Roi d’Angleterre il y (St. Germains) parait content,—et c’est
pour cela qu’il est là.’ Observe the perfect good-sense of the last
remark, and the ease and liveliness with which it is made. Tacitus and
Machiavel could have said nothing better; but a superficial reader
will think no more of it than the writer herself seems to do.”—Again,
further on: “The style of Mme. de Sévigné is evidently copied not only
by her worshipper Walpole, but even by Gray; who notwithstanding the
extraordinary merits of his matter, has the double stiffness of an
imitator and of a college recluse....”

_Friday, 28th October._—I awoke at 7 and got up at 20 minutes to 8.
Read in the _Exposition_ while my hair was doing. Received a most kind
dear and pretty letter from dearest Aunt Louise, from which I will copy
a passage: “I have today not much to say. It is my brother Nemours’
birthday; and in the same time, the anniversary of the death of my dear
governess” (Mme. de Mallet, who died when Aunt Louise was at Paris last
year) “of the best and truest friend I had for twenty years, to make me
melancholy. In her was broken the first link of the chain of my strong
and youthful affections. How many more shall I live perhaps to see
destroyed?” How pretty and feeling this is; it comes straight from her
dear good heart. I can well say of my _precious_ Lehzen what she says
of Mme. de Mallet, that she is my “best and truest friend” I have had
for nearly 17 years and I trust I shall have for 30 or 40 and _many_
more!...

_Tuesday, 1st November._— ... Read in _The Conquest of Granada_, and
wrote my journal. There are two lines in _Rokeby_ (which is so full of
beauty that I could copy the whole and not find one part which is not
full of loveliness, sweetness, grace, elegance, and feeling, for the
immortal bard who wrote these beautiful poems never _could_ write an
_ugly_ line in _my_ opinion) which struck me, as well as the Dean, who
is, s’il est permis de le dire, poetry-mad, as most splendid.... Oh!
Walter Scott is my _beau idéal_ of a Poet; I do so admire him both in
Poetry and Prose!...

_Thursday, 3rd November._— ... After 7 we dined. The Duke of
Wellington, the Countess of Ashburnham,[243] and Lady Elinor
Ashburnham,[244] Lord and Lady Radstock,[245] Lord and Lady
Barham,[246] Colonel Stopford,[247] Colonel Barnard, Mr. Sicklemore,
and Mr. Mayhew dined here. I sat between the Duke of Wellington and
Lord Radstock. The Duke looked remarkably well and was in very good
spirits. Lady Barham looked very handsome; she had a reddish brown
velvet turban and a dark velvet dress. She is a likeness of the
Duchess of Sutherland in dark, but the Duchess is handsomer, in figure
and all together handsomer, having a finer nose and mouth than Lady
Barham. Lady Barham has a beautiful brow and fine dark expressive
eyes with a fine pale complexion, but the lower part of her face,
particularly the mouth and chin, are not at all good. She looks 28 and
is only 22....

_Sunday, 6th November._— ... We walked home at 1. Read in _Astoria_.
Added a few lines to my letter to Feodore. Wrote one to Aunt Sophia
and my journal. At ½ p. 2 we went out with _dearest_ Lehzen and came
home at a little before 4. Received a most kind letter from dearest
Uncle Leopold accompanied by a “supplément extraordinaire” to the
_Moniteur Universel_, giving an account of the “échauffourée” which
took place at Strasburg on the 30th October, headed by Louis Napoleon
Buonaparte,[248] a young man of 28 years old, son of the Duchesse
de St. Leu (Hortense), and who tried to make the Troops rise in his
favour, but the latter proved faithful to their King (Louis Philippe)
and country, as they ought; and the Prince and Rebels have been put in
prison. The Queen of the French sent Uncle the paper....

_Sunday, 20th November._— ... Read a letter of Lord Palmerston’s to
Mamma relative to the late unfortunate affairs at Lisbon, which is very
consolatory. Marshal Saldanha was charged to bring about the reaction,
which was to spread first in the provinces and then to the capital
and the Queen was _not_ to give the first impulse.[249] Unfortunately
poor Donna Maria was hurried into this step by the jealousy of those
about her. The friends of the Duke of Terceira, unwilling that Marshal
Saldanha should have the credit of the reaction, snatched it out of
his hands and brought on all this confusion. However, Lord Palmerston
concludes with this: “The result of the whole is, that the Queen’s
position is _better_ than it _was_, not so _bad_ as it _might_ have
been after such a failure, but _much less good_ than if she had waited
patiently till the proper time for action had arrived. The Prince
behaved throughout with spirit, courage and firmness and has acquired
by his conduct the respect of both parties.” That our beloved and
precious Ferdinand has behaved in such a way is most _delightful_ for
me, who _love him_ like the _dearest of Brothers_. It could not be
otherwise, I was sure....

_Tuesday, 29th November._— ... At 8 we left poor West Cliff House....
We reached Canterbury in safety in spite of the rain and some wind,
but not very long after we left it, it began to blow so dreadfully,
accompanied by floods of rain at intervals, that our carriage swung and
the post-boys could scarcely keep on their horses. As we approached
Sittingbourne, the _hurricane_, for I cannot call it by any other name,
became quite frightful and even alarming; corn stacks were flying
about, trees torn up by their roots, and chimneys blown to atoms. We
got out, or rather were _blown_ out, at Sittingbourne. After staying
there for a short while we got into the carriage where Lady Theresa
and Lehzen were, with them, which being larger and heavier than our
post-chaise, would not shake so much. For the first 4 or 5 miles all
went on more smoothly and I began to hope our difficulties were at an
end. Alas! far from it. The wind blew worse than before and in going
down the hill just before Chatham, the hurricane was so tremendous that
the horses stopped for a minute, and I thought that we were undone,
but by dint of whipping and very good management of the post-boys
we reached Rochester in safety. Here we got out, and here it was
determined that we must pass the night. Here we are therefore, and here
we must remain, greatly to my annoyance, for I am totally unprepared,
Lehzen’s and my wardrobe maid are gone on to Claremont, and I hate
sleeping at an Inn. I had been so glad at the thought of not doing so
this time, mais “l’homme propose et Dieu dispose,” and it would have
been temerity to proceed, for a coach had been upset on the bridge
just before we arrived, and the battlements of the bridge itself were
totally blown in....

_Sunday, 18th December._— ... I sat between Mr. Croker[250] and Col.
Wemyss.[251] Der erste ist ein kluger, aber nach meiner Meinung, nicht
angenehmer Mann; er spricht zu viel. He has a very excellent memory and
tells anecdotes cleverly but with a peculiar pronunciation of the _r_.
He said that the Duke of Wellington had told him that the character
of the 3 nations, the English, Scotch, and Irish, was very apparent
in the army. He said (the Duke), “It may seem like a joke what I am
going to say, but it is quite true; the _Scotch_ were pleased when the
_money_ arrived, the _Irish_ when they got into a _wine country_, and
the _English_ when the _roast beef_ came up.” He told many anecdotes
and made many remarks upon the various nations, ein wenig sehr stark.
Il aime trop à étaler, il n’a pas de tacte; il prend trop le ton
supérieur....

CLAREMONT, _Saturday, 24th December (Xmas Eve)_.—I awoke after 7
and got up at 8. After 9 we breakfasted. At a little after 10 we
left Kensington with dearest Lehzen, Lady Conroy and—_Dashy_! and
reached Claremont at a ¼ to 12. Played and sang. At 2 dearest Lehzen,
Victoire and I [? went out] and came home at 20 minutes p. 3. No one
was stirring about the Gipsy encampment except George, which I was
sorry for, as I was anxious to know how our poor friends were after
this bitterly cold night. Played and sang. Received from dearest best
Lehzen as a Christmas box: 2 lovely little Dresden china figures, 2
pair of lovely little chased gold buttons, a small lovely button with
an angel’s head which she used to wear herself, and a pretty music
book; from good Louis a beautiful piece of Persian stuff for an album;
and from Victoire and Emily Gardiner a small box worked by themselves.
Wrote my journal. Went down to arrange Mamma’s table for her. At 6
we dined. Mr. Edmund Byng[252] and Mr. Conroy dined here. Mr. Byng
is going to stay here a night or two. Very soon after dinner Mamma
sent for us into the Gallery, where all the things were arranged on
different tables. From my dear Mamma I received a beautiful massive
gold buckle in the shape of two serpents; a lovely little delicate
gold chain with a turquoise clasp; a lovely coloured sketch of dearest
Aunt Louise by Partridge, copied from the picture he brought, and so
like her; 3 beautiful drawings by Munn, one lovely sea view by Purser,
and one beautiful cattle piece by Cooper (all coloured), 3 prints, a
book called _Finden’s Tableaux_, _Heath’s Picturesque Annual for 1837,
Ireland_; both these are very pretty; _Friendship’s Offering_, and _The
English Annual for 1837_, _The Holy Land_ illustrated beautifully,
two handkerchiefs, a very pretty black satin apron trimmed with red
velvet, and two almanacks. I am very thankful to my dear Mamma for
all these very pretty things. From dear Uncle Leopold, a beautiful
turquoise ring; from the Queen a fine piece of Indian gold tissue; and
from Sir J. Conroy a print. I gave my dear Lehzen a green morocco jewel
case, and the _Picturesque Annual_; Mamma gave her a shawl, a dress,
a pair of turquoise earrings, an annual, and handkerchiefs. I then
took Mamma to the Library where my humble table was arranged. I gave
her a bracelet made of my hair, the clasp of which contains Charles’,
Feodore’s and my hair; and the _Keepsake_ and _Oriental Annual_. Lehzen
gave her two pair of little buttons just like mine. I danced a little
with Victoire. Stayed up till 11.

_Sunday, 25th December (Xmas day)._—At 9 we all breakfasted. Mamma,
Lehzen and I read prayers. Arranged my new drawings. At a little
before 2 dearest Lehzen, Victoire and I went out and came home at 3.
As we were approaching _the camp_,[253] we met Rea coming from it, who
had been sent there by Mamma to enquire into the story of these poor
wanderers. He told us (what I was quite sure of before) that all was
quite true, that the poor young woman and baby were doing very well,
though very weak and miserable and that what they wanted chiefly was
fuel and nourishment. Mamma has ordered broth and fuel to be sent
tonight, as also 2 blankets; and several of our people have sent old
flannel things for them. Mamma has ordered that the broth and fuel is
to be sent each day till the woman is recovered. Lehzen sent them by
our footmen a little worsted knit jacket for the poor baby, and when we
drove by, Aunt Sarah,[254] the old woman and the Husband all looked out
and bowed most gratefully. Rea gave them directly a sovereign. I cannot
say how happy I am that these poor creatures are assisted, for they are
such a nice set of Gipsies, so quiet, so affectionate to one another,
so discreet, not at all forward or importunate, and _so_ grateful; so
unlike the gossiping, fortune-telling race-gipsies; and this is such a
peculiar and touching case. Their being assisted makes me quite merry
and happy today, for yesterday night when I was safe and happy at home
in that cold night and today when it snowed so and everything looked
white, I felt quite unhappy and grieved to think that our poor gipsy
friends should perish and shiver for want; and now today I shall go to
bed happy, knowing they are better off and more comfortable....

_Thursday, 29th December._— ... At 12 we went out with dear Lehzen
and came home at 2. Everything still looked very white and the ground
rather slippery but not so much as yesterday. It snowed part of the
time we were walking. I saw Aunt Sarah and the least pretty of the two
sisters-in-law, who has returned, in a shop at Esher. How I _do_ wish
I could do something for their _spiritual_ and _mental_ benefit and
for the education of their children and in particular for the poor
little baby who I have known since its birth, in the admirable manner
Mr. Crabbe in his _Gipsies’ Advocate_ so strongly urges; he beseeches
and urges those who have kind hearts and Christian feelings to think of
these poor wanderers, who have many good qualities and who have many
good people amongst them. He says, and alas! I _too well_ know its
truth, from experience, that whenever any poor Gipsies are encamped
anywhere and crimes and robberies &c. occur, it is invariably laid to
their account, which is shocking; and if they are always looked upon as
vagabonds, how _can_ they become good people? I trust in Heaven that
the day may come when _I_ may do something for these poor people, and
for this particular family! I am sure that the little kindness which
they have experienced from us will have a good and lasting effect on
them!...

[Illustration: GYPSY WOMEN.

  From a sketch by Princess Victoria.]




                    INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO CHAPTER VI

  This was her _annus mirabilis_, her wonder-year. The earlier months
  passed much as usual. On 24th May she was eighteen years old. The
  entry in her Journal shows some presentiment of what was to come.
  In less than a month she had stepped from out of the precincts of
  that quiet, ill-furnished palace in Kensington Gardens into the
  full glare of the Throne. The 20th June was her most wonderful
  day, but although keenly alive to its significance and glory, she
  never lost her self-control. The hidden forces which even her
  Journals failed to reveal, appear so to have moulded her character
  that she was enabled to appreciate and yet resist the glamours of
  this supreme moment. There is not a trace of doubt or misgiving.
  She was conscious of a mysterious duty imposed upon her by Divine
  Providence, and although she obviously felt her inexperience, she
  never for a moment doubted her fitness for her task. King William
  died at Windsor soon after two in the morning, and three hours
  later the Archbishop and Lord Conyngham were at Kensington Palace.
  The Princess received them in a dressing-gown hastily thrown over
  her nightdress, her feet in slippers, and her fair hair loose about
  her head. Four hours later she received for the first time Lord
  Melbourne, the Prime Minister, who was destined until the day of
  her marriage to exercise a potent influence over her thoughts and
  actions. Her caution in the selection of confidantes, her wariness
  in granting her approval, and her care to safeguard the regal
  tradition, are clearly apparent from the day of her accession.
  Although she accepted advice, she never appeared to yield. There
  is nothing in these Journals that displays the inner thoughts of
  the Queen, in a light differing from that in which her conduct
  appeared both to her Ministers and to her courtiers. Then, as in
  after-years, she fulfilled the hope publicly expressed by Lord
  John Russell, that she would prove to be an Elizabeth without her
  tyranny and an Anne without her weakness.

  It must be remembered that from the day of her accession the Crowns
  of Great Britain and Hanover were divided. Her uncle, Ernest, Duke
  of Cumberland, succeeded to the Throne of Hanover. The fear that
  he might succeed to the Throne of Great Britain had always haunted
  the minds of the people, and added to the feeling of gladness with
  which they welcomed the young Queen. On the second day of her reign
  the name Alexandrina was dropped for ever, and she was thenceforth
  known, as she desired to be, by the name of Victoria.


                              CHAPTER VI

                                 1837

_Sunday, 8th January._— ... The service was performed by the Dean,
who gave us likewise a sermon. The text was from the 1st Chapter of
Isaiah,—verse:—“Wash you, make you clean.” At 12 dear Lehzen and I went
out and came home at 10 minutes p. 1. It is today a week that we took
leave of our poor good friends the Gipsies, and I am quite sorry when
I pass the spot so long enlivened by their little camp, and behold it
empty and deserted, and with almost no trace to be seen of their ever
having been there. They had been there more than a month, for they
encamped there about 5 days after we arrived here and have been there
ever since until last Wednesday or Thursday. To _my_ feeling, the chief
ornament of the Portsmouth Road is gone since their departure. But this
is their life; they are happy and grateful and we have done them some
good. The place and spot may be forgotten, but the Gipsy family Cooper
will _never_ be obliterated from my memory!...

_Tuesday, 10th January._— ... At a ¼ p. 3 came M. Van de Weyer, who
arrived in London last night from Lisbon. He gave us most interesting
and most valuable information about Portugal; praised our _dearest_
Ferdinand to the skies, said he showed cleverness, firmness, and
character which no other young man of his age hardly ever showed; said
the poor Queen was totally indifferent to whatever happened, but was
extremely obedient to Ferdinand who had great power over her. He told
us much to distress us, but said that the present ministers were ready
to do anything that was right. He is a most clever, clear-sighted,
sensible little man, Van de Weyer himself. He looks much careworn and
fatigued, and _no_ wonder at it....

_Tuesday, 7th February._—Read in _Bajazet_. Read to Lehzen out of
_Polyeucte_ and finished it; it is certainly _very_ beautiful and
full of most beautiful and highminded feelings, but the end is, to my
feelings, rather unnatural. Lehzen dictated to me some passages from
_Polyeucte_....

_Thursday, 9th February._— ... Read to dear Lehzen out of the
newspapers Lord John Russell’s very able and judicious speech
on bringing in the Irish Corporation bill; and out of the Irish
History.... Read in _Bajazet_ and wrote my journal. Lehzen dictated
French to me. Played and sang. Read in Raumer’s _Königinnen_. Read
in Clive’s life[255] while my hair was doing. At 6 we dined. Read in
_Bajazet_. Sang, and Mamma also. Stayed up till 10. Read in School
Shakespeare while my hair was undoing.

_Saturday, 8th April._—At 10 came the Dean till 11. Read with him in
the N.T. and in Boswell’s _Life of Johnson_. At ½ p. 11 I went down
and sat to Mr. Lane[256] till a ¼ to 1. He showed me 4 very beautiful
coloured drawings by Chalon, 3 portraits,—Mrs. Ashley, very like;
Miss Fanny Wyndham as Contino in _Scaramuccia_, ridiculously like; and
Bellini as Figaro; the 4th is a very beautiful head and hands of Juliet
asleep after she has taken the draught. Mr. Lane likewise showed me a
very beautiful miniature of Lady Blessington[257] painted by Chalon
about 15 years ago; and a beautiful drawing of C. Kemble as Falstaff,
done by himself. He is a great friend of Kemble’s and admires him
beyond everything. He is also very intimate with Mr. Macready, and
says he is such an excellent father and husband. Charles Mathews, he
says, speaks Italian as well as he does French.... At 20 minutes p. 7
we went with dear Lehzen, Lady Theresa, Charles and Lord Ilchester &c.
to the Opera. It was my dear _I Puritani_, and they were singing the
opening Chorus when we came in. Grisi, Rubini, Lablache, and Tamburini
made their first appearance this season, and were all enthusiastically
cheered on their appearance, in particular my worthy Master and Rubini.
There is not a word of truth in what was said about Grisi, for I never
saw anything look more lovely that she did, and she sang deliciously,
as did also Rubini whose voice seems to get if possible finer each
year. It is useless to add that the singing of these 4 incomparable and
unequalled _artistes_ was, as always, perfection! with the exception
perhaps of Lablache’s being a little hoarse at times; he did not look
well and was not in his usual spirits I thought. The Quartet “Ah! te o
cara,” the Polacca, “Suoni la tromba,” and “Ella è tremante” were all
loudly encored. After the Opera was over the 4 cantanti were called out
and loudly cheered....

_Tuesday, 11th April._—Heard that poor Lady De L’Isle,[258] the King’s
eldest daughter, had expired at 10 o’clock the night before. On the
death of old Mrs. Strode last February, the King made Lady De L’Isle
housekeeper of Kensington Palace; and she arrived here about 2 or 3
days after we came from Claremont, was confined with a daughter about a
month ago, and was going on very well, when she was taken so alarmingly
ill, I think on Sunday. It is very awful and very dreadful for her 4
poor children.

After 9 we breakfasted. At a little before 10 came the Dean till 12
minutes to 11. Read with him in the N.T. and in Hume. At 11 came my
good Lablache and stayed till 6 minutes to 12. He was as good-humoured,
kind, ready, and gentlemanlike as ever; there never is any difference
in his manners or ways, may he be ill, well, tired or not tired, he is
always in the same ready good-humour. He is perhaps a little greyer,
_mais voilà tout_. He was in splendid voice and sang beautifully. It
was quite a delight for me to hear his fine and unique voice again and
to sing with him; it is such a support to my voice and he accompanies
so agreeably. I sang first with him the favourite duo of mine: “Voglio
dire,” from _L’Elisire d’Amore_; then “Una furtiva lagrima,” a pretty
little Aria from the same opera, which I repeated and which Catone
used to sing so nicely, as also “Quanto è bella quanto è cara” from
_L’Elisir_, which I also sung. After this Lablache sang with Mamma and
me “Se il fratel stringere” from _Belisario_, which he _had never seen_
or even _heard_ before!...

_Thursday, 20th April._—I got up at 8. Read in the _Exposition_ while
my hair was doing. After 9 we breakfasted. Played and sang; practised
for Lablache. Drew. At 20 minutes to 2 we went to the Drawing Room with
dear Lehzen, Lady Mary Stopford,[259] Sir George Anson &c. The poor
Queen not being well, the King held the Drawing-room, and (strange to
say) Princess Augusta represented her. There were several young ladies
presented, amongst whom were Lady Wilhelmina Stanhope (daughter to
the Earl and Countess Stanhope),[260] a beautiful girl; Lady Fanny
Cowper[261] (daughter to the Earl and Countess Cowper), also pretty;
Lady Mary Grimston,[262] Miss Louisa Percy,[263] Miss Wynn (niece to
the Duchess of Northumberland), Victoire Conroy, &c. The poor Duchess
of Northumberland was unable to attend me, having a bad cold. We came
home at 20 minutes p. 3....

_Friday, 19th May._—Got up at 8. Wrote the _brouillon_ of a French
letter to dearest Aunt Louise while my hair was doing. After 9 we
breakfasted. The children played in the room. At 10 Mary,[264] Lehzen,
I and the children went out walking and came home at 10 minutes to 11.
Wrote my letter to dearest Aunt Louise. At ½ p. 11 came M. Guazzaroni
till 12. Received a letter from _the King_ by Lord Conyngham....

Read in W. Scott’s Life. Received an address from the Mayor and City of
Lincoln, which was presented by Colonel Sibthorp[265] and Mr. Edward
Lytton Bulwer,[266] the two Members. I was attended by my dearest
Lehzen, and Mamma by Lady Flora. Played and sung &c. Wrote my journal.
Drew. Felt very miserable and agitated. Did not go down to dinner, but
dined in my own room at 8 o’clock. Stayed up till 10.

_Saturday, 20th May._—Got up after 8. After 9 we breakfasted. The dear
children were in the room and played very merrily. Wrote a letter to
the King, which Mamma had previously written for me. At 3 minutes
past 11 came my buon Maestro Lablache, looking pale and coughing, and
complaining he was still unwell and feared he would remain so till the
weather became warmer....

[Illustration:

  _Lablache
  from recollection._

  _P.V. del:—
  Kensington
  Palace Aug. 1836._

  LUIGI LABLACHE.

  From a sketch by Princess Victoria.]

_Wednesday, 24th May._—Today is my 18th birthday! How old! and yet
how far am I from being what I should be. I shall from this day take
the _firm_ resolution to study with renewed assiduity, to keep my
attention always well fixed on whatever I am about, and to strive to
become every day less trifling and more fit for what, if Heaven wills
it, I’m some day to be!... At ½ p. 3 we drove out with Mary and dear
Lehzen and came home at 5. The demonstrations of loyalty and affection
from all the people were highly gratifying. The parks and streets were
thronged and everything looked like a _Gala_ day. Numbers of people
put down their names and amongst others good old Lablache inscribed
his.... At ½ p. 10 we went to the ball at St. James’s with the Duchess
of Northumberland, dear Lehzen, Lady Flora and Lady Conroy &c. The King
though much better was unable of course to be there, and the Queen
neither, so that, strange to say, Princess Augusta made the _honneurs_!
I danced first with Lord Fitzalan,[267] 2ndly with Prince Nicholas
Esterhazy,[268] who is a very amiable, agreeable, gentlemanly young
man; 3rdly with the Marquis of Granby[269]; 4thly with the Marquis of
Douro[270] who is very odd and amusing; and 5thly and lastly with the
Earl of Sandwich[271] who is an agreeable young man. I wished to dance
with Count Waldstein who is such an amiable man, but he replied that
he could not dance quadrilles, and as in my station I unfortunately
cannot valse and gallop, I could not dance with him. The beauties
there were (in my opinion) the Duchess of Sutherland, Lady Frances (or
Fanny) Cowper, who is very pleasing, natural and clever-looking.... The
Courtyard and the streets were crammed when we went to the Ball, and
the anxiety of the people to see poor stupid me was very great, and I
must say I am quite touched by it, and feel proud which I always have
done of my country and of the English Nation. I forgot to say that
before we went to dinner we saw the dear children. I gave my beloved
Lehzen a small brooch of my hair.

_Friday, 26th May._— ... Wrote a letter to dear Uncle Leopold, to
dearest Albert from whom I received a most kind and affectionate
letter for my birthday yesterday, and to Ernest Hohenlohe. Finished my
_brouillon_ of Aunt’s letter and began to write it. At 2 we went with
dear Lehzen and I received two more Addresses, one from Kidderminster
presented (not _read_) by Lord Foley[272]; the other from the Borough
of Louth by ——. First of all the Sheriffs of the City came and wished
to know when we should be pleased to receive the Address from the Mayor
and Corporation of London....

_Monday, 29th May._—At ½ p. 1 we went to the Drawing-Room with the
Duchess of Northumberland, dear Lehzen, Lady Mary Stopford, Lady
Catherine Jenkinson, Lady Flora Hastings, Lady Cust, Sir George
Anson, &c. The King and Queen being both unwell, though better, the
Drawing-room was held by the Princess Augusta!! It was an immensely
full one—2000 people, and we did not get home till a ¼ p. 5. The
handsomest people there were: the Duchess of Sutherland, Lady Fanny
Cowper, the Marchioness of Abercorn,[273] Lady Seymour,[274] Mrs.
Blackwood, &c., &c. Countess Emanuel Zichy (Miss Strachan that was)
and who was also at our Concert, was presented. Count Zichy is very
good-looking in uniform, but not in plain clothes. Count Waldstein
looks remarkably well in his pretty Hungarian uniform....

_Tuesday, 30th May._—At ½ p. 2 we went into the saloon with Mary and
Princess Sophia, I being attended by the Duchess of Northumberland
and dear Lehzen, and Mamma by all her ladies and gentlemen. The Lord
Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of the City of London presented Mamma 1st
with an Address to which she read an answer, and then me with a very
kind one. I only answered the following words, from my own accord: “I
am very thankful for your kindness and my Mother has expressed all my
feelings.” The Addresses were read by the Recorder of London (Mr. Law).
There were all together 150 who came up with the Lord Mayor....

_Sunday, 4th June._—Read in the _Exposition_ while my hair was doing.
At ½ p. 9 we breakfasted. The children played in the room. Wrote a
letter to dear Feodore. Drew. At 11 we went to Chapel with dear Lehzen.
The whole service was performed by Mr. Jackson. Wrote my journal.
Wrote. Drew. At a little after 3 came my good and honest friend,
_Stockmar_,[275] and stayed with me till ½ p. 3. He had a very pleasant
and useful conversation with me; he is one of those few people who tell
plain honest truth, don’t flatter, give wholesome necessary advice, and
strive to do good and smooth all dissensions. He is Uncle Leopold’s
greatest and most confidential attached and disinterested friend, and
I hope he is the same to me, at least, I feel so towards him; Lehzen
being of course the _greatest_ friend I have....

_Thursday, 15th June._—After 9 we breakfasted. The children played
in the room. At 10 Mary, dear Lehzen and I drove out and came home
at 10 minutes to 11. _Wrote!!_ The news of the King are so very bad
that all my lessons save the Dean’s are put off, including Lablache’s,
Mrs. Anderson’s, Guazzaroni’s, &c., &c., and we see _nobody_. I regret
rather my singing-lesson, though it is only for a short period, but
duty and _proper feeling_ go before _all pleasures_.—10 minutes to
1,—I just hear that the Doctors think my poor Uncle the King cannot
last more than 48 hours! Poor man! he was always kind to me, and he
_meant_ it well I know; I am grateful for it, and shall ever remember
his kindness with gratitude. He was odd, very odd and singular, but his
intentions were often ill interpreted!—Wrote my journal. At about a ¼
p. 2 came Lord Liverpool and I had a highly important conversation with
him—_alone_....

_Friday, 16th June._— ... Began and read to Lehzen out of De Lolme, _On
the English Constitution_. I forgot to mention that Lehzen finished
reading to me on the 16th of May the delightful letters of Mme. de
Sévigné, and began on the following day _Les Mémoires de l’Impératrice
Joséphine_, par Mdlle. Le Normand, en 2 tomes, which is written in a
very affected and flourished style, but is amusing. The news of the
poor King were a shade better. At a little after 5 we drove out with
Mary and Lehzen and came home at a ¼ to 7. At ½ p. 7 we dined. Saw the
children before dinner. Sang _un poco_. Stayed up till ½ p. 10.

_Saturday, 17th June._—Read in the _Exposition_ while my hair was
doing. After 9 we breakfasted. The children played in the room. At 10
Mary, dear Lehzen, the dear children and I drove out and came home at
11. I like Mary very much; she is a very honest, warm-hearted, good
soul, and very susceptible of kindness shown to her; she is extremely
discreet and retiring too. The news of the King are worse again today.
Wrote my journal &c. Arranged some prints &c. At a little after 2 came
Baron Stockmar and stayed till near 3. The news of the poor King were
_very_ bad! Drew. At a ¼ to 5 we drove out with Mary, Lehzen and dear
little Edward, who was very funny and amusing. We came home at 6....

_Sunday, 18th June._—Got up at 8. After 9 we breakfasted. The children
played in the room. At 10 we went down to prayers with dear Lehzen.
The Dean read and preached. The text was from the 2nd Chapter of St.
John’s epistle, 5th verse. Drew and painted. Mary came up with Edward
and stayed some time. Edward also remained alone with me for a ¼ of
an hour. Painted. Saw Stockmar, who brought me a letter from Uncle
Leopold!!—Painted. The poor King, they say, can live but a few hours
more!—Wrote my journal....

_Monday, 19th June._—Got up at a ¼ p. 8. Read in _Les Veillées du
Château_ while my hair was doing. After 9 we breakfasted. The children
played in the room. At a ¼ p. 10 Mary, Lehzen, the children and I
drove out and came home at a little after 11. Read in _Les Veillées du
Château_. Wrote my journal. Saw Dr. Clark. Saw Ernest Hohenlohe who
brought me the news from Windsor that the poor King was _so_ ill that
he could hardly live through the day. He likewise brought me a very
kind message from the poor Queen, and also one from the poor old King.
After 7 we dined. Saw the children before dinner for a minute. Stayed
up till a ¼ p. 10. Read in W. Scott’s life while my hair was undoing.

_Tuesday, 20th June._—I was awoke at 6 o’clock by Mamma, who told
me that the Archbishop of Canterbury[276] and Lord Conyngham[277]
were here, and wished to see me. I got out of bed and went into my
sitting-room (only in my dressing-gown), and _alone_, and saw them.
Lord Conyngham (the Lord Chamberlain) then acquainted me that my poor
Uncle, the King, was no more, and had expired at 12 minutes p. 2 this
morning, and consequently that I am _Queen_. Lord Conyngham knelt down
and kissed my hand, at the same time delivering to me the official
announcement of the poor King’s demise. The Archbishop then told
me that the Queen was desirous that he should come and tell me the
details of the last moments of my poor, good Uncle; he said that he had
directed his mind to religion, and had died in a perfectly happy, quiet
state of mind, and was quite prepared for his death. He added that the
King’s sufferings at the last were not very great but that there was a
good deal of uneasiness. Lord Conyngham, whom I charged to express my
feelings of condolence and sorrow to the poor Queen, returned directly
to Windsor. I then went to my room and dressed.

Since it has pleased Providence to place me in this station, I shall
do my utmost to fulfil my duty towards my country; I am very young and
perhaps in many, though not in all things, inexperienced, but I am
sure, that very few have more real good will and more real desire to do
what is fit and right than I have.

Breakfasted, during which time good faithful Stockmar[278] came and
talked to me. Wrote a letter to dear Uncle Leopold and a few words
to dear good Feodore. Received a letter from Lord Melbourne[279] in
which he said he would wait upon me at a little before 9. At 9 came
Lord Melbourne, whom I saw in my room, and of COURSE _quite_ ALONE as
I shall _always_ do all my Ministers. He kissed my hand and I then
acquainted him that it had long been my intention to retain him and the
rest of the present Ministry at the head of affairs, and that it could
not be in better hands than his. He then again kissed my hand. He then
read to me the Declaration which I was to read to the Council, which he
wrote himself and which is a very fine one. I then talked with him some
little longer time after which he left me. He was in full dress. I like
him very much and feel confidence in him. He is a very straightforward,
honest, clever and good man. I then wrote a letter to the Queen. At
about 11 Lord Melbourne came again to me and spoke to me upon various
subjects. At about ½ p. 11 I went downstairs and held a Council in
the red saloon. I went in of course quite alone, and remained seated
the whole time. My two Uncles, the Dukes of Cumberland[280] and
Sussex,[281] and Lord Melbourne conducted me. The declaration, the
various forms, the swearing in of the Privy Councillors of which there
were a great number present, and the reception of some of the Lords of
Council, previous to the Council in an adjacent room (likewise alone)
I subjoin here. I was not at all nervous and had the satisfaction of
hearing that people were satisfied with what I had done and how I had
done it. Receiving after this, Audiences of Lord Melbourne, Lord John
Russell, Lord Albemarle (Master of the Horse), and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, all in my room and alone. Saw Stockmar. Saw Clark, whom
I named my Physician. Saw Mary. Wrote to Uncle Ernest. Saw Ernest
Hohenlohe who brought me a kind and very feeling letter from the poor
Queen. I feel very much for her, and really feel that the poor good
King was always so kind personally to me, that I should be ungrateful
were I not to recollect it and feel grieved at his death. The poor
Queen is wonderfully composed now, I hear. Wrote my journal. Took my
dinner upstairs alone. Went downstairs. Saw Stockmar. At about 20
minutes to 9 came Lord Melbourne and remained till near 10. I had a
very important and a very _comfortable_ conversation with him. Each
time I see him I feel more confidence in him; I find him very kind in
his manner too. Saw Stockmar. Went down and said good-night to Mamma
&c. My _dear_ Lehzen will ALWAYS remain with me as my friend but will
take no situation about me, and I think she is right.

_Wednesday, 21st June._—Got up at 8. At 9 we all breakfasted. At ½ p.
9 I went to St. James’s in state. Mamma and Lady Mary Stopford were in
my carriage, and Lord Albemarle, Col. Cavendish, Lady Flora Hastings,
and Col. Harcourt in the others.... After the Proclamation Mamma and
the ladies repaired to an adjoining room and left me in the Closet. I
gave audiences to Lord Melbourne (a long one), the Earl Marshal (Duke
of Norfolk), and Garter King at Arms (Sir John Woods), relative to the
funeral of my poor Uncle the late King; to Lord Albemarle, Lord Hill,
Lord Melbourne (again for some time), and the Lord President (Lord
Lansdowne). I then held a Privy Council in the Throne Room. It was
not fully attended and was not the third part so full as it had been
on the preceding day. The Marquis of Anglesey,[282] the Chancellor
of the Exchequer (Mr. Spring Rice),[283] Lords Wharncliffe,[284]
Ashburton,[285] and Wynford,[286] Sir Hussey Vivian,[287] and some
Judges were sworn in as Privy Councillors and kissed hands. After
the Council I gave audiences to Lord Melbourne, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and all the Bishops except one or two, the Lord Chancellor
and all the Judges; Sir Hussey Vivian (Master General of the Ordnance),
Lord John Russell, Lord Glenelg,[288] Mr. Poulett Thomson,[289] Lord
Howick,[290] Lord Palmerston, and Lord Minto.[291] I then returned
home at 1. I must say it was quite like a dream and a sad one, when
I was seated in the Closet where but barely 5 weeks ago I beheld for
the last time my poor Uncle. At 2 came Stockmar till after 3. Wrote to
the Duchess of Gloucester and Princess Augusta.[292] Walked. Saw the
Duke of Norfolk. Wrote my journal. At 7 we dined. At 10 minutes to 9
came Lord Melbourne and stayed with me till 10. I had an agreeable and
important and satisfactory conversation with him. Stayed up till a ¼ p.
10. Lord Hill told me a curious coincidence which is that the 21st of
June, the day on which I was proclaimed, is likewise the anniversary of
the Battle of Vittoria!

_Thursday, 22nd June._—Got up after 8. After 9 we breakfasted. The
children played in the room. At a ¼ p. 10 I walked out with Mary,
Lehzen, Charles and Edward, and came home at 20 minutes to 11. Wrote
to the Duchess of Gloucester. Wrote my journal. At 12 came the Judge
Advocate General (Mr. Cutlar Ferguson)[293] to submit various sentences
of Court Martial to me. He is a very clever intelligent man and
explained all the cases very clearly to me. I, of _course_, saw him
alone....

_Friday, 23rd June._—Got up at ½ p. 8. After 9 we breakfasted. The
children played in the room. I do not mention the VERY _frequent_
communications I have with Lord Melbourne, Lord John Russell,[294]
&c., &c., &c., as also the other official letters I have to write and
receive, for want of time and space. Saw good Stockmar, who remained
in my room for some time. Saw the Marquis of Conyngham, then Lord
Hill, who explained to me finally about the Court Martials, then Sir
Henry Wheatley[295] and Col. Wood, who as Executors of the late
King, brought me his Will. At ½ p. 12 arrived Lady Catherine[296]
who remained in one of my sitting-rooms till now and still remains
(4 o’clock) answering letters, &c., &c. Saw the Duke of Argyll
(Lord Steward) at ½ p. 2. I wrote a letter to the Marchioness of
Tavistock[297] while Stockmar was here, asking her to become one of
my Ladies of the Bedchamber. Lay down. Wrote to the Marchioness of
Lansdowne,[298] asking her to become my first Lady of the Bedchamber.
At ½ p. 5 I drove out with Mary and Lehzen, and came home at ½ p.
6. After 7 we all dined. I had a GREAT deal of business to do after
dinner. Saw Stockmar. Received a very kind letter from Lady Lansdowne
accepting the situation. After dinner came Princess Sophia. Stayed up
till after 10.

_Saturday, 24th June._—Got up after 8. At ½ p. 9 we all breakfasted.
The children played in the room. Wrote a letter to the Duke of Sussex,
and to good Späth. At 11 came Lord Melbourne and stayed till 12. He is
a very honest, good and kind-hearted, as well as very clever man. He
told me that Lady Tavistock had accepted the situation. And he read
to me the answer which I was to give to the address from the House of
Lords. He told me that the Duke of Argyll would bring the Address but
would not read it; and consequently I was not to read mine. Wrote. At
12 came Lady Catherine Jenkinson and remained in my room till near 3.
Saw Stockmar at a little after 12. Saw Sir Frederick Wetherall.[299]
Saw Lord John Russell. _Wrote._—I really have immensely to do; I
receive so many communications from my Ministers but I like it very
much....

_Sunday, 25th June._—Got up at 8. At ½ p. 9 we breakfasted. The
children played in the room. At 10 I went down to prayers with Mamma,
Mary, Lehzen, and Charles. The service was read by the Dean who
was much affected when he read the prayers in which my name is now
mentioned in the place of my poor Uncle, the late King. He preached a
very good and appropriate sermon; the text of which was from the 3rd
chapter of the Epistle General of St. Peter, 13th and 14th verses....
At a few minutes p. 12 came the Chancellor of the Exchequer (Mr. Spring
Rice) and stayed some time. He is a very clever and good man.... At
about 20 minutes p. 4 came Lord Melbourne till 20 minutes p. 5. He is a
good, honest, kind-hearted and clever man, and I like to talk to him....

_Monday, 26th June._—Got up at 8. Before 9 we breakfasted. At ½ p.
9 went with Mamma to Windsor. I was attended by Lady Tavistock and
Colonel Cavendish,[300] and Mamma by Lady Flora Hastings. We arrived
at the Castle, which looked very mournful and melancholy with the flag
half mast high, at about a ¼ p. 11. We went instantly to the poor
Queen’s apartments.[301] She received me _most kindly_ but was at first
much affected. She however soon regained her self-possession and was
wonderfully calm and composed. She gave us many painfully interesting
details of the illness and last moments of my poor Uncle the late
King. He bore his dreadful sufferings with the most exemplary patience
and always thanked Heaven when these sufferings were but slightly and
momentarily alleviated. He was in the happiest state of mind possible
and his death was worthy his high station. He felt so composed and
seemed to find so much consolation in Religion. The Queen is really a
most estimable and excellent person and she bears the prospect of the
great change she must soon go through in leaving Windsor and changing
her position in a most admirable, strong and high-minded manner. I do
not think her looking ill and the widow’s cap and weeds rather become
her. I saw Ernest Hohenlohe, Gustav and Prince Ernest of Hesse P.B. We
left Windsor at ½ p. 12. It gave me a very painful feeling to think
that the remains of my poor Uncle were in the Castle. Altogether the
whole rather upset me. We came at ½ p. 2. I forgot to say that Lord
Melbourne told me that the Duchess of Sutherland[302] has accepted the
office of Mistress of the Robes, and the Countess of Charlemont[303]
of one of my ladies of the Bedchamber. At ½ p. 2 came the Duchess of
Sutherland, whom I am delighted to have as my Mistress of the Robes;
she was looking so handsome and nice. At about 10 minutes to 4 came
Lord Melbourne and stayed till ½ p. 4. I talked with him as usual on
Political affairs, about my Household, and various other _Confidential_
affairs....

[Illustration: _H.M. Queen Adelaide_

  _from a portrait by Sir W. Ross_]

_Tuesday, 27th June._—Got up at ½ p. 8. At a ¼ to 10 we breakfasted.
The children played in the room. Wrote my journal. At about 20 minutes
p. 11 came Lord Melbourne and stayed till ½ p. 12. At a little after
½ p. 12 came Lord Palmerston and stayed till a little p. 1. He is a
clever and agreeable man. Saw Lord John Russell and Lord Melbourne
for a minute. At a few minutes p. 2 I went down into the saloon with
Lady Lansdowne; Col. Cavendish, the Vice-Chamberlain (Lord Charles
Fitzroy),[304] and the Comptroller of the Household (Mr. Byng)[305]
were in waiting. Lord Melbourne then came in and announced that the
Addresses from the House of Commons were ready to come in. They were
read by Lord John Russell and I read an answer to both. Lord Melbourne
stood on my left hand and Lady Lansdowne behind me. Most of the Privy
Councillors of the House of Commons were present. After this Lord
Palmerston brought in the Earl of Durham,[306] who is just returned
from St. Petersburg. I conferred on him the Grand Cross of the Bath.
I knighted him with the Sword of State which is so enormously heavy
that Lord Melbourne was obliged to hold it for me, and I only inclined
it. I then put the ribbon over his shoulder. After this the foreign
Ambassadors and Ministers were severally introduced to me by Lord
Palmerston. I then went upstairs and gave audiences to the Earl of
Mulgrave[307] and to the Earl of Durham. The latter gave a long
account of Russia. Did various things. Saw Stockmar. As I did not feel
well I did not come down to dinner, but dined upstairs. I went down
after dinner. Stayed up till 10. I wore the blue Ribbon and Star of the
Garter in the afternoon....

_Saturday, 1st July._—Got up after 8. At ½ p. 9 we breakfasted. Edward
played in the room only, Ernest not being good. Wrote. I repeat what I
said before that I have _so many_ communications from the Ministers,
and from me to them, and I get so many papers to sign _every_ day, that
I have always a _very great_ deal to do; but for want of time and space
I do not write these things down. I _delight_ in this work. Saw Lord
Melbourne. At about ½ p. 11 or a ¼ to 12 came Mr. Spring Rice. Saw Lord
John Russell. Wrote &c. At 2 came Sir Henry Wheatley to kiss hands upon
being appointed my Privy Purse. At a little after 2 I saw Stockmar for
a minute. At 10 minutes p. 2 came Lord Palmerston and stayed till 6
minutes p. 3. We talked about Russia and Turkey a good deal &c. He is
very agreeable, and clear in what he says. Saw Stockmar for some time
afterwards. Wrote my journal. I forgot to mention that I received a
letter from dearest Aunt Louise in the morning. The children played in
my room for a little while. At ½ past 5 I drove out with Mamma and dear
Lehzen and came home at 20 minutes to 7. At ½ p. 7 we dined. Stayed up
till a ¼ p. 10.

_Sunday, 2nd July._—Got up at ½ p. 8. At ½ p. 9 we breakfasted. The
children played in the room. At 10 I went to prayers with Mamma, Mary,
and dear Lehzen. The service was performed by the Dean who gave us also
a very good sermon. The text was from the 6th chapter of St. Matthew,
9th and 10th verses. Wrote, signed, &c. Wrote to dear Feodore. Received
a kind long letter from dear Uncle Leopold. At 10 minutes to 2 came
Lord Melbourne till a few minutes p. 3. Talked with him about many
important things. He is indeed a most truly honest, straightforward
and noble-minded man and I esteem myself _most_ fortunate to have such
a man at the head of the Government; a man in whom I can safely place
confidence. There are not _many_ like him in this world of deceit!
Mary and the children came up for a few minutes. At a little before 4
came Stockmar and stayed till a little before 5. He is a most honest,
excellent, disinterested and straightforward man, and most exceedingly
attached and devoted to me; he has been, and is, of the greatest use to
me....

_Saturday, 8th July._—Got up at a little after 8. At ½ p. 9 we
breakfasted. The children played in the room. Signed, &c. Sat to Mr.
Lane for a few minutes. Wrote to the poor Queen from whom I received
a _very_ kind letter last night; &c., &c. Saw good Stockmar for some
time. Saw Lord John Russell. At a few minutes p. 12 came my good
and honest friend Lord Melbourne and stayed till 20 minutes p. 1.
Talked over many important things. Saw Mr. Spring Rice.... I forgot
to say that Lord Melbourne wrote me word yesterday evening that Lady
Mulgrave[308] I was very desirous to become one of my Ladies of the
Bedchamber, and I told Lord Melbourne this morning that I would make
her one of my ladies. Wrote to Lady Lyttelton[309] to ask her to become
one of my ladies of the Bedchamber (in a _year_), for she is still in
widow’s weeds.... At a ¼ p. 7 I, Mamma, Mary and Lehzen dined, Charles
having gone at 5 o’clock to Windsor to attend the funeral of my poor
Uncle, the late King. It was very very sad to hear from ½ p. 8 till
nearly 10 o’clock, those dreadful minute guns! Alas! my poor Uncle, he
now reposes in quiet and peace! As Lord Melbourne said to me, the first
morning when I became Queen, that the poor King “had his faults as we
all have, but that he possessed many valuable qualities.” I have heard
from all sides that he was really very fond of me, and I shall _ever_
retain a grateful sense of his kindness to me and shall never forget
him. Life is short and uncertain, and I am determined to employ my time
well, so that when I am called away from this world my end may be a
peaceful and a happy one!...

_Tuesday, 11th July._—Got up at 8. At ½ p. 9 we breakfasted. The
children played in the room. At a little after 10, sat to Mr. Lane for
a few minutes. Saw Col. Cavendish. Wrote, &c., &c. At ½ p. 11. came
Stockmar who brought me the unwelcome news of poor Lord Melbourne’s
continued indisposition and total incapability of coming to see me
to-day, which I regret for two reasons: first because I have many
things to ask him, 2ndly because I like very much to talk to him, as he
is so quiet in what he says....

_Wednesday, 12th July._—Got up at 8. At ½ p. 9 we breakfasted. Did
various things. At ½ p. 10 came Stockmar and stayed for some time. At
½ p. 11 came Lord Melbourne and stayed till ½ p. 12. He looked and
said he was better, but not quite well. Dressed. At a little before
2 I went with Mamma and the Duchess of Sutherland (in my carriage),
Charles and Mary and Lady Tavistock and Lord Albemarle (in the next
carriage), and Lady Mary Stopford and Colonel Cavendish in another. I
was in full dress and wore the Order of the Bath. I went in state with
a large escort. I was received at the door by the Lord Chamberlain,
the Lord Steward, &c., &c., and was by them conducted into the Closet,
where some people kissed hands. I then went into the Throne Room, Lord
Conyngham handing me in, and a Page of Honour (Master Ellice) bearing
my train. I sat on the Throne. Mamma and Mary stood on the steps of the
Throne on one side, and the Duchess of Sutherland and Lady Tavistock
stood near me (behind). I then received the two Addresses (of which, as
also of all the other things, I subjoin an account), and read Answers
to both. I then returned to the Closet; and went into another room to
put on the Mantle of the Bath[310] (of crimson satin lined with white
silk); I then saw Lord Melbourne in the Closet for a few minutes.
After this I went again into the Throne-room, and seated myself on
the Throne. I then conferred the Order of the Bath (_not sitting_ of
course) upon Prince Esterhazy. After this I again went into the Closet.
Mamma, Mary, Charles and Lady Mary Stopford then went home; it was 3
o’clock. I then took off my Mantle. Received two Deputations from the
Sheriffs &c., to ask when I would receive two more Addresses from the
City. My two Ladies attended me, but after this they went into another
room, where they remained till I went. I then gave an Audience to Lord
Lansdowne. After this I held a Privy Council. After the Council I gave
audiences to the Earl of Yarborough[311] (who thanked me very much for
having appointed his amiable daughter, Lady Charlotte Copley, one of my
Bedchamber Women); to Lord Melbourne, Lord John Russell, Lord Mulgrave,
and Lord Hill. I then left the Palace, the Duchess of Sutherland (who
looked lovely, as she always does), and Lady Tavistock, going with me
in my carriage, in the same way as I came, and got home at a ¼ to 5....

_Thursday, 13th July._—Got up at 8. At ½ p. 9 we breakfasted. It
was the _last time_ that I slept in this poor old Palace,[312] as I
go into Buckingham Palace today. Though I rejoice to _go_ into B.P.
for many reasons, it is not without feelings of regret that I shall
bid adieu _for ever_ (that is to say _for ever_ as a DWELLING), to
this my birth-place, where I have been born and bred, and to which
I am really attached! I have seen my dear sister married here, I
have seen many of my dear relations here, I have had pleasant balls
and _delicious_ concerts here, my present rooms upstairs are really
very pleasant, comfortable and pretty, and _enfin_ I like this poor
Palace. I have held my first Council here too! I have gone through
painful and disagreeable scenes here, ’tis true, but still I am fond
of the poor old Palace. Lord Melbourne told me yesterday that the
Hon. Miss Dillon[313] (to whom I had offered it), has accepted the
situation of Maid of Honour. I always saw Lord Melbourne and also
Stockmar in my Private Sitting-room (the first of the three), but all
the other Ministers &c. &c. I saw in the further room (the farthest
of the 3). Did various things. Saw Stockmar for some time. The poor
rooms look so sad and deserted, everything being taken away. Wrote my
journal. At a little after 2 I went with Mamma and Lady Lansdowne (in
my carriage), Lehzen, and Col. Cavendish (in the next) to Buckingham
Palace. I am much pleased with my rooms.[314] They are high, pleasant
and cheerful. Arranged things. At a little after 4 Lady Lansdowne
brought Miss Pitt[315] and Miss Spring Rice[316] (the two Maids of
Honour in Waiting, and who lodge here) to kiss hands. Miss Pitt is
a _very_ pretty, elegant, nice girl, and Miss Spring Rice is a nice,
clever-looking girl. Saw Stockmar. Lady Lansdowne afterwards brought
Miss Davys to kiss hands, who is a very nice girl (though not at all
pretty). I then walked round the garden (which is large and very
pretty) with Mamma. Dear _Dashy_ was quite happy in it....

[Illustration: _H.R.H. Princess Victoria_

  _from a portrait by R. J. Lane 1829._]




                   INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO CHAPTER VII

  The break between the life of Princess Victoria and that of the
  young Queen was now complete. Changes came innumerable and fast.
  Her Household was formed, and it reflected the complexion of Lord
  Melbourne’s Ministry, which had been established in power after
  the General Election by a majority of thirty-eight. The Queen left
  the home of her childhood for ever. She was the first Sovereign to
  occupy Buckingham Palace. The building had been begun by George
  IV., and although finished by William IV., had never been prepared
  for occupation. It remained an inconvenient house until it was
  added to in after-years by Prince Albert. Although Baron Stockmar,
  the old medical attendant of King Leopold, who had been domiciled
  in England by command of his master, was reputed to be acting as
  the Queen’s Private Secretary, that post was in reality occupied
  by Lord Melbourne himself. He was both Private Secretary and Tutor
  to the young Queen at this stage of her career. Her political
  education proceeded fast, and she learned with avidity. Her good
  sense and composure were indeed remarkable. It was noted by all
  that she was considerate and thoughtful to her elderly relatives,
  and to the friends and servants of her predecessor. Her girlish
  charm was attractive to those who were privileged to be about her,
  and its influence over her subjects was soon widespread. When
  within a month of her accession she appeared in the House of Lords
  to dissolve Parliament in accordance with the Law, she read her
  Speech, said Fanny Kemble, who was present, with splendid effect.
  This well-qualified judge observed that the Queen’s voice was
  exquisite, that her enunciation was as perfect as the intonation
  was melodious, and that it was impossible to hear more excellent
  utterance than that of the Queen’s English by the English Queen.

  It is difficult always to remember that the writer of these
  Journals was at this epoch little more than a child, that she
  had been educated almost exclusively by women, and that she had
  lived on the whole a very solitary life, hampered by the unhappy
  conditions attached to a girl who possesses no brothers and
  sisters, and is in addition heir to a Throne. She was now suddenly
  thrown almost entirely among men, grave and old, all of whom were
  engaged in administering the complicated affairs of that Kingdom of
  which she was Queen. It is difficult to imagine a greater contrast.
  How rapidly the youthful Princess became a woman under the pressure
  of these extraordinary circumstances becomes clear from her
  Journals. They indicate a curious maturity, through which, however,
  there peeps occasionally the face and figure of a child.


                              CHAPTER VII

                                 1837

_Friday, 14th July._—Got up after 8. At ½ p. 9 I, Mamma, Lehzen, and
Lady Flora breakfasted upstairs. Wrote, signed, &c. Saw Sir F. Watson,
Col. Cavendish, Sir H. Wheatley, Stockmar. At a little after 11 saw
Sir John Hobhouse[317] for a little while. He is a very clever and
agreeable man. I saw him (where I shall see all the Ministers &c.) in
the small room[318] which opens into my sitting-room. Wrote my journal.
Dressed. At a few minutes to 2 I went with Mamma and the Duchess of
Sutherland (in my carriage), Lady Charlemont and Lord Albemarle (in the
next carriage), and Charles, Mary, and Lady Flora (in the other) to St.
James’s. I was in full dress and wore the blue ribbon and star of the
Garter, and the Garter round my arm. I was received in the same way as
before. I went into the Throne Room, sat on the Throne, and received
three Addresses in the same way as on Friday. Two of the Addresses
were _very fully_ attended and the room became intensely hot. I then
put on the Mantle and Collar of the Garter (of dark blue velvet lined
with white silk). Gave a few minutes audience to Lord Melbourne. I then
went into the Throne Room (did not sit on the Throne), held a Chapter
of the Garter and conferred that Order on Charles. Mamma, Charles and
Mary went away immediately after this, but I remained and gave a long
audience to Lord Melbourne, who read to me the Speech which I am to
deliver when I prorogue Parliament. He reads so well and with _so_ much
good feeling. I am sorry to see him still looking ill. I then saw the
Duke of Devonshire.[319] Came home with my two Ladies at ½ p. 4.

_Saturday, 15th July._—At a few minutes p. 2 I went into one of the
large drawing-rooms and held a Cabinet Council, at which were present
all the Ministers. The Council lasted but a very short while. I then
went into my Closet and received Lord Melbourne there. He stayed with
me till 20 minutes to 4. He seemed and said he was better. He has
such an honest, frank, and yet gentle manner. He talks so quietly.
I always feel peculiarly satisfied when I have talked with him. I
have _great_ confidence in him. Saw the Duke of Argyll[320] and Lord
Albemarle. At 10 minutes to 4 came Lord Palmerston and stayed about
20 minutes. He is a very clever and agreeable man. I then saw Lord
Glenelg for a short while. Played and sang. Wrote my journal. At a ¼
to 8 I dined. Mamma being unwell did not come to dinner. Besides the
people in the House which made with me 6,—Charles, Mary, the Duke of
Sussex, Princess Sophia, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl and Countess
of Mulgrave, the Earl and Countess of Durham, the Earl of Liverpool
and the Ladies Jenkinson, the Lord and the Equerry in Waiting, and
Lord John Churchill[321] dined here. I sat between Uncle Sussex and
the Duke of Norfolk. After dinner, at 10 o’clock came _Thalberg_,[322]
the most famous pianist in the world! He played four things, all by
heart. They were all Fantasias by him; (1) on _The Preghiera of Mosé_,
(2) on “God save the King” and “Rule Britannia,” (3) on _Norma_, (4)
on _Les Huguenots_. _Never, never_ did I hear anything at all like
him! He combines the most _exquisite_, _delicate_ and touching feeling
with the most wonderful and powerful execution! He is unique and I am
quite in ecstasies and raptures with him. I sat quite near the piano
and it is quite extraordinary to watch his hands, which are large,
but fine and graceful. He draws tones and sounds from the piano which
no one else can do. He is _unique_. He is quite young, about 25,
small, delicate-looking, a very pleasing countenance, and extremely
gentlemanlike. He is modest to a degree and very agreeable to talk to.
J’étais en extase!...

_Monday, 17th July._—Got up at 8. At ½ p. 9 we breakfasted. Saw Sir
F. Watson and Col. Cavendish. Saw Stockmar. At ½ p. 1 I went in state
to the House of Lords, with the Duchess of Sutherland and the Master
of the Horse in my carriage, and Lady Lansdowne and Lady Mulgrave in
another. Had I time I would give a very minute account of the whole,
but as I have _very_ little, I will only say what I feel I wish
particularly to name. I went first to the Robing-room, but as there
were so many people there I went to a Dressing-room where I put on
the Robe which is enormously heavy. After this I entered the House of
Lords preceded by all the Officers of State and Lord Melbourne bearing
the Sword of State walking just before me. He stood quite close to me
on the left-hand of the Throne, and I feel always a satisfaction to
have him near me on such occasions, as he is such an honest, good,
kind-hearted man and is my _friend_, I know it. The Lord Chancellor
stood on my left. The house was very full and I felt somewhat (but very
little) nervous before I read my speech, but it did very well, and I
was happy to hear people were satisfied. I then unrobed in the Library
and came home as I went, at 20 minutes p. 3....

_Wednesday, 19th July._—Got up at ½ p. 8. At ½ p. 9 we breakfasted. Saw
Sir F. Watson, Col. Cavendish, and Stockmar. At 20 minutes p. 11 came
Lord Melbourne till a ¼ p. 12. Talked over many things. Dressed. At a
¼ p. 1 I went with the Duchess of Sutherland and Lady Portman in my
carriage, to St. James’s. I received two addresses on the Throne and
read answers to them. After that Col. Buckley[323] and Col. Wemyss
kissed hands on being appointed Equerries, as also the Hon. William
Cowper (nephew to Lord Melbourne) as Groom in Waiting. Also many
others. I gave audiences to various foreign Ambassadors, amongst which
were Count Orloff,[324] sent by the Emperor of Russia to compliment me.
He presented me with a letter from the Empress of Russia accompanied
by the Order of St. Catherine all set in diamonds. (I, of course,
as I generally do every evening, wore the Garter.) The Levee began
immediately after this and lasted till ½ p. 4 without one minute’s
interruption. I had my hand kissed nearly _3000_ times! I then held a
Council, at which were present almost all the Ministers. After this I
saw Lord Melbourne for a little while, and then Lord Palmerston....

_Wednesday, 2nd August._— ... After dinner I sat on the sofa with
the pretty amiable little Countess C. Pozzo di Borgo and Lady
Salisbury,[325] and Count Pozzo di Borgo and Prince Auersperg[326]
sat near us. Prince Auersperg is a very nice, good-looking young
man, very quiet, good-humoured and retiring. Lady Seymour is
certainly _exceedingly_ beautiful; she has not the splendid eyes and
fine expression of her sister Mrs. Norton, but altogether she is
handsomest, and there is a sweetness and gentleness about her which
neither Mrs. Norton nor Mrs. Blackwood have.[327] Stayed up till ½ p.
10....

_Wednesday, 9th August._—Got up at a little after 8 and breakfasted at
½ p. 9. Saw Sir Frederic Watson and Col. Buckley. Began a letter to
dear Uncle Leopold. Saw Stockmar. Finished my letter to Uncle Leopold
and wrote my journal. At 7 minutes to 12 came Lord Melbourne and stayed
till a ¼ to 2. Talked over many serious subjects. I’m somewhat anxious
about the Elections but I trust in Heaven that we shall have a Majority
for us, and that the present Government may remain firm for _long_.
Lord Melbourne spoke so candidly, so disinterestedly, and so calmly
about all this. Wrote my journal. Drew. At 3 came the Queen Adelaide’s
sister, Ida, Duchess of Saxe-Weimar,[328] with 3 of her children. Her
2nd son, Edward, 14 years old, who was born here[329] and consequently
is my subject, and her little girls, Anna and Amalie, 9 and 7 years
old. Edward is a very nice boy. I stayed some time with them and then
went down and drew in my room while Mamma took them into the garden....

_Tuesday, 15th August._—Got up at ½ p. 8, and breakfasted in my own
room at a ¼ to 10. Put on my habit and went with dear Lehzen, Miss
Cavendish,[330] Lord Albemarle, Col. Cavendish, Col. Buckley and
Stockmar, to the Mews, which are in the garden. The Riding-house is
very large. Sir George Quentin and Mr. Fozard (who has a situation in
my Stables) &c., were there. I had not ridden for 2 years! I first
rode a bay horse, a delightful one called Ottoman, and cantered about
a good while. I then tried for a minute another horse which I did not
like so well. I then remounted Ottoman. After him I mounted a beautiful
and very powerful but delightful grey horse, a Hanoverian, called
Fearon. Miss Cavendish rode also the whole time; she rides very nicely.
Came home at 20 minutes to 12. Mamma came into the School when I had
been riding a little while....

_Wednesday, 16th August._—Got up at ½ p. 8, and breakfasted before 10
in my own room. At ½ p. 10 I went to the Riding House with Mamma, Miss
Cocks,[331] Miss Cavendish, dearest Lehzen, Col. Cavendish, and Col.
Buckley. I rode 1st a horse called Rosa (not my poor little Rosa), then
Monarch, rather a nice horse, then Emma, not a bad horse, then Fearon,
my favourite, and lastly Emperor, a _very_ nice chestnut horse. Mamma
and my Maids of Honour also rode. Came home at 12. At 7 minutes past 1
came Lord Melbourne and stayed till a ¼ to 3....

WINDSOR CASTLE, _Tuesday, 22nd August_.—Got up at a ¼ to 9 and
breakfasted at 10. Saw Col. Buckley. Wrote to the Grand Duchess of
Oldenbourg.[332] Arranged various things. At 20 minutes to 12 came my
kind, good friend Lord Melbourne and stayed till ½ p. 1. I am quite
sorry to think I shall not see him till next Monday, when he comes down
to me at Windsor, for I am so fond of him, and his conversations do
me much good; he is such a thoroughly straightforward, disinterested,
excellent and kindhearted man. He goes down to Brocket Hall tonight
with his sister Lady Cowper, Lady Fanny, and Mr. Cowper (my Groom), and
the younger brother, Spencer Cowper. I hope the country air and rest
will do him good. Saw Sir H. Wheatley, and Stockmar. Wrote my journal.
Saw Sir F. Wetherall,[333] and Prince Ernest of Hesse P.B.[334] At ½
p. 2 I went with Mamma, Lady Charlotte Copley, and Lady Flora in my
carriage; dear Lehzen, Miss Cocks, Miss Cavendish, and Col. Buckley
going in the other, to Windsor Castle, where I arrived at ½ p. 5. I had
escort of Lancers. All along the road the people were very loyal and
civil, and my poor native place, Kensington, particularly so. When we
reached the Long Walk at Windsor a larger escort of the 1st Life Guards
met me; the Walk was thronged with people, where a dinner was given to
them in honour of my arrival. The people were remarkably friendly and
civil. Unfortunately it began to rain before we reached the Long Walk.
Windsor looked somewhat gloomy and I cannot help feeling as though _I_
was not the Mistress of the House and as if I was to see the poor King
and Queen. There is sadness about the whole which I must say I feel.
Lady Tavistock, who is in waiting for 4 weeks, Lord Conyngham, and the
Lord Steward received me at the door. I inhabit the Queen’s rooms,
though not in the same way as she did. At ½ p. 7 we dined....

_Saturday, 26th August._—Got up at a ¼ to 9 and at 10 we breakfasted
with all the Ladies including Lady Charlemont and Lady Barham. To-day
is my _dearest_ cousin Albert’s 18th birthday, and I pray Heaven to
pour its choicest blessings on his beloved head! Took leave of Lady
Barham as both she and he go away....

_Sunday, 27th August._— ... At ½ p. 2 we all went into the drawing-room
and received the King of Würtemburg[335] who came to take leave. He
was accompanied by Count Mandelsloh, Baron Spitzemberg, and General
Fleischmann. He took luncheon with us and the whole party including
Lord Glenelg, whom I asked to stay another night. By some mistake Lord
Tavistock did not come to luncheon. I sat between the King and Count
Mandelsloh. After luncheon I showed the King the State Rooms &c. and at
4 he took leave and went away. He leaves England on Tuesday and is much
pleased with what he has seen....

_Monday, 28th August._— ... I hope Lord Melbourne will stay here for
some days. At 4 I rode out with Mamma, Lady Charlotte Copley, Lady
Mary Stopford (who got into the carriage and drove), Miss Cavendish,
Miss Cocks, Lord Melbourne, Lord Conyngham, Lord Torrington,[336]
Col. Cavendish, Col. Buckley, and Mr. Rich. As Sir George Quentin
and Mr. Fozard _always_ ride out with us, I shall not mention them
any more. Lady Tavistock and Lehzen followed in a pony carriage. I
rode Duchess, a nice bay horse, but rather too quiet and not near so
pleasant as Monarch. Mamma rode Barbara. Lord Melbourne rode his own
horse, a very fine black mare which came down from London this day. It
was a very pleasant ride and we came home at a ¼ p. 6.... _Tuesday,
29th August._—Got up at ½ p. 8 and at ½ p. 9 we breakfasted with all
the ladies. Wrote my journal. At ½ p. 11 or rather at a ¼ to 12 came
Lord Melbourne and stayed till a ¼ to 2. At 3 I walked over the House
with Mamma and most of the ladies, and Lord Conyngham, Col. Buckley,
Col. Cavendish, &c. The offices are not good. We then walked a little
while on the Terrace. Played on the piano or rather more sang with
Mamma. At 7 o’clock arrived my _dearest most beloved_ Uncle Leopold
and my _dearest most beloved_ Aunt Louise. They _are both_, and _look
both_, _very well_; dearest Aunt Louise is looking so well and is grown
_quite_ fat. I and Mamma as well as my whole court were all at the door
to receive them. It is an inexpressible _happiness_ and _joy_ to me,
to have these dearest beloved relations with me and in _my own_ house.
I took them to their rooms, and then hastened to dress for dinner. At
8 we dined.... Dearest Aunt Louise went in first with Lord Lansdowne,
then I with dear Uncle, and Mamma with M. Van de Weyer. I sat between
dear Uncle and my good Lord Melbourne; two delightful neighbours. Dear
Aunt Louise sat opposite. After dinner I sat on the sofa with dearest
Aunt Louise, who is really _an angel_, and Lord Melbourne sat near me.
Uncle talked with Lord Palmerston. It was a most delightful evening....

_Friday, 1st September._— ... I rode Monarch who went delightfully,
and Aunt Louise and Mamma the same horses as the preceding day. The
weather looked lowering when we went out. When we were about the middle
of Queen Anne’s Walk, there came a most unexpected and violent flash of
lightning which was followed instantaneously by a tremendous clap of
thunder. My horse jumped a little, but very little, but Aunt Louise’s
being very much alarmed by the thunder, _ran away, full gallop_, to our
great horror, and poor dear Aunt lost her hat; thank God! the horse
stopped after 100 yards at the foot of a hill and was led back. We had
meanwhile got into a close carriage with the three ladies, and dear
Aunt Louise who was not the _least_ frightened but only “quite ashamed”
as she said, also got in, and we drove home (all six) in a tremendous
thunderstorm and deluge of rain. We reached home in perfect safety at 5
o’clock....

_Friday, 8th September._—Got up at a ¼ to 9 and at a little before 10
I breakfasted with dearest Uncle Leopold, dearest Aunt Louise, Mamma
and the Duke of Sussex. Talked with Uncle Leopold for some time. How I
wish I had time to take _minutes_ of the very interesting and highly
important conversations I have with my Uncle and with Lord Melbourne;
the sound observations they make, and the impartial advice they give
me would make a most interesting book. At 11 Lord Melbourne came to
me and stayed with me till 20 minutes to 1. He is a most excellent,
kindhearted, honest and upright man, and my beloved Uncle is delighted
with him, which makes me very happy, as I am so fond of Lord Melbourne,
and he _has been_ and _is such_ a _kind friend_ to me. Uncle and he
perfectly agree in Politics too, which are the _best_ there _are_. Lord
Melbourne goes to town, I’m sorry to say, today, but will be back here
tomorrow. Saw dearest Uncle Leopold. Talked with him. Signed. Wrote my
journal....

_Tuesday, 12th September._— ... After dinner I sat part of the evening
on the sofa with Lady Tavistock, dearest Uncle Leopold and Lord
Melbourne sitting near me; they talked very interestingly together.
The rest of the evening I sat on the sofa with dearest Aunt Louise,
who played a game at chess with me, to _teach_ me, and Lord Melbourne
sat near me. Lord Tavistock, Lord Palmerston, Mrs. Cavendish, Sir J.
Hobhouse and Mme. de Mérode,[337] sat round the table. Lord Melbourne,
Lord Palmerston, Sir J. Hobhouse, and later too Lord Conyngham, all
gave me advice, and _all different_ advice, about my playing at chess,
and _all_ got so _eager_ that it was very amusing; in particular Lord
Palmerston and Sir J. Hobhouse,[338] who differed totally and got quite
excited and serious about it. Between them all, I got quite beat, and
Aunt Louise triumphed over my Council of Ministers!...

_Monday, 18th September._— ... After dinner I sat on the sofa part
of the evening with Lady Tavistock, Lord Melbourne sitting near me,
and the rest with my _dearest_ Aunt Louise, with whom I played a game
at chess, and _beat_ her; Lord Palmerston, Lord Melbourne, and Lord
Conyngham sat near me advising me. At 11, our _last happy evening_
broke up, and Aunt Louise took leave in the kindest way imaginable
of the whole party except my gentlemen; and good Lord Melbourne was
touched to tears by this leave-taking. I cannot say _how_ I shall
miss my dearest Aunt Louise; she combines with _great_ cleverness and
learning, so much merriment, and has all the liveliness and fun of a
girl of 16, with all the _sense_ and _deep_ thought of one of 30 and
much older even. And I think she is _so lovely_, so graceful, she
has such an angelic expression in her clear eyes; and she dresses _so
well_, morning and evening. And then my beloved Uncle whom I look up
to and _love_ as a _father_, how I shall _miss_ his protection out
_riding_, and his conversation!...

_Thursday, 28th September._—Got up at ½ p. 8 and breakfasted with
Mamma at a ¼ to 10. Wrote to the Duchess of Gloucester. Saw Sir
Jeffrey Wyattville.[339] Wrote to the Queen and my journal. At 12 Lord
Melbourne came to me and stayed with me till 10 m. p. 1. Dressed, in a
habit of dark blue with red collar and cuffs (the Windsor Uniform which
all my gentlemen wear), a military cap, and my Order of the Garter, as
I was going to review the Troops. At 2 I mounted Leopold, who was very
handsomely harnessed; all the gentlemen were in uniform, that is to say
Lord Hill, Lord Alfred Paget[340] (who looked remarkably handsome in
his uniform of the Blues), Prince Lichtenstein,[341] Baron Reisehach,
&c., and my other gentlemen wore the Windsor uniform with cocked hats.
Mamma and Miss Cavendish rode, as did also my pretty little page,
George Cavendish, who looked so pretty in his uniform, mounted on a
little pony all harnessed like a large horse. Lord Palmerston also
rode. All the other ladies and gentlemen, including Lord Melbourne,
drove in carriages after us. The Lancers escorted us. When we came
upon the ground, which is in the Home Park, I rode up with the whole
party to where a Sergeant was stationed with the colours, and there
stopped, and the regiments saluted me. I saluted them by putting my
hand to my cap like the officers do, and was much admired for my manner
of doing so. I then cantered up to the Lines with all the gentlemen
and rode along them. Leopold behaved most beautifully, so quietly, the
Bands really playing _in_ his face. I then cantered back to my first
position and there remained while the Troops marched by in slow and
quick time, and when they manœuvred, which they did beautifully. The
Troops consisted of the 1st Regiment of Life Guards who are beautiful,
of the Grenadier Guards, and of some of the Lancers. They fired and
skirmished a good deal, and near us, and Leopold never moved. The whole
went off beautifully; and I felt for the first time like a man, as if
I could fight myself at the head of my Troops. We rode back to the
Castle at ½ p. 4, and I mounted Barbara and rode out with Mamma, Prince
Lichtenstein, Lord Melbourne, Lord Palmerston, Baron Reisehach, Lord
Torrington, Lord Alfred Paget, Miss Cavendish, Lady Mary, Mr. Murray
and Miss Murray, and came home at 7 m. to 6. Lord Melbourne rode near
me.

_Friday, 29th September._—Got up at a ¼ to 9 and breakfasted at 10 with
Mamma. Wrote to dear Ferdinand and to the good Queen of Portugal while
my hair was doing before breakfast. Wrote to dearest Aunt Louise and
my journal. At 12 Lord Melbourne came to me and stayed with me till ½
p. 1. He read to me a Paper about the Civil List, and explained it to
me, and so _clearly_ and _well_ he explained it; he reads very well
too, so distinctly and with so much good emphasis....

_Saturday, 30th September._—Got up at a ¼ to 9 and breakfasted at 10
with Mamma. Saw Lord Albemarle. Wrote my journal. At a ¼ p. 11 Lord
Melbourne came to me and stayed with me till a ¼ to 12. At a ¼ to 12
came the Queen with her sister the Duchess of Saxe-Weimar and stayed
with me till 1 o’clock. The poor Queen was very much composed, though
it must have been a very painful and severe trial for her, considering
she had not been here since she left the Castle, the night after the
poor King’s funeral. I showed her all my rooms with which she was much
pleased; and she went by herself to see the room where the King died. I
sang a little and Mamma also, while they were there....

_Tuesday, 3rd October._—Got up at a ¼ to 9 and at a ¼ p. 10 I
breakfasted with Mamma. Wrote to dearest Uncle Leopold and my journal.
Saw Sir H. Wheatley. At ½ p. 12 Lord Melbourne came to me and stayed
with me till 5 m. to 2. He read to me some Despatches from Canada
which are not very satisfactory. Saw Princess Augusta. At ½ p. 3 I
rode out with Mamma, Lord Melbourne, Lord Palmerston, Lady Mary, Lord
Torrington, Mr. Murray, Mr. Brand, Col., Mrs. and Miss Cavendish, and
Miss Murray, and came home at 6. We rode all round Virginia Water, a
beautiful ride, and cantered almost the whole way home. It was the
hottest summer evening that can be imagined, not a breath of air, and
hotter coming home than going out. Alas! it was our last ride here!
I am _very sorry_ indeed to go! I passed such a very pleasant time
here; the pleasantest summer I EVER passed in _my life_, and I shall
never forget this first summer of my Reign. I have had the _great_
happiness of having my beloved Uncle and Aunt here with me, I have had
very pleasant people and kind friends staying with me, and I have had
_delicious_ rides which have done me a world of good. Lord Melbourne
rode near me the whole time. The more I see of him and the more I know
of him, the more I like and appreciate his fine and honest character.
I have seen a great deal of him, every day, these last 5 weeks, and I
have always found him in good humour, kind, good, and most agreeable;
I have seen him in my Closet for Political Affairs, I have ridden out
with him (every day), I have sat near him constantly at and after
dinner, and talked about all sorts of things, and have always found him
a kind and most excellent and very agreeable man. I am very fond of
him. Wrote my journal....

BRIGHTON, _Wednesday, 4th October_.—... I constantly regret I cannot
write down many of the pleasant and instructive conversations I have
with clever people, such as Lord Melbourne, Lord Palmerston, Lord
Holland, &c., &c. And many of the Foreign Despatches which I read, in
particular some of the Private letters of the Ambassadors and Ministers
to Lord Palmerston, are _so_ interesting and well written that I wish
I could note them down. I read one of Mr. Villiers’[342] from Madrid
to-day, which is remarkably well written....

_Tuesday, 24th October._—Got up at 25 m. p. 8 and breakfasted at a ¼
to 10 with Mamma, having signed &c. before breakfast. Wrote my journal
&c. At 3 m. to 11 Lord Melbourne came to me and stayed with me till ½
p. 12. Talked over many things and gave him a letter I had received
this morning from Uncle Leopold, to read; he took it with him. Sat to
Sir David Wilkie. Before I left the painting room, I sent for Lord
Melbourne to see the Picture, with which he was much pleased. It is
to be my _First Council_,[343] and a great many Portraits will be
introduced into the picture; Lord Melbourne will be painted standing
near me. Wrote my journal....

_Sunday, 29th October._— ... At a little after 3 I _tried_ to drive out
with Lady Mulgrave, Lady Gardiner and Miss Paget[344] following, but
we were obliged to come home again almost directly as it rained the
whole time. It is really most provoking weather. Finished my letter
to Feodore, and wrote one to my _Cousin Marie_.[345] Saw Stockmar for
one instant. At 7 we dined....

_Wednesday, 1st November._—Got up at a ¼ to 9 and breakfasted at 10
with Mamma. Received before breakfast a letter from Ferdinand and
one from Mary with a very pretty little ring in it. At ½ p. 10 my
excellent, kind friend Lord Melbourne came to me and stayed with me
till 12. Talked over many things; and talked over some _disagreeable
business_ about which Lord Melbourne is _very kind_ (as he is about
_everything_, for he is the best-hearted, kindest and most feeling man
in the world) and very anxious. Showed him dear Ferdinand’s letter.
Poor Ferdinand’s position and the unfortunate state of Portuguese
affairs distress him much; he takes everything so much to heart,
which is generally not the case with a Statesman. I observed to Lord
Melbourne that there were not many very good preachers to be found;
he replied in the affirmative and added, “But there are not _many
very good anything_,” which is _very true_.... I then took leave of
him, told him I was very sorry he went, to which he replied he was
also very sorry. I shall see him again however on Saturday when I go
to town. I am _very sorry_ to lose his agreeable company (as I always
like to have those who are kind to me, and _my_ friends, with me)
these last days here. And I am very sorry to think that the summer and
autumn (the pleasantest _I_ EVER passed) are over! How time flies when
pleasantly spent!! Lord Melbourne also was much better for this quiet
life and liked it too. He is a great friend of Lehzen’s which makes
me _more_ fond of him still. I always saw Lord Melbourne in my little
sitting-room; I being seated on a sofa, and he in an armchair near or
close opposite me; the other ministers and visitors I saw in another
little room just the same size as this one, where Lehzen always sits;
it is close to the other, one little room only being between the two....

BUCKINGHAM PALACE, _Saturday, 4th November_.—Got up at ½ p. 7. Wrote
my journal while my hair was doing. Received a few lines from Lord
Melbourne. At 9 I breakfasted with Mama. Saw Stockmar. At 10 minutes
to 10 I left Brighton with Mama and Lady Mulgrave; Miss Dillon, Lady
Mary Stopford, dearest Lehzen and Col. Cavendish following in another
carriage. Lady Gardiner went in her own carriage. I took leave of Miss
Paget before I went; both her and Miss Dillon’s waitings were out on
Thursday, but I did not wish to give the other Maids of Honour the
trouble of coming down only for two days and then going back again.
Miss Paget is a very good, quiet, nice, unaffected girl. We changed
horses first at Hickstead, 2ndly at Crawley, 3rdly at Redhill, and
lastly at Croydon, and reached Buckingham Palace at 3. It is a journey
of 52 miles.... I have changed my rooms, that is to say, I sit in my
dressing-room, and make it both my sitting and dressing-room, which is
much more comfortable and cheerful than the other rooms on the other
side; and I shall see all my Ministers &c. in the former breakfast
room,[346] next my dressing-room, which is now very prettily furnished
and looks very nice and cheerful. Lehzen’s little sitting-room is next
this room. At a few m. p. 4 came my good Lord Melbourne, whom I was
happy to see well and in good spirits, though a little tired with the
deal he has to do; he stayed with me till 10 m. p. 5, and we talked
over various important things. I, of course, saw him in the _new
Ministerial Room_....

_Thursday, 9th November._—Got up at ½ p. 9 and breakfasted by myself
in my room at ½ p. 10. Played on the piano and sang. Wrote my journal.
Dressed for the Lord Mayor’s dinner, in _all my finery_. At 2 I went
in the state carriage and 8 horses with the Duchess of Sutherland and
Lord Albemarle; all my suite, the Royal Family, &c., went before me.
I reached the Guildhall at a little before 4. Throughout my progress
to the city, I met with the MOST gratifying, affectionate, hearty
and brilliant reception from the greatest concourse of people I ever
witnessed; the streets being _immensely crowded_ as were also the
windows, houses, churches, balconies, every where. I was then conducted
by the Lord Chamberlain, the Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress preceding
me, and my whole suite following me,—to a private drawing-room, where
I found Mamma, the Duchess of Gloucester, the Duchess of Cambridge,
and Augusta, and all their Ladies. All my Ladies came in there. After
waiting some little time, I sent for Lord Melbourne and Lord John
Russell, to ask them some questions, and they came in for a minute or
two, and then went away. After waiting a little longer, I was conducted
by Lord Conyngham in the same way as before, the Royal Family and my
Ladies &c. following, to the Council Room, where were the Dukes of
Sussex and Cambridge and George,—all my Ministers, all the Foreign
Ambassadors and Ministers &c., &c., the Lord Mayor, all the Aldermen,
the Lady Mayoress and all the Aldermen’s wives. I was seated in a large
arm-chair, all the others standing. The Recorder then read an Address,
to which I read an answer; when the Lord Mayor was presented I said to
Lord John Russell (what I had previously been told to do), “I desire
you to take proper measures for conferring the dignity of Baronet on
the Lord Mayor.” I then knighted the Sheriffs, one of whom was Mr.
Montefiore, a Jew, an excellent man[347]; and I was very glad that I
was the first to do what _I_ think quite right, as it should be. The
Lady Mayoress and all the Aldermen’s wives were then presented. After
this we returned, as before, to the Private Drawing room and remained
there till a ¼ p. 5 when we went to dinner.... I drank a glass of wine
with the Lord Mayor (John Cowan) and the late Lord Mayor. The Lord
Mayor is a quiet little old man of 70 (they say). When my health was
given out, there was great cheering and applause. I left dinner in the
same way I came in at about ½ p. 7; and we went as before into the
Private Drawing room and waited there till the carriages were ready.
All the Royal Family went away before me. I went at ½ p. 8 in a usual
carriage (not a state carriage) with the Duchess of Sutherland and Lord
Albemarle as before. We came back just in the same way as we went,
only that each carriage had only a pair of horses, and there were no
people on foot walking by the carriage. The crowd was, if possible,
greater than it had been when I went in the day; and they cheered me
excessively as I came along. The streets were beautifully illuminated
on all sides, and looked very brilliant and gay. I got home by 20
m. to 10, and quite safely; I trust there have been no accidents. I
cannot say HOW gratified, and HOW _touched_ I am by the very brilliant,
affectionate, cordial, enthusiastic and _unanimous_ reception I met
with in this the _greatest_ Metropolis in the _World_; there was not
a discontented look, not a sign of displeasure—all loyalty, affection
and loud greeting from the immense multitude I passed through; and
no disorder whatever. I feel _deeply grateful_ for this display of
affection and unfeigned loyalty and _attachment_ from my good people.
It is much more than I deserve, and I shall do my utmost to render
myself worthy of all this love and affection. I had a very bad headache
in the morning, but it went off during all the ceremonies; it was
somewhat bad when I came home, but I went to bed immediately after I
had signed a few papers....

_Sunday, 12th November._— ... Saw Stockmar. Walked. Signed. Wrote my
journal. Read Despatches. At a little after 7 we dined. Our whole party
made only 12 in number, which were, us 10 (for Miss Davys and Col.
Cavendish had gone home and Lady Mary was ill), Lord Melbourne and Mr.
Cowper. Lord Melbourne led me in and I sat between him and Mr. Cowper.
I was happy to see Lord Melbourne in very good spirits; he was very
amusing about Theatricals and has peculiar tastes of his own about
actors. He has such an honest, blunt, and amusing manner of coming out
with his remarks and observations. After dinner I sat on the sofa with
Mamma, and Lord Melbourne sat near me the whole evening. Mr. Cowper
(who, as usual, was very amusing), and Lady Mulgrave sat near the
table. Lord Melbourne does not, I think, look quite as well as he used
to do when at Windsor and Brighton; he looks paler and tired often; and
he says he feels the want of exercise. I fear since I have come to the
throne he has still more to do than he had before; but he is always
ready to assist me in every way, and will not admit that I trouble him.
Stayed up till 11. It was a very pleasant evening.

_Monday, 13th November._— ... I do not mention when I get
communications from Lord Melbourne and when I write to him, for that
occurs _every_ day and _generally_ 2 or 3 times a day, so that it would
take up too much time; I also receive communications from all the
other Ministers; the one with whom I communicate _oftenest_ after Lord
Melbourne is Lord Palmerston....

_Thursday, 16th November._— ... At a ¼ p. 2 Lord Melbourne came to me
and stayed with me till 12 m. p. 3. He read me the Speech again, as
it is settled to be now; and became touched to tears in reading the
concluding part which alludes to my youth and reliance on the Loyalty
of my People—kind, excellent, good man. Talked over various things....

_Friday, 17th November._— ... After dinner I went at ½ p. 6 with all
the dinner party, except Lehzen (who again went with Mr. Rich to the
play in a box opposite), Miss Davys (who did not go), and Lord Alfred
Paget (who was on the escort and rode by the carriage), to the play to
Covent Garden, the Duchess of Sutherland and Lord Albemarle going with
me in the carriage. I met with the same brilliant reception, the house
being _so_ full that there was a great piece of work for want of room,
and many people had to be _pulled_ out of the Pit by their wrists and
arms into the Dress Circle. I never saw such an exhibition; it was the
oddest thing I ever saw. My Ladies took it by turns, (their standing
behind me, I mean). Mamma sat near me, and Lady Mary stood behind her.
The performances were the fine but dreadful tragedy of _Werner_ by Lord
Byron, and the 1st act of _Fra Diavolo_....

_Monday, 20th November._—Got up at a ¼ to 9 and breakfasted by myself
at a ¼ p. 10. Played on the piano. Saw Mr. Spring Rice. Dressed for
going to the House of Lords, exactly in the same costume as last
July. When I was dressed I saw the Duchess of Gloucester, the Duchess
of Cambridge, and Augusta[348] and little Mary.[349] At ½ p. 1 I
went in the State Carriage with the Duchess of Sutherland and Lord
Albemarle; Lady Lansdowne, Lady Barham, and all my gentlemen (except
Lord Conyngham who went as a Peer and not in my suite), and 3 Pages,
going in 6 other carriages, to the House of Lords to open Parliament.
I arrived there at 2, and was conducted to the Library—all the Great
Officers of State, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord President, the Lord
Privy Seal, preceding me—Lord Melbourne walking quite close before
me bearing the sword of state. I robed in the Library, all the
above-mentioned people, my ladies and gentlemen, being there, and then
proceeded into the House of Lords—the manner of going in being the same
as before—and seated myself on the Throne; Lord Melbourne standing
quite close to me on my left; I feel a satisfaction in having this
excellent man near me on such important public occasions. I read the
Declaration about Transubstantiation, or rather repeated it after the
Chancellor—the Commons having been summoned to the Bar. After this I
read the Speech (which I think an excellent one) and which people were
pleased to say I read well. The House was very full. I then returned
to the Library and unrobed. Good, kind Melbourne was quite touched to
tears after I read the Speech. I could only say a very few words to
him. I came home, as I went, at a ¼ p. 3. Lehzen was at the House,
which I am very glad of, and _she_ was pleased with my manner.... The
Duke of Sussex was the mover of the Address in the House of Lords, and
made a very able and judicious speech, Lord Melbourne wrote me word.
I got Lord Melbourne’s despatch while I was at dinner, and I left the
table for a minute to read it. Lord Melbourne likewise informed me
that “the Address was voted without a dissentient voice”; and that the
Duke of Wellington spoke fairly; adhering to his declaration of last
Session, and saying that the manner in which the Measures for Ireland
were mentioned in the Speech would facilitate his intention to support
Ministers in their measures. None of the Ministers spoke. I hail this
bright and unanimous beginning as an auspicious augury of the coming
Session and I trust that all will do well....

_Friday, 24th November._— ... Saw Lord Conyngham and Edwin Landseer,
who brought a beautiful little sketch which he has done this morning,
of a picture he is to paint for me of Hector and Dash. He is an
unassuming, pleasing and very young-looking man, with fair hair. At 1
Lord Melbourne came to me and stayed with me till a ¼ to 2. Talked over
various things....

_Tuesday, 28th November._— ... At 20 m. to 1 came Lord Melbourne and
stayed with me till 2. I was glad to see him looking well and in high
spirits. He said it was “a very good debate” in the House of Lords;
that the Duke of Wellington had been somewhat eager but had been put
down. The House sat till p. 11, and Lord Melbourne only got his dinner
then. I showed him Lord John’s account of the Debate in the H. of
Commons. He said there was a good deal in this _large_ majority as the
Opposition had made rather a point of it to carry it. Lord Melbourne
was quite touched in saying this, as he knows how anxious I am the
Government should be _firm_ for the peace of the Country and for my
own peace and happiness; as also when he spoke of the readiness with
which the Civil List would be voted. He is _so_ kind to me; I have the
GREATEST confidence in him. He is so truly excellent. I cannot say
HOW happy I am at this _good_ beginning! Lord Melbourne even said,
everything went much better than they expected. I trust most fervently
that all will continue thus well....

_Wednesday, 29th November._— ... At 20 m. p. 12 Lord Melbourne came
to me and stayed with me till 2. He told me there had been a very
short debate upon the Duke of Newcastle’s[350] bringing in a Bill for
the Repeal of the Catholic Emancipation Act (a most absurd idea). He
(the Duke of Newcastle) was only supported by Lord Lorton[351] and
Lord Winchilsea. Lord Melbourne and Lord Brougham spoke. I read the
speech of the former (Lord Melbourne) in the papers; it is, as all his
speeches and sayings are, remarkably judicious and clever.... At ½ p.
7 we dined.... I sat between the Duke of Wellington and the Marquis
Conyngham. The former I thought looking very old, and silent and out
of spirits. I think he does not feel _à son aise dans sa position_; he
fears to displease his friends and does not wish to oppose the Ministry
violently.... I sat on the sofa with Lady Mulgrave and Lady Barham;
Lady Wilhelmina Stanhope[352] and Lady Caroline Strangways[353] sitting
near me. Lady Wilhelmina is not so handsome as she was; she is not to
be compared, in _my_ opinion, to Lady Fanny Cowper, whose great charm,
besides her lovely face, fine complexion and beautiful figure is her
great quietness, and unaffected manners, and unconsciousness of her
beauty. Lady Wilhelmina is nevertheless an agreeable, clever girl....

_Monday, 4th December._—Got up at ½ p. 9.... At about 10 m. to 1 came
Lord Melbourne and stayed with me till 2. Talked about many things,
and amongst others about the Pensions which give so much trouble. Lord
Melbourne said he thought it “quite an abomination to meddle with the
pensions” which people now had; that upon the whole, hereafter, he was
rather against giving pensions, for he said, “if people know that you
have the power to grant them, they apply without end, and it is very
difficult to refuse”; “it requires,” he added, “nerves of _iron_ to
refuse,” and “if you have none to give away, why there is an end of
it.” I think this is all very true....

_Wednesday, 6th December._—At 1 came Lord Melbourne and stayed with me
till a ¼ p. 2. He told me that there was a good deal of speaking in
the House of Lords yesterday, upon the 2nd reading of the Imprisonment
for Debt Bill, and that they sat till 10 o’clock. The bill, though
opposed in detail, by some, was read a 2nd time, and was referred to
a Committee. In the House of Commons, the Municipal Corporation Bill
for Ireland was introduced without opposition. There was some debate
upon an affair of the dismissal of a Col. Verner in Ireland (which was
done, as Lord Melbourne told me at Windsor, against his (Lord M.’s)
wish, and which he still dislikes, but which cannot be helped now), on
account of a toast he gave at a public dinner. Lord Morpeth quite put
him (Col. Verner) down, by “a triumphant speech,” as Lord John wrote me
word; I always shew these reports of Lord John to Lord Melbourne....
Lord Melbourne led me in, and I sat between him and Lord Canning, who
is exceedingly shy. Lord Melbourne was in good spirits and we talked a
good deal upon various subjects; I made him laugh very much by telling
him what the Duchess of Sutherland told me _he_ had told _her_ about
Lord Brougham’s speech on education, which was: “That it was tiresome
to hear, tiresome to educate, and tiresome to be educated.” He said, “I
think it is very true....”

_Thursday, 7th December._—Went into the Drawing room where Mr. Landseer
showed me two _most_ beautiful pictures, done by himself, one large,
the other small, which he had brought for me to see; the figures
and animals are all most beautifully painted and grouped; and most
exquisitely finished, so that I looked at them through a _magnifying
glass_; I never saw anything so exquisite in every way. He also showed
me a sketch in oils (small) of Lord Melbourne which is like, but too
fat, and though flattered is not in my opinion half pleasing enough.
It is very well done; he also showed me a sketch of Mrs. Lister done
in _one_ sitting, and exceedingly pretty. He had only had two sittings
of Lord Melbourne. He certainly is the cleverest artist there is. Sat
to Mr. Hayter for a long while. Showed him some of my drawings which
he praised and told me where they were in fault. Drew. Tried to sketch
little Mary Barrington while her mother amused her....

_Friday, 8th December._— ... After dinner I sat on the sofa with Lady
Ashley,[354] who was very agreeable and talked to me of her children
&c. One of her charms is her being so natural. Lord Melbourne sat near
me the whole evening. He talked to me about the play, about Joan of
Arc, whom he admires, and said, “It is clearly proved that what she did
is not to be attributed to any impropriety of conduct.” Many historians
have chosen to blemish the character of this poor, innocent maid, who
was _so_ great. He asked me if I had ever read Barante’s _History of
the Princes of the House of Burgundy_, in 8 vols., which gives a whole
account of Joan; which I have not. M. de Barente is French Ambassador
at St. Petersburg. Lord Melbourne also spoke to me of Lord Ashley, who
he says is a very good man; and less eager in Politics than he was;
Lord Ashley is a high Tory. He “adores” Lady Ashley, Lord Melbourne
says. Lord Melbourne also told me that when I first came to the
Throne, Lord Ashley “wrote to Emily” (Lady Cowper) “and said, ‘Why,
it’s shocking that Lord Melbourne has only put Whig ladies about the
Queen’; upon which Lady Cowper said, ‘Why, Lady Barham is not such a
great Whig’; ‘Oh!’ said Ashley, ‘_she_ is quite terrible, _she_ is the
worst of all.’” This amused me much. There is no end to the amusing
anecdotes and stories Lord Melbourne tells, and he tells them all
in such an amusing funny way. Spoke to me about horses; he told me
his pretty black mare is rather crippled by his having travelled her
about so much, and that she must get rest. Lady Ashley says that Lady
Cowper dotes upon her grandchildren and would give them and let them do
anything. Stayed up till 11. It was a _very_ pleasant evening.

_Saturday, 9th December._— ... I forgot to say that Lord Melbourne
got a letter after dinner from Mr. Cowper (which he showed me) from
the House of Commons, in which he said, “The Debate is going in our
favour.” Lord Melbourne spoke to me about several of the speakers in
the House of Commons; spoke of Sir E. Sugden[355] whom he says is a
very clever lawyer, and said, “His father was a hair-cutter; he cut my
hair very often.” This is a singular thing. Told me of an affront which
the “Demagogue Hunt”[356] offered William Peel one day, in the House
of Commons, on the latter’s attacking him. William Peel said something
derogatory about Hunt’s extraction, upon which Hunt replied: “If _my_
father was the _first gentleman_ of his family, _your_ father was the
_last gentleman_ of _his_ family....”

_Tuesday, 12th December._— ... Lord Melbourne, though looking pale,
I was happy to see in very good spirits. A few minutes after we had
sat down, he turned to me and said, “We have had a great _set-to_ in
the House of Lords.” He added that Lord Brougham[357] had made an
unexpected opposition against the Message which Lord Melbourne read
in my name the day before, pressing my increase of income for my
Mother. Lord Duncannon told me that Lord Brougham had lately taken
to making cutting attacks against my Ministers, and that he had most
unhandsomely attacked my excellent Lord Melbourne, called him “a
Courtier,” &c., &c., which, no wonder, roused Lord Melbourne’s temper,
and that he returned it Lord Brougham most admirably. He always speaks
well, but particularly well this time, Lord Duncannon said. I turned
to Lord Melbourne and said I had heard he had spoken so well, “as you
always do,” I added. But he is so modest and backward about his own
extraordinary merits. He said to me, there might be a like difficulty
in the H. of Commons upon this Message. Spoke to me about many other
things and about boys at school, and told me a very amusing anecdote
about himself. He and Lady Mulgrave were saying how imprudent it was
to tell children things which they might not repeat. So he said, “When
I was a boy of ten, and came home, my Mother was asking me about the
boys at school, and I mentioned who were there, and amongst others the
present Lord Boston.[358] My Mother said ‘Oh! every Irby is a fool,’
which is very true; so, when I went back to school, I told this, and
said, ‘My Mother says every Irby is a fool.’ This was repeated, and
written back to Lord Boston,[359] and created most dreadful offence.”
We then spoke about Magnetism, which every body is mad about now; and
I said it was very disagreeable to be magnetised, as people got to say
such odd things in this _magnetic_ state. “Why,” said Lord Melbourne,
“people say odd enough things without being magnetised....” Spoke of
Lord and Lady Ashley, their happiness and fondness for each other. I
spoke to him of Lady C. Barrington’s[360] gratitude to me, at which his
eyes filled with tears. He is the kindest, best, and tenderest hearted
man I know; he is so truly excellent, and moral, and has such a strong
feeling against immorality and wickedness; and he is _so_ truly kind to
me....

_Friday, 22nd December._— ... Lord Melbourne spoke to me a good deal
about the Privy Purse, about its expenses, the Pensions on it, &c., &c.
About the Household Expenditure; about many other things concerning
expenditure; about the late Kings, George 4th and William 4th’s
fancies, &c., &c. His ideas about all these things are so reasonable
and so excellent.... I sat between Lord Melbourne (who led me in) and
Lord Palmerston. I was delighted to see Lord Melbourne in excellent
spirits, and looking much better. He was very clever and funny about
education, at dinner; his ideas are excellent about it, I think. He
said that he thought almost every body’s character was formed by their
Mother, and that if the children did not turn out well, the mothers
should be punished for it. I daresay _his_ noble, fine and excellent
character was formed by his mother,[361] for she was a remarkably
clever and sensible woman. He told me that the Civil List Bill was
read a third time that evening, without any opposition. The news are,
I grieve to say, very bad from Canada[362]; that is to say rumours and
reports by the Papers, though we have no Official Reports. But Lord
Melbourne hopes that it may not be so bad as it is rumoured. There
certainly is open Rebellion. This makes it expedient that Parliament
should meet again on the 16th January and not adjourn _till_ the 1st
Feb. as was at first intended....

_Tuesday, 26th December._— ... At 3 I left Buckingham Palace (with
regret, as I had passed a pleasant time there), with Mamma and Lady
Mulgrave; Lady Mary, Miss Cocks, Mrs. Campbell, Col. Grey,[363] Lehzen,
Miss Dillon, and Miss Davys following in 2 other carriages. We arrived
at Windsor Castle at ½ p. 5. It was quite dark. The Castle looked very
cheerful and comfortable, and I cannot say _how_ much it put me in mind
of last summer and of the VERY VERY HAPPY days I spent there....

_Wednesday, 27th December._— ... Besides our party of yesterday, the
Duke and Duchess of Sutherland and the Duke of Argyll (who all stay
here till Monday, 1st Jan.) dined here. The Duchess was looking so
well; neither she nor the Duke have ever been staying at Windsor before
and are delighted with the Castle. I sat between the Duke of Sutherland
and Mr. Cowper. I talked a great deal with the latter, and a great deal
about Lord Melbourne. He says that all the people who have never seen
Lord Melbourne and come to have interviews with him, and those Members
of the H. of Commons who dine with him and have not seen or known
him before and expect to find the Prime Minister a very proud, stiff
person, are quite delighted with his very kind, unaffected, merry and
open, frank manner, which I think everybody _must_ and _ought_ to be.
He told me some amusing anecdotes about him, &c., &c., and many other
funny things. Lord Melbourne is very absent when in company, often, and
talks to himself every now and then, loud enough to be heard but never
loud enough to be understood. I am now, from habit, quite accustomed to
it, but at first I turned round sometimes, thinking he was talking to
me. Mr. Cowper says he does not think his uncle is aware of it; he says
he is much less absent than he used to be....

[Illustration: H.S.H. Charles Prince of Leiningen from a portrait by
  R. J. Lane]




                   INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO CHAPTER VIII

  The impression produced by the Queen at this time is vividly
  described by Princess Lieven in a letter to Lord Aberdeen. “I have
  seen the Queen twice,” she writes; “I have seen her alone, and I
  have seen her in Society with her Prime Minister. She possesses
  a composure, an air of command, and of dignity, which with her
  childlike face, her tiny figure, and her pretty smile, create
  one of the most extraordinary impressions that it is possible to
  imagine. She is extremely reserved in conversation. It is said that
  prudence is one of her highest qualities. Lord Melbourne adopts,
  when he is near her, an attitude of affection, of content, of
  self-consciousness mingled with a great deal of respect, which with
  his easy manners, the obvious habit of holding the first place amid
  her surroundings, his dreaminess at one moment, and his gaiety at
  another, make a picture you can easily realise. The Queen is full
  of amiability towards him.”

  That is a glimpse of the external setting in which these Journals
  were composed. Lord Melbourne never forgot, from the outset, that
  the girl to whom he was acting as guardian and tutor was the
  Sovereign of these Realms. His letters from the first are written
  in the conventional form of a Minister addressing the Sovereign.
  Although he obviously tried in conversation to amuse the Queen, and
  to impart to her youthful intelligence some knowledge of Society,
  and of the world of Affairs in which she was about to take part,
  he did not shrink from the graver topics of statecraft, and did
  not spare her the details of public matters that must have been
  difficult for her to grasp and comprehend.

  There is a passage in one of his letters, written about this time,
  in which he is explaining to the Queen the powers and duties which
  it was intended to transfer from the Secretary of State, who
  combined at that time the administration of Colonial and Military
  affairs, to a new Secretary of State for War. Lord Melbourne adds
  these words: “Your Majesty will not suppose that Lord Melbourne by
  laying before you the whole case has an idea of throwing the weight
  of such a decision entirely upon Your Majesty. Lord Melbourne will
  deem it his duty to offer to Your Majesty a decided opinion upon
  the subject.” This passage illuminates, if taken in conjunction
  with Princess Lieven’s descriptive passage, the atmosphere in which
  Lord Melbourne and the Queen were living at this time. To this
  young Queen he was Roger Ascham and Burleigh in one and _in petto_.


                             CHAPTER VIII

                                 1838

_Monday, 1st January._— ... The Duke of Sutherland told me the
other night, that Lord Melbourne’s mother (whom he knew) was a very
agreeable, sensible, clever woman, and that Lord Melbourne was very
like her as to features; Lady Melbourne was very large latterly. Lord
Melbourne’s father, on the contrary, the Duke said, was very far from
agreeable or clever; he was a short fat man and not like any of his
children. He died at the age of 80. The Duchess of Sutherland spoke to
me last night about Lady Caroline Lamb,[364] Lord Melbourne’s wife;
she was Lord Duncannon’s only sister, and the strangest person that
ever lived, really half crazy, and quite so when she died; she was not
good-looking, but very clever, and could be very amusing. She teazed
that excellent Lord Melbourne in every way, dreadfully, and quite
embittered his life, which it ought to have been her pride to study
to render a happy one; he was the kindest of husbands to her, and
bore it most admirably; any other man would have separated from such
a wife. He has now the greatest horror of any woman who is in any
way eccentric or extravagant, which shows how very much he must have
suffered from such a wife. The Duchess told me the strangest stories
about her....

_Tuesday, 2nd January._— ... I rode a new horse, a most _delightful_
creature, called Tartar; he is taller than Barbara, excessively pretty,
and of a very dark brown colour; he has a very springy charming canter
and action, is full of spirit, and yet as quiet as a lamb, never shies
and is the best-tempered creature possible; to crown all these valuable
qualities, Tartar is exceedingly sure-footed. It was a delightful ride
and we cantered a great deal coming home; the roads were so dirty that
my habit was quite heavy with mud. Changed my dress and walked out with
Lady Mulgrave and Lehzen and came home at ½ p. 3. Read Despatches from
Canada which are very interesting....

_Thursday, 4th January._— ... At ½ p. 5 came my excellent, kind friend,
Lord Melbourne, whom I was quite delighted to see again after such a
long absence, the longest that has taken place since I came to the
Throne. I thought him in very good spirits, and looking well, though
pale, and as kind, amiable and mild as ever; never do I find any
difference in this excellent man, may he be very tired, or not tired,
he is always equally kind and gentle, though he may at times be low.
I was agreeably surprised to find him in good spirits, for from his
letters and all the troubles and difficulties he has had of late, I
feared it might not be so. He spoke to me first a good deal about
Canada; said they were all agreed as to what was to be done, namely
to repeal a Statute (_which_, I cannot say), and _for_ the present,
govern as Canada had been governed before; but that Lord Howick was of
a different opinion and thought that these strong measures ought to be
accompanied by conciliatory measures, which Lord Melbourne said would
not answer the purpose and have a bad effect; Lord Howick, he said, was
excessively eager about this, for various reasons which Lord Melbourne
explained to me; “if Lord Howick was to resign,” he added, “I do not
think that would affect the Government; it would be a bad thing for
there is a good deal of strength in him.” The other question, about the
Army, he considered a more difficult one; the five Ministers who signed
the Report relative to the changes meditated in the office of the
Secretary of War, are, Lord John Russell, Lord Howick, Lord Palmerston,
Sir J. Hobhouse, and Mr. Spring Rice. Lord Howick and Lord John, he
said, are the only two who are eager about it; the others he believed
signed it reluctantly, particularly Mr. Rice. We spoke a good deal
about this difficult question; there is, in my opinion, a good deal for
and a good deal against it. It is, as Lord Melbourne says, creating
a new Minister with new powers, by giving the Secretary at War great
power over the Army. There have been, as Lord Melbourne says, great
abuses which it would be desirable to remedy. Spoke about the Troops
to be sent to Canada; about Mr. Rice’s wish to take the Chair; about
_his_ reasons for doing so; how to replace _him_; about the present
Speaker; about the quarrel in Belgium relative to the cutting of timber
in the Grünewald; about the King of Hanover’s foolish proceedings; how
they are viewed in Germany; about some despatches from Sir Frederick
Lamb,[365] saying that Metternich was much displeased at the expulsion
of the Archbishop of Cologne, at the manner of doing it, and at the
impolicy of the act. Lord Melbourne said he had dined once or twice at
Lord Holland’s[366] since I had seen him. I was quite happy to talk to
him again, as there were many subjects on which I wanted explanation
and he explains _so_ well and so clearly and agreeably.... My good
Lord Melbourne led me in and I sat between him and Lord Torrington. He
(Ld. M.) spoke to me about many things; about riding and horses; about
_bad ears_ for Music; said that everybody would suppose from Scott’s
writings that he was very fond of and understood music very well;
whereas Lord Melbourne said, _he_ said: “In music I don’t know _high_
from _low_!”...

_Tuesday, 9th January._— ... At 22 m. to 12 came my excellent Lord
Melbourne and stayed with me till 27 m. p. 12. He had informed me
by a note in the morning, that he should be obliged to go to London
which I am extremely sorry for; Lord Glenelg wrote to him wishing
to see him, and both he and Lord Glenelg were to see Lord Durham
at _four_ about this Canadian business. _I_ shall say more of this
hereafter. Lord Melbourne said: “It will be a long interview, I
dare say; probably last 2 hours, and there would be no time to be
back,”—meaning for dinner tonight, so he will only come back at 4
tomorrow; I am _very_ sorry to lose him _even_ for _one_ night. Spoke
a good while about this. Spoke about this army business, upon which
Lord Melbourne will see Lord Howick. He said, “It would be madness to
propose at this moment a complete change in the Administration of the
Army, when we have got all these affairs of Canada.” He spoke of this
a good deal; and seemed to hope Lord Howick would give it up; he said
the others would be ready to do so if he did.... Though I think Lord
Duncannon agreeable and amusing, I cannot find in him or in any of
the other Ministers, that kindness, mildness, and open frankness, and
_agreeability_ (to use a word of Lady Mary Stopford’s) which I find in
my kind friend Lord Melbourne; _he alone_ inspires me with that feeling
of great confidence and I may say _security_, for I feel _so safe_ when
he speaks to me and is with me; what he says is all so kind and good,
and he never says anything which could alarm or hurt me. But I should
not _wish_ to be on the same confidential footing with any of my other
Ministers as I am with this truly excellent friend....

_Wednesday, 10th January._— ... Lord Melbourne said that he had seen
Lord Durham who seemed very much inclined to accept the Proposition
of going to Canada; he (Ld. D.) was not quite satisfied with all the
plans proposed by Government, and particularly with a Council of 17,
which he said was too many; that he could not manage more than 4 or 5.
Lord Durham requires, Lord Melbourne added, a large outfit, as he would
not spend any of his private fortune; and he would not go till the
Navigation was open. Lord Melbourne then told me that he had seen Lord
Howick who seemed “disposed to reconsider” the question of the army,
and said he would not press parts of it, and would give way on some
points. This is a great satisfaction and I think Lord Melbourne seemed
quite happy about it....

_Wednesday, 17th January._— ... My excellent Lord Melbourne led me in,
and I sat between him and Lord Glenelg. Lord Melbourne _said_ he was,
and I was happy to see he _looked_, better. He said, as he led me in,
that the Majority in the House of Commons of the night before was very
favourable. He spoke to me about Greece; said he had heard from his
brother that they were very uneasy at Vienna about the state of Greece;
said that the only person who showed any sense or character there was
the Queen of Greece,[367] but that she was very young and was placed in
rather a rougher situation than suited her; that the Archduke John[368]
had told Sir Frederic (on his return from Greece) “that she was like
a Brazillian Paraquite in a wood of firs covered with snow,” meaning
that she was in a position not suited to her; I said to Lord Melbourne
that I had heard in the Summer that there were hopes of there being
an _heir_ in some time; he said, “I am afraid not.” He told me that
the Archduke John had likewise told his brother that the Emperor of
Russia[369] was beginning to sink under the immense weight and fatigue
of governing such an empire as Russia; we spoke about him some time;
and also a good deal about the Austrian Royal Family; Lord Melbourne
told me that the Emperor of Austria[370] was worse, and hardly able to
do anything; but, that as his _mental faculties decreased_, his _bodily
strength increased_. Spoke of Aunt Louise; of the Queen of Portugal;
of Clementine, Augustus, &c., of Feodore, her happiness, her not being
rich; he spoke of the poverty of the younger branches in high families
in England, and of their being often obliged to gain their livelihood
in inferior situations; he said that he thought his nephew Lord Cowper
was cleverer and had “a sounder understanding” than William Cowper....
Spoke about Shakespear’s plays; _Hamlet_, _Macbeth_, _Lear_, &c., &c.;
he thinks the 2 first named the finest; he said: “I think the German
critics understand Shakespear better than we do here”; mentioned
Goethe’s _Wilhelm Meister_, and Schlegel’s book upon Shakespear, which
he thinks very good; he knew, or at least saw, Schlegel here; he knew
Mme. de Staël; spoke of her, of her daughter, the Duchess de Broglie;
spoke of actresses; of their marrying out of their sphere; of its often
not answering; of Lady Harrington,[371] Lady Craven[372] (the Dowager),
Lady Derby (the late),[373] Mrs. Butler; of marriages in _general_,
and most cleverly and sensibly; of their often being broken off—the
reasons why. Lord Melbourne said, “Why, you see, a gentleman hardly
knows a girl till he has proposed, and then when he has an unrestrained
intercourse with her he sees something and says, ‘This I don’t quite
like....’”

_Friday, 19th January._— ... The cold increases, the snow is getting
deep, and I hear the Thames is frozen over very nearly, which has not
happened since 1814. At ½ p. 1 came my excellent friend Lord Melbourne
and stayed with me till 3. He looked well, I was very happy to see, and
said he was not at all tired. He said that they had got through this
Canada business very well; that Lord Brougham made a good though very
violent speech; that the Duke of Wellington’s was very fair; in fact
very friendly; that he (Lord Melbourne) thought the only difficult part
to defend was the not having sent more troops; “but,” he added, “there
the Duke of Wellington came to our assistance, and said there were
not too few troops.” Spoke about Canada for some time.... In speaking
of the Duke of Wellington he said: “He has no oratorical powers; he
attempts no ornament, but speaks generally very much to the point; he
cannot always express what he feels and understands.” He added that
people sometimes who were great in action could not express well in
words what they meant and conceived; spoke of all the Duke’s family,
and said he thought the Duke was the cleverest; asked me if I had ever
read the Duke’s Despatches, and said they were worth looking at, to see
the way he did them.... Lord Melbourne told me, in speaking of the Duke
of Wellington, “His people are very angry with him; they think he is
leaving them.” How wrong of these people! I told Lord Melbourne what
my Uncle Leopold had written to me about him (Ld M.), which seemed
to please him. Talked of other things. Talked for some time with him
and Lord Palmerston, about education, punishments, &c., Lord Melbourne
was amazingly funny and amusing about this. I said I thought solitary
confinement a good punishment: Lord Melbourne replied, “I think it’s
a very stupefying punishment.” I mentioned the system of _silence_ as
a very good one and quoted myself as a proof of its having answered,
which made them laugh very much. Lord Melbourne said, “It may do very
well with a lively child; but with one of a sulky, _grumpy_ disposition
it would not answer....” I said I thought it cruel to punish children
by depriving them of their meals and saying they should go without
their supper, &c. Lord Melbourne replied, “Why, when I was a child,
they had contrived to annoy me so, and had made me cry so much, that I
had lost all appetite.”

_Saturday, 20th January._— ... At ½ p. 12 Lord Glenelg presented Lord
Durham to me on his appointment; Lord Glenelg then left the room
and Lord Durham remained with me for about ½ an hour, I should say.
He spoke entirely about Canada which subject he seems to understand
thoroughly; said he considered the task he was about to undertake, a
most difficult one; and he _might_ not succeed; but that he would do
his utmost to restore tranquillity in Canada; said he wished to have my
authority, when the rebellion was quelled, to conciliate these deluded
people and to hold out mercy to them. He spoke at much length about
all this,—about what he intended to do,—the difficulty of the task,
&c., &c. At ½ p. 1 came Lord Melbourne and stayed with me till 20 m.
p. 2. He seemed well. He said, “I am sorry to say I received a letter
from Lord Howick this morning and that he makes a great demur about
this Army affair.” Lord Melbourne then added that as it was such a
difficult question and as it could be done “as it were by one blow,”
and as the Army disliked it so much and altogether it was such a bad
time for it, and he thought it such a difficult question, that he could
not give way to him upon it, and could not advise me to do it; he added
he would not mind it near so much if it were brought before Parliament
and there fairly discussed, for then if it passed, it would be done
by the authority of Parliament; but in this way, it was so entirely
to be done by me, as it were, that he really could not agree to it;
moreover that if even it were a very good thing in itself (which he
does not think it), this would not be the moment for doing it; none
of the other Ministers he thought were eager for it; but if it were
proposed in the Cabinet and carried by a majority against Lord Howick,
he (Ld. H.) might resign (which Lord M. says would be a bad thing, but
would not affect the Government), and Lord Melbourne did not know what
Lord John Russell might _then_ do, if Lord Howick held out on it; which
would then affect the Government. I told Lord Melbourne that if it
could be of any use, he might say that _I quite_ agreed with him (Lord
Melbourne) and that he might rely upon me; which assurance pleased him,
though I think he must long be aware of my firm resolution to support
this kind and true friend of mine, as he truly and really is, in every
way.... Got a few lines (when I went to my room) from Lord Melbourne (I
generally _hear from_ him and _write to him_ every day, and very often
_two_ or _three_ times a day), in which he said that great difference
had prevailed and did prevail in the Cabinet respecting the Details
about Canada. A Cabinet had been held immediately after he left me. I
am _very_ sorry to hear this.

_Sunday, 21st January._— ... After dinner before we sat down, I talked
to Lord Melbourne about some important things; I asked him the cause of
the differences in the Cabinet; he said that he wished, and also most
of the others, that the Legislative Council in Canada should be chosen
from those which composed the present Legislative Assembly,—whereas
Lord Howick and some others wished the Council should be chosen from
the Country at large, and not from the Assembly; Lord Melbourne was
against this and for this reason; we should probably lose by such an
Election many of the _English_ party, now in the Legislative Assembly,
and get a good many of the _French_ party who would be hostile to us;
and consequently diminish our influence; none of the other Ministers
were as obstinately for this as Lord Howick—but he at length gave
way.... He was very funny about a word which Lady Mary gave me to find
out; she gave me the ivory letters and I was to find out the word; she
gave me “thermometer,” and she spelt it with an “a” instead of an “e,”
and laughed very much at her bad spelling; upon which Lord Melbourne
said, “It is a very good way to spell it, but not _the_ way,” which
made us laugh. I said to him I was reading the first novel I had ever
read—_The Bride of Lammermoor_; he said it was a very melancholy—a
terrible story—but admires it; he mentioned _Old Mortality_, _Quentin
Durward_, _The Fair Maid of Perth_, and _Kenilworth_, as Scott’s best
novels; he said there was “a great deal of good” and “a great deal of
bad” in his novels; said he admired his poems very much, though most
people said his novels were greatly superior in their way to his poems;
spoke of Richard Cœur de Lion whom we both rather admire; of Henry IV.
and Sully; Lord Melbourne said that Sully was a clever and good man,
and greatly superior to those Ministers who followed him; Richelieu and
Mazarin; “They were shocking fellows,” he added....

_Tuesday, 23rd January._— ... He spoke of what had just taken place
in Canada; said Sir John Colborne[374] was an excellent officer. “A
good officer,” he added, “can generally effect with a small force,
what a bad officer with a large force would fail in.” Spoke about this
question of the Army. Said that Lord Francis Egerton[375] had said in
the House, “That the troops had done remarkably well and that he hoped
nothing would be done to tamper with the management of the Army,”
evidently alluding, Lord Melbourne observed, to the intended changes
in the Army. I told Lord Melbourne that Lord Adolphus Fitzclarence, on
being told that I would continue to him and his brothers and sisters
the same annual allowance they enjoyed from the late King, burst into
tears, and said it was unexpected, for they did not dare to hope for
anything....

_Wednesday, 24th January._— ... Lady Falkland,[376] whom I had not yet
seen, was of course presented to me by Lady Portman.[377] I (as usual
to all Peeresses and Ladies by courtesy) wished to kiss her, but she
insisted on kissing my hand first and then only received her kiss from
me.... I observed to Lord Melbourne that it must be a great trial for
poor Lady Falkland dining here.... Lady Falkland must have felt very
low, and it must have been a sad trial for her to see me for the 1st
time in the place of her poor father, but she behaved uncommonly well;
she is a very nice person. She looked pale and thin, but still very
pretty. I sat on the sofa with her; Lord Melbourne sitting near me
the whole evening; and all the other ladies sitting round the table.
Spoke with Lord Melbourne about Lady Falkland &c. Asked him what he
thought was the best History of the last 60 or 70 years. He said there
was no History of that time _only_, but that it must be got from
different books; that the _Annual Register_ was as good a book as any,
if I wanted to look for any particular event in any one year. That
the beginning was written by Burke, and followed up by Dr. Laurence
&c. Said that being written at the time, it was tinctured with party
spirit. He said Adolphus’s _History of George III._ was curious as he
had got a good deal of information, and that the anecdotes told in it
were true, though the _names_ of the people were sometimes wrong.
Said that Hume’s _History of England_ was undoubtedly the best, in
spite of his party prejudices, and that he thought I would like it much
better now than when I read it before. Spoke of Clarendon’s _History
of the Rebellion_ (which I told him I had read), which he thought
curious, but likes his (Clarendon’s) _Memoirs_ better. Spoke of Mrs.
Hutchinson’s book, said I had been reading it; he thinks that “a nice
book” and “very curious”; he knew the Editor of it; spoke of Charles
the First, whom I thought much to blame.... Spoke of Sismondi, whom he
thinks a dull writer; he recommends Barante’s _History of the House
of Burgundy_; and Daru’s _History of Venice_; spoke of Voltaire’s
Histories; of O’Driscol’s _Ireland_ which he likes and whom he knew; of
Scott’s _History of Scotland_ which he has not read, &c. &c....

_Thursday, 25th January._— ... At ½ p. 3 came my excellent Lord
Melbourne and stayed with me till ½ p. 4. He said, “I think we have
patched this up,” meaning the affair about the bill relating to Canada.
“We mean to stand by the bill,” he added, “and take our chance of a
division.” Lord John, he said, was very much for leaving the Preamble
out, and was not at all pleased at being obliged to stand by it; and
Lord Melbourne said it was a bad thing “to force a man to do what he
dislikes when he has a principal part to act in it,” which is very
true. He added something more about Canada and what was meant to be
done, if they were beat about this clause. He said that Lord Howick’s
great violence irritated the others on the other side (in the Cabinet);
Mr. Thomson was very eager against Lord Howick’s ideas about Canada.
I asked him if Mr. Poulett Thomson was eager; he replied that he was,
but that he could control himself, which Lord Howick could not, and
was excessively cross, and kept saying he would resign and would not
be party to this and that, which offended the others.... Spoke of Sir
Robert Peel, who I observed I thought was more eager than the Duke
of Wellington. Lord Melbourne replied he was not acquainted with Sir
Robert Peel’s character, could not judge of his feelings, did “not know
if he was desirous of office or not.” Said he believed that his (the
Duke’s) party were very angry with him for what he had said in the
House of Lords, and therefore that Sir Robert was obliged to be more
violent in order to keep his party together. “This I believe to be the
truth,” Lord Melbourne observed....

_Friday, 26th January._— ... He told me that they had settled the
matter about Canada. “We have settled to leave out the Preamble; Lord
Howick has given way, and owned he was in the wrong.” He added: “It
will be a triumph to the other party, but I don’t much mind that.” I
said that I was surprised Lord Howick had given way. Lord Melbourne
replied: “He is not devoid of candour,” but that his opinions were so
very strong that he did not feel able to “surrender them.” Said that
Sir Robert Peel had justly observed that: “what was the necessity of
asking Parliament about what they _were going_ to do”; “we don’t mean
to oppose you; we won’t fetter you.” “Why therefore ask our approbation
of what you are going to do?” “Act like any other Ministers and then
afterwards we will approve or disapprove what has been done.”[378]
“Now,” Lord Melbourne said, “this is almost unanswerable.” He is the
fairest person about his opponents I ever knew; _so_ frank, so noble!
so candid!... Spoke of the Combinations of the workmen in Scotland and
Ireland and England, which he says are quite frightful. This led him
to speak of servants, of their combinations with tradespeople, their
being bribed, &c. He observed how disagreeable it was to recommend
tradespeople or servants; he said that his coachmaker had come to him
this morning and begged him to write a letter to the Bishop of Ely to
recommend him to him. “Very well,” said Lord Melbourne, “I will write
a letter if you wish which I will show you.” “So I wrote to the Bishop
of Ely,” continued Lord Melbourne; “‘My dear Lord,—Mr. Robson has been
my coachmaker for many years, and I believe him to be a very good one,
but so he ought, for I must say he is a very dear one.’ ‘Now,’ I said
to the man, ‘here is the letter, you may read it if you like....’” At
7 I went to Drury Lane with the Duchess of Sutherland, Lady Portman,
Miss Cavendish, Lady Mary Stopford, Lord Conyngham, Lord Headfort, and
Col. Buckley (who this day replaced Col. Grey). It was Shakespear’s
tragedy of _Hamlet_, and we came in at the beginning of it. Mr.
Charles Kean (son of old Kean) acted the part of Hamlet and I must say
beautifully. His conception of this very difficult and I may almost
say incomprehensible character, is admirable; his delivery of all the
fine long speeches quite beautiful; he is excessively graceful and all
his actions and attitudes are good, though not at all good-looking
in face; the two finest scenes I thought were the _Play-scene_,
which he acts, they say, quite differently to any other actor who
has performed Hamlet; and the scene with his mother, the Queen; it
was quite beautiful when he rushed out after having killed Polonius,
exclaiming, “Is it the King?” He fights uncommonly well too. All the
other characters were very badly acted. I came away just as _Hamlet_
was over. They would recognise me between the 2nd and 3rd acts,—I was
compelled to come forward, curtsey, and hear “God save the Queen” sung.
The house was amazingly crowded and they received me admirably. Came
home at ½ p. 10.

_Saturday, 27th January._— ... Told Lord M. I had been much pleased
with _Hamlet_ last night; observed it was a very hard play to
understand, which he agreed in; he said he thought the end of it
“awkward” and horrid; said he thought Hamlet was supposed to be mad, of
a philosophical mind, and urged to do something which he did not like
to do. He added that Mr. Fox always said that _Hamlet_ possessed more
of Shakespear’s faults than almost any other play of Shakespear, &c.,
&c.—Saw Lord Palmerston who introduced Baron Munchausen, Minister from
the Court of Hanover.... I told Ld. M. of my last recollection of Baron
Munchausen,[379] namely, my giving him a commission to send me some
wax dolls from Berlin, which made Lord Melbourne laugh excessively.
He spoke of children’s love for dolls, and that they sometimes think
they are alive. Spoke of my former great love for dolls....[380]
After dinner, talked (before I sat down) with all the gentlemen, &c.
Spoke about Kean with Lord Melbourne; about Landseer and the sketches
which Lord Melbourne saw and none of which he “thought _like_,” he
said, though very clever.... Lord Melbourne said that _Richard III._
by Shakespear was a very fine play; I observed that Richard was a very
bad man; Lord Melbourne also thinks he was a horrid man; he believes
him to have been deformed (which some people deny), and thinks “there
is no doubt that he murdered those two young Princes.” I was delighted
to hear Lord Melbourne say he thought Henry 7th a very bad man, and
reckless of blood; spoke of the inhuman _murder_, I may call it, of the
young Earl of Warwick; he said that Ferdinand of Spain would not give
his daughter Catherine to _Arthur_ unless this poor Warwick was got
rid of; that Catherine felt this all along and observed that it dwelt
upon her and “that it did not go well with her in the world” for this
reason. He spoke of Henry VIII.; said he was not so bad at first and
had begun with good intentions; spoke of Catherine of Arragon, &c.,
&c.; that when Henry VIII. took a liking to somebody else, he only
sought to get rid of the other in the quickest way. Spoke of the wars
in Flanders.... He fell asleep for a little while in the evening, which
is always a proof that he is not quite well....

_Tuesday, 30th January._— ... I asked Lord M. what Lord Palmerston’s
Politics were at the time when he stood against Lord Lansdowne and Lord
Althorp. Lord Melbourne said that Lord Palmerston then belonged to
the _high Tory_ Party! Spoke of the change of opinions &c., &c. Spoke
of the salaries &c. of my people, and spoke of Names, Christian names,
for a long while; said that Lady Vivian’s[381] little girl was called
_Lalage_, from Horace; he thought the name rather pretty on account of
the lines which he repeated and which are, I _think_, “Dulce ridentem,
Lalagen amabo, Dulce loquentem.” Told him of the intention there once
was of changing my name, which he was surprised at, and could not think
how it could have been done.

_Thursday, 1st February._—The curious old form of pricking the Sheriffs
was gone through; and I had to prick them all, with a huge pin. This
was the first Council that I have yet held at which Lord Melbourne was
not present, and I must say I felt sad not to see him in his place as
I feel a peculiar satisfaction, nay I must own almost _security_, at
seeing him present at these formal proceedings, as I know and feel that
I have a _friend_ near me, when I am as it were alone among so many
strangers. This may sound almost childish, but it is not so. Saw Lord
John Russell....

_Saturday, 3rd February._—Received a communication from Lord Melbourne
which I shall transcribe: “Lord Melbourne presents his humble duty to
Your Majesty and acquaints Y.M. that the Canada Government Bill was
read a second time in the House of Lords, with the single dissentient
voice of Lord Brougham. Lord Melbourne sends the returns of the
attendance and the speeches. Lord Brougham made a long and able speech,
not over-violent for him. The Duke of Wellington made a moderate
speech and concluded with some very able views” (I think) “of the
subject. Lord Aberdeen and Lord Wharncliffe also spoke, both strongly
condemning the conduct of Government.” This note was dated from last
night. Heard also from Lord John Russell that they had proceeded in the
House of Commons with the Irish Corporation Bill and the Pluralities
Bill.... Lord M. said they sat till near 12 o’clock last night. Said
“it was a very good Debate.” “The Duke of Wellington,” he added, “again
made a very fair speech”; and that the Duke’s remarks were very good
about Canada, for that there was a great deal to say about it; and that
the Duke observed, “that each Mail brought the account of some new and
very important event.” He (Ld. Melbourne) said that Lord Aberdeen and
Lord Wharncliffe “were very severe.” I asked him if Lord Aberdeen was
not rather a dull and heavy speaker; he replied in the affirmative; and
said (in reply to my question as to whether he were a good speaker)
that Lord Wharncliffe was a good speaker and spoke “very clearly.” I
asked him about Lord Brougham’s speech which he said “was more bitter
than violent; very bitter, but a fine speech.” Lord Melbourne told me:
“We have not yet settled this Army Question; but I am more and more
convinced it would be madness to propose it; and after this affair of
Canada too.” He seemed, however, I thought, sanguine about its being
ultimately settled.

_Sunday, 4th February._—Lord Melbourne asked if I had seen _King Lear_
(which I had half intended to do last week); I said I had not. He
said (alluding to the manner in which it is being performed at Covent
Garden), “It is _King Lear_ as Shakespear wrote it; and which has not
been performed so, since the time of Queen Anne.” As it is generally
acted, Lord Melbourne told me, it is altered by Cibber, who “put in a
deal of stuff” of his own; that it was a much finer play as Shakespear
wrote it, but “most dreadfully tragic.” That Dr. Johnson had seen it
performed in that way, and that “it made such an impression on him that
he never forgot it.” I observed to him that I feared that, and did not
like all that madness on the stage. Lord Melbourne said, “I can’t bear
that, but still it is a very fine play, and many think Shakespear’s
best.” Spoke of the play of _Richard III._, which I said I was going
to see. Lord Melbourne said it was “a fine striking play.” He observed
that that scene where Richard makes love to Anne, at the funeral of
Henry VI., did not belong to the play, but was taken from _Henry VI._;
he said, “That is a very foolish scene; I always thought it a most
ridiculous scene; and there is not the slightest foundation in History
for it; he married her 8 years afterwards.” He added that Shakespear
constantly mixed up events, in his Historical plays, without minding
when they happened, and how far asunder.

_Monday, 5th February._—Lord M. showed me a letter he had got this
morning, from Lord Ebrington,[382] saying that Lord Tavistock (who,
Lord Melbourne tells me, has great influence over Lord John, and was
sent for) had prevailed on Lord John to put off the Army Question
till June or July; so that Lord Melbourne says they will get over
it this Session; and when a thing is put off, he added, it is often
forgotten or the moment not found suitable for it. “But,” continued
Lord Melbourne, “when one gets over one difficulty, there always comes
another; and there is now another question of great difficulty, which
is the Ballot.” He then explained to me, that not only several of their
supporters but even some of the Government had pledged themselves to
the Ballot, and consequently after Lord John made that very decided
declaration against the Ballot, these people said they must go against
this; amongst others Sir Hussey Vivian who has pledged himself to
it; and Lord Melbourne says if they should vote for it after Lord
John’s declaration, either they or perhaps Lord John will resign, and
this “would make such gaps in the Government as would make it very
difficult to fill up; and Sir Hussey Vivian has written to Lord John
this morning, and he to me, saying I shall have to choose whether I
will accept Sir Hussey’s or his resignation.” Lord Melbourne however
said he would see if he could manage it, which I fervently hope and
trust he will; but he is sadly teazed and plagued. He said, “There
is a succession of difficulties in a Government....” At 20 m. to 7 I
went with Lady Portman, Lady Tavistock, Miss Cavendish, Miss Pitt,
Lord Conyngham, Lord Headfort, and Col. Buckley to Drury Lane theatre.
We came in before the performance had commenced. It was Shakespear’s
tragedy of _Richard III._, and Charles Kean’s first appearance (in
London) as Richard. The house was crammed to the ceiling; and the
applause was tremendous when Kean came on; he was unable to make
himself heard for at least five minutes I should say. He was dressed
exactly like his father, and all those who were with me, and who
had seen his father, were struck with the great resemblance to his
father both in appearance and voice. It would be impossible for me to
attempt to describe the _admirable_ manner in which Kean delineated
the ferocious and fiend-like Richard. It was quite a _triumph_ and the
latter part particularly so; he was applauded throughout in the most
enthusiastic manner. He acted with such spirit too! One of the best
scenes was the one when the Lord Mayor urges him to accept the regal
Dignity, which Kean did uncommonly well. As also the disagreeable
and absurd scene with Lady Anne. The manner in which he gave: “So
much for Buckingham,” was truly _splendid_, and called down thunders
of applause, as also many other of the scenes where he gets very
much excited; he fought and died beautifully. He was uncommonly well
disguised, and looked very deformed and wicked. All the other parts
were very badly acted, and the three women were _quite detestable_. It
is a fine, heart-stirring play, and there are some beautiful passages
in it. I but just escaped being recognised, for as the curtain was
dropping and I left the box, they called out “the Queen.”

_Tuesday, 6th February._—At 17 m. p. 2 came my kind friend Lord
Melbourne who said he was better, and stayed with me till 20 m. p. 3.
He spoke to me about Mr. Roebuck’s[383] speech of last night; said “it
was a very bitter speech.” I told him what Lord John had written to me
of what took place in the House of Commons last night. He spoke to me
about this Parliamentary Elections Bill; said it would he thought not
pass the House of Lords. Gave me an explanation about it, and about
people’s being unable to vote unless they had paid the rates up to the
very day; and that many people wanted to get rid of this; but the Lords
did not like that as they thought it was “meddling with the Reform
Bill.” I asked him if he had done anything more about the Ballot. He
replied that he had heard from Lord John this morning, who said they
had best wait the decision; he added that Lord John thinks he must
resign if any of the others vote for the Ballot, as after his very
strong declaration against it, he would consider their voting for it
as “passing a censure upon him”; Lord Melbourne said he did not quite
think that, and that he thought Lord John took it rather too seriously;
but he added: “Lord John does.” Lord Melbourne said he thinks it better
not to take much notice of who vote for or against it; and he added “we
took no notice of it when Lord Charles Fitzroy voted for it (Ballot)
last year; he is a very foolish man, I think.” I said to him that I
believed the _Cabinet_ were all agreed upon this question; he replied
they were; “that is to say either to vote against its being made an
open question, or not to vote at all.” He added that Sir John Hobhouse
and Mr. Poulett Thomson did not vote at all, having he believed pledged
themselves before they came into the Ministry.... Lord Melbourne told
me he had dined at home the night before. Spoke to him about the play
of _Richard III._, and of Kean; spoke of Richard III. himself, who
he (Ld. M.) believes to have been crooked and deformed, and to have
murdered the two young Princes; though, he said, that great pains had
been taken to trace it all in the _Historical Doubts_ by Horace Walpole
and to prove the contrary. He also mentioned the well-known old story
of the old Countess of Desmond,[384] who “said she had danced with him”
(Richard) “the night of his Coronation and that he was a very handsome
man.” Spoke of the Duke of Wellington; he said “The Duke of Wellington
is amazingly sensible to attention; nothing pleases him so much as if
one asks him his opinion about anything.” He added that many people
were offended with the Duke’s abrupt manner of speaking; I observed
that I thought that was only a manner, and that he did not mean it
so. “No more do I,” replied Lord Melbourne. Spoke of Lord Ebrington,
who Lord Melbourne has known a long while and says is a clever man
and possesses a considerable influence over Lord John; Lord Tavistock
also he added, has influence over his brother John; “but,” said Lord
Melbourne, “Lord Tavistock has also got some strange notions; he lives
a great deal in the country; and people who live a great deal in the
country pick up strange ideas.” I asked him if he thought there would
be much opposition to the Irish Poor Laws in the House of Lords. “I
think there will be none,” he said. “I don’t think there will be any
difficulty about any of the _Questions_—it’s only this Ballot.” I asked
him if he had seen Lord John about it. He replied that others had, but
that “I don’t like to speak to him about it; I feel rather awkward
about speaking to him about it, as last year he wanted me to make it
an open question and I refused; and now that I want him to relax he
would say, ‘Why, what have you to say?’” He said Lord John was “very
unbendable” about it. Lord Melbourne wanted him not to be so very
particular about it, and let them vote for or against it (its being an
open question) and not take much notice of it; but Lord John said that
after _his_ declaration _that_ would _affect him_. I asked who were the
others who wanted to vote for it. “Why, Sir Hussey Vivian is the one of
the greatest consequence, and Parnell,”[385] he replied. “The fact is,
Vivian should not have pledged himself; he carried his election in a
way he should not have done.”

_Wednesday, 7th February._—Lord Melbourne said he had just been to see
Lord Durham “who wants more force.” He (Ld. D.) said that the Duke of
Wellington had told him he ought to have 75,000 men in Canada, to put
it down. Lord Melbourne further told me that the Duke of Wellington
had been to see Lord Durham on Friday, he thinks; stayed with him for
an hour and a half; had gone with him through the whole thing, had
told him how to manage the troops by sending them from one place to
another, and told him all his ideas of doing the thing. Lord Melbourne
seemed quite pleased about it.[386] I showed Lord Melbourne a letter I
had got from Stockmar, about which Lord Melbourne said he would write
to Stockmar. Spoke about my asking Sir Robert Peel &c. to dinner,
which led us to speak about Lady Ashley, who, Lord Melbourne says,
is decided in her politics, though not violent; she is a Tory; Lord
Melbourne says she does not talk about it much; but he thinks she has
at one time discussed it with her mother, who of course is a Whig; I
said I supposed Lady Fanny had no ideas of her own about Politics; he
replied, “Why I think she is a Tory.” I was surprised; said laughing I
thought it very wrong, and very odd, as all her brothers were Whigs.
Spoke to him at dinner about various things; he told me Mr. Roebuck
is a small man with “small finely cut features,” and that he speaks
well—“plainly, without ornament.”

_Thursday, 8th February._—He said he thought there would be some debate
in the H. of Lords about the third reading of the Canada bill tonight;
he thinks Lord Ellenborough[387] will speak. I asked him if he (Ld. E.)
was a clever man; he replied, “He is a disagreeable, conceited man,
but a clever man....” Lord Melbourne told me today that when he was as
young as Lord Canning is now, he “was very shy”; “I think I was about
as shy as anybody could be,” he said.

_Friday, 9th February._—Got the following communication from Lord
Melbourne. “The Canada Bill was read a third time yesterday evening
without division, but after a Debate which lasted until ten o’clock.
Lord Ashburton[388] made a speech generally upon the subject of
Colonies, Lord Mansfield[389] made an elaborate attack upon the
Government and in some measure complained of the Duke of Wellington
and Sir Robert Peel for not having taken more active measures in
opposition, and Lord Brougham repeated the observations which he had
before made, with no diminution of vehemence. The speakers were Lord
Ellenborough, Lord Glenelg, Lord Ashburton, Lord Mansfield, Lord
Lansdowne, Lord Brougham, Lord Melbourne, Lord Fitzwilliam,[390]
who spoke with great kindness of the Government, but declared his
disapprobation of the Bill.” I asked Lord Melbourne the other day how
many Peers could constitute a House of Lords and be considered able
to sit; he said _three_; and in the House of Commons 40 Members must
be present to make a House of Commons. I likewise asked him if there
was any particular form when a Peer takes his seat; he said _on his
creation_ there was a great deal of form; but on taking it in a new
Parliament or upon succeeding to the Title there was hardly any. “You
go up to the table,” he added, “take the oaths, pay the fees, and shake
hands with the Chancellor.” Lord Melbourne also told me that any Peer
may bring in any bill and lay it upon the table, and it is generally
read a first time; whereas “in the H. of Commons, they must always move
for leave to bring in a bill.” He said that Lord Ashburton had got that
“fashionable theory” that it was better to give up the Colonies at
once when they became at all unquiet; which Lord Melbourne observed
with great justice, would be just the way to encourage them to revolt;
for they would then say, “Why, we have nothing to do but to revolt to
get rid of our masters.” And “a very dangerous thing to declare,” Lord
Melbourne observed. Spoke a long time about all this; then about George
IV., who he said was not at all unhappy at Princess Charlotte’s death,
on the contrary, he was rather glad; spoke of her—of Uncle Leopold—her
happiness with him—her death—that she might have been saved if she had
not been so much weakened. I was delighted to see Lord Melbourne in
very good spirits, and very talkative, and _so_ agreeable! Spoke of
many things; of M. de Barante, the French Ambassador at St. Petersburg
who Lady Durham said she knew, as also his daughter who was separated
from her husband and excited pity as he was known or supposed to have
beat her. Upon this Lord Melbourne said: “Why, it is almost worth while
for a woman to be beat, considering the exceeding pity she excites,”
which made us laugh. Spoke of the dinner next day at the Lord Mayor’s,
which Lord Melbourne said was called a private dinner of about 50 or
60 persons, and which was generally very dull. He spoke of the Duke
of Wellington, and, with tears in his eyes at the Duke’s friendliness
to Lord Durham, about Canada. I asked him if it would do well if I
asked Lord and Lady Francis Egerton[391] the same day as the Duke of
Wellington dined here; he replied extremely well, and that it would
“be very agreeable to both.” I told him that I was very thankful to
him when he told me _who_ I should invite; he said, “I am afraid I
don’t attend enough to that; I am rather neglectful about it,” which
I would not allow. Spoke about the Emperor of Austria—the Duchess of
Sutherland—her family; Lord Melbourne said she was naturally very
proud; spoke about her house[392]; the lease of which she wishes to
buy, but which as it is Crown property Lord Melbourne said she could
not do; he dreaded the time when the Duchess should learn she could
not do so; that he was afraid of writing to her before she received
the formal answer from the Treasury; I told him, however, it would
be better if he did so, upon which he said: “Then it shall be done.”
Spoke of Lady Ashley—Lady Hardwicke[393]—Lady Fanny; I asked him how
she came to be a Tory—and who could have made her so. He said, “Why, I
think her Nurse; people generally get their ideas in that way.” He told
me he went to Eton when he was nine years old; he went there at Xmas
in the year 1788, and stayed there till Midsummer 1796. Lord Holland
left Eton about 3 months after Lord Melbourne went there. He spoke
most cleverly and sensibly about Public Schools; said “I am not at all
bigotted about a Public School”; said he was very happy at Eton; spoke
of the many disadvantages and dangers of a Public School; amongst which
he mentioned the great habit of telling falsehoods which boys get to
do with impunity in order to save themselves from punishment; and the
disagreeable, bad, blackguard boys you were obliged to meet at such
schools; and if a boy is weak, the liability of being led and governed
by such boys; Lady Durham likewise entered into the conversation, and
she and Lord Melbourne and I went on discussing the subject for some
time; Lady Durham observed that it was a constant _War_ between boy and
master at school, which however Lord Melbourne thought the same with
a Tutor; we all agreed that it was very bad that no French was taught
at the Public Schools, for that boys never learnt it afterwards. Lady
Durham said that Lord Durham had had a great mind that their boy should
learn no Latin at all, which however Lord Melbourne said he thought was
a bad thing, for that he thought a man could not get on well in the
world without Latin in the present state of society.[394] I told Lord
Melbourne that though Lehzen had often said that she had _never_ seen
such a passionate and naughty child as I was, still that I had never
told a falsehood, though I knew I would be punished; Lord Melbourne
said: “That is a fine character”; and I added that Lehzen entrusted
me with things which I knew she would not like me to tell again, and
that when I was ever so naughty, I never threatened to tell, or ever
did tell them. Lord Melbourne observed: “That is a fine trait.” I felt
quite ashamed, on hearing this praise, that I had said so much about
myself. I asked him if his sister’s children had not been passionate
when little. “Minny and Fanny were dreadfully passionate,” he said,
“and now they have both very sweet tempers and are very calm.” I
observed to him that I was sure _he_ had never been so; he answered,
“dreadfully passionate, and so I am now,” which I _would not_ and
_cannot_ believe....

_Tuesday, 13th February._—Lord M. spoke of the apparent cruelty,
when a person is dying and is suffering dreadfully, and anything
to hasten the end would be mercy and relief, that _that_ is not
allowed, and is considered unjustifiable by law. I mentioned to Lord
Melbourne a case in which it had been done; he told me an anecdote of
Napoleon respecting this; when his great favourite and friend Duroc
was so frightfully wounded, the lower part of his body being carried
away—Napoleon came to him, and Duroc implored him to give him laudanum
to alleviate his sufferings and hasten his end, but Napoleon would not
do it, and said he could not sanction such a thing. Lord Melbourne
observed, “If they get the habit of doing such a thing” (hastening the
end) “when a person is in a hopeless state, why, they _may_ do it when
a person is _not_ in a hopeless state.” Spoke of Lord Leveson[395]
who is such a very odd-looking young man; Lord Melbourne said that
Lady Granville “was always very ugly,” and that “she is _now_ better
looking than she used to be.” Spoke of large dogs, which Lord Melbourne
thinks dangerous pets, as you are always so completely at their mercy
if they choose to do you harm. Spoke of Lady Lilford,[396] Lord and
Lady Holland; the latter, Lord Melbourne says, always thinks _first_
of herself and then of Lord Holland, who quite obeys her. I asked Lord
Melbourne if Lord Glenelg was at all obstinate; he said not now, but
that he had been, and had given great trouble in ’30 or ’31, when he
alone opposed in the Cabinet £25,000 being proposed as an outfit for
the Queen Dowager; and that Lord Grey had been obliged to go and tell
the King that he could not propose it, as Lord Glenelg was so much
against it; Lord Melbourne said that neither the King or Queen ever
forgave this and that the King could not _bear_ Lord Glenelg; he could
neither bear Lord John Russell, who, Lord Melbourne said, he always
called “that young man”; he also disliked Sir John Hobhouse, and Mr.
Poulett Thomson, and latterly Lord Palmerston, though in the beginning
he liked him very much; Mr. S. Rice he liked pretty well; the Lord
Chancellor[397] very much, and always told Lord Melbourne that the
Lord Chancellor was “a kind good man”; Lord Dunraven[398] thought
the King liked him (Ld. D.), but Lord Melbourne said he thought the
King disliked him “at bottom,” though he was confidential with him. I
asked Lord Melbourne if he did not see the King often? Lord Melbourne
replied not often, and never at Windsor latterly; that he was always
very civil to him, though not very open, and always very short. He
said (that by the paper which Taylor wrote and gave me, and which Lord
Melbourne has read) that the King had intended, in case the Ministry
had resigned (which Lord Melbourne said they had declared they would,
about the Irish Corporation Bill) to send a paper round to the Duke of
Wellington, Sir Robert Peel and Lord Melbourne calling upon them to
form a Ministry. Lord Melbourne added: “He” (the late King) “was not at
all a clever man; he was a very timid man; very easily frightened; in
fact he was quite in Taylor’s hands; Taylor could turn him any way.”
This I observed was a wrong thing; Lord Melbourne said certainly it
was, “but considering the King’s character, and how difficult it was
for him to take a resolution, one cannot say it was an unfortunate
thing.” I observed that Taylor turned the King to the Tory side; Lord
Melbourne said: “The Tories don’t at all consider Taylor a friend.”
I spoke of the unfortunate day in August ’36, when the King came to
Windsor (after having prorogued Parliament) in a great passion. Lord
Melbourne said this was caused by the King having set his mind upon
having a Marine executed who was recommended to mercy; Lord Minto (whom
the King neither liked) came to Lord Melbourne in great distress and
said: “The King will have this man hanged.” The King hated the Speaker,
and told Lord Melbourne that all the time the Speaker was addressing
him in the House of Lords: “Shocking voice he has.”

_Wednesday, 14th February._—Lord M. told me that Lord John had written
to him that he would be unable to attend the House of Commons next
day, when this _anxious_ Ballot Question comes on. Lord Melbourne said
he did not think it quite a bad thing that Lord John would be away
when this Ballot Question came on, as he thinks there will be less
irritation if he is absent, and as Lord John is unwell and “worried
about the child,” Lord Melbourne observed he “might say something
imprudent.” I think this all very true. Lord Melbourne was very funny
about caps and bonnets; he looked round the table and said, “There
is an amazing cargo of bonnets and things come from Paris, I fancy,”
which made us laugh; and he observed Lady Caroline’s hat and said he
imagined that was something quite new. He spoke of Mdlle. Laure; we
(Lady Durham and I) laughed very much and asked him how he knew about
her; “They tell me of her,” he added, “and I fancy she has beautiful
things.” The Duke of Wellington was in very good spirits, but it
strikes me he is a good deal aged, particularly in appearance. Lady
Francis Egerton[399] is a clever, agreeable little person; and, though
much altered, is still very pretty. I sat on the sofa with Lady Francis
and Lady Durham[400]; Lord Melbourne sitting near me the whole evening;
and Lord Francis not far from him; the other ladies were seated round
the table. We (Lord Melbourne, Lord Francis and I) spoke about German
literature—the weather—fires, the fire at Paris, &c., &c. Lord Francis
is rather a silent person and it is not easy _de le mettre en train de
parler_. I asked Lord Melbourne what the Duke of Wellington had told
him that made him (Ld. M.) laugh so much; Lord Melbourne then told me
the following anecdote of George IV., which caused the laughter. When
George IV. returned from Ireland, he was very sick and suffered a good
deal; and he stopped and rested at Badminton; upon this the Judge, who
was sitting at the Assizes at Gloucester, imagined that he could not
have a man executed when the King was in the County without asking
him about it, came over to Badminton and wished the King to hear the
case, which put the King into the greatest passion and he exclaimed,
“What! am I to be followed all over the country with the Recorder’s
report?...” Spoke to Lord Melbourne about Lord John’s child, and the
anxiety of having one child only. I observed to him however that I did
not think having more than one child lessened the anxiety about them;
for if persons loved their children, they would be just as anxious if
_one_ of the many was ill, and would feel the loss of _one_ as much as
if he or she had but that one. Lord Melbourne said he thought quite so
too; but that somehow or other “if there are many, they have seldom
anything the matter with them.” He added “it is not the right affection
for a child, if they love them only as being their heir, or for keeping
up their name.” He said he was going home after he had left the Palace,
as he had a great deal to do. He thinks his sister had better go out of
town, as she is not well, and out of spirits since she is in London. I
spoke of sons-in-law and daughters-in-law and observed that I thought
daughters-in-law seldom got on well with their mothers-in-law, in which
Lord Melbourne quite agreed; whereas the sons-in-law they generally
were fond of. I asked him how his sister agreed with the young Lady
Cowper. “Pretty well,” he replied, “but I don’t think she forms any
exception to the rule.” Lady Ashley and Lady Fanny, he said, liked
their sister-in-law, but had also a certain feeling about it; “they
don’t like to see her in the same place where they used to see their
mother.” Spoke of the very strange custom in Russia that on Easter
Sunday _everybody_ who chooses is allowed to _kiss_ the Empress,
saying at the same time “Christ is risen.” Lord Melbourne told me an
anecdote of the Emperor of Russia. “He said to a sentinel, ‘Christ is
risen,’ and the man answered, ‘No, he is not’; the Emperor started and
repeated, ‘Christ is risen’; the man again said, ‘No, he is not, for
I am a Jew.’ The Emperor said, ‘You are quite right.’” I was quite
happy to see the very amicable and friendly terms on which the Duke and
my excellent friend were; it is impossible for Lord Melbourne to be
otherwise almost with anybody, and the Duke having behaved very well
lately, and being likewise an open, frank man, it renders it easy for
them to be so....

_Thursday, 15th February._—I sat on the sofa with the Duchess of
Sutherland, the Duke of Sutherland and Lord Durham sitting near us.
Lord Durham spoke of the King of Greece[401]; says he is _remarkably_
plain and mean-looking, very shy and awkward in society, and _en
fin_ unable to do _anything_. The Sultan,[402] whom he also saw, he
describes as a fine-looking but not “thorough-bred” looking man; short
and dark, with an expression of treachery in his eyes....

_Wednesday, 21st February._—At about a ¼ p. 2 I went into the Throne
room for the Levee with my Ladies &c., and all the Household and the
Ministers being in the room. The only person who I was very anxious
to see and whom I was much interested to have seen, was _O’Connell_,
who was presented, and of course, as everybody does when they are
presented, kissed hands. He was in a full wig as one of the Queen’s
Councillors in Ireland, and not in the brown Brutus wig he generally
wears. He is very tall, rather large, has a remarkably good-humoured
countenance, small features, small clever blue eyes, and very like
his caricatures; there were likewise two of his sons, Morgan and John
O’Connell; his son-in-law, Mr. Fitzsimon, and his nephew John Morgan
O’Connell. Lord Melbourne told me that one of my pensioners, a Sir John
Lade,[403] one of George IV.’s associates, was dead; spoke of him, of
another called George Lee; of old Mrs. Fox, who Lord Melbourne knew
formerly; he said of Mr. Fox, “he took great notice of me.” Mr. Fox
died on the 13th of September 1806. Spoke of Nelson, &c., &c. He spoke
of the Committee on the Pensions which was going on; that it was a
very fair Committee, and that there had only been a difficulty about
one case, which was a curious one, and which is a pension given to two
French ladies, Madame de Rohan and Madame de Longueville, daughters
of the Duc de Biron. Lord Melbourne told me how they came to get it,
which is as follows, and in telling which he became quite affected
and his eyes filled with tears. When Lord Rodney went to Paris just
before he obtained his great victory, he was arrested for debt, as
(Lord Melbourne said) he was always without a shilling in the world;
and the Duc de Biron said, “Though we are enemies, still it is too bad
that a great English officer should be arrested for debt here,” and he
paid his debts for him. Afterwards when the Duc de Biron’s daughters,
Mmes. de Rohan and Longueville, who are the first nobility in France,
got into distress, they sent a statement to George III. of what their
father had done for Lord Rodney, and George III. gave them a pension.
Spoke of O’Connell, and George IV., to whose Levee in Dublin he
(O’Connell) went; Lord Melbourne said that O’Connell declared he heard
George IV. distinctly say (when he passed) to some one, “God damn him.”
Lord Melbourne said that George IV. was in a very awkward position
when he was in Ireland, for that the whole country was in a ferment
of enthusiasm believing the King to be for the Catholic Emancipation,
whereas in his heart he was against it. I said to Lord Melbourne that
there was rather a disagreeable business about Lord Durham’s wishing
me to receive Lady —— at Court, which, if she had been refused at
the late Court, it would, I feared, be impossible for me to do. Lord
Melbourne said, “It will not do for you to reverse a sentence passed
by the late Court in the beginning of your reign; I quite agree with
you that you cannot do this.” He said that in general with respect
to receiving people it was better to go according to what had been
determined by a Court of Justice and if there was nothing against them
there, to receive them and not to inquire into what their early lives
had been[404]....

_Friday, 23rd February._—I lamented my being _so_ short, which Lord M.
smiled at and thought no misfortune. Spoke to him of the Levée, the
place where I stood which some people objected to, which led him to
speak of the old Court in the time of George III., when a Levee and
also a Drawing-room was like an Assembly; the King and Queen used to
come into the room where the people were already assembled, and to walk
round and speak to the people; they did not speak to everybody, and
it was considered no offence, he said, if they did not. He said Queen
Charlotte spoke English with a little accent, but that it was rather
pretty. I asked him when he first went to Court; he said in the year
1803, he thought; it was at the time when everybody volunteered their
services and when he was in a Volunteer Corps. Spoke of Lord Howe, his
remaining about the Queen[405]; and when he was made to resign. Lord
Melbourne said he (Ld. H.) seldom voted but that when he voted against
the Reform Bill, Lord Grey was urged by an outcry from “his people”
to press his (Ld. Howe’s) removal, which Lord Melbourne said was very
unwise; Lord Grey went down to Windsor, and told the King of it, which
alarmed the King a good deal; they (the King and Lord Grey) discussed
with Taylor how it should be done; Lord Grey proposed his seeing the
Queen upon it, which Taylor said never would do, and that the only way
was to send for Lord Howe and make him resign, which he (Ld. H.) said
he would do. Lord Melbourne said that the Queen had just come home from
riding and was half undressed when Lord Howe sent to say he must see
the Queen; she said she would see him when she was dressed; whereupon
Lord Howe sent again to her saying the affair was so urgent that he
must see her immediately; she buttoned up her habit again and saw him;
he gave her the key and said he must resign, which Lord Melbourne said
made the Queen very angry and rendered her still more hostile to Lord
Grey’s Government than she already was....

_Tuesday, 27th February._—I said to Lord Melbourne that Uncle Leopold
was amazingly frightened when the Prince of Orange came over with his
sons, as he always imagined that the late King had _some intentions_
about that; (meaning a marriage between me and one of the young
Princes.) “And so he had,” said Lord Melbourne decidedly. “He sounded
me about it,” and Lord Melbourne wrote to him (the late King) to say
that in a political point of view, he did not think it a desirable
thing; that the country would not like a connection with Holland; the
King was much disappointed at this, Lord Melbourne said; he (the King)
had always a fear about a marriage; he was afraid Mamma had intentions,
which I observed she certainly had; and that the King therefore thought
“he must _dévancer_ her”; that Lord Melbourne told him, if he wished
such a thing he had better be sure first if the _Parties_ themselves
liked it; for that he never could force such a thing; of which Lord
Melbourne said the King never seemed sensible; at which I laughed.
He said that the Prince of Orange also came to him (Ld. M.) from the
King, and asked him if he or the Government had any objection to such
a connection. “Personally,” Lord Melbourne said to him, “there could
be no objection; no more than to any other Prince in Europe”; but at
the same time he must tell him that his (the Prince’s) country was so
situated that it would be constantly involved in war if any war was
to break out; “I told him as much as that,” Lord Melbourne said, “and
that I could not say anything until we saw it in some sort of shape or
other.” This was all very curious and interesting for me to hear.

[Illustration: _H.R.H. The Duchess of Kent_

  _from a portrait by Stone_]




                    INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO CHAPTER IX

  The early months of the year 1838 found Lord Melbourne’s Government
  in considerable difficulties. For legislative purposes the
  Parliamentary majority was impotent. It was just able to keep the
  Ministry afloat. “The Queen,” wrote Lord Palmerston, “is as steady
  to us as ever, and was in the depth of despair when she thought we
  were in danger of being turned out.”

  This was a year of grave trouble in Canada, but, as it turned out,
  a year full of promise for the subsequent welfare of that great
  Dominion, and for her connection with the Mother-country. The Queen
  was undoubtedly attracted by Lord Durham, the Governor-General,
  who, although impulsive and impatient of restraint, possessed
  charms of manner and appearance, together with intellectual gifts,
  which rendered his personality agreeable to those with whom he was
  brought in contact. The Queen showed great kindness to him and Lady
  Durham before their departure for Canada. She regretted his return,
  and was grieved by the quarrel between him and her Ministers.

  Although during this year the Queen was in the habit of taking long
  rides into the country, which were found to be very beneficial to
  her health, she worked hard, and she laboriously read, under Lord
  Melbourne’s guidance, masses of despatches and correspondence. At
  no time during her reign was she more persistent in following the
  course of public business.

  She was now brought a good deal into contact with Lord Palmerston,
  and was undoubtedly attracted by his great gifts, although at
  a later period of her reign his administrative methods and
  high-handed independence occasioned her much anxiety and led to
  strong remonstrance.

  In the month of April, King Leopold was engaged in suggesting to
  the Queen the possibility of a union between her and Prince Albert
  of Saxe-Coburg. He wrote constantly to her upon this topic, laying
  stress upon the young Prince’s goodness and distinction, and upon
  his great anxiety to see his intellectual and moral training
  perfected under the auspices of Baron Stockmar.

  In the course of the spring the preparations for the Queen’s
  Coronation were commenced, and she took keen interest in the detail
  of that ceremonial. It was a somewhat delicate matter to avoid
  having to invite her Uncle King Leopold and Queen Louise, but a
  hint having been dropped to the King of the Belgians, he speedily
  realised that the custom of not including crowned heads in the
  invitations to a Coronation was sound and worth preserving. “On
  mature reflection,” he wrote, “I think that a King and Queen at
  your dear Coronation might perhaps be a _hors d’œuvre_.” To this
  view the Queen graciously assented.


                              CHAPTER IX

                                 1838

_Tuesday, 6th March._—It was Mr. Bulwer’s play of _The Lady of Lyons_;
and we came in very soon after the beginning. I think the play
acts well, and I like it. Macready acted well as Claude Melnotte,
Bartley[406] was very good as Damas; and Meadows[407] as Glavis. Mr.
Elton[408] acted fairly enough as the wicked Beauséant.

_Wednesday, 7th March._—Dressed for riding. At a few m. p. 12 I _rode_
out with Lord Conyngham, Lord Uxbridge, dear Lehzen, Miss Cavendish,
Col. Cavendish, and Sir G. Quentin and Mr. Fozard. I mounted in the
garden just under the terrace in order that nobody should know I was
going to ride out. I rode my dear favourite Tartar who went perfectly
and _most delightfully_, never shying, never starting through all the
_very_ noisy streets, rattling omnibuses—carts—carriages, &c., &c. I
quite _love_ him. We rode out through the garden, through the gate on
Constitution Hill; round the park by the water, out at the new gate, by
Lord Hill’s former villa, a good way on the Harrow Road, I should say
within 4 or 5 miles of Harrow—then down a pretty narrow lane where one
could fancy oneself 2 or 300 miles from London, out by Willesden Field
(where I had never been), and Kilburn, down the Edgware Road—Connaught
Place, through omnibuses, carts, &c., &c., in at Cumberland Gate,
galloped up to Hyde Park Corner—and in at the same garden gate at
Constitution Hill, and safely to the Palace at 10 m. to 3. It was a
lovely day, a beautiful and delicious ride, and I have come home quite
charmed and delighted. I rode between Lord Conyngham and Col. Cavendish
the whole way. Dearest Lehzen rode Rosa and felt all the better for
the ride. Wrote my journal. Signed. Walked about. At ½ p. 4 came my
kind and excellent Lord Melbourne and stayed with me till 20 m. p. 5.
He spoke to me about my ride; said he had just come from the Cabinet,
which was about these Canadian prisoners[409]; viz. what is to be done
with them; the revolt being put down they cannot be tried by Martial
Law, and there is great difficulty as to what is to be done with them.
I said to Lord Melbourne I hoped he was not tired from last night; he
said not at all. He said: “I am not quite so sure of to-night; I think
we shall carry it, but you must not be surprised if it should be the
other way.” I coloured very much at this honest, frank avowal of our
fears, from this best and kindest of friends; and tears were nearer
than words to me at that moment....

_Tuesday, 13th March._—I asked Lord Melbourne what was to take place
concerning Slavery to-night.[410] Lord Melbourne then pulled out of his
pocket the Bill or Act which is to be read to-night; he read to me the
principal Heads of it explaining to me each part in the _most clear and
agreeable_ manner possible. I shall not have time or space to explain
or name _each_ head here, but before I do any, I must just observe that
the necessity of this Act shows how shockingly cruel and cheating the
Masters of the Slaves are, attempting to evade in every possible way
what they are told to do, and what, as the Laws cannot be enforced on
the spot, must be done by an Act of Parliament here.

_Wednesday, 14th March._— ... I asked Lord Melbourne how he liked my
dress. He said he thought it “very pretty” and that “it did very well.”
He is so natural and funny and nice about _toilette_ and has a very
good taste I think....

_Saturday, 17th March._—Spoke of the Cabinet, which was just over; he
said that they had been speaking about the Coronation in the Cabinet;
and they all thought that it would be best to have it about the 25th
or 26th of June, as it would end the Parliament well and make a good
break; that it would be best to have it like William IV.’s, which would
be less long. I of course agreed to this....

_Wednesday, 21st March._—Heard from Lord Melbourne that “the House sat
till ½ past eleven last night. Lord Stanhope made a long declamatory
speech, very violent, but having in it nothing defined or specific, and
was answered by Lord Brougham in a most able and triumphant defence and
maintenance of the late Act for amending the laws for the relief of
the Poor. Lord Melbourne was very sorry to be prevented from waiting
upon Your Majesty. He is very grateful for Your Majesty’s enquiries and
feels very well this morning....” Spoke of Portugal; Lord Melbourne
was very much pleased with the good news, and with the Queen’s
conduct.[411] I then saw Lord Palmerston, who was in high spirits at
the good news from Portugal. The Levée was over at 3. I then went for a
moment to the dressing-room to ease my head, as my diadem (which Lord
Melbourne thought “very handsome”) hurt me so dreadfully. After this
I invested (in the Closet) the Marquis of Breadalbane[412] with the
Order of the Thistle; Sir Thomas Bradford[413] with the Grand Cross
of the Bath; and Lord Burghersh[414] and General Donald McLeod were
made Knights Commanders of the Order of the Bath. My Ladies, my whole
Household and all the Ministers were present at this ceremony.

_Thursday, 22nd March._—Lord Melbourne said he had been to see the
Duke of Wellington this morning about asking him to be at the head of
a Commission to be appointed to inquire into the promotions in the
Army and in the Marines, which were so very slow in the time of peace
and about which they were being attacked in the House of Commons. Lord
Melbourne said the Duke had consented to it; and that his being at the
head of it “will give it authority”; the Duke wished to know who was
to be in the Commission; Lord Melbourne named them to him and he was
very well satisfied with them. Lord Melbourne told me some of them,
which are: Lord Hill, Sir Hussey Vivian, Sir Alexander Dickson,[415]
Sir Thomas Hardy,[416] the First Lord of the Admiralty,[417] and the
Secretary at War.[418] Lord Melbourne said, with the tears in his eyes
(kind, excellent man), that the Duke was in very good humour, and “a
very pleasant man to do business with, I think; he is so plain and
speaks to the point.” The Duke had been reviewing the Battalions which
are going to Canada, and praised them very much, and said “particularly
my regiment.” The Duke said that Lord Brougham’s speech on the Poor
Laws was the best he ever heard him make. I told Lord Melbourne that
_Diet_ was the best physician for him; he said laughing, he drank
too much _champagne_, and I added, mixed too many wines; at which he
laughed a good deal. Spoke of the Queen Dowager who he is going to
see at ½ p. 1 on Saturday; spoke of my calling her Queen Adelaide and
not Queen Dowager, as it was painful to people to receive that name.
Spoke of all changes of that kind; of the Queen Dowager’s having signed
“_Subject_” to me the day after the King died.[419]

_Friday, 23rd March._—Lord Cowper is very shy and reserved and speaks
but little. He really is the image of his mother,[420] and has exactly
the same voice and manner of speaking. The cut of the features is so
exactly his mother’s—he looks delicate and is very thin; he has a
mild and pleasing countenance. Lord Melbourne spoke to me of these
Portuguese despatches which he had not yet seen. He said: “I am very
glad the Queen has shown courage; it gives confidence....”

_Sunday, 25th March._—I said I had heard from Uncle Leopold, who seems
a good deal vexed at this recommencement of this Belgian Question; we
spoke of this and Lord Melbourne said: “I don’t like it at all; I think
we shall get into a quarrel somehow or other, which is a bad thing.”
He said Uncle Leopold had written to Lord Palmerston about this and
about this Portuguese Affair; Lord Melbourne said that Uncle wrote that
people complained and with truth that Ferdinand did not show himself;
upon which Dietz[421] wrote that a King should not show himself when
his subjects are spilling their blood. Whereupon Uncle observed:
that was a very fine German sentiment, but that if Louis Philippe
had followed that principle, he would have lost his head like Louis
xvi.... Of the late hurricane in Ireland; Lord Melbourne said trees
never grew so well in Ireland and were all a little bent from the wind
blowing across the Atlantic. He dislikes trees near a house, and he is
very fond of thinning trees. Spoke of Claremont and the trees there.
We then spoke of _names_ (Xtian names) for a long while, about which
Lord Melbourne was very amusing and very funny. He said Lady Ashley
was always called _Minny_. He said: “I think Mary beautiful.” We spoke
of Molly; “Molly is beautiful; it’s such a soft word, there are more
liquids in it than in almost any word.” Then _Bess_ he thinks “quite
beautiful,” as also _Jane_, and _Kate_, and _Alice_; “Jane and Joan,”
he said, “are John.” “Louisa,” he says, “is a fastidious name....”

_Tuesday, 27th March._—At ½ p. 12 I rode out with Lord Conyngham, Lord
Uxbridge, Lord Byron,[422] Lady Mary, dearest Lehzen, Miss Cavendish,
Miss Quentin, Sir F. Stovin and Col. Cavendish, and came home at ½ p.
3, having ridden 22 MILES!!! We rode very hard and Tartar went MOST
delightfully, NEVER was there SUCH a dear horse. We rode to Richmond,
through part of the Richmond Park, out at Robin Hood Gate, and home
over Wimbledon Common and Vauxhall Bridge. It was as hot as summer, and
_going_ I thought I should have melted; coming over Wimbledon Common
there was some delicious air. It was a heavenly day. At 6 m. p. 4 came
Lord Melbourne and stayed with me till 20 m. to 5. He seemed well.
Spoke a good deal of my ride. The Debate lasted till 11 last night,
and he dined and stayed at home. Spoke of the Archbishop’s having made
a long speech last night about the Indian Worship; spoke of that.
Spoke of the Duke of Sussex and what he told me about the rank a Prime
Minister should have, viz. that of Lord High Treasurer; Lord Melbourne
said: “I think it had better remain as it is.”[423]

_Wednesday, 28th March._—Spoke of my ride; of Mr. Bulwer’s novels,
_none_ of which Lord Melbourne has read. Lady Durham said it was very
odd that so clever a man should be vain about his personal appearance.
Lord Melbourne replied: “I think clever people generally have more of
those weaknesses than others.” Lord Melbourne said: “I always predicted
he would be a genius when he was a boy; and I was sure he would make
a figure; he used to come over to Brocket when he was 17, and show me
his poetry.” I asked Lord Melbourne if he was fond of novels; he said
“very fond,” but that he had no time to read them now. Spoke of Lady
Wilhelmina, who Lord Melbourne says is certainly much grown since last
year. I said “Everybody grows but me.” He laughed and said, “I think
you are grown....”

_Thursday, 29th March._—I showed Lord Melbourne a bracelet with my
portrait by Ross in it, which I’m going to give Lady Durham, which he
thought very like.

_Friday, 30th March._—Got up at 10 m. to 10, and breakfasted at a
¼ to 11. Heard from Lord John before breakfast, that Sir George
Strickland[424] brought on this Motion for emancipating the Apprentices
this year, last night, and was seconded by Mr. Pease[425] (the Quaker).
Sir George Grey[426] made a speech of 2 hours and fifty minutes, and
completely exhausted the subject. The speech was a very able one and
Lord John thinks will change many Votes.

_Sunday, 1st April._—I told him of the Duke of Cambridge and what
he had said about his wish of going to the Emperor of Austria’s
Coronation; and also that he said he could not dine with me on
Tuesday, but _invited himself_ to dine with me another day _without_
the Duchess; Lord Melbourne laughed and said, “That’s very odd; Your
Majesty should have said ‘That’s not right.’” Spoke of Little Holland
House, which Lord Melbourne says is quite near Holland House and a
very nice place, with a very pretty garden; spoke of Miss Fox, Lord
Holland’s sister, who is such an amiable person; we were not sure of
her age; Lord Melbourne said she was grown up when he was a boy at
school; spoke of Lady Holland, who has been very handsome though he
always remembers her very large; and she has a vulgar mouth and used
always to say, “A vulgar ordinary mouth I have.” Spoke of her and Lady
Lilford, who, Lord Melbourne said laughing, “never had the use of her
legs.” Lady Holland is about 68, he thinks; she was married in 1786 to
her 1st husband, Sir Godfrey Webster, when she was only 16. Spoke of
Portugal &c....

_Monday, 2nd April._—I said to Lord Melbourne I was so stupid that I
must beg him to explain to me about Sir William Follett[427] again;
he answered very kindly, “It is not stupid, but I daresay you can’t
understand it,” and he explained it to me like a _kind_ father would
do to his child; he has something so fatherly, and so affectionate
and kind in him, that one must love him.... I rode Lord Uxbridge’s
little horse, which I have Christened _Uxbridge_, and which is the most
charming, delightful, quiet horse possible. It has a most beautiful
little head, is of a dark chestnut colour, if possible quieter than
Tartar, for it never takes notice of anything; full of spirit, and
very easy and pleasant in its canter which is faster than Tartar’s. It
is delightful to have two such horses as Tartar and Uxbridge. It was
a very warm, bright, clear, pleasant day. We rode to Hanwell through
Acton; home by Castle Hill, Acton again, and in at the Victoria Gate,
and home by the garden gate; we rode about 19 or 20 miles. When we were
near Notting Hill, or rather more at Brookgreen, I sent on a groom to
inform Lord Melbourne (who told me last night he would come to me at
_four_ today), that I should be at home in a few minutes; but when I
came home, they said Lord Melbourne had been at the gate a few minutes
before, and on hearing I was still out, said “Very well,” and walked
his horse away. I waited in my habit till 5, the hour for the House of
Lords, when I felt that my good Lord Melbourne could not come, and I
wrote to him. It is my own fault....

_Wednesday, 4th April._—Spoke of the Coronation, and the fuss the
Princesses were in about their robes; I told Lord Melbourne that the
Duchess of Gloucester had offered to hold the tip of my train when
I was being crowned, as the Duchess of Brunswick had done for Queen
Charlotte, and that I thought this very kind of the Duchess; which
quite touched my good friend. Spoke of Hanwell, and rail-roads; I said
I feared there were so many rail-roads that they could not all answer;
Lord Melbourne said he feared they would not, but that he was sorry for
it, as he was engaged in one. “I was fool enough to engage in one and
to take 50 shares; I have already paid £1,000, and have lately had a
call for £500 more,” he added. This rail-road is in Nottingham and he
engaged in it about 4 years ago. I asked him if he liked rail-roads in
general; he replied, “I don’t care about them,” which made me laugh;
and he added that they were bad for the country as they brought such a
shocking set of people “who commit every horror.” “They are picked men,
who mind neither Lord nor laws, and commit every species of violence;
nothing is safe,” he added; and “it’s more like a country in time of
war” than peace. He spoke of Dorsetshire to Lady Portman, and she said
it was so poor; he replied, “That’s because you don’t give enough
wages.”

_Thursday, 5th April._—Spoke of Lady Burghersh[428]; Lord Melbourne
said, “She is of a great deal of use to us, in a quiet way”; for if he
wished to communicate with the Duke of Wellington, he did it through
her; he, of course, does not wish me to mention this; but I hope I _am_
discreet and tell but little of what he tells to me. Lady Burghersh is
a sensible, clever woman, and has great influence over the Duke.

_Friday, 6th April._—Spoke of my ride; rail-roads; that the
Steam-Carriage could not be stopped under 150 yards’ distance of an
object; I observed that these Steam-Carriages are very dangerous; Lord
Melbourne said, “Oh! none of these modern inventions consider human
life.” Spoke of Col. Cavendish and Sir George Quentin; of horses;
Lord Melbourne said his mare would not be well enough to come down
to Windsor, but that he could get a horse from me there, to ride. I
observed that Mr. Cowper complained he (Ld. M.) never rode the horses
he should ride; “I don’t know, he never got me a horse I liked; I don’t
think he is a very good hand at horses.” Lord Melbourne said Mr. Fred
Byng[429] got him his present black mare; he hears a horse-dealer has
got a horse which he thinks will do for him; the price is 160 guineas,
which he says is nothing if the horse is a good one; but a good deal
if it is a bad one.... Spoke of Byron, who Lord Melbourne said would
not be 50 if he were alive[430]; he said he was extremely handsome;
had dark hair, was very lame and limped very much; I asked if the
expression of his countenance was agreeable; he said not; “he had a
sarcastic, sardonic expression; a contemptuous expression.” I asked if
he was not agreeable; he said “He could be excessively so”; “he had a
pretty smile”; “treacherous beyond conception; I believe he was fond of
treachery.” Lord Melbourne added, “he dazzled everybody,” and deceived
them; “for he could tell his story very well....” Lord Melbourne said,
“The old King (George III.) had that hurried manner; but he was a
shrewd, acute man, and most scrupulously civil.” He added that the
King was rather tall, red in the face, large though not a corpulent
man; prejudiced and obstinate beyond conception; spoke of the old Duke
of Gloucester who, he said, was not a clever man but a good-natured
man, though very proud; of the Duchess of Gloucester his wife; Lord
Melbourne said that Horace Walpole tells that one day _he_ (I think)
gave the Duke of Gloucester a fête at Strawberry Hill; and the Duchess
came over before to see that all was right; and when she came there
she saw that the host had put up her arms with the Duke’s; she said,
“God bless me! this will never do; you must take this down directly,
this will never do; the Duke would be extremely angry were he to see
this.” The Duchess was a Walpole by birth[431]; she was first married
to Lord Waldegrave; her children by that marriage were beautiful; they
were Elizabeth, Lady Waldegrave,[432] Lady Euston,[433] and Lady Hugh
Seymour, who was mother to Sir Horace Seymour.[434] “People were very
fond of her,” Lord Melbourne said....

_Sunday, 8th April._—Lord Melbourne looked over one of the Volumes
(the sixth) of a Work called “Lodge’s Portraits”; there are portraits
of all sorts of famous people in it, with short Memoirs of them
annexed to them. Lord Melbourne looked carefully over each, reading
the accounts of the people and admiring the prints. I wish I had
time to write down all the clever observations he made about _all_.
It is quite _a delight_ for me to hear him speak about all these
things; he has such _stores_ of knowledge; such a wonderful memory;
he knows about everybody and everything; _who_ they were, and _what_
they did; and he imparts all his knowledge in such a _kind_ and
agreeable manner; it does me a _world_ of good; and his conversations
always _improve_ one greatly. I shall just name a few of the people
he observed upon:—_Raleigh_, which he thought a very handsome head;
_Hobbes_, who was “an infidel philosopher”; he had been tutor to one of
the Earls of Devonshire,[435] he said; _Knox_—Lord Melbourne observed
that those Scotch Reformers were very violent people; but that Knox
denied having been so harsh to Mary of Scots as she said he had been;
_Lord Mansfield_, who, he said, “was great-uncle” to the present Lord;
_Melanchthon_, whose name means Black Earth in Greek, and whose head
he admired; _Pitt_, whose print Lord Melbourne said was very like;
“he died in 1806 when I came into Parliament.” He (Ld. M.) came in
for Leominster. _Wesley_; Lord Melbourne said the greatest number of
Dissenters were Wesleyans; he read from the book that there were (at
his death) 135,000 of his followers; _Porson_,—Lord Melbourne said,
“I knew him; he was a great Greek scholar,” and looking at the print,
“it’s very like him.” _Leibnitz_, a great German philosopher, and a
correspondent of Queen Caroline, wife to George II.; spoke of her being
so learned and her whole court too; “the Tories laughed at it very
much”; and Swift ridiculing the Maids of Honour wrote, “Since they talk
to Dr. Clark, They now venture in the Dark.” _Addison_; Lord Melbourne
admires his “Spectator,” his “Cato” he also admires, but says it’s
not like a Roman tragedy; “there is so much love in it.” Addison died
at Holland House; he disagreed very much with his wife, Lady Warwick.
Holland House was built, he said, by Rich, Lord Holland, in the reign
of Charles 1st.[436] _Madame de Staël_, whose print he thought very
like; “she had good eyes, she was very vain of her arms.” She was over
here in ’15, and died in ’17, aged 51; she disliked dying very much;
Lord Melbourne also knew her daughter the Duchesse de Broglie; he said,
“Louis Philippe dislikes _her_ as much as Napoleon did _her Mother_.”
Lord Melbourne saw Madame de Broglie for a moment when he was at Paris
for the last time in 1825. He read from the book, with great emphasis,
the following passage, what Napoleon said of Madame de Staël: “They
pretend that she neither talks politics nor mentions me; but I know
not how it happens that people seem to like me less after visiting
her.” _Queen Elizabeth_; spoke of her, and that her Mother must have
been very handsome. Lady Holland, he told me, has the greatest fear of
dying; spoke of pictures; Lord Melbourne does not admire Murillo much,
nor Rubens; he so greatly prefers the Italian Masters to any others;
spoke of subjects for painting; of the Holy Family being constantly
painted; “After all,” he said, “a woman and child is the most beautiful
subject one can have.” He is going down alone to Brocket; I told him
his sister thought Brocket so cold, and that she wanted him to put
up stoves, which he said would “burn down the house.” “I reduced the
grates,” he continued, “because I thought they gave heat enough; and
so they do, if they make large fires; but they don’t know how to make
fires.” He can’t bear Brocket in winter. He was going home and did not
feel tired any more. He spoke of my riding very kindly. Stayed up till
a ¼ p. 11. It was a most delightful evening.

_Monday, 9th April._—I showed him letters of thanks from Lords
Fitzwilliam and Dundas and Captain Sykes, relative to my having repaid
to the two first-named the debt incurred by my poor father and owing
to their late fathers; and to the latter the debt owing to himself,
accompanied by gifts. Lord Melbourne observed my sleeves (which were
very long) with astonishment, and said “Amazing sleeves!...”

_Monday, 16th April._—Lord Melbourne told me that there were very
strange accounts of Lord Brougham and all he was _saying_ and _doing_
at Paris; his having gone to see Louis Philippe at 11 o’clock at night,
when the Swiss Guard were (as they always are) asleep on the staircase;
they stopped him (Brougham), saying the King was gone to bed; upon
which Brougham observed that their King had “very rustic habits.” Spoke
of him, his visiting Lady Fitzharris[437]; Lord Melbourne spoke of
Brougham and his oddities; of this Review which he (B.) has written and
which Lord Melbourne thinks “well done.” He thinks Queen Charlotte and
George III. very harshly handled in it, and Queen Caroline amazingly
puffed up; the Duke of York’s character he thinks the best done; he
says there is a great deal which Brougham seems not to know; spoke of
George IV.’s character, not being understood; of Sir William Knighton’s
Memoirs which are just published, and which Lord Melbourne thinks it
very wrong in Lady Knighton[438] to have published; of George IV. being
so completely in the hands of Knighton, &c., &c. I felt very unhappy at
dinner, in spite of my being gay when I spoke, and I could have cried
almost at every moment; so much so, that when I got into bed, my nerves
(which had been more shaken by the loss of _dearest_ Louis,[439] than
I can express, and by the struggle when in company to overcome _grief_
which I felt so acutely) could resist no longer, and more than half an
hour elapsed, in tears, before I fell asleep. And before I was asleep
I saw her, in my imagination, before me, dressed in her neat white
morning gown, sitting at her breakfast in her room at Claremont; again,
standing in my room of an evening, dressed in her best, holding herself
so erect, as she always did, and making the low dignified curtsey so
peculiar to herself; and lastly on her death-bed, pale and emaciated,
but the expression the same, and the mind vigorous and firm as ever!
These were the images I beheld as I lay in bed! Yet, mingled with my
grief were feelings of thankfulness that her end was so peaceful—so
happy!...

_Saturday, 21st April._—I showed Lord Melbourne the plans for changing
the Slopes and making a new walk, and we looked over them for some time
together. We then spoke of what _might_ have happened when the Duke of
York married; for who could foretell, Lord Melbourne observed, that the
Duchess of York would have no children?—and that the late King should
lose the two he had? This led us to speak of the whole Royal Family,
their characters, of the Princesses marrying so late; of George III.’s
dislike to their marrying, which Lord Melbourne did not know; of their
beauty; he always thought Princess Sophia (when young) very pretty,
though very like a Gipsy; spoke of the singular instance of both George
III.’s and Queen Charlotte’s being very plain and all their children
very handsome; spoke of all the Princes and Princesses, of the two
little Princes, Octavius and Alfred, who died; Lord Melbourne said,
George III. said when he felt he was to be unwell (which he always
forefelt) he dreamt and thought of Octavius. Lord Melbourne said Queen
Charlotte had fine hands and feet, a good bust, and a pretty figure.

_Sunday, 22nd April._—I spoke to him of what I was to write to Uncle
relative to Soult’s nomination[440]; Soult, he told me, is a large,
tall man; looks more “like the Purser of a ship” than an officer; a
very distinguished officer risen from the ranks, and a man of great
abilities besides. Lord Melbourne knew him when he was in Paris. I
asked Lord Melbourne when he was first at Paris; in 1815 he said, which
was the first time he was ever on the Continent. “We went,” he said
(which “we” implies himself and Lady Caroline, his wife) “to Brussels
immediately after the Battle of Waterloo, to see Fred. Ponsonby[441]
who was desperately wounded.” This was in June 1815, and he went to
Paris in August, and stayed there September and October and came back
in November. He saw Uncle Leopold there then, and said he was extremely
handsome.

_Monday, 23rd April._—Lord Melbourne looked into the newspapers and
said there was nothing in them; he read (in the papers) a denial from
Lady Charlotte Bury[442] of her having written the book called _Diary
of the Reign_ (I think) _of George IV._; Lord Melbourne spoke of Lady
Hertford, though he of course could not remember her in her great
beauty; he said, “My nurse nursed Lord Hertford,[443] so that I used
to hear a great deal about her.” The present Lord Hertford’s wife, he
said, was a natural daughter of the Duke of Queensberry, called Mmé.
Fagniani[444]; she is still alive at Paris, but Lord Hertford has long
been separated from her; Lord Yarmouth, he said, is very clever, but
always lives abroad....[445]

_Wednesday, 25th April._—In speaking before of Mrs. Baring,[446] who, I
said, from having been the most affectionate of mothers, latterly never
asked after her children,—Lord Melbourne said with the tears in his
eyes, “That’s a sure sign that all is over; when people intermit what
they have been in the habit of doing.” He mentioned that when William
III. was dying they brought him some good news from abroad, but he took
no notice of it whatever, and said, “Je tire à ma fin....”

_Friday, 27th April._—I showed Lord Melbourne two pictures of Lord
Durham’s children; spoke of the beautiful boy Lord Durham lost, who
would now be 20. Lord Melbourne said, that boy’s death was the cause of
a dreadful scene between Durham and Lord Grey in one of the Cabinets.
Spoke of this Flahaut[447] business, and of the wish at Paris to throw
the blame of the whole on Uncle Leopold; spoke of Flahaut; Lord
Melbourne said he (Flahaut) was first noticed by Napoleon, in the
Russian Retreat, when in all that cold and misery he heard a young
officer singing, and appearing quite gay; that was Flahaut; Napoleon
said, “That is a fine young fellow,” and placed him on his Staff....
Spoke of Lady Campbell[448] (Pamela Fitzgerald) who Lord Melbourne has
not seen again, but from whom he has had a long letter....

_Saturday, 28th April._—Lord Melbourne continued, that those who were
about the Prince of Wales[449] were not liked at Court “and vice
versa.” And he said _his_ family quite belonged to Carlton House;
still, he added, the King and Queen were very civil to him. Speaking
of George IV. he said, “He expected those he was fond of to go quite
with him; to dislike those he disliked, and to like those he liked, and
to turn with him.” He then mentioned what he told me before, that his
(Ld. M.’s) father and mother got into disgrace, for I think 3 years,
when Mrs. Fitzherbert was banished, and they continued seeing her; and
when George IV. came back to Mrs. Fitzherbert he came to dine with them
(Lord Melbourne was there the first day he came) as if nothing had
happened, and as if he had been there the day before. Lord Melbourne
said, before all this, that “the only thing one learns at a public
school” is _punctuality_, and the value of time; that he never had a
clock in his room, and always called to somebody to tell him what
o’clock it was, which he owned was bad, as it put you in the power of
the man to make you late. He “never carried a watch about him” in his
life, and yet he thinks he generally knows what o’clock it is....

_Monday, 30th April._—I then showed him a little book relating to the
Coronations of various of my Ancestors, and amongst others Queen Anne;
he looked over parts of it, and glanced at one part which states that
Queen Anne said in her first speech to Parliament that “_her heart
was entirely_ English.” Upon which Lord Melbourne told me that when
she concluded the Peace of Utrecht, which was supposed to be rather
favourable to the French, a Sir Samuel Garth[450] wrote a poem in
which he said of Queen Anne: “The Queen this year has lost a part,
Of her entirely English heart,”—which is very funny; Lord Melbourne
did not remember what followed. Speaking of Prince George of Denmark,
who Lord Melbourne said “was a very stupid fellow,” he added that he
(G. of Denmark) was always saying, “Est-il possible?” to everything,
and was always saying so whenever he was told of another Lord having
left James II. So when James heard that George of Denmark had left
him, he said, “So _Est-il possible_ is gone at last!” I spoke of
the Duchess of Ancaster[451] having been Queen Charlotte’s first
Mistress of the Robes; the title of Duke of Ancaster became extinct,
Lord Melbourne told me, and the Dowager Lady Cholmondeley[452] and
Lord Willoughby’s mother[453] were her co-heiresses. I asked him
who was now Lord Fauconberg; he said the title was extinct[454]; he
was a descendant of Oliver Cromwell’s by Cromwell’s daughter Lady
Fauconberg; Lady Charlotte Bellasyse married a person called Thomas
Wynne, a Welshman.[455] Sir Ed. Desborow, Lord Melbourne told me, is
also a descendant of Cromwell’s by one of his daughters. I told Lord
Melbourne what the Duke of Sussex had told me, viz. that none of his
family “could hold their tongue,” which is very true; which made Lord
Melbourne laugh, and still more so when I told him that the Duke, in
speaking of the King of Hanover, called him “that other man.” After
dinner I sat on the sofa with Lady Isabella and Lady Augusta, Lord
Melbourne sitting near me the whole evening, and some of the other
ladies being seated round the table. Spoke of Lady Isabella; Henry
Fox,[456] of the Apartments at Hampton Court &c.; of this Review of
Brougham’s of Lady C. Bury’s book. Lord Melbourne said again, what he
told me the other day, that there was much which Brougham seemed to
know nothing about; he (B.) states that Mrs. Fitzherbert did not know
when she married the King that a marriage with a Catholic could not
be valid; Lord Melbourne says she must have known that, and that, by
what he has heard, she was against the marriage; he said Lord Holland
knows a good deal about it, and that it is known _where_ the marriage
took place and by whom it was celebrated. Lord Melbourne thinks it
took place in 1784 or 5[457]; the King left her in 1795, when Lady
Jersey got into favour, whom he put about the Princess of Wales; he
came back to Mrs. Fitzherbert in 1802, then left her for Lady Hertford,
quarrelled with her, and then Lady Conyngham followed; the last-named,
I observed, was very good-natured; Lord Melbourne said, “She was the
most good-natured, but the most rapacious; she got the most money from
him.” Spoke of Lady Augusta Fox; Lord Melbourne said her mother, Lady
Coventry, was Lady Mary Beauclerc, daughter of a Duke of St. Albans
(uncle to the present Duke). Her (Lady Coventry’s) mother was a Miss
Moses, a Jewess. Lady Holland, Lord Melbourne says, does not like
Lady Augusta Fox. Lord Melbourne told me that the Irish Poor Law Bill
would come up to the House of Lords next day, and that there would be
probably a good deal next week, in the Committee about it; a great deal
of difference of opinion; but he thinks they’ll pass it....

_Friday, 4th May._—Lord Melbourne told me on Wednesday evening that
Landseer said of McLise[458]: “He is beating us all; his imagination,
grouping, and drawing is wonderful; he must soften his colouring
perhaps a little.” Two very clever ones of Grant; a portrait of Lord
Cowper by Lucas which is excessively like; Lord Melbourne, by Hayter,
and my dogs by Landseer looked very well. The latter is too beautiful.
There were also two very clever pictures by Landseer’s brother; there
was also a very good picture by Sir Martin Shee of the late King; it is
the likest I’ve seen; it’s so like his figure.

_Saturday, 5th May._—We then spoke of my sitting one day to Sir Martin
Shee; of Lord Melbourne’s having seen an Academician this morning who
said the reason why Hayter was not elected one of their Members was
because his character was not good; Lord Melbourne asked me about
it; I said I did not know much about it, but that I believed he had
quarrelled with his wife and had separated from her. “And did he get
another?” said Lord M. I laughed and said I was not sure of that....

_Monday, 7th May._—We (that is Lord Melbourne, Lord Holland and I)
spoke about the Exhibition, Landseer’s picture of my dogs, the origin
of the dog in the Arms of the Seal of the Duchy of Lancaster, which
Lord Holland said came originally from John of Gaunt, was adopted by
Henry VII., abolished by James I., and restored by William IV.; spoke
of _Macaws_, and he offered me one which belongs to Lady Holland.
Spoke of Nightingales; Lord Melbourne said he could not distinguish
its song from that of another bird’s; that it could be mistaken for a
wood-lark’s, which Lord Holland denied, and they went on discussing
the different songs of birds; we then spoke of various birds; of
nightingales migrating; of how wonderful the migration of birds was;
Lord Melbourne did not think it so incredible; they first went to
France, he said, and “then they slide along the country....”

_Wednesday, 9th May._—Lord Melbourne said he was kept in the House of
Lords till 8, the night before; that Lord Shrewsbury[459] made rather
a good speech, but that his (Ld. M.’s) fear was that some of the Roman
Catholic Peers might refuse to take the Oath on account of all this;
and then “we should have all this question” (the Roman Catholic) “over
again.”

_Thursday, 10th May._—At ½ p. 10 the doors were opened and I went
through the Saloon into the other Ball-room next the Dining-room in
which was Strauss’s band. I felt a little shy in going in, but soon got
over it and went and talked to the people. The rooms I must say looked
beautiful, were so well lit up, and everything so well done; and all
done in one day. There was no crowd at all; indeed, there might have
been more people. The dining-room looked also very handsome as the
supper-room. The Throne-room was arranged for the tea-room. I danced (a
Quadrille of course, as I only dance quadrilles) first (in the large
ball-room) with George[460]; and 2ndly with Prince Nicholas Esterhazy;
there was a valse between each quadrille; I never heard anything so
_beautiful_ in my life as Strauss’s band. We then went into the other
ball-room where I danced two other quadrilles with Lord Jocelyn[461]
and Lord Fitzalan[462]; the first named is very merry and funny. When
I did not dance (which was only the case when valzing went on) I sat
with Mamma and my Aunts, on a seat raised one step above the floor.
Lady Fanny Cowper was my vis-à-vis when I danced with Lord Jocelyn. At
1 (after my quadrille with Lord Fitzalan) we went into the Supper-room.
After supper we went into the large Ball-room where we remained till
the last quadrille which I danced in Weippert’s room. I danced with
Lord Cowper (who was much less shy and very agreeable); Lord Uxbridge
(who dances remarkably well); Lord Douro; Lord Folkestone[463] (a great
ally of mine); Lord Suffield[464]; and lastly with Lord Morpeth. There
was a great deal of beauty there, amongst which were Lady Ashley,
Lady Fanny Cowper, Lady Wilhelmina Stanhope, Lady Seymour,[465] Lady
Clanricarde,[466] Lady Mary Vyner,[467] Lady Norreys,[468] Lady Emma
Herbert,[469] Lady Clanwilliam,[470] Lady Mary Grimston,[471] Lady
Powerscourt,[472] Miss Maude,[473] Miss Elphinstone.[474] Lady Fanny
was twice my vis-à-vis, as was also Lady Adelaide Paget.[475] I did
not leave the ball-room till 10 m. to _four_!! and was in bed by ½
p. 4,—the sun shining. It was a lovely ball, so gay, so nice,—and I
felt so happy and so merry; I had not danced for _so_ long and was so
glad to do so again! One _only_ regret I had,—and that was, that my
excellent, kind, good friend, Lord Melbourne was not there. I missed
him much at this my first ball; he would have been pleased I think!

_Friday, 11th May._—Got up at 20 m. p. 10 and breakfasted at ½ p. 11.
Heard from my good Lord Melbourne that he was “extremely concerned”
at not having been able to come to the Ball, but that “he felt so
unwell and so disturbed” that he was afraid to venture; which was
right of him, though I regret it _so_ much. Heard from Lord John that
“Sir Thomas Acland[476] gave notice yesterday that he should move on
Monday to rescind the resolution of 1835 respecting the Church of
Ireland. The Debate on this Question must lead to one of the most
severe struggles of the session both in discussion and in the Division.
Both parties have nearly all their strength in London. But a majority
for Ministers, though a small one, is tolerably certain.” This gave
me a pang which somewhat damped my very light and high spirits. We
spoke for a long time about my Ball—who I danced with, the beauties,
and the different persons there; I said to Lord Melbourne the moment
I saw him, how very sorry I was that he had not come last night. We
spoke of all this for some time, and he was so kind about it all, and
seemed to take quite an interest in it all. He then said, “They are
going to make another attack upon us on Monday; Sir Thomas Acland has
given notice that he means to make a motion to rescind the Resolutions
about the Irish Church passed in 1835, upon which we came in.” I then
added that Lord John seemed certain about a majority, though a small
one; Lord Melbourne said Sir Thomas Acland was a conscientious and
not very violent man, and consequently well chosen in that respect
to make a good effect. There is to be a Cabinet upon it tomorrow at
1; and Lord John is going to have a Meeting of the Members at 4. All
this distresses me much; would to God! none of these Motions, which
are so _useless_, were brought on. I fervently trust however that all
will do well. Spoke of my ball, and the different people, the rooms;
he asked if I was not tired; I said not the least, for though I had
danced a great deal I did not valze, as I did not think it would do
for me to valze. Lord Melbourne said eagerly, “I think you are quite
right; that’s quite right.” Lord Melbourne dines with me tonight, I’m
happy to say. I showed him the letter I meant to write to the King
of Hanover, which he quite approved of. Spoke of several people at
the Ball and several other things concerning it; of Lord Duncannon
who is rather better but still very poorly; Lord Melbourne does not
like his being so long ill, and suffering with so many different
things; there is a disease in the sockets of his teeth which become
quite loose, the teeth themselves being quite sound. Lord Melbourne
said the Ponsonbys were generally strong, and lived to a great age;
that the present Lord Bessborough’s father lived to a very great age;
Lord Melbourne said he was the man of whom the following anecdote is
told:—he (_that_ Lord Bessborough) was playing at cards, at Picquet,
Lord Melbourne thinks, when his partner dropped down dead; and he said
to the Waiter, “Remember, if the gentleman recovers, that I’ve got
such and such a thing in my hand....” Spoke to him of the Coronation,
and of the different people who were to bear the Swords (which he had
already spoken to me of, in the morning; for he showed me then a letter
from the Duke of Grafton declining to take any part in it, as he only
meant to attend as a Peer). He (Ld. Melbourne) will carry the Sword of
State; the Duke of Hamilton[477] he _thinks_ of proposing to carry the
Crown; the Duke of Somerset[478] the Orb; the Dukes of Devonshire and
Sutherland the other swords; and the Duke of Roxburgh,[479] something
else. But nothing is as yet settled with respect to all this. Spoke of
my reading the Despatches, of which there were so many.

_Saturday, 12th May._—At a ¼ p. 1 came Lord Melbourne and stayed with
me till 10 m. to 2. He said he was, and seemed, much better. He first
read me a Petition from the Society of British Artists, wishing me to
go to their Exhibition, which however he said was quite unnecessary.
He then said they were going to have a Cabinet upon this motion,[480]
which is to take place on Monday, and to see what can be done upon it.
Lord Melbourne then explained to me in the clearest manner possible
all about it. He told me that:—In 1835, Sir Robert Peel found himself
several times in minorities about various things which I forget; but
he said he would not resign until he was beat upon a Question relative
to the Irish Church; when he brought in his Bill for Irish Tithes,
the resolution, to appropriate the surplus for the benefit of Moral
Education, was carried against him by 37,—and he resigned; well,
the present Government came in, and Lord Melbourne said, found this
resolution an awkward one, and that there was less surplus than they
had imagined; they however brought forward several Acts, and also
awkward ones, Lord Melbourne said, which were each year rejected by
the House of Lords. Well, this year the following Bill was brought in
(which Lord Melbourne thinks a very good one, as do I, but which he
hears will meet with a great deal of opposition), which is, leaving
out the Appropriation Clause, and doing away with the surplus, but
proposing to pay the Irish Church out of the funds of the Empire,
which is separating the Irish Church from the Land, and keeping it
up, _not_ for the people, as they are almost all Catholics, but for
the Protestant feeling in the country. Now, Lord Melbourne says,
the _Church_ don’t like it, as they think it’s making the Church
Stipendiary and is separating it too much from the Land, and the
_violent democrats_ dislike it as they think it is giving the Church
too much support. Lord Melbourne observes that the opposition will be
so considerable from these two Parties that he thinks it will hardly be
possible for _us_ to carry this measure. _Now_, it is upon this measure
being proposed on Monday that this Motion or amendment is to be made:
“to rescind the resolution of ’35”; “that is,” as Lord Melbourne said,
“to do away with it, to scratch it out of the Journals.” Lord Melbourne
said that if this _should_ be carried against us, it will be almost
fatal to the Government; he added that it is one of those awkward sort
of questions in Politics, which it is very difficult to get over, and
at the same time hardly possible to resign upon; “it is not good ground
to resign upon,” he said, “it would not be understood by the people,
they would not sympathise with you.” He continued—but that _Lord John_
might consider his honour at stake, and might resign upon it, which
Lord Melbourne said he almost thought he would, but that he would
hear that at the Cabinet today. He added, “If we have a Majority, why
then it’s all well.” I observed that Lord John seemed to think that
likely. Lord Melbourne said he certainly thought we should; but from
the nature of the House it made it “ticklish” and “nervous”; which, God
knows! it does. He says the Irish Poor Law Bill will not meet with much
opposition in the House of Lords, except from the Irish Peers; Lord
Londonderry[481] means to oppose it very violently. Sir Robert Peel has
a great dinner today, given to him by his followers. Lord Melbourne
said he would let me know what took place at the Cabinet; and if
there was anything very particular he would come himself. He dines at
the Speaker’s tonight. I cannot say (though I feel _confident_ of OUR
_success_) HOW _low_, HOW _sad_ I feel, when I think of the POSSIBILITY
of this excellent and truly kind man (Lord Melbourne) not _remaining_
my Minister! Yet I trust fervently that _He_ who has so wonderfully
protected me through such manifold difficulties will not _now_ desert
me! I should have liked to have expressed to Lord Melbourne my anxiety,
but the tears were nearer than words throughout the time I saw him, and
I felt I should have choked, had I attempted to say anything.

_Sunday, 13th May._—In speaking of the singing of birds, which Lord
Melbourne said he never could make out one from another, he said, “I
never can admire the singing of birds; there’s no melody in it; it’s so
shrill; that’s all humbug; it’s mere Poetry; it is not pretty.” This
made us laugh; he likes the Blackbird’s singing best. He said that
people say there is no difference between the song of a ground-lark and
the nightingale. I observed that Lord Holland said there was. “Oh!”
he said, “I don’t think Lord Holland knows anything about it.” “It’s
very odd,” he continued, “Mr. Fox, and Lord Holland the same, like the
singing of birds, and can’t bear music, nor the Human Voice....”

_Tuesday, 15th May._— ... Heard from Lord John “that he yesterday
brought forward the question of Irish Tithes in a speech of two hours,
in which he endeavoured to review the whole subject. Sir Thomas Acland
then moved to rescind the resolution of 1835. He spoke temperately and
well. Lord Stanley made a short speech professing a desire to settle
the Question; Lord Morpeth finished the debate for the night with a
very vigorous and very effective speech. The division will probably
take place tonight, and may be rather early.” Lord Melbourne told me
yesterday that he thought Sir Robert Peel’s speech at the dinner on
Saturday very moderate; but that the whole thing seemed to have been
“rather flat....” Lord Melbourne said he did not know what the Council
(today) was to be about; I said neither did I know, but that it was
Lord Glenelg who wished for it. “They always run everything so very
late in that Colonial Office,” he said; that they never thought _when_
they would want a Council, and when they did, they said they wanted it
immediately, and always upon the most inconvenient days; that to-day
was a most inconvenient day for the Members of the House of Commons....
Lord Melbourne said that Lord Munster had been to see him this morning,
about their (the Fitzclarences’) Pensions, on the Civil List, which
there was some fear the Committee might make some difficulty about,
which Lord Melbourne said would be very hard; Lord Munster came to show
Lord Melbourne the letter he meant to write (to Mr. Rice, I think)
about it. This pension was granted them by George IV. Lord Munster
told Lord Melbourne that the late King always imagined that Lord
Egremont[482] would leave Lord Munster a great deal; and whenever he
gave Lord Munster anything, he used to write to Lord Egremont to tell
him he had done so, which Lord Egremont did not at all like and said,
“This is a scheme from the beginning,” meaning that the King promoted
the match on account of the money. Lord Melbourne said, “Lord Egremont
was a very good man but rather suspicious”; from always having had a
very large fortune he fancied people wanted to get it from him. He gave
Lord Munster £5,000 about a fortnight before he died. Spoke of this
new Election Committee Bill which Sir Robert Peel asked for leave to
bring in. He proposes that at the beginning of each session the Speaker
should name 6 or 4 Members who should then choose the Committees to try
the Elections. Formerly, as Lord Melbourne told me once before, the
Elections used to be tried by the whole House, and it was considered
such a mark of want of confidence in the Ministers if their Member
was unseated, that Sir Robert Walpole resigned when the Member for
Chippenham was unseated. When this became “too flagrant” Lord Melbourne
said, George Grenville, great-grandfather to the present Duke of
Buckingham, made what is called “the Grenville Act,” which is as they
are tried now; viz. the Speaker draws 40 names from glasses, with which
Lists the different parties retire and strike off names from each list
until they get it down to 15; and that’s the Committee. Now this, Lord
Melbourne said, is found to be partial,[483] and a new mode must be
devised.

[Illustration: _Don Fernando Prince of Portugal
  from recollection  
  P.V. del. Ken. Palace. April, 1836._

  H.S.H. PRINCE FERDINAND OF SAXE-COBURG,
  AFTERWARDS KING CONSORT OF PORTUGAL.
  From a sketch by Princess Victoria.]

Lord Melbourne said Lord Redesdale[484] brought him the Duke of
Wellington’s letter yesterday. Lord Melbourne had seen Lord John this
morning, who thinks we shall only have a majority of 11 to-night, and
that Mr. Hobhouse said we should have more in order to delude us into
security.

_Wednesday, 16th May._—Got up at 10 and heard from Lord John that on
a Division _we_ had a majority of 19, which he said was more than he
expected. How thankful I am and feel! Lord Melbourne said he heard
that Ferdinand was annoyed at our pressing the Portuguese Government
about the Slave Trade; and that it would be well, if I were to state to
Ferdinand that the feeling was so strong in this country about Slavery,
and we were so pressed about it, that it was impossible for us to do
otherwise. I spoke to Lord Melbourne of these Resolutions relative to
the Irish Tithe Bill, which I thought excellent, but which he said a
very great number of people were against. I observed that Lord John
had told me at Windsor that he thought we should not carry it, but
that it might be compromised. Lord Melbourne then again repeated that
the Established Church was _generally_ kept up for the Poor, as the
rich could afford that themselves; whereas in Ireland, 700,000 are
Roman Catholics, and the Established Church is _only_ kept up for the
Protestant feeling in the United Kingdom, and not for the Poor who
are almost all Roman Catholics. I then asked about who should stand
Sponsor in my place at the Christening of Col. and Lady Catharine
Buckley’s[485] little boy, who is to be christened down in the New
Forest where they lived. I said the child was to be called _Victor_,
which I thought an ugly name; he did not, and said laughing that “Sir
Victor Buckley” would sound very well....

_Friday, 18th May._—We spoke of various things; I asked him if he liked
my headdress which was done in plaits round my ears,[486] for I know
_in general_ he only likes the hair in front crêpé in 2 puffs. He said,
looking at me and making one of his funny faces, “It’s pretty; isn’t it
rather curious—something new?”

_Saturday, 19th May._—At a little after 2 I rode out with Mamma, Lord
Uxbridge, Lord Torrington, Lady Forbes, dearest Lehzen, Lord Alfred,
Miss Dillon, Mr. Murray, Lord Headfort, Lady Flora, Miss Quentin,
and Col. Cavendish, and came home at 6 m. to 5. I rode dear little
Uxbridge who went _perfectly_. We met Lord Melbourne in going out, who
was riding his pony. We rode out by the Harrow Road and home by the
Uxbridge Road and Park. Heard from Lord John that “he yesterday stated
to the House of Commons the course respecting the Irish Bills, which
he had the honour to explain to Your Majesty yesterday. Sir Robert
Peel asked for a delay till Friday, and appeared much agitated; but
what afterwards fell from him gives every reason to suppose that the
Municipal Corporations Bill will not be opposed. Nor is it probable
that the Irish Tithe Bill will meet with resistance from the Radical
party in the House of Commons. The Chancellor of the Exchequer made a
very clear financial statement, and the deficiency of the Revenue being
before known, no disappointment was caused by the announcement. Should
matters proceed smoothly another fortnight will end the chief party
questions in the House of Commons.” This was _delightful_ news....
“Very nice party” (my Concert), Lord M. said, “and everybody very much
pleased.” I smiled and said I feared I had done it very ill; that I was
quite angry with myself and thought I had done it so ill; and was not
civil enough. He said most kindly, “Oh! no, quite the contrary, for I
should have told you if it had been otherwise.” I then said I had felt
so nervous and shy. “That wasn’t at all observed,” he said. I said
that I often stood before a person not knowing what to say; and Lord
Melbourne said that the longer one stood thinking the worse it was; and
he really thought the best thing to do was to say anything commonplace
and foolish, better than to say nothing.

_Sunday, 20th May._—Lord Melbourne was in delightful spirits and _so_
talkative and _so_ kind and so VERY AGREEABLE throughout the evening.
I almost fear therefore (in consequence of our having talked so much)
that I may have forgotten some of the things we talked about. I asked
him if he had dined at Lord Shrewsbury’s the night before; he said no,
that it was all a mistake; he went there, was shown upstairs, where he
found Lord Shrewsbury alone with his books and papers, who said that
all his family were gone to the Opera; Lord Melbourne said, “I came to
dine here”; upon which Lord S. told him that it was _next_ Saturday;
Lord Melbourne said it was very stupid of himself to forget it, as Lord
Shrewsbury had put off the dinner on account of him. He walked home,
found his people at home, got his dinner in ½ an hour, and went to
his sister’s. Spoke of the Preachers being so badly appointed at the
Chapel Royal, which Lord Melbourne said was a great pity, as it would
have been such “an instrument of good” if it had been the contrary. We
looked at some prints, and amongst others there was a very clever one
of Capt. Macheath with Polly and Lucy in _The Beggar’s Opera_; Lord
Melbourne said that _The Beggar’s Opera_ was written by Gay, and was
used by the Tory Party in order to show up Lord Townshend[487] and Sir
Robert Walpole; was very clever, and had an immense run; but is coarse
beyond conception; it was likewise performed with great success when
Lord Sandwich brought forward an indictment against Mr. Wilkes for
immorality. Of Lord Teynham[488] wanting to have a Private Audience of
me, which Lord Melbourne stopped; he said Peers are only allowed to
have these Private Audiences to speak on Public Affairs, and not on
Private concerns; that when the Regent wanted to prevent Lady Jersey
going so often to see Princess Charlotte, Lord Jersey asked for a
Private audience; and the Regent said to him, “Of course you come to
speak of Public matters, for if you come to speak about your wife, I
cannot speak to you,” and he spoke to him upon ordinary matters and
dismissed him. Talleyrand is dead—at last!

_Monday, 21st May._—Spoke of Talleyrand’s death, which Lord Melbourne
said he heard was quite like that of the former French Ministers—like
Mazarin—the house full of people to see him die. He (Ld. Melbourne)
said he had heard that Louis Philippe and Mme. Adelaide had been to
see Talleyrand. Spoke of his fear of dying, which Lord Melbourne said
people always said of persons whose feelings on religion were rather
loose. Lord Melbourne said he heard that Talleyrand had signed a sort
of recantation to the Pope, for something he had done, at the time
of the Revolution—for having performed Mass upon some occasion or
other....[489]

_Thursday, 24th May._—I this day enter my 20th year, which I think
_very_ old! In looking back on the past year, I feel more grateful
than I can express for ALL the VERY GREAT BLESSINGS I have received
since my last birthday. I have only ONE VERY dear affectionate friend
less—dearest Louis! Oh! if she could but be still with us!! Though I
have _lost_ a _dear_ friend, I can never be _thankful_ enough for the
_true, faithful, honest, kind_ one I’ve GAINED since last year, which
is my _excellent_ Lord Melbourne, who is so kind and good to me!!... At
25 m. p. 10 I went with the whole Royal Family into the other Ball-room
through the Saloon which was full of people; after speaking to a good
many I went to my seat (without sitting down) and then opened the Ball
in a Quadrille with George.[490] There were about the same number of
people there as at the 1st Ball, and a great number of Foreigners
there. My good Lord Melbourne came up to me after my 1st Quadrille,
but only stopped one minute, and though I saw him looking on at 3 of
the Quadrilles I danced afterwards, he never came near me again, which
I was very sorry for; and when I sent for him after supper, he was
gone.... After supper I danced 4 Quadrilles in Strauss’s room; he
was playing most beautifully. I danced with Lord George Paget,[491]
Lord Cantelupe,[492] Lord Milton,[493] and Lord Leveson. Count Eugene
Zichy (cousin to Countess Zichy’s husband) wore a most beautiful
uniform all covered with splendid turquoises; he is a handsome man,
with a very good-natured expression, as he is too, very unaffected and
good-humoured, and a beautiful valzer. We then went into the other
room, and danced a regular old English Country Dance of 72 couple,
which lasted 1 hour, from 3 till 4! I danced with Lord Uxbridge, Lord
Cantelupe and Lady Cowper being next, and the Duke of Devonshire
and Lady Lothian[494] on the other side. It was the merriest, most
delightful thing possible. I left the Ball room at 10 m. p. 4, and
was in bed at 5—broad daylight. It was a _delightful_ Ball, and the
pleasantest birthday I’ve spent for _many_ years!...

_Monday, 28th May._—Spoke of writing to George of Hanover,[495] which
he said I should do; and also to the King of Hanover for his birthday;
spoke of the report of poor George’s marrying a Russian Princess. He
then continued saying it would raise a curious question, “his marrying
a Greek” (of the Greek religion it is); for he believed that _only_
marrying _Roman Catholics_ was forbidden by _law_ here (George being
in the succession here). I said I thought it was said, _all_ who were
not of the _Reformed Religion_, without naming specifically (Greek, he
says, he supposes is included under Roman Catholics) _Roman Catholic_.
Lord Melbourne said I might be right, for that he had not looked at the
Act for some time. He said he believed also that George could not marry
without my leave.[496]

_Tuesday, 29th May._—I told him that Lord Glenelg had made me a present
of a Black Swan; Lord Melbourne said that a _Black Swan_ was _not_ a
Swan; “It’s a Goose.” Lady Mulgrave said the Ancients had Black Swans,
and to prove it began quoting the lines from the Latin Grammar, which
Lord Melbourne then repeated, and which I used to learn: “Rara avis in
terris, nigroque simillima cygno.” Lord Melbourne said, _that_ meant
to describe something very rare, and which _did not exist_. I said
to Lord Melbourne I was very glad to hear that he would come down to
Windsor for the Eton Montem. He said, “It’s quite right to go, but I
don’t think it’s a very pleasant thing, the Montem; rather foolish”;
and we spoke of the Regatta on the 4th of June, to which I’m not going.
“The Regatta as you call it,” he said to Lady Mulgrave; “The Boats” it
used always to be called. _That_ is in fact done _without_ the consent
of the Masters, and all the boys were generally flogged next day. Lord
Melbourne has not been to a Montem since 1809. In speaking of the head
Colleger who generally is made the Captain, he said he was usually
a big boy about 19; “More foolish than a boy,” Lord Melbourne said
laughing; and that the expenses were generally so great, and the boy so
extravagant for some time before, that he seldom _cleared_ anything.
I said the Montem generally ended in the boys’ being sick and drunk;
Lord Melbourne said in his funny manner, he thought in these days of
education, no boys ever got drunk or sick—which I fear is _not_ the
case. He said all this eating and drinking, “all the chocolate and tea
and coffee” for breakfast, had got up since his time; that when he was
at Eton, they used to cut a roll in half and put a pat of butter inside
it and give it to you, and that you then might drink a glass of milk
and water (for breakfast); “I never could take milk, and therefore I
always took water,” he said, “and we did very well”; much better he
thinks than they do now. He said that he remembered people always gave
children what they disliked most; he used (before he went to school)
to have _every_ day boiled mutton and rice pudding, which he hated;
“Children’s stomachs are rather squeamish,” he said; and boiled mutton
is particularly nauseous to a child, he observed; and he hated rice
pudding. “Somehow or other,” he said, “they found out you disliked
it, and there it was every day”; this, he thinks (and everybody else
almost, I think, ought to do so), a bad system. He added, “Children’s
stomachs are rather delicate and _queasy_”; which made us all laugh.

_Thursday, 31st May._—He said that Lord Mulgrave was very anxious about
being made a Marquis at the Coronation, and that he supposed it must
be done, but that it would offend other Earls; he added that there was
great difficulty about making these Peers,—but that he must soon lay
the list before me. “I shall advise Your Majesty to make as few as
possible,” he added. It would not do, he said, to make any Members of
the House of Commons Peers, on account of vacating their seats. Lord
Dundas wishes to be made an Earl, he says, which he supposes should be
granted; and Lord Barham wishes to be made Earl of Gainsborough.[497]
William IV. made 16 Peers and 24 Baronets at his Coronation; and George
IV. 15 Peers; “he was so clogged with promises,” Lord Melbourne said,
“he had made such heaps of promises.”




                    INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO CHAPTER X

  The three summer months of 1838 were eventful in the life of the
  young Queen. It is not only that she attended an Eton Montem (that
  quaint ceremony so graphically described in _Coningsby_ by one who
  was in future years to be her Prime Minister), and not only that
  she held her first Review in Hyde Park (which was somewhat of a
  disappointment to her owing to Lord Melbourne having dissuaded
  her from riding on horseback), but on the 28th June she was
  crowned in Westminster Abbey. There have been many accounts from
  eye-witnesses of the Coronation of British Sovereigns. Volumes
  have been written on the subject from the earliest times. Even the
  immortal pen of Shakespeare has touched upon this great ceremonial.
  Queen Victoria’s description, however, is unique in this, that the
  writer is the Sovereign herself, and that the Coronation is painted
  from the point of view of the central figure in the picture. Owing
  to the extreme youth of the Queen, her childlike appearance, her
  fairness and fragility, and the romance attaching to her sex, owing
  also to her dignity, simplicity, and composure amid that vast
  concourse in the setting of the great Abbey, surrounded as she was
  by every circumstance of pomp and splendour, and overweighted, as
  it seemed, by the tremendous and glittering responsibility of St.
  Edward’s Crown, the ceremony appeared to onlookers extraordinarily
  moving. The Queen noticed that Lord Melbourne was deeply stirred.
  He was one of the many who were in tears.

  To the thousands who saw her on this occasion for the first time
  and to the millions who read the story of the Coronation, the 28th
  June, 1838, appeared to be the opening day of Queen Victoria’s
  reign. Who, among those present in the Abbey or in the streets of
  the metropolis, could foresee what her reign was to bring forth,
  and who could measure with any degree of accuracy the progress of
  the country she was about to rule, or the growth of the Empire over
  which she was destined to preside, between the day when the Crown
  was placed upon her head, and the day when it was borne away by her
  sorrowing servants from the Mausoleum at Frogmore sixty-three years
  afterwards?

  “The guns are just announcing,” wrote Queen Adelaide to her niece,
  “your approach to the Abbey, and as I am not near you, and cannot
  take part in the sacred ceremony of your Coronation, I must address
  you in writing to assure you that my thoughts and my whole heart
  are with you, and my prayers are offered up to heaven for your
  happiness and the prosperity and glory of your reign.” The answer
  to this prayer for the young Queen is to be found in the story of
  her reign, and it is written large in golden letters across the
  face of her Empire.


                               CHAPTER X

                          1838 (_continued_)

_Friday, 1st June._—I also told Lord Melbourne that I quite approved
of what he had written to me (also in the afternoon) about the Homage
at the Coronation; namely, that the Peers should _kiss my hand_; Lord
Melbourne smiled when I said this. Lord Melbourne had left Lady Holland
in a great fright, fearing there would be a thunderstorm, of which she
is dreadfully afraid. We spoke of thunderstorms, of people being afraid
of them, of there being always a certain degree of danger; of the
danger of standing under a tree. I told Lord Melbourne I never could
forgive him for having stood under a tree in that violent thunderstorm
at Windsor last year; he said, “It’s a hundred to one that you’re not
struck,” and then added smiling: “It’s a sublime death.” Spoke ...
of Lord Durham for some time, of whose arrival we think we must soon
hear. Lord Melbourne said, “I’ll bet you he’ll go by Bermuda,” which
would be a good deal out of his way; I asked Lord Melbourne what could
make Lord Durham wish to go there. He replied, “I’m sure I don’t know
why he’s got it into his head, but I’ll bet you he’ll go there.” Spoke
of my fear that Lord Melbourne was right in what he said about Lady
Mary Lambton’s[498] great regret at leaving England, the other day;
namely, her being attached to John Ponsonby,[499] which we think seems
likely, as he (J. Ponsonby) is the ONLY person to whom Lady Mary has
written since she left England. Spoke of Epsom, and Lord Melbourne said
there was scarcely ever “a Derby without somebody killing himself;
generally somebody kills himself; it is not perfect without that,” he
said laughing. Spoke of _Don Giovanni_, and the Statue having laughed
so much the other night (about which Lablache told him he was so
distressed), and Lord Melbourne said the _original_ Piece and Music was
very old; and on my observing that I thought _this_ music by Mozart
old-fashioned, he clasped his hands and looked up in astonishment....

_Sunday, 3rd June._—We spoke of Music; of Lord Melbourne’s going to
sleep when Thomas Moore was singing, which he would hardly allow.
Lord Melbourne quoted some lines to prove that Lydian music used to
put people to sleep; and of Phrygian music, which made people fight.
I showed Lord Melbourne the 1st number of a work called, _Portraits
of the Female Aristocracy_. Then he, and also I, looked at a new Work
called _Sketches of the People and Country of the Island of Zealand_,
which are very well done. Lord Melbourne said, in opening it, “These
are a fine race, but they eat men, and they say it’s almost impossible
to break them of it.” He farther added, “There are no _animals_
whatever there, and therefore they are obliged to eat men.” Lady
Mulgrave observed that she thought they only eat their enemies; Lord
Melbourne said, “I fancy they eat them pretty promiscuously.” Lord
Melbourne was in excellent spirits, and very funny in his remarks
about the different drawings; it’s always my delight to make him look
at these sorts of things, as his remarks are always so clever and
funny. He again said that it was so difficult to break them (the New
Zealanders) of eating men; “for they say it’s the very best thing,”
which made us laugh. He added, “There was an old woman who was sick,
and they asked her what she would like to have; and she said, ‘I think
I could eat a little piece of the small bone of a boy’s head,’” and he
pointed laughing to his own head, explaining _what_ part of the head
that small bone was.... Lord Melbourne went on speaking of New Zealand,
&c., and said, “The English eat up everything wherever they go; they
exterminate everything”; and Lady Mulgrave and Mr. Murray[500] also
said that wherever the English went, they always would have everything
their own way, and never would accommodate themselves to other
countries. “A person in a public situation should write as few private
letters as possible”....

_Monday, 4th June._—Spoke of the Eton Montem, and I told Lord Melbourne
I was going to the Provost’s house, which he said he was very glad
of. There were two Montems while he was at Eton; he said no one knows
the origin of the Eton Montem. Formerly there used to be, he said, a
Mock Sermon at Salt Hill; a boy dressed like a clergyman and another
like a clerk delivered a sort of sermon, and in the middle of it the
other boys kicked them down the hill; George III. put a stop to it,
as he thought it very improper. We spoke of the Montem, and of giving
money, and Lord Melbourne said he thought he should give £20. I asked
Lord Melbourne what he did when Lady Holland goes down to Brocket.
“Oh! I give up the whole house to her,” he replied. And he says she
twists everything about; not only in her own room but in other rooms
downstairs. Then she swears she has too much light, and puts out all
the candles; then too little, and sends for more candles; then she
shuts up first one window, then another. I showed him in the Genealogy
of _Lodge’s Peerage_ how Lord Barham came to his title and how he was
related to the Earl of Gainsborough. In looking over it, Lord Melbourne
began to speak of Sir Charles Midleton, First Lord of the Admiralty,
made 1st Lord Barham, and maternal grandfather to Lord Barham. He said
he was a most distinguished and clever man. He told me, with the tears
in his eyes, an anecdote of what he (Sir C. Midleton) did at the time
of the Mutiny.[501] He was very much for those people and said, “I used
always to think those poor fellows very hardly treated”; but when he
heard of the Mutiny, he ordered two 74-gun ships to be put broadside of
the ship in which the Mutineers were, and desire her to surrender, and
if she did not, to send her to the bottom. So they said to him, “But if
the men should disobey?” “Why, then we shall be in a scrape; but give
your orders steadily and they won’t disobey.” “That was very fine,”
said Lord Melbourne. Spoke of clothes, about which Lord Melbourne was
very funny; said the fewer you had the better, and that he was certain
it was very bad to keep things in _store_, at which we laughed much,
and said it would be impossible for ladies to keep dresses in store,
as the fashions always changed; and he was against keeping furs, as he
said “The moth doth corrupt.” Spoke of Miss Chaworth, Byron’s first
admiration, about whom Lord Melbourne told a story on Sunday, which I
did not quite understand, and I begged him to repeat it which he did.
It was as follows:—Miss Chaworth was told that she would like Lord
Byron very much (she _did_ admire him) and would in fact marry him.
She said, No, she never would; for that if ever she married, it should
be a man with two straight legs (Byron having one leg and foot quite
deformed[502] from his birth, which made him limp very much); this was
told to Byron, whom it shocked most exceedingly, as he was extremely
unhappy and conscious of his lameness, and made him quite indignant.
He went to her, made her copy a piece of music for him (they had been
in the habit of singing together) in order to have a remembrance of
her, took it, left the house, and never saw her again. Lord Melbourne
told me there was an awkwardness between the two families; as in George
II.’s reign Miss Chaworth’s ancestor was killed in a duel by a Lord
Byron; they quarrelled at a Club, went upstairs, fought and Chaworth
was killed[503]; Lord Melbourne said it was always suspected that he
had been killed unfairly, as Chaworth was known to be the best fencer
there was, and it was thought that Byron passed his sword through him
before they fought. Miss Chaworth married afterwards a Mr. Musters and
was very unhappy; lived on bad terms with her husband, and at last died
deranged. Lord Melbourne said he saw her once, he went over to her
place, Annesley, when he was staying in Nottinghamshire in 1813, and
stayed there two days. She was then living on very bad terms with her
husband, and everything was in a very uncomfortable state; but she was
very kind to Lord Melbourne. I asked Lord Melbourne where Lord Byron
made the acquaintance of his cousin, Miss Milbanke, now the Dowager
Lady Byron; he said at his house, at Whitehall, where Byron used to
come. Spoke of Irish and Italian servants, who Lord Melbourne says are
very uncertain and not to be trusted. I asked Lord Melbourne if he had
good servants; he said, “Not very”; he added, “I’m told that great
drunkenness prevails in my house,” but that _he_ never saw it, and as
long as that was the case, he could not much complain; he, _of course_,
can’t look after them. The man he always takes about with him, when
he comes here, he says is a very steady, exact man, and always ready;
he has risen from being a steward’s boy in his house. He told me that
he has but few servants; a butler, this man, an under butler, and one
footman; that’s all. He’s likewise told that his expenses in comparison
to other people’s are very great; that the profuseness in his country
house was beyond everything, people told him; _he_ does _not_ think the
expense very great, in fact he says it _cannot_ be, as he is so little
at home.

_Tuesday, 5th June._—At a ¼ to 11 we got into our carriages for Montem.
Mamma and Lady Mulgrave were with me; Lord Melbourne, Miss Paget, Lord
Albemarle and Lady Flora were in the next carriage to mine; then Lady
Theresa, Miss Dillon, Lord Conyngham, and Miss Davys; and lastly Lord
Lilford, Mr. Murray; Colonel Wemyss and Col. Cavendish. These carriages
_preceded_ us in going to Eton. We were stopped on the Bridge for
“Salt.” When we reached Eton College we were received there by the
Provost,[504] Dr. Hawtrey,[505] and the other Fellows; we went under
the Cloisters and saw all the boys march by, 3 times, which is a pretty
sight; some of the boys were beautifully dressed. We then all went up
to one of the rooms in the Provost’s house, where we looked out of the
window and saw the flag flourished; we then took some luncheon at the
Provost’s, I sitting between the Provost and Lord Melbourne. The only
people besides our own party there, were, Mrs. Goodall (the Provost’s
wife), Lady Braybrooke,[506] Edward of Saxe-Weimar,[507] Mr. Wood,[508]
and two nieces of the Provost’s. The room in which we lunched is hung
round with many portraits of the young men (now mostly, if indeed not
all, old) who had been at Eton; amongst which were Lord Grey’s, Lord
Holland’s, Lord Wellesley’s, Mr. Canning’s.[509] Lord Melbourne’s was
not there, which it _ought_ to have been. Lord Melbourne, said he
had been painted by Hoppner, for Dr. Langford (his Master, but not
the _Head_ Master, who was then Dr. Heath), and had been sold at the
sale of his things when he died.[510] Lord Melbourne said that Lord
Holland had a fine countenance when young, but always _lame_, there
being some ossification in one of his legs; he was “very slim” when
young!! After luncheon we got into our carriages again (the other
carriages _following_ mine), and drove to Salt Hill, where we saw the
boy again flourish the flag. The heat was _quite intense_, and the
crowd _enormous_! We got back to the Castle at 20 m. to 2. I saw Lord
Melbourne from 7 m. to 2 till 7 m. p. 2, in my room on my return. He
said he was not tired, and was very anxious I should not be so. Spoke
of the Montem, the fine boys; he thought they looked “very sheepish”
and shy as they marched by; and the boy (a great big boy) who held up
the bag for “Salt,” very shy, on the bridge. Lord Melbourne gave £10;
and I £100. Lord Melbourne thought that the Provost and Mrs. Goodall,
knew nobody, for she took Lord Melbourne for Lord Ebrington. It is 69
years, Lord Melbourne told me (the Provost had said) since he (the
Provost) walked in a Montem! Lord Melbourne was going to dine at Lord
Anglesey’s. He said he was going away directly. He had neither slept
well. At ½ p. 2 I left Windsor (as I came the day before), and reached
Buckingham Palace at ½ p. 4 or 20 m. to 5....

_Wednesday, 6th June._—I showed him the letter from Uncle Leopold
which I got yesterday, and in which he touches upon these unhappy
Affairs, wishing _me_ to prevent my Government from taking the lead
in these Affairs, &c., &c.; and saying his position is _des plus
embarassantes_. Lord Melbourne read it over with great attention, and
then spoke of it all most _kindly_ and sensibly; said he did not see
how we could get out of this Territorial Arrangement; said he felt
that Uncle’s position was not an agreeable one, for that he was made
to do what his people disliked and what was extremely unpopular; “and
people and countries never make allowances for the difficulties Kings
are placed in; the King is made the Instrument of an Act which is
extremely unpopular; and all the blame will fall upon him.” All this
is most true; we spoke of this, and of its being rather hard of Uncle
appealing to my feelings of affection for him. I told him what Uncle
had said of Stockmar to Van de Weyer, and that Stockmar said he did not
fear all this, and was sure that Uncle would give way in a little time.
Lord Melbourne said, “He always says that the pressure of circumstances
will make him give way, but I think he trusts everything to that
power”; which Lord Melbourne does not think always is the case. He
was going to show the letter to Lord Palmerston. I showed him another
letter from Ferdinand in answer to mine to him about the Slave Trade;
he seems very anxious to do what we wish, but stated the difficulties
are so great; which Lord Melbourne said was true.... Before this, Lord
Melbourne said, “Immense crowd at the Montem; my servant told me he
never saw such a number of people.” Lord Melbourne was in sight of us,
in coming to London, already before Datchet. His servant also told him
that there were _72_ pair of Post-horses sent down the road yesterday,
and he (Ld. M.) paid 8 guineas for going; whereas in general he only
pays 4. Spoke of the Montem; and of the boys there; the Collegers
generally stay longer than the others; they must stay till there is
a vacancy at King’s, unless they are past 19; he says there are much
fewer little boys than there used to be; the Provost told him “they had
only 20 in the lower form.” “People don’t send their children as early
as they used to do.” We spoke of the Montem; the deal of money said to
have been collected, more than ever was known. Lord Melbourne spoke
of the boy who held the bag and looked so sheepish; of the Provost,
who Lord Melbourne said was an excellent Master; that nobody could
make a lesson so pleasant to the boys; and that he was “a beautiful
scholar” and “a good-natured man.” Lord Melbourne said that “A Master
should have great spirits; better spirits than all the boys.” He went
on saying, “It’s now 42 years ago since I left Eton, and I should like
very much to be put back to that time.” He would not like, he said, to
go through all he _had_ gone through; but to go back to that time, with
his _present_ experience; “I should manage them all so much better,” he
said laughing. He spoke of the extreme love of contradiction children
have; of the great deal of disputing there used to be formerly in
private Society. Lord Egremont used to say, that Society was not near
so amusing as it used to be; people were all so well educated, that
there were no more any originals to be seen. Lord Melbourne said the
love of arguing was at an amazing height when he was born; “People used
to argue till they got into a passion and swore at each other.” That
people always would find the other in the wrong....

_Sunday, 10th June._—I told Lord Melbourne that the Queen Dowager had
come to me the day before, and had told me that Chambers[511] had told
her that she must not pass another winter in England, and wished her
to go to Madeira, which she declared was too far off; he then named
Malta, to which she assented, and asked my leave to go, and to have
a frigate to go in; about which Lord Melbourne said there could not
be the slightest difficulty. I said she told me she preferred Malta,
as being still in _my_ dominions.... Lady Mulgrave began saying how
much mischief the Eton boys committed after the Montem, hacking and
cutting things all to pieces. Of the Montem, its origin; the wish
of some to abolish it; the Provost’s declaring he never would. The
Provost, he told us, is the son of the butler of Lord Lichfield’s
grandfather. Spoke of Dr. Hawtrey’s introducing much new learning,
which the Provost disliked. Spoke of what the boys learn, and many
coming away amazingly ignorant. What makes the school one, Lord
Melbourne said, is that the most gentlemanly boys are sent there. Lord
Melbourne told us that Talleyrand said, “La _meilleure_ éducation,
c’est l’éducation Publique Anglaise; et c’est _détestable_!” There is
one Head Master and an Under Master, and eight other Masters at Eton,
Lord Melbourne said. The Masters, he says, who are quite young men,
often require more keeping in order and are more irregular than the
boys. “_My opinion is_,” said Lord Melbourne, “that it does not much
signify _what_ is taught, if what’s taught is _well_ taught.” Then he
added, “People too often confound learning and knowledge with talent
and abilities”; for that the two former could not make the two latter.
Lord Melbourne was sent to Eton at 9 years old, but had been with a
clergyman before, who taught him on quite a different principle, but
very well; made him work very hard, with a dictionary, by himself, and
at Eton they construe it to you first; “so that when I came to Eton
I was infinitely superior to most of the other boys, and I could do
my lessons and theirs too.” That’s because he _always_ was cleverer
than most other people. He said, “I never was so surprised as when I
came there; I did not know what to do. It was perhaps 12 o’clock, and
they said that I might stay out till two. I said, ‘What can I do? Who
is to stay with me now?’ I thought it then very odd, for I had been
accustomed to have 2 or 3 nursery-maids after me, not allowing me to
wet my heels near the water; and here you are let into a field alone,
with a river running through it, which is 10 feet deep at the bank;
and if you make a false step you’re drowned to a certainty.” Then he
said his father gave him a great deal of money, and he ate such a
quantity of tarts, made himself so sick, though he was only there three
weeks when he first went—that he was very ill when he went home, with
eruptions and spots over his face. This made us laugh much. Spoke of
the fighting there, and that the Masters should never allow it to go
on long. “I always yielded directly,” he said, “if I found the boy too
much for me; after the first round if I found I could not lick the
fellow, I gave it up, and said, ‘Come, this won’t do, I’ll go away,
it’s no use standing to be knocked to pieces.’” All this and a great
deal more Lord Melbourne told us in the funniest, most delightful way
possible; he is _so_ amusing about himself, and so clever and sensible
about education.

_Monday, 11th June._—At 20 m. to 2 Lord Palmerston introduced the
Prince de Ligne to me, Uncle Leopold’s Ambassador to me for the
Coronation; I then went into the Drawing-room where the Prince de Ligne
(who is a gentlemanlike and rather young man) introduced five other
Belgian gentlemen, who have accompanied him. I hear he came in the
most splendid equipage, with four grey horses. At 7 m. to 2 came my
good Lord Melbourne and stayed with me till 5 m. to 3. He said he was
well, and we spoke of the weather. He then told me of the difficulty
of replacing the Chief Baron of Ireland (Joy, of whose death he had
told me last Friday), and he said it was wished, and he thought it was
best, to make O’Loghlen, now Master of the Rolls, Chief Baron, and to
offer the Mastership of the Rolls to O’Connell; he said O’Connell might
possibly refuse it, but that it might likewise satisfy him and his
party; on the other hand, the difficulties are, that O’Connell might
not give up his _agitation_, and that “we,” as Lord Melbourne says, may
be attacked for it by the other party. He then asked me twice over,
“Have you any particular feeling about it?” I said none whatever, and
therefore it is left to Ministers to offer it, or not, as they may
think fit.[512]

_Wednesday, 13th June._—I made Lady Mary Paget[513] sing after
dinner which she did beautifully, two songs before the gentlemen
came in, the pretty one from _The Ambassadrice_, and one by Alari;
Lady Adelaide[514] accompanying her in the last. The gentlemen then
came in; after this Lady Mary sang the other song by Alari which she
sang at Buckingham Palace; and then “Ah! non giunge” (Lady Adelaide
accompanying her), _most beautifully_, with all Persiani’s ornaments.
They, particularly Lord Anglesey, then insisted on _my_ singing; which
I did, but literally shaking with fear and fright. I sang “Il superbo
vinctor” from _Il Giuramento_. Lord Melbourne stood opposite me,
_listening_, which really is marvellous, considering he does not care
the least about music. Lady Mary sang a very pretty little thing from
_Beatrice_; and I then sang “Sogno talor.” We then sat down (at a ¼ p.
10), I sitting on the sofa with Lady Surrey, Lord Melbourne sitting
near me the whole evening, and several of the other ladies sitting
round the table. I observed to Lord Melbourne how dreadfully frightened
I had been; and he smiled and said “I can quite understand it.” Talked
of Ascot Races; Lord Melbourne said he had not been to Ascot Races
since he left Eton, _42_ years ago!! The Eton boys are now not allowed
to go to Ascot, but in Lord Melbourne’s days they were much less severe
than they are now. “My brother” (Pen Lamb) “was a great man on the
Turf. I used always to go to him; I always got leave all the week,
and used to go all the week, and very good fun it used to be,” Lord
Melbourne said.

_Thursday, 14th June._—Spoke of Miss Pitt, and of our fearing she was
attached to her brother-in-law; Lord Melbourne said such a marriage
could not take place now[515]; that the _Law_ preventing it was only
made last year. Till then such a marriage could take place; but was
void, if any of the parties made objections to such marriage. This Bill
made good all such marriages which had taken place (like the Duke of
Beaufort’s[516]) but prevented any others being made. Lord Melbourne
said he did not know if it was right or wrong; we spoke of it for a
little while.[517] I then asked him if he thought it would be well, if,
on occasions like the Races, I should wear my Star and Ribbon; he said
yes.[518] I said to him also, that, if he did not dislike it, I should
be so very happy if he would wear the Windsor Uniform when he came down
to Windsor; he replied kindly, “I shall be very happy,” and I added I
hoped he would often be at Windsor.[519]

_Friday, 15th June._—I told him that I had been reading in the morning
in Coxe’s _Life of Walpole_; which I found very interesting, but that
I had got a good deal puzzled with the South Sea Company, and the
_Redeemable_ and _Irredeemable_ debt; and that it was very difficult
and puzzling, which he said it was, and that I should not trouble or
puzzle myself with that part of the book, which is not clearly written;
and he explained to me in a few words and in his clear delightful
way, like a father to his child, this difficult South Sea Scheme. We
spoke of that strange proposition, the Peerage Bill,[520] which is
curiously told in Coxe’s _Life_. “That was all a party scheme,” said
Lord Melbourne; “and done with a view to cripple George II.” “If that
had been done,” he continued, “there would be hardly any peerages left
now.” Lord Melbourne was speaking of how many peerages, _of that time_,
were extinct; and that there were now 20 peers in the House of Lords
without heirs. I likewise told him that the Duke of Wellington had let
me know that George IV. and William IV. always wore the _Order of the
Bath_ on that day—Waterloo Day—as also on the anniversary of the battle
of Trafalgar; and I asked Lord Melbourne if he thought I should do so,
or not. He said he thought I should. I observed I did not like giving
up my _Blue Ribbon_, _even_ for one night; but if he wished it I would
do so. He said, “If you don’t dislike it, I think you should do it; it
will be considered a compliment to the Army....”[521]

_Monday, 18th June._—Lord Melbourne then gave me a list of the
Creations and Advancements which are to take place, which are as
follows:

  The Earl of Mulgrave    Marquis of Normanby
  Lord Dundas             Earl of Zetland
  The Earl of Kintore     Baron Kintore
    (Scotch)
  The Viscount Lismore    Baron Lismore of Shanbally
    (Irish)                 Castle in the
                            County of Tipperary
  The Lord Rossmore       Baron Rossmore of the
    (Irish)                 County of Monaghan
  The Lord Carew          Baron Carew of Castle
    (Irish)                 Boro in the County of
                            Wexford
  The Hon. Wm. S. C.      Baron de Mauley
    Ponsonby
  Sir John Wrottesley,    Baron Wrottesley of
    Bart.                   Wrottesley in the
                            County of Stafford
  Charles Hanbury         Baron Sudeley
    Tracy, Esq.
  Paul Methuen, Esq., of  Baron Methuen of Corsham.
    Corsham in the
    County of Wilts

Lord Melbourne said he wished to add two more,[522] with my consent,
namely, Lord King,[523] an Earl; and to call up Lord Carmarthen[524] to
the House of Lords. I of course consented to both. Before I say another
word, I must not omit to mention that I wrote a letter to Stockmar
begging him to mention to Lord Melbourne my anxious wish to give him
the _Blue Ribbon_ (which I offered to him through Stockmar already last
year, immediately upon my accession, and which he refused in the most
noble manner), as I said I felt I owed him so much; and he had been
and was so very kind to me that it would grieve me to be giving other
people honours whom I cared not about, and him nothing. Stockmar told
me this morning he had shown Lord Melbourne my letter and that Lord
Melbourne would speak to me on the subject. Accordingly Lord Melbourne
said to me, “The Baron showed me your letter, and I feel very grateful,
I am very sensible of Your Majesty’s kindness”; upon which I assured
him he was quite right (having previously heard from Stockmar that
he would decline it); “I hope,” he continued, “you don’t think I’ve
any contempt for these things, but it gives me such a command”; which
is most true; “and therefore you’ll allow me to decline it.”[525] I
added I thought him quite right but that _I_ could not do less. This
is a fine noble disinterested act, and worthy of Lord Melbourne, and
I honour, esteem and admire him the more for it; it only increases my
fondness of him....[526] [**F1: no anchor apparent in text]

_Friday, 22nd June._—At a ¼ p. 2 came Marshal Soult, Due de Dalmatie,
who was introduced by Lord Glenelg. I was very curious to see him; he
is not tall, but very broad, and one leg quite crooked from having been
severely wounded; his complexion is dark, and he has the appearance
of great age; his features are hard, and he speaks slowly and
indistinctly. His eyes are piercing; he seemed much embarrassed. I then
went into the outer room, where he presented his 12 (I think) Attachés
to me, amongst whom were the Marquis de Dalmatie (his son), and his
son-in-law. Wrote to Aunt Louise. At 3 came Lord Melbourne, and stayed
with me till 4. He asked how I was, and was sorry to hear I had so much
to do. I told him I had just seen Soult, who was so much embarrassed;
which Lord Melbourne said he was also when he came to him; and that he
never would understand anything, and that he made Lord Melbourne repeat
the things over 20 times. He gave me a list of the names to be made
Baronets on the occasion of the Coronation; there are 30; amongst whom
are Mr. E. Lytton Bulwer and Mr. Micklethwait,[527] which last I must
say Lord Melbourne has been most exceedingly kind about. I then begged
him to add (to write down) the two following names to the list of Peers
which he gave me the other day, and which he did; Lord King to be Earl
of Lovelace, and Viscount Ockham in the County of Surrey; and the
Marquis of Carmarthen to be called up by the title of Baron Osborne....

_Wednesday, 27th June._—At 20 m. p. 4 I went with Lady Lansdowne and
Lady Barham (the Duchess of Sutherland going in her own carriage,
as she feared an open one), and Lord Conyngham and Col. Wemyss to
Westminster Abbey to see all the Preparations for to-morrow. The
streets were full of people, and preparations of all kinds. I was
received at the Abbey by Lord Melbourne, the Duke of Norfolk, Sir
William Woods,[528] and Sir Benjamin Stevenson. The whole thing is
beautifully and splendidly and very conveniently done; Lord Melbourne
made me try the various thrones (that is, two) which was very
fortunate, as they were both too low. I came home again as I went
(crowds in the streets and all _so_ friendly) at 5. The preparations
for Fairs, Balloons, &c. in the Parks, quite changes all, and the
encampments of the Artillery, with all their white tents, has a very
pretty effect. I did not think Lord Melbourne looking well, though he
said he was better. I’m very glad I went to the Abbey, as I shall now
know exactly where I’m to go, and be. The Duchess of Sutherland came
to ask for further Orders a few minutes after I had got home, and said
she had taken Lord Melbourne in her carriage to Downing Street which
is only one step from the Abbey. He walked _to_ the Abbey. Wrote my
journal. At ½ p. 7 we dined.

_Thursday, 28th June!_—I was awoke at four o’clock by the guns in
the Park, and could not get much sleep afterwards on account of the
noise of the people, bands, &c., &c. Got up at 7 feeling strong and
well; the Park presented a curious spectacle; crowds of people up to
Constitution Hill, soldiers, bands, &c. I dressed, having taken a
little breakfast before I dressed, and a little after. At ½ p. 9 I
went into the next room dressed exactly in my House of Lords costume;
and met Uncle Ernest, Charles and Feodore (who had come a few minutes
before into my dressing-room), Lady Lansdowne, Lady Normanby, the
Duchess of Sutherland, and Lady Barham, all in their robes. At 10 I
got into the State Coach with the Duchess of Sutherland and Lord
Albemarle, and we began our Progress. It was a fine day, and the crowds
of people exceeded what I have ever seen; many as there were the day
I went to the City, it was nothing—nothing to the multitudes, the
millions of my loyal subjects who were assembled in _every spot_ to
witness the Procession. Their good-humour and excessive loyalty was
beyond everything, and I really cannot say _how_ proud I feel to be
the Queen of _such_ a _Nation_. I was alarmed at times for fear that
the people would be crushed and squeezed on account of the tremendous
rush and pressure. I reached the Abbey amid deafening cheers at a
little after ½ p. 11; I first went into a robing-room quite close to
the entrance, where I found my eight Train-bearers: Lady Caroline
Lennox, Lady Adelaide Paget, Lady Mary Talbot, Lady Fanny Cowper, Lady
Wilhelmina Stanhope, Lady Anne Fitzwilliam, Lady Mary Grimston, and
Lady Louisa Jenkinson,—all dressed alike and beautifully, in white
satin and silver tissue, with wreaths of silver corn-ears in front,
and a small one of pink roses round the plait behind, and pink roses
in the trimming of the dresses. After putting on my Mantle, and the
young ladies having properly got hold of it, and Lord Conyngham holding
the end of it, I left the robing-room and the Procession began. The
sight was splendid; the bank of Peeresses quite beautiful, all in
their robes, and the Peers on the other side. My young Train-bearers
were always near me, and helped me whenever I wanted anything. The
Bishop of Durham[529] stood on one side near me. At the beginning of
the Anthem where I’ve made a mark, I retired to St. Edward’s Chapel,
a small dark place immediately behind the Altar, with my Ladies and
Train-bearers; took off my crimson robe and kirtle and put on the
Supertunica of Cloth of Gold, also in the shape of a kirtle, which was
put over a singular sort of little gown of linen trimmed with lace; I
also took off my circlet of diamonds, and then proceeded bare-headed
into the Abbey; I was then seated upon St. Edward’s chair where the
Dalmatic robe was clasped round me by the Lord Great Chamberlain.
Then followed all the various things; and last (of those things) the
Crown being placed on my head;—which was, I must own, a most beautiful
impressive moment; _all_ the Peers and Peeresses put on their Coronets
at the same instant. My excellent Lord Melbourne, who stood very close
to me throughout the whole ceremony, was _completely_ overcome at this
moment, and very much affected; he gave me _such_ a kind, and I may
say _fatherly_ look. The shouts, which were very great, the drums, the
trumpets, the firing of the guns, all at the same instant, rendered
the spectacle most imposing. The Enthronization and the Homage of, 1st
all the Bishops, then my Uncles, and lastly of all the Peers, in their
respective order, was very fine. The Duke of Norfolk (holding for me
the Sceptre with a Cross) with Lord Melbourne, stood close to me on my
right, and the Duke of Richmond with the other Sceptre on my left. All
my Train-bearers standing behind the Throne. Poor old Lord Rolle, who
is 82 and dreadfully infirm, in attempting to ascend the steps, fell
and rolled quite down, but was not the least hurt; when he attempted
to reascend them I got up and advanced to the end of the steps, in
order to prevent another fall. When Lord Melbourne’s turn to do Homage
came, there was loud cheering; they also cheered Lord Grey and the
Duke of Wellington; it’s a pretty ceremony; they first all touch the
Crown; and then kiss my hand. When my good Lord Melbourne knelt down
and kissed my hand, he pressed my hand and I grasped his with all my
heart, at which he looked up with his eyes filled with tears and seemed
much touched, as he was, I observed, throughout the whole ceremony.
After the Homage was concluded I left the Throne, took off my Crown and
received the Sacrament; I then put on my Crown again, and re-ascended
the Throne, leaning on Lord Melbourne’s arm; at the commencement of the
Anthem I descended from the Throne, and went into St. Edward’s Chapel
with my Ladies, Train-bearers, and Lord Willoughby, where I took off
the Dalmatic robe, Supertunica, and put on the Purple Velvet Kirtle and
Mantle, and proceeded again to the Throne, which I ascended leaning
on Lord Melbourne’s hand. There was another present at this ceremony,
in the box immediately above the Royal Box, and who witnessed all; it
was Lehzen, whose eyes I caught when on the Throne, and we exchanged
smiles. She and Späth, Lady John Russell and Mr. Murray saw me leave
the Palace, arrive at the Abbey, leave the Abbey and again return to
the Palace!! I then again descended from the Throne, and repaired
with all the Peers bearing the Regalia, my Ladies and Train-bearers,
to St. Edward’s Chapel, as it is called; but which, as Lord Melbourne
said, was more _unlike_ a Chapel than anything he had ever seen; for,
what was _called_ an _Altar_ was covered with sandwiches, bottles
of wine, &c. The Archbishop came in and _ought_ to have delivered
the Orb to me, but I had already got it. There we waited for some
minutes; Lord Melbourne took a glass of wine, for he seemed completely
tired; the Procession being formed, I replaced my Crown (which I had
taken off for a few minutes), took the Orb in my left hand and the
Sceptre in my right, and thus _loaded_ proceeded through the Abbey,
which resounded with cheers, to the first Robing-room, where I found
the Duchess of Gloucester, Mamma, and the Duchess of Cambridge with
their ladies. And here we waited for at least an hour, with _all_ my
ladies and Train-bearers; the Princesses went away about half an hour
before I did; the Archbishop had put the ring on the wrong finger,
and the consequence was that I had the greatest difficulty to take
it off again,—which I at last did with great pain. Lady Fanny, Lady
Wilhelmina, and Lady Mary Grimston looked quite beautiful. At about ½
p. 4 I re-entered my carriage, the Crown on my head and Sceptre and
Orb in my hand, and we proceeded the same way as we came—the crowds if
possible having increased. The enthusiasm, affection and loyalty was
really touching, and I shall ever remember this day as the _proudest_
of my life. I came home at a little after 6,—really _not_ feeling
tired.[530]

At 8 we dined. Besides we 13, Lord Melbourne and Lord Surrey[531] dined
here. Lord Melbourne came up to me and said, “I must congratulate you
on this most brilliant day,” and that all had gone off _so_ well. He
said he was not tired, and was in high spirits. I sat between Uncle
Ernest and Lord Melbourne, and Lord Melbourne between me and Feodore,
whom he had led in. My kind Lord Melbourne was much affected in
speaking of the whole ceremony. He asked kindly if I was tired; said
the Sword he carried (the 1st, the Sword of State) was excessively
heavy. I said that the Crown hurt me a good deal. He was much amused at
Uncle Ernest’s being astonished at our still having the Litany[532];
we agreed that the whole thing was a very fine sight. He thought the
robes,[533] and particularly the Dalmatic, “looked remarkably well.”
“And you did it all so well; excellent!” said he with the tears in his
eyes. He said he thought I looked rather pale, and “moved by all the
people” when I arrived; “and that’s natural.” The Archbishop’s and
Dean’s Copes (which were remarkably handsome) were from James the 1st’s
time; the very same that were worn at his Coronation, Lord Melbourne
told me. Spoke of the Duc de Nemours[534] being like his father in
face; of the young ladies’ (Train-bearers’) dresses which he thought
beautiful; and he said he thought the Duchess of Richmond (who had
ordered the make of the dresses, and had been much condemned by some
of the young ladies for it) quite right. She said to him, “One thing I
was determined about; that I would have no discussion with their Mammas
about it.” Spoke of Talleyrand and Soult having been much struck by
the ceremony of the Coronation; of the English being far too generous
_not_ to be kind to Soult. Lord Melbourne went home the night before,
and slept very deeply till he was woke at 6 in the morning. I said I
did not sleep well. Spoke of the Illuminations and Uncle Ernest’s wish
to see them.

[Illustration: _H.S.H. Feodora_

  _Princess of Hohenlohe-Langenburg_

  _from a portrait by Gutekunst 1830_]

After dinner, before we sat down, we—that is, Charles, Lord Melbourne
and I—spoke of the numbers of Peers at the Coronation, which Lord
Melbourne said was unprecedented. I observed that there were very few
Viscounts; he said, “There are very few Viscounts”[535]; that they
were an odd sort of title, and not really English; that they came
from Vice-Comités; that Dukes and Barons were the only _real_ English
titles; that Marquises were likewise not English; and that they made
people Marquises when they did not wish to make them Dukes. Spoke of
Lord Audley who came as the 1st Baron, and who Lord Melbourne said was
of a very old family; his ancestor was a Sir Something Audley[536]
in the time of the Black Prince, who with Chandos gained the Battle
of Poitiers. I then sat on the sofa for a little while with Lady
Barham and then with Charles; Lord Melbourne sitting near me the whole
evening. Mamma and Feodore remained to see the Illuminations, and only
came in later, and Mamma went away before I did. Uncle Ernest drove
out to see the Illuminations. I said to Lord Melbourne when I
first sat down, I felt a little tired on my feet; “You must be very
tired,” he said. Spoke of the weight of the robes, &c.; the Coronets;
and he turned round to me, and said _so_ kindly, “And you did it
beautifully,—every part of it, with so much taste; it’s a thing that
you can’t give a person advice upon; it must be left to a person.” To
hear this, from this kind impartial friend, gave me great and real
pleasure. Mamma and Feodore came back just after he said this. Spoke
of these Bishops’ Copes, about which he was very funny; of the Pages,
who were such a nice set of boys and who were so handy, Lord Melbourne
said, that they kept them near them the whole time. Little Lord
Stafford[537] and Slane (Lord Mountcharles)[538] were Pages to their
fathers and looked lovely; Lord Paget[539] was Lord Melbourne’s Page
and remarkably handy, he said. Spoke again of the young ladies’ dress
about which he was very amusing; he waited for his carriage with Lady
Mary Talbot and Lady Wilhelmina; he thinks Lady Fanny does not make as
much show as other girls, which I would not allow. He set off for the
Abbey from his house at ½ p. 8, and was there long before anybody else;
he only got home at ½ p. 6, and had to go round by Kensington. He said
there was a large breakfast in the Jerusalem Chamber, where they met
_before_ all began; he said laughing that whenever the clergy or a Dean
and Chapter had anything to do with anything, there’s sure to be plenty
to eat. Spoke of my intending to go to bed; he said, “You may depend
upon it, you are more tired than you think you are.” I said I had slept
badly the night before; he said that was my mind, and that nothing kept
people more awake than any consciousness of a great event going to take
place and being agitated. He was not sure if he was not going to the
Duke of Wellington’s.

Stayed in the drawing-room till 20 m. p. 11, but remained till 12
o’clock on Mamma’s balcony looking at the fireworks in Green Park,
which were quite beautiful.

_Friday, 29th June._—I told Lord M. that I had been quarrelling with
Feodore about Louis Philippe, whom she called a Usurper, and that I
told her he was not, and that we disagreed amazingly about it; he
smiled. That she called our William III. and Mary Usurpers; Lord
Melbourne said it was that strong feeling of the divine right of Kings
which some people have; that many people would not be convinced that
Louis Philippe had _not_ organised that Revolution; but that it did
not do, he said, to wish well to the Family and not to Louis Philippe
as Feodore did; for that the happiness of the _one_ depended on the
_other_....

_Sunday, 8th July._—Got up at 20 m. to 10 and breakfasted at 11.
Signed. Heard from Lord Melbourne that, “He finds himself much better
this morning and will wait upon Your Majesty about three or a little
after.” At ½ p. 3 came my excellent Lord Melbourne and stayed with me
till a ¼ p. 4. He looks very thin and pulled as I think, but was in
excellent spirits and as kind as ever. He said he felt much better
today, but that his knee was still stiff and had been very painful
yesterday. It’s the same leg (the left) which was first bad, but the
_foot_ was nearly well; he wore large loose shoes and no straps to
his trousers. I showed Lord Melbourne a letter from Lord Glenelg I
had got about Lord Durham and a letter from Lady Durham. And Lord
Melbourne showed me one from Lord Palmerston about Van de Weyer’s being
asked, and about the Ladies of the Ambassadors having some seat at the
Balls....

_Monday, 9th July._—At a ¼ p. 11 I went with Mamma and the Duchess
of Sutherland, Feodore, Lady Barham, Lord Conyngham, Lord Albemarle,
Miss Pitt, Lady Flora, Späth, Lord Fingall, Miss Spring Rice, and Miss
Davys, Lady Harriet Clive and Mr. Murray to a Review in Hyde Park,
of which I subjoin an account. I could have cried almost not to have
_ridden_ and been in _my right_ place as I ought; but Lord Melbourne
and Lord Hill thought it more prudent on account of the great crowd
that I should not _this_ time do so,[540] which however now they all
see I might have done, and Lord Anglesey (who had the command of
the day, looked so handsome, and did it beautifully and gracefully)
regretted much I did not ride. I drove down the lines. All the Foreign
Princes and Ambassadors were there, and the various uniforms looked
very pretty. The troops never looked handsomer or did better; and I
heard their praises from all the Foreigners and particularly from
Soult. There was an immense crowd and all so friendly and kind to me....

_Wednesday, 11th July._—Spoke of Soult, and that Uncle Ernest said
that the Duc de Nemours told him that Soult was in excellent humour
here, in better humour than he had ever seen him. Lord Melbourne
seemed pleased. He said he was not at all surprised at the manner in
which the English received Soult; as they were always curious to see
distinguished foreigners. During the War, at the Peace of Amiens when
Marshal Orison[541] came over, they took the horses out of his carriage
and dragged him through the streets; “and that was in the midst of
war,” he continued. “Many people were rather annoyed at that; but
that was from mere curiosity.” I spoke of Feodore, and asked him if
he saw any likeness between us; he said, “I see the likeness, though
not perhaps very strong.” I spoke of her children and of Charles (her
eldest) being her favourite, as he was so much the fondest of her. Lord
Melbourne said smiling that one must not judge according to that, and
to the _manner_ in which children _showed_ their love; “Children are
great dissemblers; remember how Lear was deceived by that. They learn
to be the greatest hypocrites,” he said.

_Thursday, 12th July._—Lord Melbourne said that they were going to
have a Cabinet upon what O’Connell and Sir Robert Peel declared in the
House of Commons, the day before yesterday, upon the Irish Tithes. They
proposed that the sum left from the sum which was voted in 1833 for the
distressed Clergy, should be employed to pay the arrears of Tithes
due. I asked Lord Melbourne if he thought this a good plan; he said it
would have the effect of quieting the people, but that it was “rather a
lavish way of bestowing the Public Money.” In general, Lord Melbourne
said, when any sum of the kind is voted for a certain class of people,
many miss it who ought to get it, and many get it who ought not to get
anything.

_Friday, 13th July._—Lord Melbourne said Ellice had told him that they
cheered Soult amazingly when he went to Eton (that day), and Ellice
told him he must ask for a Holiday, which he did, upon which the Boys
cheered him much more; he shook hands with some of the Boys, and then
they all wished to shake hands with him, so he shook hands with the
whole school....

_Tuesday, 17th July._—He (Ld. M.) said that the Sutherlands had a large
family; and asked if the last was a boy or girl, at which I laughed
very much, as I said he _ought_ to know; he said boys were much more
expensive than girls; there was only the girl’s dress that could be
expensive and perhaps Masters; but nothing to what boys’ going to
school cost. I said that younger sons were always so poor, and that
girls married; he said certainly that was so, and even if girls did not
marry they wanted less money. I said Feodore at one time liked having
boys much better than girls, but she did not now, as she thought that
boys got into more difficulties and scrapes than girls. “Men certainly
get into more scrapes than girls,” said Lord Melbourne; “but there is
risk in both.” We spoke of other things; and he said Lord Ebrington
had come to him and spoken to him about its being reported that I had
so many French things, and that the lace of the Servants’ coats came
from France; which I said I knew nothing about, and I assured him I had
quantities of English things, but must sometimes have French things.
He said he knew quite well it was so, and that it was impossible not
to have French things, if one wished to be well dressed. That it was
not so much the material, but the make which we English could not do;
he said they never could make a cap or a bonnet; and that the English
women dressed so ill....

_Monday, 24th July._—We spoke of Sir Edmund Lyons,[542] who writes such
long despatches; and who Lord Melbourne has never seen before; he was
a Naval Officer and never employed before in the Diplomatic Service.
He was the Captain who took out Otho. I then went over to the Closet,
where the Prince Royal of Bavaria was introduced by Lord Palmerston and
Baron Cetto. Having neither attendants nor uniform, he came in morning
attire. He is not quite good-looking, but nearly so,—slim, not very
tall, but very gentlemanlike and agreeable and lively. I made him sit
down, and he was completely _à son aise_ and consequently put _me_ at
ease. I showed Lord Melbourne Hayter’s sketch for his great picture
of the Coronation; which Lord Melbourne liked very much, and which
was very generally admired; Lord Melbourne looked at it for some time
observing upon each part; he said that Hayter would never get it as
good in the large picture as he had got it here. I then said to Lord
Melbourne that I thought the Coronation made him ill, and all the worry
of it; he said he thought he would have been ill without it; “It wasn’t
the _Coronation_,” he said, “it was all these Peerages; but I think
that’s subsiding a little now.” I asked if Lord Derby expected being
made a Duke; Lord Melbourne replied, “No, I don’t think he did; I told
him at once that could not be, and that generally satisfies people.”
Lord Derby has a very good claim for it, Lord Melbourne said, for the
following reasons:—George III. declared he never would make any Dukes,
and wished to reserve that Title _only_ for the Royal Family; and he
only made 2, Lord Melbourne thinks—the Duke of Northumberland and the
Duke of Montagu[543]; Mr. Fox told the late Lord Derby that if he could
ever make the King waive his objections, _he_ should be made a Duke;
and _this_, Lord Melbourne said, certainly was a strong pledge for a
Whig Government; but Lord Grey passed him over (Ld. M. doesn’t know
why) and made the Duke of Sutherland and the Duke of Cleveland; and
Lord Derby said in his letter to Lord Melbourne, “he did not see why
the names of Vane (D. of Cleveland), Grenville (Duke of Buckingham),
and Grosvenor (Ld. Westminster), should be preferred before him.”[544]
He did not mention _Gower_, Lord Melbourne thinks from civility,
but that he _feels_ the same respecting him. I asked _what Duke_ he
wished to be; Lord Melbourne said he supposed Duke of Derby, which
was formerly a Royal title, having belonged to the Dukes of Lancaster;
he takes his title from Derby, a Hundred of Lancashire—_not_ from the
C^o. of Derby. He thinks, Lord Melbourne continued, that he has a right
to be Duke of Hamilton, through his mother, Lady Elizabeth Hamilton,
who was daughter to James, 6th Duke of Hamilton, and a very handsome
person; I asked who she married afterwards; Lord Melbourne replied,
“It was a very awkward business; she _married_ nobody; she had a great
attachment for the Duke of Dorset” (father to the late), “Lord Derby
parted from her, but would not divorce her, in order that she might
not marry the Duke of Dorset.” “The Duke of Dorset,” Lord Melbourne
continued, “was a very handsome and agreeable man; with a great deal
of gallantry....” I asked Lord Melbourne what sort of person Charles
Sheridan was; he said an agreeable lively young man; but rather wild.
We then spoke for a long time about all the Sheridans. C. Sheridan was
in the Admiralty and rose to get £300 a year; but they fancied, he
said, that he was in bad health, and made him give it up. There are
three sons, Brinsley, Frank (who is with Lord Normanby), and Charles;
“They are, like all the Sheridans, clever but careless, and have no
application,” he said. They plagued Lord Melbourne constantly to give
Charles a place; and Lord Melbourne offered him a Clerkship in the
Audit Office; but he would not have that, and said it was less than
he had had. George Anson[545] told Lord Melbourne it would be quite
nonsense to give it to him, as he would never come, and there would be
a complaint of him the first month. Lord Melbourne said that a person
who leaves the situation he has, must not expect to be put in again in
the same place he had. This is a £100 a year, “which is better than
nothing.” I observed that a person who does not wish to submit to that
cannot be very anxious to do much, in which Lord Melbourne agreed.
This Charles Sheridan lives a good deal with the Chesterfields, and
positively has nothing.[546] Lord Melbourne said, “I know they’ll get
ruined, and we shall have to provide for them.” “They all have £60 a
year.” There is one Charles Sheridan, an excessively ugly man, who
is Uncle to all these people; he is Brinsley Sheridan’s son by his
2nd wife; his 1st wife was a professional singer, a Miss Linley, whom
Lord Melbourne remembers when he was a boy; she died in 1794; she was
excessively handsome[547]; “The women” (Lady Seymour) “are very like
her; some of them,” he said. Spoke of young Brinsley Sheridan running
away with his wife; of Lady Seymour, who, Lord Melbourne said, “is the
most _posée_ of them all.” “She says those odd things,” Lord Melbourne
continued, “as if they were quite natural.” They (the Seymours) are
always teazing Lord Melbourne about _Titles_, and are so vexed at their
boy’s having no title; and they never will call him anything else but
the _Baby_[548]; I said that was foolish; “Very foolish; and I’ve told
them so,” replied Lord Melbourne, “but I can’t convince them.” The
Sheridan[549] who wrote the Dictionary was Great-Grandfather to all
these; his Wife was a very clever woman, Lord Melbourne said, and wrote
some very good books; “they have been a very distinguished family for a
long time,” he added.

_Tuesday, 25th July._—At a ¼ to 4 I _rode_ out with Lady Portman, Lord
Uxbridge, Lord Lilford, Lord Portman, Col. Buckley, Col. Cavendish,
and Miss Quentin, &c., and came home at 6. I rode _dear Tartar_ who
went most beautifully; it was a delightful ride; we rode to Acton, and
round by East Acton home. We never rode _harder_. We cantered almost
the whole way going out, but coming home we _galloped_ at least for _3
miles_ without _once_ pulling up. We came home through the Park and in
at the front entrance of the Palace. It was a charming ride. At 7 we
dined. Besides we 13 (Lady Charlemont, Lord Headfort, Lady Caroline
Barrington, and Wm. Cowper replacing Lord Byron, Lady Tavistock, Mrs.
Campbell, and Sir H. Seton), Lord Conyngham dined here. I sat between
Lord Conyngham and Lord Headfort. At a ¼ p. 8 I went to the Opera with
Mamma, dear Feo, Lady Charlemont, Lady Caroline, Miss Cavendish, Lord
Conyngham, Lord Headfort, Mr. Cowper, Col. Buckley, Col. Cavendish, and
Lady Flora. It was _I Puritani_, and Lablache and Grisi were singing
their Duo when we came in. Unfortunately poor Grisi was taken ill,
quite at the end of the 1st act, and was unable consequently to sing
her fine Scene in the 2nd act. Fanny Elsler danced the Chachucha (at
my desire) between the 2nd and 3rd acts.

_Wednesday, 26th July._—Lord Melbourne said, “Lord Duncannon tells
me he thinks that marriage of Lord Shelburne’s[550] is quite off.”
Lord Melbourne said that somebody said to him (Ld. Shelburne) how
handsome Miss Elphinstone was; upon which he replied, “I don’t think
so; but beauty is not the thing to look to in a Wife.” Now this may
have been repeated to her, Lord Melbourne says, and of course could
not please her; and the young lady may have said, Lord Melbourne
continued, “Why, you don’t seem to show that fondness for me you ought
to have, and therefore I think we’d better break it off altogether.”
Lady Kerry,[551] he said, had told Lord Duncannon that she believed
it was all off; I observed, _Why_ then had Lord Lansdowne announced
it to me, if it was not quite settled?—Lord Melbourne said, “The same
thing happened to Lord Duncannon that happened to you”; Lord Lansdowne
announced it to him—said it gave him great pleasure—that it was very
nearly settled but they did not wish to speak of it for the present;
“and two hours afterwards he got a letter from Lansdowne, saying it
was not at all settled,” and that he should not mention it.[552] Lord
Melbourne then asked if I had got the letter he sent me, from the
Duchess of Sutherland to him, saying her sister Lady Burlington[553]
gladly accepted the situation of Lady of the Bedchamber; and Lord
Melbourne said, “That may now be considered as settled”; and that Lady
Lansdowne had best be spoken to about it all; which I begged him to
be kind enough to do, which he said he would. I told Lord Melbourne
that Conyngham had told me that he heard from Frederic Byng, that Lord
Essex[554] was so _excessively_ pleased at my having called up Lady
Essex (Miss Stephens, the Singer that was, and married about 2 or 3
months ago to Lord Essex) at the Ball, and having spoken to her; this
touched Lord Melbourne; we both agreed she was a very nice person.[555]
Wrote my journal. At a ¼ to 8 I went into the Throne room with my
Ladies and Gentlemen, Feo and Mamma, where I found the Duchess of
Gloucester, the Duke of Sussex, the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, and
Augusta and George. After waiting a little while we went into the green
drawing-room, which looked very handsome lit up, and was full of people
_all_ in uniform. I subjoin an account of all the arrangements and
all the people. After remaining for about five minutes in that room,
talking to several people, amongst others to good Lord Melbourne, we
went in to dinner, which was served in the Gallery, and looked, I must
say, most brilliant and beautiful. We sat down _103_, and _might_ have
been more. The display of plate at one end of the room was really very
handsome. I sat between Uncle Sussex and Prince Esterhazy. The music
was in a small Orchestra in the Saloon, and sounded extremely well.
Uncle Sussex seemed in very good spirits, and Esterhazy in high force,
and full of fun, and talking so loud. I drank a glass of _stein-wein_
with Lord Melbourne who sat a good way down on my left between the Duke
of Devonshire and Lord Holland. After dinner we went into the Yellow
drawing-room. Princesse Schwartzenberg looked very pretty but tired;
and Mme. Zavadowsky beautiful, and so sweet and placid. About 20 m.
after we ladies came in, the gentlemen joined us. I spoke to almost
everybody; Lord Grey looked well[556]; the Duke of Wellington ill but
cheerful and in good spirits. I spoke for some time also with Lord
Melbourne, who thought the Gallery looked very handsome, and that the
whole “did very well”; “I don’t see how it could do better,” he said.
He admired the large diadem I had on. At about 11 came some people who
(as the Gallery was full of dinner &c.) were obliged to come through
the Closet, and of whom I annex a List. Lady Clanricarde I did not
think looked very well; Lady Ashley, Lady Fanny, Lady Wilhelmina, and
Lady Mary Grimston looked extremely pretty. Strauss played delightfully
the whole evening in the Saloon. After staying a little while in the
Saloon, we went and sat down in the further drawing-room, next to the
dining-room. I sat on a sofa between Princesse Schwartzenberg and
Mme. Stroganoff[557]; Lord Melbourne sitting next Mme. Stroganoff,
and in a little while Esterhazy near him, and Furstenberg (who talked
amazingly to Lord Melbourne, and made us laugh a good deal) behind
him. The Duchess of Sutherland and the Duchess of Northumberland sat
near Princess Schwartzenberg, and a good many of the other Ambassadors
and Ambassadresses were seated near them. The Duchess of Cambridge and
Mamma were opposite to us; and all the others in different parts of the
room. Several gentlemen, foreigners, came up behind the sofa to speak
to me. We talked and laughed a good deal together. I stayed up till a ¼
to 1. It was a successful evening....

_Wednesday, 1st August._—I asked Lord Melbourne if he saw any likeness
in me to the Duke of Gloucester; he said none whatever; for that when
formerly they wished to make me angry, they always said I was like him.
I asked if Lord Melbourne remembered the Duke’s father; he said he did;
that he was a very good man, but also very dull and tiresome. His two
brothers were Edward, Duke of York, who died long before Lord Melbourne
was born, and Henry, the Duke of Cumberland. “The Duke of Gloucester
and the Duke of Cumberland always remained Whigs,” Lord Melbourne said,
“and never could understand the King’s (George III.) change; they
said the Whigs brought their Family to this country; they went with
the King but could not understand it.” Lord Melbourne said, “Whenever
George IV. took offence at the church, he used to say, ‘By God, my
Uncle the Duke of Cumberland was right when he told me, The people you
must be apprehensive of, are those black-legged gentlemen.’” I said to
Lord Melbourne that Princess Sophia Matilda told me that George III.
had four illnesses. Lord Melbourne said they were not all declared
illnesses. The 1st, he said, was in 1788; the 2nd in 1800, then in
1804, which was not exactly allowed to be so; and the last in ’10, when
he never got well again; it is said, Lord Melbourne told me, that he
had been ill in the early part of his reign; as early as 63 or 4, but
no one knows exactly; he had a very bad fever then. I observed that
the Cheltenham Waters, it was said, brought it on the first time. Lord
Melbourne said, so it was said, but that he did very odd things when
he first went down there.... He used to give, Lord Melbourne said, all
the orders before his being ill with perfect composure. Whenever he was
going to be ill, the King heard—Lord Melbourne continued—perpetually
ringing in his ears, one of Handel’s oratorios; and was constantly
thinking of Octavius[558] who died, “of whom he (the King) said,
‘Heaven will be no Heaven to me if my Octavius isn’t there.’” But his
“master delusion,” as Lord Melbourne expressed it, was thinking that
he was married to Lady Pembroke (Lady Elizabeth Spencer that was, and
Mother to the late Lord Pembroke, and who only died 7 or 8 years ago),
with whom he had been very much in love in his young days, and very
near marrying. I told Lord Melbourne I remembered going to see her when
she was ninety, and she was very handsome even then. Lord Melbourne
then told me how very near George III. was marrying Lady Sarah
Lennox,[559] sister to the late Duke of Richmond, who was excessively
handsome. Lord Melbourne said he was only prevented from marrying
her “by her levity.” This was quite early in his reign. He told Lady
Susan Strangways, Lord Ilchester’s Aunt, “Don’t you think I ought
to marry a Subject? I think I ought; and that must be your friend”
(meaning Lady Sarah Lennox); “and you may tell her so from me.” “Then,”
Lord Melbourne continued, “she” (Lady Sarah) “committed every sort of
folly; she entered into a flirtation with the Marquis of Lothian, rode
out with him after a masquerade quite early in the morning; this was
represented to the King, and _détournée_’d His Majesty a little,” said
Lord Melbourne laughing. Nothing could equal the beauty of the Women
at that time, said Lord Melbourne, from all the accounts he heard, the
Duchess of Argyll and Lady Coventry, sisters,[560] &c....

_Sunday, 5th August._—Spoke of Lord Alfred’s[561] having gone to see
his father’s leg, which is buried at Waterloo, and of _100 old women_
having come to see him get into his carriage when they heard whose
son he was. We spoke of all this; of Sir H. Vivian’s suffering much
now, Lord Melbourne said, in consequence of a severe blow he got at
Waterloo “by a spent grape shot.” Lord Melbourne went over to Brussels
almost immediately _after_ the battle of Waterloo, to see Sir Frederic
Ponsonby[562] who was dreadfully wounded, stabbed through and through;
Lord Melbourne said, though he lived for 20 years afterwards, he
certainly died in consequence of these wounds. I asked Lord Melbourne
if he didn’t think Johnson’s Poetry very hard; he said he did, and that
Garrick said, “Hang it, it’s as hard as Greek.” His Prose he admires,
though he said pedantry was to be observed throughout it; and Lord
Melbourne thinks what he _said_ superior to what he _wrote_. In spite
of all that pedantry, Lord Melbourne said, “a deep feeling and a great
knowledge of human nature” pervaded all he said and wrote....

_Tuesday, 7th August._—I asked him if he had seen Pozzo, which he told
me in the evening he was going to do; he said he had, and it was about
the Pasha of Egypt[563]; and he said Russia would go quite with England
in the whole affair and quite approved of England’s intention of
sending a Fleet there; at the same time, Lord Melbourne said, he stated
distinctly, that if we didn’t send a Fleet, they would be obliged to
march an Army into Turkey for its protection; but, Lord Melbourne said
he hoped, from what he saw by the last despatches, that the Pasha had
given up the idea of declaring his Independence. “I think he only tried
it,” Lord Melbourne said, “to see what effect it would make!” Lord
Melbourne said he had also seen Lord Palmerston, and had spoken to him
about these Belgian Affairs, which they still hope, in spite of many
difficulties, to settle; and they have now satisfied Sebastiani,[564]
who, Lord Melbourne said, was of a jealous disposition and thought they
were going on without him with Bülow[565]; Lord Palmerston had only
got from Van de Weyer a statement of this Debt,[566] Lord Melbourne
said; but that it would be impossible to alter; I expressed a fear of
the Belgians resisting. Lord Melbourne said (which is quite true) that
it would be very awkward if Uncle Leopold came over just in the midst
of these Conferences, which would have the effect, as if he came for
that purpose, and which Lord Melbourne said would prevent their acting
as much for his interests as they otherwise might do. I said I quite
felt it; but that Lord Melbourne had best send for Stockmar and get him
to settle it with the King....

_Sunday, 12th August._—Saw Stockmar for a little while, and then took
leave of this good and kind friend, which I was really sorry to do. He
told me he had been to see Lord Melbourne, and he said I should have
(what _I_ have _always_ had) the greatest confidence in Lord Melbourne,
and ask his advice, not only in Political Matters, but in domestic
affairs,—and ask his advice just like a _Father_, which are quite my
feelings. Lord Melbourne was very funny about the Statue of the Duke of
Wellington which is put up (in wood) only as a Trial, on the Archway
on Constitution Hill,[567] and which we think looks dreadful and much
too large; but Lord Melbourne said he thought a statue would look well
there, and that it should be as large. We then observed what a pity
Wyatt should do the statue, as we thought he did them so ill; and we
mentioned George III.’s; but Lord Melbourne does not dislike that, and
says it’s exactly like George III., and like his way of bowing.[568] He
continued, “I never will have anything to do with Artists; I wished to
keep out of it all; for they’re a waspish set of people....”

_Tuesday, 14th August._—I went and fetched the Speech, and he read it
to me, in his beautiful, clear manner, and with that fine voice of his,
and full of fine expression. I always feel that _I_ can read it better
when I have heard him read it. The Speech is, as Lord Melbourne said,
“not long and safe.”

_Wednesday, 15th August._—Lady Normanby then practised putting on my
crown, for to-morrow. After this I read my Speech twice over, in my
crown. Played and sang. Wrote. Wrote my journal. I forgot to say that
I got in the morning, 2 notes from Lord Melbourne in which it seemed
almost certain that the Prorogation could only take place on Friday;
but at a little before 2 I got another note from him, in which he
said that he heard from Lord John, it could take place next day, and
therefore, that there would be a Council. I asked Lord Melbourne if it
ever had been usual for the Sovereign to _read_ the Speech _after_ the
Prime Minister had done so at the Council, as Lord Lansdowne had twice
asked that question. Lord Melbourne said, never; but that the late King
had done it once, when he was in a great state of irritation, and had
said, “I will read it myself, paragraph by paragraph.” This was the
last time the late King ever prorogued Parliament in person. I asked if
Brougham was in the House; he said no, he was gone. I told him I heard
Brougham had asked Lady Cowper down to Brougham Hall; but that she
wouldn’t go; I asked if she knew him (Brougham) well; Lord Melbourne
said very well, and “I’ve known him all my life; he can’t bear me now;
he won’t speak to me; I’ve tried to speak to him on ordinary subjects
in the House of Lords, but he won’t answer, and looks very stern”; Lord
Melbourne said, laughing, “Why, we’ve had several severe set-to’s,
and I’ve hit him very hard.” I asked if he (B.) didn’t still sit on
the same bench with Lord Melbourne. “Quite on the gangway; only one
between,” replied Lord Melbourne. Lord Melbourne and I both agreed that
it was _since_ the King’s death that Brougham was so enraged with Lord
Melbourne; for, till then, he would have it that it was the _King’s_
dislike to him (and the King made no objection whatever to him, Lord
Melbourne told me) and _not Lord Melbourne_; “he wouldn’t believe me,”
Lord M. said; and _now_ he’s undeceived. Brougham always, he said,
used to make a great many speeches. I observed that I thought if his
daughter was to die, he would go mad; but Lord Melbourne doesn’t think
so; and said, “A man who is always very odd never goes really mad.”

_Thursday, 16th August._—“You were rather nervous,”[569] said Lord
Melbourne; to which I replied, dreadfully so; “More so than any
time,” he continued. I asked if it was observed; he said, “I don’t
think anyone else would have observed it, but I could see you were.”
Spoke of my fear of reading it too low, or too loud, or too quick; “I
thought you read it very well,” he said kindly. I spoke of my great
nervousness, which I said I feared I never would get over. “I won’t
flatter Your Majesty that you ever will; for I think people scarcely
ever get over it; it belongs to a peculiar temperament, sensitive
and susceptible; that shyness generally accompanies high and right
feelings,” said Lord Melbourne most kindly; he was so kind and paternal
to me. He spoke of my riding, which he thought a very good thing. “It
gives a feeling of ease the day one has done with Parliament,” said
Lord Melbourne. He spoke of the people in the Park when I went to the
House; and I said how very civil the people were—_always_—to me; which
touched him; he said it was a very good thing; it didn’t do to rely too
much on those things, but that it was well it was there. I observed to
Lord Melbourne how ill and out of spirits the Duke of Sussex was; “I
have ended the Session in great charity,” said Lord Melbourne, “with
the Duke of Wellington, but I don’t end it in charity with those who
didn’t vote with the Duke when he voted with us”; we spoke of all
that; “The Duke is a very great and able man,” said Lord Melbourne,
“but he is more often wrong than right.” Lord Holland wouldn’t allow
this; “Well, let’s throw the balance the other way,” continued Lord
Melbourne, “but when he is wrong he is _very_ wrong.”

_Friday, 17th August._—I then told Lord Melbourne that I had so much
to do, I didn’t think I possibly could go to Windsor on Monday; he
said if I put off going once for that reason, I should have to put it
off again, which I wouldn’t allow; I said there were so many things
to go, and to pack,—and so many useless things; “I wouldn’t take those
useless things,” said Lord Melbourne laughing. I then added that he
couldn’t have an idea of the number of things women had to pack and
take; he said many men had quite as much,—which I said couldn’t be,
and he continued that Lord Anglesey had _36_ trunks; and that many men
had 30 or 40 different waistcoats, and neck-cloths, to choose from;
which made me laugh; I said a man _couldn’t_ really want more than
3 or 4 coats for some months. He said in fact 6 were enough for a
year,—but that people had often fancies for more. I said our dresses
required such smooth packing; “Coats ought to be packed smooth,”
replied Lord Melbourne. I asked Lord Melbourne if Pozzo had spoken at
all about the Belgian affairs. He said he told him he wouldn’t meddle
with them at all. Spoke of Pozzo’s disliking Lord Palmerston, who
didn’t, he fancied, treat him with enough _égard_; and Lord Melbourne
said Palmerston keeps them waiting sometimes for a long while,—which,
though they say they don’t mind it, they do mind; and we both agreed
that he was a little apt to sneer sometimes, and to make it appear
absurd what people said. I said, independent of Uncle’s coming—hurting
his interests in the Conferences—his own country was in too disturbed
a state to do so[570]; Lord Melbourne said whatever would be done
would be attributed to Uncle’s presence; that justice must be done to
Belgium; but that there was such a desire in the Cabinet to settle the
affair, that they wouldn’t be disposed to listen to any unreasonable
demands of Belgium; I said one felt less anxious reading the Speech
at the close than at the beginning of the Session. Lord Melbourne said
he didn’t know; “The responsibility is so much greater during the
Vacations; when Parliament is sitting one comes at once to Parliament;
one has that to go to, and hears the worst at once....”

_Sunday, 19th August._—Spoke of the Phœnix Park being considered
unwholesome; of its being drained by what they call the
Sub-soil-plough. He repeated the anecdote about Lord Talbot; the
present Lord Talbot—(I believe I have already noted down the anecdote
as he told it me twice before, but am not quite sure)—asked someone why
they had never thought of draining the Phœnix Park, and they replied,
“Why, your Ancestors were so much employed in draining the _Country_,
that they had no time to think of draining the Park.” He said
Talleyrand told an anecdote of a lady in the time of the Revolution
who was speaking of what she would be, and she said, “Paysanne, oui;
mais Bourgeoise, jamais.” I said to Lord Melbourne I was afraid he
disliked the Germans, as he was always laughing at them, which he
wouldn’t allow at all and laughed much. He said, “I’ve a great opinion
of their talents, but not of their beauty.” He asked if I had seen
Mr. MacNeill’s[571] despatches giving an account of his going into
_Herat_ at night; I replied, I had not; Lord Melbourne said it was a
very curious and even fearful account, his going through these Barbaric
Armies at night, 9 o’clock, all the Persians without, prepared for the
Attack, and all those within, for Defence; and he gave an interesting
account of one of the principal persons in Herat; Mr. MacNeill said
he found them quite disposed to negotiate, but when he returned to the
Shah’s camp, he found the Russian Ambassador there, and the Shah would
listen to nothing; so Mr. MacNeill came away. Spoke of not liking the
Cathedral Service and all that singing, and Lord Melbourne said, “It
is inconsistent with a calm and right devotion; it’s papistical, and
theatrical.”[572]

_Monday, 20th August._—Spoke of Pozzo’s being very civil to Lord
Melbourne; Lord Melbourne said, “He’s very fond of me,” upon which I
said, “I don’t wonder at that,” which made Lord Melbourne smile. He
continued, that Lord Palmerston gave Pozzo rather unnecessary offence
by not treating him with respect and _égard_, which those sensitive
Corsicans and Italians expect. I said to Lord Melbourne, I felt often
ashamed at being so ignorant about many things, and at being obliged
to ask him about so many things. He replied MOST KINDLY, “Oh! no,
you know everything very well; it’s impossible for anybody to know
everything that it is right for them to know.” We spoke of the Archduke
Charles, who, as Mr. Macgregor told Lord Melbourne, “and as we know,”
he said, was a most able man, but wouldn’t take the slightest part in
public affairs. We spoke of how many brothers there are still alive:
Archduke Charles, Archduke Palatine, Archduke John, Archduke Rainer,
and Archduke Louis. Spoke of Hayter’s Picture, and of his having
made the Duchess of Sutherland so like already. Spoke of the Duchess
of Sutherland’s features being large, which he agreed in; but that
he liked large features, for that people with small features and
“_Squeeny_ noses” never did anything. Spoke of the business of the
Army, which Lord Melbourne said he was afraid Lord Howick would bring
on, and that there would be a good deal of difficulty about it. Lord
Howick, he says, has pledged himself about it, and is displeased with
the Horse-Guards. He (Lord Howick) is very indiscreet in the House of
Commons, Lord Melbourne said. He has written Lord Melbourne a letter
about this Army business, which Lord Melbourne told him he would
answer; but he begged Lord Melbourne not to write to him, as long as he
was at Spa,—as the letter would be read. I said I hoped Lord Melbourne
had never found me indiscreet, or that I had ever repeated things which
I ought not to have done. He said, “Not at all; no one is so discreet,”
and that it was impossible sometimes to help letting out things. I
then also begged him always to tell me, when he heard anything, might
it be agreeable or disagreeable, and that he should never be afraid of
telling me so; which he promised to do.[573]

_Tuesday, 21st August._—Lord Melbourne said he had seen Lord
Palmerston, who told him he hoped to be able soon to bring this Belgian
business[574] to a sort of conclusion; that he had had several
conversations with Bülow, and Senfft,[575] “who seems a very fair
man”; and that they think they may settle this Debt, and satisfy the
Belgians by this slight change. “Then I talked to him,” continued Lord
Melbourne, “about the King’s coming, and that it would be more for the
disadvantage of his Interests.” I then spoke of my having received such
an odd present of a Kitten in the morning, which made him laugh. (I
got a basket, which they said came from Sir Henry Wheatley, and which
I thought was full of flowers, and when my Maid opened it, we found
a pretty little _Kitten_ in it—which some poor people sent me as a
present.)

_Monday, 27th August._—Of Uncle Leopold; when he married Princess
Charlotte; Lord Melbourne hadn’t the slightest acquaintance with her,
and never had spoken to her. She never came to her father at that time.
Lord M. said he never went near the Princess of Wales, for he said
considering that he opposed the Regent so much in Parliament, he didn’t
wish to oppose him in his quarrels with his Wife; for, he said, he had
been so much with the Prince of Wales, and was so much attached to him,
that he thought that would have been wrong.

_Tuesday, 28th August._—Lord Melbourne then read me a letter from Lord
John about all this Belgian business; he says that he won’t support
Belgium in its new claims. Lord Melbourne said, “It’s very well of
John saying he won’t support,” and so forth, but that it would be
impossible for us not to take one side; our interests would compel
us to do so; they lay so much with the Low Countries; England, he
said, could never permit France to have possession of Antwerp, which
was such a great Maritime place. He then read me a letter from Lord
Minto relative to an alarm which prevails, and which was caused,
Lord Melbourne says, by a speech the Duke of Wellington made in the
House, about the weakness of our Naval force; which Lord Minto quite
disclaims. Lord Melbourne sent him a paper of Sir Robert Inglis’s[576]
about the Russian, French, and American Fleets; which Lord Minto says
is quite erroneous; Lord Minto states that in a very few weeks, he
could be quite ready for war; Lord M. says, what countries generally
ruin themselves with, is, keeping up their Naval and Military
Establishments during the time of peace; and he said, “Better be at
War then.”[577] He owned that the Russians sending their fleet to
the Black Sea “certainly is far from pleasant.” Then I spoke of Lord
Ponsonby’s great alarm about Russian Influence, which Lord Melbourne
said always was the case. Spoke of Queen Charlotte’s having been
supposed to have had a great many presents which she was fond of, from
Mrs. Hastings[578]; and Lord Melbourne said the King was thought rather
to go with Hastings, who was accused and tried for misdemeanours in
India. There was an ivory bed-stead Queen Charlotte got, which Lord
M. believed was at Frogmore now. Spoke of Queen Adelaide’s having got
all those Shawls which the King of Oude sent. This led us to speak
of the Crown Jewels; of there not being many, yet more than I ever
wished to wear, of my not liking those sort of things. Lord M. said
he didn’t like a profusion of them, but thought a few fine ones the
best. Spoke of the Jewels which Queen Charlotte left to her daughters.
Lord Melbourne said the Queen Consort can do with her _own_ things
what she pleases; can make her own Will, and “is a _femme seule_,” for
no other woman can—all is her husband’s. Lord Melbourne (in reply to
my question when he first knew George IV.) said, as soon as he could
remember any one; he was 4 when the King was 21, in ’83, when Lord
Melbourne’s father was first put about the Prince of Wales. “He used to
be at Whitehall, or Piccadilly[579] where we then lived, morning, noon
and night,” Lord Melbourne said; and he used to come down to Brocket;
he always was fond of children and took notice of them; I said he
took notice of me; I observed how much more submissive we were to him
than to the late King; Lord Melbourne said George IV. had more power.
Lord Melbourne said _none_ of the Royal Family could marry without
the Sovereign’s leave since the Marriage Act, passed early in George
III.’s reign, in consequence, Lord Melbourne believes, of the Duke
of Cumberland’s marrying a Mrs. Luttrell[580] which was very much
disliked; else the Duke of Sussex might have married Lady Augusta, and
the late King Mrs. Jordan, Lord Melbourne said. The member of the Royal
Family, Lord Melbourne continued, gives notice to the Privy Council of
his intention to marry, and if they don’t disapprove, it’s supposed
the King will consent. Lord Melbourne said it was a difficult subject
the marriage of the Royal Family; marrying a subject was inconvenient,
and there was inconvenience in foreigners; “It was very often done”
(marrying subjects); “Kings did it; and I don’t know there was any
harm in it,” said Lord Melbourne. Anne Hyde was the last who married
a Prince who became _King_, and that was considered a dreadful thing.
Lord M. said he had been looking at some of those letters [George
III.’s] to Lord North which seemed to him very ill written,[581] both
as to hand and style, and in bad English. Lord North was a great
favourite of George IV.’s, Lord Melbourne said; “Lord North was a very
easy, good-natured man,” and the King knew him “when he first came in
to life.” Lord Thurlow, whom Mr. Pitt beat and turned out in ’93,[582]
turned to George IV. and became also a great favourite of his. He was
clever but ill-tempered, Lord Melbourne said.

_Wednesday, 29th August._—Lord Melbourne said he had been looking at
those letters to Lord North, and found on closer examination that
they were written with much more practical knowledge and knowledge of
men than he had at first thought. The letters he has been reading
are relative to a Negotiation which the King entered into, with the
Opposition, in order to strengthen the Government; and Lord Melbourne
related several parts of it, which made him smile and which he said
were true enough. Lord Melbourne said he (George III.) couldn’t bear
Mr. Fox, for that he says in one of these letters that he (Lord North)
might offer him any situation which did not bring him in immediate
contact with the King, or into the Closet; and as he (Mr. Fox) never
had any principles, he wouldn’t have any difficulty in changing. These
letters prove, Lord Melbourne said, what strong personal dislikes the
King had. These letters to Lord North, Lord M. thinks, were returned
to George IV. by Mrs. Douglas on the death of her husband, who was
the son of Lady Glenbervie, Lord North’s daughter; Lord North had
three daughters, Lady Glenbervie, Lady Sheffield, and Lady Charlotte
Lindsay (whom I know); all very clever, Lord M. says. He had 3 sons,
George (who was a very pleasant, lively man and a great bon-vivant,
Lord M. says), Frederic, and Frank; who were all in succession Earls
of Guilford. The present Lord is son to Lord North’s brother[583] who
was a Bishop, Lord M. told me. Lord North died in ’93, and Lord M.
remembers seeing him (when Lord M. was a boy) led into the House of
Lords, quite blind, at Hastings’ trial; he was Lord Guilford for a very
short time.

Lord M. does not think that George III. was very fond of Mr. Pitt.
Spoke of the violent dislikes George III. and George IV. had; William
IV. had them also, but Lord M. said they were easily got over.
Spoke of George III.’s hand-writing; of mine, which Lord M. thinks
very legible and generally very good; of my inclination to imitate
hand-writings, and people,—which Lord M. said, showed quickness, and
was in the Family; of George IV.’s mimickry. I said I kept a journal,
which, as Lord Melbourne said, is very laborious, but a very good
thing; for that it was astonishing in transacting business, how much
one forgot, and how one forgot _why_ one did the things.

_Thursday, 30th August._— ... I gave Lord M. this Pamphlet of Sir H.
Taylor’s which Mamma lent me. We talked about many things, and in going
home I asked Lord M. how long Lord North had been Prime Minister to
George III.; “From ’70 till ’82,” he told me. “The Duke of Grafton”
(who preceded him, and was the present Duke of Grafton’s father) “went
away,” Lord M. continued, “without telling any body and without telling
the King; they were difficult times, and he went away; I know why he
went away, people are always doing those foolish things; and the King
didn’t know what to do; he sent for Lord Gower”[584] (I forget what
he was), who, I think Lord M. said, refused it; “and then he sent for
his Chancellor of the Exchequer” (Lord North) “and made him his Prime
Minister.” Lord M. spoke of Dr. Keate, and told me an anecdote of him
and George III.; and then he said that Dr. Keate couldn’t bear to be
reminded of his boyish days at Eton; somebody, who Lord M. knows,
reminded Keate when he was walking across the School-Yard with him,
of the window, pointing at it, out of which they had often jumped,
upon which Dr. Keate said, “Don’t mention it; it’s a very foolish
remark.”

_Friday, 31st August._—Lord M. then said, that the French were going
to send out a fleet to Mexico, with which State they have been in
a quarrel for some time,—and that they meant to send the Prince de
Joinville with it, to ask for reparation, and if not, to attack the
fort of Aloa which commands the river, and which it would not be
agreeable for us if the French were to possess; and Lord Palmerston
proposes we should send a swift sailing Vessel to Mexico to apprize
the Mexicans of what was to take place and to advise them to make
reparation. And also, Lord P. proposes sending a Vessel to Guiana,
where the French are making great encroachments, and to see what they
are about.

[Illustration: _H.R.H. The Duc de Nemours_

  _from a portrait by Eugene Lami_]

Lady Cork[585] is 92, a very strange old woman; Lord M. knows her; she
was clever, a great favourite of George III. and Queen Charlotte. She
was a Miss Monckton, sister to Lord Galway, he said. Lord M. said in
returning Dr. Hook’s sermon (which I sent him to read) when he came in,
that it was eager, but nothing very particular, and able. Lady Holland
seems “very fond of Senfft,” Lord M. observed; “she would settle that
Embassy too, as she does every thing else,” he said laughing. Lord M.
said, in speaking of Taylor’s pamphlet,[586] “There is no force in it;
it isn’t pointed.” Taylor is very fond of writing, he says, and fancies
he writes well. Spoke of Lady C. Bury’s book.[587] Lord M. says these
things make less impression than people fancy; they “make a day’s
noise; but nobody minds them much.” Spoke of Lady Anne Hamilton,[588]
who attended Queen Caroline at her Trial; Lady Charlotte Lindsay
gave evidence. “Lord Egremont said,” continued Lord M., “‘As for
Guilford,[589] he twaddled like a waiting maid when he gave evidence;
but his Sister lied like a man,’” which made us both laugh very much.
Spoke of Kenney,[590] who is Author (Lord M. told me) of _Love, Law,
and Physic_, and _Raising the Wind_, and is at Holland House. Spoke of
my knowing Rogers and Moore; having seen Scott and Southey. Lord M.
rather admires Southey’s works, and thinks his _Life of Nelson_ very
pretty. Spoke of his _Life of Cowper_. Spoke of a new book lying on the
table, sent to me by Granville Penn,[591] which Lord M. looked at and
said he thought might be curious; it is the _Life of Sir William Penn_,
Admiral in Cromwell’s time, and who, with Venables, took Jamaica. Spoke
of Mrs. Hutchinson’s _Memoirs of Colonel Hutchinson_, which Lord M.
thinks very curious; spoke of her violence; spoke of Clarendon’s book
which Lord M. said “is a fine book.” I observed there were few books
on the Parliamentary side; he replied few at the time, but a good
many since. He mentioned one by Brodie, a Scotchman; Bishop Burnet’s
Memoirs of his own time, during Charles II.’s reign; and he said,
“There is a book which I think would amuse Your Majesty, and would be
of use to you, and which isn’t long, which is Guizot’s account of the
Revolution.” It’s only in 2 vols., and is a summary of whole thing, he
said.

Lord M. said Lady Holland was a great friend of Pozzo’s, and that his
first acquaintance with Pozzo was at Holland House. I asked if she
knew Sebastiani; he said she did, but didn’t like him much, except
from his connection with Napoleon “whom she adored.” She never knew
Napoleon, Lord Melbourne added, but saw him at Paris at the Peace of
Amiens. She used to send him things she knew he liked, said Lord M.;
when he was at St. Helena she sent him _gâteaux_ and chocolate, &c.
“She was half on his side,” Lord M. continued, “if not more.” Spoke of
Lady E. Wortley’s[592] admiration for Napoleon. Soult was no friend of
Napoleon, Lord M. said; none of them, he continued, were to be compared
to Napoleon himself; the two best after Napoleon, Lord M. said, were
Dessaix who was killed at Marengo, and Kleber who was murdered in Egypt.

I asked Lord M. what Lord Gower, whom he mentioned to me before, was;
that Lord Gower, he said, was the Duke of Sutherland’s grandfather; he
was “Lord Privy Seal” when the King sent for him.[593] “He did not
think himself equal to it” (being Prime Minister); “he was a man who
took great part in politics.” Lord M. also told me that he believes
the present Lord Bute to be the great-grandson of the Minister of
George III. “George III. found the Duke of Newcastle and Mr. Pitt, and
everything was going on very well, when he was advised to change; he
couldn’t bear Mr. Pitt; who was afterwards Lord Chatham; and he took
Lord Bute in his place; and then followed all that unpopularity.” I
asked if these letters of George III. showed great confidence in Lord
North; Lord M. said “they show a great liking for him, more than a
great confidence.” That the King never seemed to think him strong
enough; Lord North, all along, Lord M. continued, was pursuing a
Policy contrary to what he himself approved, but which he was urged
to by the King: and Lord North remonstrated very much with the King.
The difference, Lord M. observed before, between George IV. and his
father, was, that the former (which Knighton’s Memoirs show, Lord M.
said) always required somebody to lean upon, whereas the latter always
wished to act for himself, and only yielded, but said at the same time
he disliked doing it. He never would have yielded on the Catholic
Question, Lord M. continued, nor would the Duke of York; the late King
was for it; but George IV. did it very unwillingly. George III. was
deeply hurt at the loss of the American provinces, which I observed
was no wonder; I said I thought it was _his_ fault. Lord M. said most
likely it was; but that it was impossible any longer to keep up the
great Colonial Policy, namely that they should exclusively trade with
England and make nothing for themselves; even Lord Chatham, Lord M.
said, who all along advocated their cause, “said they shouldn’t drive
one hob-nail for themselves.” The Separation was easily done, they
had nothing to do but to declare it. Lord M. continued that the first
settlers were composed of people who left England in discontent,—of
dissenters &c., and consequently no loyal people could spring from
them. Spoke of the people whom William III. ennobled, which I’ve no
time to enumerate. He told a most absurd anecdote of a very fat little
porter at Lansdowne House. “He is a leading man in all the Parish
Debates,” said Lord M.; “and somebody told Albemarle, ‘He speaks very
well; to tell you the truth he speaks very like my lord.’”


                             END OF VOL. I


    _Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury._




                              FOOTNOTES

[1] In later years the volumes of the Queen’s Journals were of larger
size, but they were always simply bound in half calf or half morocco.

[2] They were ultimately paid by the Queen immediately after her
accession.

[3] Kensington Palace.

[4] The Journal was written in pencil and inked over afterwards.

[5] Edward, first Earl of Powis (1754–1839), was the eldest son of the
great Lord Clive; his eldest son, afterwards second Earl, married Lucy,
daughter of the third Duke of Montrose; his second son, Robert Clive,
M.P., married Harriet, younger daughter of the fifth Earl of Plymouth:
these are the ladies referred to in the text. The barony of Windsor,
which had fallen into abeyance, was afterwards terminated in favour of
Lady Harriet Clive.

[6] Lady Catherine Jenkinson, elder daughter of the third Earl of
Liverpool, was married later to Colonel Francis Vernon Harcourt, son of
the Archbishop of York and Equerry to the Duchess of Kent.

[7] Sir Richard Bulkeley, tenth Baronet, M.P. for Anglesey, afterwards
Lord Lieutenant of Carnarvonshire. He had just married Maria Frances,
daughter of Sir Thomas Stanley-Massy-Stanley.

[8] Lady Williams, wife of Sir John Williams of Bodelwyddan, first
Baronet.

[9] Daughter of Sir John Conroy, Comptroller to the Duchess of Kent.

[10] Louise Lehzen became Governess to Princess Victoria in 1824.
In 1827 George IV. created her a Hanoverian Baroness. When in 1830
the Duchess of Northumberland was made the Princess’ Governess, her
“faithful Lehzen” remained on as Lady in Waiting. She stayed at Court
till 1842, when she returned to Germany.

[11] Sir John Williams, afterwards Sir John Williams-Hay, second
Baronet, of Bodelwyddan.

[12] Robert, Earl Grosvenor (1767–1845), had in 1831 been created
Marquess of Westminster; he had married Eleanor, only daughter of
Thomas, first Earl of Wilton. Richard, Lord Grosvenor, their eldest
son, married Elizabeth Mary, daughter of the first Duke of Sutherland;
Thomas, the second son, inherited, under a special remainder, his
grandfather’s Earldom of Wilton, and married Mary Margaret, daughter of
Edward, twelfth Earl of Derby.

[13] Wife of Sir Philip Grey Egerton, and daughter of George John Legh,
of High Legh, Cheshire.

[14] Robert, third son of Lord Westminster, at this time M.P. for
Chester and afterwards for Middlesex, was created in 1857 Lord Ebury.

[15] Elinor, afterwards Duchess of Northumberland.

[16] Gilbert le Grosvenator, nephew of Hugh Lupus, Earl of Chester.

[17] Joan (_temp._ Henry VI.), only daughter and heiress of John Eton
of Eton (now Eaton), married Raufe le Grosvenor, Lord of Hulme.

[18] Sir Thomas Grosvenor, third Baronet, M.P. for Chester, married
Mary, only daughter and heiress of Alexander Davis, of Ebury,
Middlesex. She died in 1730.

[19] William Spencer, sixth Duke of Devonshire. His mother was
Georgiana, famous for her beauty and its influence over George IV.
and Lord Grey. The sixth Duke inherited from his mother his Whig
proclivities. He was a patron of arts and letters. Devonshire House
under his bachelor rule was a centre of hospitality. That the Duke
never married, notwithstanding his admiration of the fair sex, gave
rise to much speculation and gossip.

[20] William, Lord Cavendish, grandson of George Augustus Henry,
first Earl of Burlington, and great-grandson of the fourth Duke of
Devonshire. In 1858 he became the seventh Duke, and died in 1891.
He married in 1829 Blanche Georgiana, daughter of the sixth Earl of
Carlisle. He was beloved and respected by all who were privileged to
know him. In the spheres of education and science his quiet activities
were not unremarked. He was an admirable landlord and a most efficient
man of affairs. For his careful education of his eldest son, the
Marquess of Hartington, the nation owes him a large debt of gratitude.

[21] Thomas, seventh Earl of Newburgh, married 1817 Margaret, daughter
of the Marquess of Ailsa. Died 1833.

[22] Rt. Hon. William S. S. Lascelles, M.P., third son of the second
Earl of Harewood, married Caroline Georgiana, eldest daughter of the
sixth Earl of Carlisle.

[23] James Archibald (1776–1845), first Lord Wharncliffe, and his wife
Elizabeth, daughter of John, first Earl of Erne.

[24] George William, Lord Morpeth, afterwards seventh Earl of Carlisle,
a prominent but comparatively undistinguished member of every Whig
Administration from 1835 to 1864.

[25] Sister of Lord Cavendish (afterwards seventh Duke of Devonshire)
referred to above. She became the wife of F. J. Howard, M.P. for
Youghal.

[26] Sir Augustus Clifford, formerly Usher of the Black Rod, married
Elizabeth Frances, sister of the fourth Marquess Townshend.

[27] Afterwards wife of Charles William Grenfell, M.P.

[28] Henry Manners, third Lord Waterpark.

[29] John, sixteenth Earl of Shrewsbury (1791–1852).

[30] Lord Liverpool’s second daughter, married, first, to Lord Milton,
secondly to George Savile Foljambe, of Osberton, Notts.

[31] Louisa, third daughter of Lord Liverpool, married John Cotes of
Woodcote, Salop.

[32] Francis, first Lord Churchill, third son of George, fourth Duke of
Marlborough.

[33] Montagu, fifth Earl of Abingdon, married Emily, sister of the
third Viscount Gage.

[34] Sir John Conroy.

[35] Thomas Gaisford, Dean of Christ Church, 1831–1855.

[36] Philip Nicholas Shuttleworth, afterwards (1840–1842) Bishop of
Chichester.

[37] George, Viscount Cantelupe (1814–1850), died in the lifetime of
his father, the fifth Earl de la Warr.

[38] Jacob, afterwards fourth Earl of Radnor (1815–1889).

[39] John Henry, afterwards third Marquess of Ely (1814–1857). His
wife was in after-years Lady of the Bedchamber to Queen Victoria, and
perhaps the most widely known of her ladies.

[40] Probably Henry Edward Hall Gage (1814–1875), eldest son of the
fourth Viscount Gage, in whose lifetime he died.

[41] Charles Canning (1812–1862), afterwards Viscount Canning and
Governor-General of India.

[42] Lord Thomas Clinton (1813–1882), third son of Henry, fourth Duke
of Newcastle, K.G.

[43] Mr. Granville Leveson-Gower, afterwards second Earl Granville
(1815–1891), well known as Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in
Mr. Gladstone’s Administration.

[44] George Henry, afterwards second Earl of Falmouth (1811–1852).

[45] Princess Sophia (1777–1848) was a daughter of George III., and
younger sister of Princess Augusta Sophia (1768–1840). See p. 200.

[46] The Very Rev. George Davys, the Princess’s instructor, at this
time Dean of Chester, subsequently Bishop of Peterborough.

[47] Richard Westall (1765–1836), an R.A. since 1794 and painter of
many historical pictures.

[48] John Bernard Sale (1779–1856), organist of St. Margaret’s,
Westminster, and afterwards of the Chapel Royal.

[49] The Duchess of Gloucester. See p. 65.

[50] An attached attendant, to whose memory, after her death, the Queen
erected a tablet in St. Martin’s-in-the-Fields. She was dresser to
Princess Charlotte.

[51] Thomas Steward, teacher of writing and arithmetic.

[52] M. Grandineau, teacher of French.

[53] Mr. (afterwards Sir) George Hayter (1792–1871), a ceremonial
painter of some merit. He was the official limner of two Royal
heiresses—_i.e._ Princess Charlotte and Princess Victoria. He was
designated, somewhat equivocally, Painter in Ordinary to the Queen.

[54] William Farren (1786–1861), an actor of distinction himself, and a
member of a histrionic family of unusual merit.

[55] Mary, fourth daughter of George III., who married her cousin
William Frederick, Duke of Gloucester. She died in 1867. The Queen
looked upon her “as a sort of grandmother,” and described her as full
of kindness, amiability, and unselfishness.

[56] See _post_, p. 104.

[57] Charlotte Florentia, daughter of Edward, first Earl of Powis, and
wife of Hugh, third Duke of Northumberland, K.G., Governess to the
Princess.

[58] Daughter of the eleventh Duke of Somerset, afterwards wife of
William Blount, of Orleton, Herefordshire.

[59] The Princess’s dancing-mistress.

[60] William Howley (1766–1848), Bishop of London 1813–28, Primate
1828–48. In the opinion of Lord Grey and the Whigs “a poor, miserable
creature,” but in reality a worthy, conscientious prelate.

[61] Lord Brougham.

[62] See _ante_, p. 53.

[63] Bernard Edward, twelfth Duke of Norfolk (1765–1842). He was given
the Garter in 1834—the only K.G. of the Roman faith. He subsequently
became a Protestant.

[64] Edward Adolphus, eleventh Duke of Somerset (1775–1855). A
personage of no importance.

[65] George, fifth and last Duke of Gordon. A soldier. He fought in
Ireland (1798) and at Walcheren (1809). A friend of the Prince Regent
and a hard liver, but a high-minded, honourable man. Three of his
sisters married the Dukes of Richmond, Manchester, and Bedford. The
fourth married the Marquis Cornwallis. These achievements were due to
the talents of the old Duchess of Gordon, a Scottish lady of strong
character and accent.

[66] John Henry, fifth Duke of Rutland, K.G. (1778–1857), chiefly
remarkable as the father of “Henry Sidney,” one of Disraeli’s
well-known sketches of contemporary potentates.

[67] Elizabeth, Countess of Sutherland in her own right (1765–1839),
married George Granville, Viscount Trentham, afterwards second Marquess
of Stafford. He was created Duke of Sutherland in January 1833. She was
habitually called the “Duchess-Countess” in the family, and is still so
called.

[68] William Harry, third Earl of Darlington and first Duke of
Cleveland, K.G. See _post_, p. 98.

[69] See _ante_, p. 49.

[70] Charles, second Earl Grey, Prime Minister. Lady Grey was Mary
Elizabeth, daughter of the first Lord Ponsonby of Imskilly.

[71] Rowland, first Viscount Hill, Commander-in-Chief from 1828 to
1842—an office upon which he left no mark.

[72] Georgiana, second daughter of George, sixth Earl of Carlisle, wife
of the Rt. Hon. George James Welbore, first Lord Dover.

[73] Henry, Earl of Uxbridge, afterwards second Marquess of Anglesey, a
cavalier of spirit, and possessed of all the dashing qualities of the
Paget family.

[74] William Charles, fourth Earl of Albemarle, Master of the Horse. A
few days after her accession the Queen sent for him and said, “My Lord,
you will immediately provide for me six chargers to review my troops.”

[75] William Pitt, first Earl Amherst, quite inconspicuous as
Ambassador to China 1816–17, and Governor-General of India 1823–28.

[76] Mary Anne, wife of Sir Edward Cust, afterwards Master of the
Ceremonies to Queen Victoria.

[77] General Sir George Anson, G.C.B., Equerry to the Duchess of Kent,
afterwards Groom of the Bedchamber to Prince Albert.

[78] General Sir Frederick Wetherall served on the staff of the Duke of
Kent, and was subsequently his equerry and one of the executors of his
will.

[79] William Wyon, chief engraver at the Mint, afterwards R.A.

[80] Marie Taglioni (1809–84). Until the invasion of Europe by Russian
ballet, Taglioni’s name was the most famous in the annals of classical
operatic dancing.

[81] He was President from 1830 to 1850. By his contemporaries he was
as much esteemed as Lawrence. America, however, has not yet discovered
him.

[82] Henry Howard, appointed Professor of Painting to the Academy in
1833.

[83] Sir William Beechey, R.A. Formerly Portrait Painter to Queen
Charlotte, and finely represented at Windsor by a series of charming
portraits of Royal children.

[84] Now in the “Corridor” at Windsor Castle.

[85] Sir Charles Eastlake (P.R.A., 1850–65). He was appointed by Sir R.
Peel secretary to the Fine Arts Commission, and later still Director of
the National Gallery. A typical and meritorious P.R.A.

[86] Sir Edwin Landseer (1802–73). The most popular of British painters.

[87] Sir Augustus Wall Callcott (1779–1844). A chorister of Westminster
Abbey; subsequently a painter. Elected R.A. 1810, and knighted 1837.

[88] Henry William Pickersgill, R.A. (1782–75), a fashionable portrait
painter, patronised by famous men and women; he exhibited at the
Academy for over sixty years. He is now quite forgotten.

[89] William Hilton, R.A., (1786–1839). His work was refined, but,
owing to the pigment he used, has practically vanished.

[90] The Duke, who was the eldest son of King Louis Philippe, was
born at Palermo in 1810, and in July 1842 was thrown from his phaeton
near the Porte Maillot in Paris, and died on the spot. His youth and
popularity, his love of art and literature, and his professional
efficiency as a soldier might, had he lived, have served to give the
events of 1848 a different turn. He was, however, a Bourbon.

[91] Wife of Leopold, King of the Belgians.

[92] The veteran Prince Talleyrand (1754–1838), once Bishop of Autun,
Republican, Bonapartist, Legitimist, and cynic; everything by turns and
everything remarkably _long_. See p. 331, and Vol. II. p. 61.

[93] The Duchesse de Dino (Princesse de Sagan), niece of Prince
Talleyrand. Her own memoirs have preserved her memory.

[94] Henry, third Marquess of Lansdowne (1780–1863). A typical and most
eminent Whig. He twice refused to be Prime Minister, but held office in
every Whig Administration from 1830 to 1858. He was Chancellor of the
Exchequer in the Ministry of “All the Talents.” He was a fine judge of
art. No statesman of his time was more universally trusted.

[95] George Granville succeeded his father, the first Duke of
Sutherland (see _ante_, p. 68, n.), in July 1833. His wife, Harriet
Elizabeth Georgiana, third daughter of the sixth Earl of Carlisle, was
the first Mistress of the Robes selected by Queen Victoria.

[96] Charles Augustus (1776–1859), fifth Earl of Tankerville, married
Corisande, daughter of Antoine, Duc de Gramont: she possessed great
charm of manner and a fine turn of wit. She had many attached friends
of both sexes. See Vol. II. p. 221.

[97] William Philip (1772–1838), second Earl of Sefton, married Maria
Margaret, daughter of William, sixth Lord Craven.

[98] See _ante_, p. 49.

[99] Thomas William (1795–1854), second Viscount Anson, had been
created in 1831 Earl of Lichfield. He married Louisa Catherine,
daughter of Nathaniel Philips, of Slebech Hall, co. Pembroke.

[100] First Earl Granville, youngest son of first Marquess of Stafford
(1773–1846), Ambassador to St. Petersburg 1804, and afterwards for many
years at Paris. He married the daughter of the fifth Duke of Devonshire.

[101] Lord Palmerston, born 1781, died Prime Minister 1865. Lord
Palmerston was now fifty-two years old. In years to come, this child
of thirteen was destined to overthrow him, when at the height of his
popularity, to receive him again as her Prime Minister, and to turn
to him in the great crisis of her life twenty-eight years after their
first meeting.

[102] See _ante_, p. 54.

[103] John William, Lord Duncannon. A Whig placeman. As Earl of
Bessborough (1846) he became Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and died in
office in 1847.

[104] Hugh, Lord Ebrington, afterwards second Earl Fortescue. Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, 1839–41.

[105] Sylvain Van de Weyer (1802–74), Belgian Minister at the Court of
St. James’s, a trusted friend of King Leopold and of Queen Victoria.
He had been a prominent leader of the Revolution in Belgium, 1830, and
a protagonist of the separation of Belgium and Holland. His wit and
charming personality gave him a prominent place in London society. He
married the daughter of Joshua Bates, senior partner in Barings.

[106] Edward Geoffrey Stanley (1799–1869), the Rupert of debate, at
this time Secretary for the Colonies, afterwards (as Earl of Derby)
three times Prime Minister. Mrs. Stanley was Emma Caroline, daughter of
Edward, first Lord Skelmersdale.

[107] Mr. Ellice (1781–1863), born at Montreal, M.P. for Coventry
and Secretary at War. He had been a very successful Government Whip;
nick-named “Bear” Ellice from his connection with the Hudson Bay
Company. He married a sister of Earl Grey.

[108] James Abercromby (1776–1858), son of the gallant Sir Ralph
Abercromby, who died in the moment of victory at Alexandria in 1801. At
this time M.P. for Edinburgh. Became Speaker of the House of Commons in
1835, and was created Lord Dunfermline four years later.

[109] The Baroness Späth, Lady-in-Waiting to the Duchess of Kent.

[110] General Sir Robert Gardiner was Principal Equerry to Prince
Leopold of Saxe-Coburg at his marriage with Princess Charlotte. In
later life he was Governor and Commander-in-Chief at Gibraltar.

[111] William George Maton, M.D., Physician Extraordinary to the
Duchess of Kent and Princess Victoria.

[112] George (1819–1904), afterwards Duke of Cambridge and
Commander-in-Chief. He was two months older than the Princess, so that
he was now fourteen years old.

[113] Arabella, wife of the fourth Earl, a Lady-in-waiting to Queen
Adelaide. She was a Miss Mackworth Praed.

[114] Daughters of the eleventh Earl of Pembroke. Lady Emma afterwards
married the third Viscount de Vesci, and Lady Georgiana the fourth
Marquess of Lansdowne.

[115] Daughters of the fifth Earl of Jersey. Lady Sarah afterwards
married Prince Nicholas Esterhazy (see p. 190), eldest son of the
famous diplomatist. Lady Clementina died unmarried in 1858.

[116] Younger son of Prince and Princess de Lieven. The Prince had been
for over twenty years Russian Minister or Ambassador in London; the
Princess was the inveterate correspondent of Earl Grey.

[117] George Guy, afterwards fourth Earl of Warwick, and an A.D.C. to
Queen Victoria. Died 1893. At this time he was fifteen years of age.

[118] Charles Henry, Earl of March, afterwards sixth Duke of Richmond
and first Duke of Gordon of a new creation. He held several high
offices in Conservative Administrations, being Lord President of the
Council 1874–80, and Secretary for Scotland 1885–6. He, like Lord
Brooke, was about fifteen at this time; and was at Westminster School.
In after-years the Queen relied much upon his excellent political
judgment.

[119] George, eighth Earl of Athlone (1820–43). The first Earl was
Godert de Ginkell, the well-known General of William III.

[120] A younger brother of Lord March; drowned in the _President_
steamer in 1841. He was at this time thirteen years old.

[121] John Frederick, afterwards M.P. for Pembrokeshire and second Earl
Cawdor.

[122] Their father was Alexander, Duke of Würtemberg. Prince Alexander
afterwards married Princess Marie, daughter of King Louis Philippe; she
died in 1839, less than two years after their marriage.

[123] A cousin of the Princess Victoria and of Princes Alexander and
Ernst, the mother of the Duchess of Kent, having been a Princess of
Reuss-Ebersdorff.

[124] Afterwards Duchess of Argyll.

[125] Afterwards Lady Blantyre.

[126] Lady Caroline Lascelles, and her daughter, afterwards Mrs.
Grenfell.

[127] Madame Malibran was now about twenty-five years of age. See
_post_, p. 168.

[128] Henry Lynedoch Gardiner, son of General Sir Robert Gardiner. He
was afterwards Equerry in Ordinary to Queen Victoria.

[129] Sir Colin Campbell (1792–1863), afterwards F.-M. Lord Clyde,
Commander-in-Chief in India. He saw more active service than any
British Field-Marshal before or since. No soldier was ever braver, more
merciful, and more modest.

[130] Admiral Williams had rendered valuable services in conjunction
with the army in the Low Counties, 1794–5; he was knighted in 1796, and
became G.C.B. in 1831.

[131] John George Lambton (1792–1840), the first Baron (and afterwards
first Earl of) Durham, son-in-law of Lord Grey, had been Ambassador to
St. Petersburg, and was now Lord Privy Seal. Lord Melbourne sent him
subsequently to Canada at a critical juncture in the history of British
North America. The Ministry afterwards recalled him, but the report
which he presented on Canadian affairs is regarded as having laid the
foundations of all colonial self-government. He was a statesman of
noble, unstained character; but his high-strung temperament made life
difficult both for him and his colleagues.

[132] He was sixty-two years of age. See _ante_, p. 78.

[133] Vice-Admiral Sir Graham Moore (1764–1843), G.C.M.G., afterwards
Commander-in-Chief at Plymouth. He had been ordered in 1807–8 to escort
the Royal Family of Portugal to Brazil; he married Dora, daughter of
Thomas Eden.

[134] Rear-Admiral Sir Frederick Lewis Maitland (1776–1839). He
commanded the _Bellerophon_ when Napoleon surrendered after Waterloo.

[135] Richard (1764–1839), second Earl, Lord Lieutenant of Cornwall.

[136] Sir William Hargood had commanded the _Belleisle_ under Nelson at
Trafalgar, becoming an Admiral and G.C.B. in 1831.

[137] Captain Charles Philip Yorke, R.N., then M.P. for Cambs.,
afterwards fourth Earl of Hardwicke.

[138] Sir John Cameron had had a distinguished record in the Peninsula.
From 1823 to 1833 he commanded the Western District.

[139] Adjutant-General, 1830–50.

[140] Donna Maria da Gloria, then aged about fourteen. She was the
daughter of Dom Pedro, who had been proclaimed Emperor of Brazil in the
lifetime of his father, John VI., and abdicated the throne of Portugal
in favour of Donna Maria. Dom Miguel, a younger brother of Pedro,
claimed the throne. Pedro had designed a marriage between Donna Maria
and Miguel, who in 1827 had been appointed Regent, but, having been
himself driven from Brazil by a revolution, Pedro endeavoured to gain
the throne decisively for his daughter. His second wife, now known as
Duchess of Braganza, was sister to Augustus, Duke of Leuchtenberg, who
at the age of twenty-five had married Donna Maria, then barely sixteen,
and died two months later. See p. 110.

[141] The death of Ferdinand without male issue caused a disputed
succession in Spain. His brother Don Carlos relied on the Salic Law
as established by the Pragmatic Sanction of 1711, which Ferdinand
had revoked. Don Carlos and Dom Miguel subsequently entered into an
alliance, while the young Queens Maria and Isabella mutually recognised
each other, and were supported by England and France.

[142] William Charles Macready (1793–1851), afterwards successively
manager of Covent Garden and Drury Lane Theatres.

[143] An actress, and mother of Helen Faucit.

[144] Benjamin Webster, an excellent and humorous comedian from about
1819 to 1874.

[145] Frances Maria Kelly (1790–1882), for many years a popular
favourite at Drury Lane, and a friend of Charles and Mary Lamb.

[146] This was the first of many Foreign Orders received by Queen
Victoria. They have been carefully collected and arranged by King
George and Queen Mary, and are displayed in Queen Mary’s audience room
in Windsor Castle.

[147] Lady Theresa Fox-Strangways, elder daughter of the third Earl of
Ilchester, afterwards wife of the ninth Lord Digby.

[148] Afterwards Lady Ebury. Sister of the first Earl Cowley. See p. 50.

[149] Giulia Grisi (1815–69) made her début at Florence, aged fourteen.
Théophile Gautier said of her that under her spell what was only an
opera became a tragedy and a poem. She first appeared in London in
1834. She was afterwards married to the Count of Candia (Mario).

[150] Henry Stephen, third Earl (1787–1812).

[151] Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg (1786–1851), uncle of the Prince
Consort.

[152] Charles Emich, Prince Leiningen, son of the Duchess of Kent by
her first husband, and half-brother of Princess Victoria.

[153] Emmanuel, Count Mensdorff-Pouilly (1777–1862), husband of
Princess Sophia, eldest sister of the Prince Consort’s father and of
the Duchess of Kent. An emigrant from France in 1793, he attained high
rank in the Austrian service. His sons were intimate companions of the
Prince Consort.

[154] Ernest, Duke of Saxe-Coburg (1784–1844), father of the Prince
Consort.

[155] See _ante_, p. 49.

[156] Eldest daughter of Francis, first Marquess of Hastings, Lady of
the Bedchamber to the Duchess of Kent. This unfortunate lady died in
1839.

[157] Charles, fifth Duke (1791–1860). As Lord March he is often
mentioned in the Duke of Wellington’s correspondence. He was one of the
very few male human beings ever alluded to by the Iron Duke in terms
of affection. The Duchess was Caroline, daughter of the Marquess of
Anglesey.

[158] George Henry (1760–1844), fourth Duke. An obscure Whig potentate.

[159] Charles, fifth Duke, but fourteenth Earl of Dorset, K.G. Master
of the Horse in various Tory Administrations. On his death, unmarried,
in 1843, his honours (including the Earldom of Middlesex) became
extinct. A favourite of George IV. One of the first gentlemen jockeys.
He and his brother Germaine were famous at Newmarket as race riders.
He established Bibury races. He was of tiny physique, but smart, and a
great favourite with ladies.

[160] William Harry, first Duke of Cleveland, of a new creation, a
great-grandson in the male line of a daughter of Barbara Palmer,
Duchess of Cleveland. He died in 1842, and his income was computed at
£110,000 per annum. See _ante_, p. 68.

[161] Francis, second Marquess (1797–1876), who, three years later,
brought to the Princess at Kensington the news of her accession. Lady
Conyngham was a daughter of Lord Anglesey.

[162] Second son of William IV. and Mrs. Jordan. The eldest son was
created Earl of Munster, 1831; the younger children (except those who
had attained higher rank by marriage) were granted the style of younger
children of a marquess. Lady Frederick was a daughter of the Earl of
Glasgow.

[163] William Basil Percy (1796–1865), seventh Earl of Denbigh,
Chamberlain to Queen Adelaide.

[164] Lady Sophia Fitzclarence, daughter of William IV. She married
Sir Philip Sidney, afterwards created Lord De l’Isle and Dudley of
Penshurst.

[165] Emily, sister of the second Lord Auckland.

[166] See _ante_, p. 69.

[167] Edward, fourth son of the first Earl Beauchamp.

[168] Afterwards Sir Charles Wood (1800–85) and first Viscount
Halifax. Married the daughter of Charles, Earl Grey. He served in many
administrations; finally as Secretary of State for India and Lord Privy
Seal. A typical Whig statesman of high probity and wisdom.

[169] See _ante_, p. 86.

[170] Charlotte, daughter of Robert Adamson of Westmeath and wife of
Sir Godfrey Vassal Webster, of Battle Abbey, formerly M.P. for Sussex.
Sir Godfrey’s mother, Elizabeth Vassal, eloped from her husband with
Lord Holland, and was the famous “Old Madagascar” of Holland House
coteries.

[171] He was made a baronet in 1838 for this act. See _post_, p. 355.

[172] William Frederick (1776–1834), second Duke, was the son of
William Henry, first Duke, by Maria, Countess-Dowager Waldegrave,
illegitimate daughter of Edward Walpole, a younger son of the
great Minister. The Duke was an inoffensive man of quiet and mild
disposition, familiarly known as “Silly Billy.” He married his cousin,
Princess Mary, daughter of George III. He was proud of his rank, but of
little else. See _ante_, p. 65.

[173] Brother of the Duchess of Braganza. See _ante_, p. 86.

[174] Princess Elizabeth (1770–1840), daughter of George III., widow of
Frederick, Landgrave of Hesse-Homburg. This Princess settled down into
an atmosphere of venerated old age at Homburg. A statue was recently
erected there and unveiled by the German Emperor to commemorate her
virtues.

[175] Emma Sophia, daughter of the second Earl of Mount Edgecumbe,
second wife of John, first Earl Brownlow.

[176] Daughter of William IV. Her husband had been raised to the
Peerage in Jan. 1835. See _ante_, p. 99.

[177] Another daughter of William IV., wife of Lucius, tenth Viscount
Falkland.

[178] Richard William Penn (1796–1870), first Earl Howe, Chamberlain to
Queen Adelaide. He was believed to have encouraged her in inciting the
King against the Ministry of Lord Grey.

[179] William Basil Percy, seventh Earl of Denbigh. See _ante_, p. 99.

[180] Adelaide Cottage, built for Queen Adelaide, but never occupied by
her except as a tea-house. It has been used ever since by successive
Sovereigns for a similar purpose. The Cottage stands surrounded by
charming gardens in the eastern corner of the private grounds of
Windsor Castle.

[181] Luigi Lablache (1794–1858), a first-rate comedian and the finest
bass singer of his time. He made his début in London in 1830, in
Cimarosa’s opera _Il Matrimonio Segreto_. He taught Princess Victoria
singing, and of all her teachers he was the favourite.

[182] Michael (afterwards Sir Michael) Costa, for many years the
conductor of the orchestra at Covent Garden. His musical taste was
considerable, but he was famous for his dominating personality, the
hauteur of his demeanour, and above all for the perfect fit of his
spotless white gloves.

[183] General Sir Frederick Trench had served in Sicily and in the
Walcheren expedition, and was afterwards Aide-de-Camp to George IV.
He was M.P. for Scarborough at this time. A man of discernment and
taste. He advocated a scheme for making an embankment along the Thames
from Charing Cross to Blackfriars. He was half a century ahead of his
contemporaries!

[184] Augusta, youngest daughter of the Landgrave Frederick of Hesse.
She was married to H.R.H. the Duke of Cambridge in 1818. “I am the
happiest of men,” wrote the Duke to Lady Harcourt from Cassel, soon
after his engagement, and he added, “The Princess is really everything
both as to heart, mind and person that I could wish.” There never was
a happier marriage. This Princess was the mother of George, Duke of
Cambridge, Commander-in-Chief of the British Armies, of the Dowager
Grand Duchess of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, and of Princess Mary, Duchess
of Teck. She was the grandmother of Queen Mary, and died, regretted by
all, in 1889.

[185] Joseph Goodall (1760–1840), Provost of Eton for thirty-one years.
An excellent but obscure scholar. It was his misfortune to be the
nominal superior of Dr. Keate. He had the temerity on one occasion at
Windsor, in the presence of William IV., to tell Sir Henry Halford, who
was vain of his scholarship and fond of quoting Latin, that he ought to
be whipped for having made a false quantity.

[186] Dr. Hawtrey (1789–1862), Headmaster of Eton for 18 years, he then
presided over the college as Provost for another 10. A profound and
elegant scholar, a man of lofty ideals, intrepid soul and warm heart,
he raised the tone of masters and boys by sheer force of his delightful
personality. He doubled the numbers of the school as well as its
efficiency and influence.

[187] Countess Mensdorff was the sister of the Duchess of Kent, a
Princess of Saxe-Coburg. See _ante_, p. 95.

[188] Grand Duchess Marie, daughter of the Emperor Paul I. of Russia,
married Charles Frederick, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, in 1804.

[189] Dr. Charles James Blomfield (1786–1857), a fine scholar, and a
Bishop of unusual administrative capacity. His influence in the Church
of England, both as Bishop of Chester and Bishop of London, was second
to none, until the day of his retirement in 1856. He died at Fulham
Palace in August 1857.

[190] She married in 1856 Duke Frederick of Schleswig-Holstein, and was
the mother of the present German Empress.

[191] Fanny Kemble, daughter of Charles Kemble, the actor, after
attaining considerable success on the stage in England, went to
America, and in 1834 married Pierce Butler. In 1835 she published an
indiscreet journal which had considerable success.

[192] Edward Vernon-Harcourt (1757–1847), Archbishop of York, was the
third son of the first Lord Vernon. He assumed his mother’s name of
Harcourt on succeeding to the family estates of Stanton Harcourt and
Nuneham Courtenay. He married Anne, third daughter of first Marquess
of Stafford. A most sumptuous prelate. He was the grandfather of Sir
William Vernon Harcourt, M.P.

[193] Daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Granville Harcourt, and wife of Montagu,
Lord Norreys, M.P. for Oxfordshire, afterwards sixth Earl of Abingdon.

[194] Sir John, second Baronet (1799–1869), father of Lord Derwent. His
wife was Louise, second daughter of Archbishop Harcourt.

[195] George Granville Harcourt, M.P. for Oxfordshire and eldest son
of the Archbishop. His first wife was Elizabeth, daughter of the
second Earl of Lucan. She died in 1838, and in 1847 Mr. Harcourt
married Lady Waldegrave, the well-known and much-liked chatelaine of
Strawberry Hill. The last of the great Ladies (she was the daughter of
John Braham, the singer) who knew how to combine hospitality with fine
political and social discernment.

[196] See p. 135.

[197] Owner of Newstead Abbey, bought from Lord Byron in 1818.

[198] Matthew Camidge, organist at York Minster 1799–1842. For five
generations the family of Camidge supplied organists in the county of
York.

[199] She afterwards married Major-General George A. Malcolm, C.B.

[200] At Nuneham there is a snuff-box, inset with diamonds, given by
Queen Victoria to Col. Francis Harcourt, and engraved “for services
rendered to her while still at Kensington.”

[201] Rev. William Harcourt (1789–1871), Canon of York. He inherited
the Harcourt estates and was the father of Sir William Vernon Harcourt,
M.P. His wife was Matilda Mary, daughter of Col. W. Gooch.

[202] Rev. Charles Harcourt, Canon of Carlisle.

[203] Albert Joseph Goblet, Count d’Alviella, a Belgian officer of
distinction much esteemed by King Leopold. He was often a guest of
M. Van de Weyer, and was well known in London Society. When sent as
Belgian Minister to Berlin, the King of Prussia refused to receive him
on the ground that he had deserted the King of Holland.

[204] General Comte Baudrand (1774–1848). Originally intended for the
Bar, he became, by choice, a soldier, and served with distinction
in Italy under the Republic, and under Napoleon at Waterloo he was
Chief of Staff of the Army of the North. After the Restoration he was
appointed Governor of the Prince Royal, with whom he paid many visits
to England.

[205] Afterwards Sir James Clark (1788–1870). He was physician to
Princess Charlotte and Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg, and afterwards to
the Duchess of Kent and Princess Victoria. He was not only the Queen’s
most trusted physician, but an adviser and friend. He recommended
Balmoral to the Queen and the Prince as their Highland home. He
attended the Prince during his last hours.

[206] This room was in later years the room of Princess Mary, now H.M.
the Queen. It forms part of the Palace temporarily appropriated to
the London Museum, and is dedicated to the relics of Queen Victoria’s
childhood. In this room Queen Mary was born.

[207] The partitions were taken down after the accession of King
Edward, and the great gallery restored to the condition in which it was
left by William III.

[208] Now occupied as a sitting-room by Princess Henry of Battenberg.

[209] When King Louis Philippe was Duc d’Orléans his eldest son was Duc
de Chartres, and the earlier name survived. In later years the Comte de
Paris’ younger brother became Duc de Chartres. See p. 72.

[210] Prince Ferdinand was nephew of the Duchess of Kent (the son of
her brother Ferdinand), and was married to Maria da Gloria, Queen of
Portugal. Their sons Pedro V. and Luis both succeeded to the Throne.
Count Lavradio had been sent to Coburg to negotiate the alliance.

[211] Mrs. Anderson was Princess Victoria’s music-mistress. She was a
pupil of Felix Mendelssohn’s, and a most beautiful musician. She taught
music to all the Queen’s children and died between 1870 and 1880. Her
husband was for many years “Master of the Queen’s Musick,” _i.e._
Private Band.

[212] Fieschi had attempted to assassinate King Louis Philippe.

[213] Ernest (born 1789), brother of the reigning Landgrave.

[214] Son of Count Pozzo di Borgo, Russian Ambassador. This diplomatist
was born in Corsica in 1768, and he began life as a Corsican Deputy to
the National Assembly. Agent of the Holy Alliance in Europe, he was the
most ardent advocate of the Legitimist cause in France. His talents
were remarkable, and his causerie was much appreciated in London
society.

[215] Henry, Earl of Lincoln (1811–64), afterwards fifth Duke of
Newcastle, a Peelite and Secretary for War during the campaign in the
Crimea. He was a holder of other high posts in the Government. An
able man, but no one except Mr. Gladstone ever thought him capable of
holding the highest. His father returned Mr. Gladstone for his close
borough of Newark. Lady Lincoln was a daughter of the tenth Duke of
Hamilton, and was divorced in 1850.

[216] William Carr Beresford (1770–1854), better known as Marshal
Beresford, so called from his supreme command of Portuguese troops in
the Peninsula, the hero of Albuera, the bloodiest battle of the war.
Created Baron Beresford of Albuera and Dungarvan 1814, and Viscount in
1823. He married Louisa, widow of Thomas Hope of Deepdene.

[217] Daughter of third Earl of Dartmouth.

[218] Miss Joanna Baillie (1762–1851), a writer of many plays, now
forgotten. She is remembered as a lady to whom Sir Walter Scott wrote
freely. She resided at Hampstead, and was visited by many distinguished
men of letters. Sir Walter edited, and Kemble acted, one of her plays.

[219] Charles Kemble (1775–1854), the youngest of the family whose
chief ornament was Mrs. Siddons. A meritorious comedian.

[220] Helen Faucit was now nineteen, and had just made her debut as
Julia in _The Hunchback_. The “Margaret” of the present occasion was
her first original part. She married Mr. (afterwards Sir) Theodore
Martin in 1851, and was as much esteemed by Queen Victoria for her
womanly qualities as by the public for her impersonation of Rosalind.
She died in 1898.

[221] George John Bennett, an actor never in the front rank. He was
associated with Phelps throughout his long management of Sadler’s
Wells, and played respectable parts.

[222] When, as Lady Martin, forty years later, she appeared as
Rosalind on a special occasion, in the interests of charity, these
characteristics were found to be unimpaired.

[223] Madame Vestris (1797–1856), daughter of Bartolozzi the engraver.
She married at sixteen Armand Vestris, and secondly Charles Mathews.
Her histrionic powers were not remarkable, but her reputation as a
singer and producer of extravaganza stood high.

[224] Charles Mathews (1803–78), one of the most delightful comedians
of all time. Destined for the Church, educated as an architect, he did
not make his debut on the stage until he was thirty-two years old. He
married Madame Vestris, and his Autobiography and Letters were edited
by Charles Dickens.

[225] He was thirty-three years old.

[226] Priscilla, daughter of William, first Lord Maryborough and
afterwards third Earl of Mornington, was the Duke of Wellington’s
niece. Her husband, Lord Burghersh, was afterwards eleventh Earl of
Westmorland.

[227] This room is now known as “the State Drawing-room.”

[228] Prince Ernest of Hesse-Philippsthal-Barchfeldt. See p. 145.

[229] Anna Maria, wife of second Marquess of Ely. She was the daughter
of Sir H. W. Dashwood, Bart. She died in 1857.

[230] See _post_, p. 297.

[231] A landscape painter.

[232] Olivia Cecilia, daughter of Charlotte, Baroness de Ros. She
married (1833) Henry Richard Wellesley, afterwards first Earl Cowley
and British Ambassador at Paris. She died in 1885.

[233] King Leopold used Stockmar for the purpose of educating Prince
Ferdinand very much as he used him to train Prince Albert and Princess
Victoria in the duties of a Sovereign. King Leopold believed that he
had reduced the rules of Sovereignty to a science. See p. 196.

[234] In later years Queen Victoria used similar language about
the Prince Consort. In her case it was not an altogether accurate
description of the facts. Her dominant character occasionally asserted
itself.

[235] His portrait by Winterhalter hangs among Queen Victoria’s
“friends” in the ante-room to the Corridor at Windsor. See p. 114.

[236] Madame Malibran. See _post_, p. 168.

[237] This is the first indication in the Journals that Princess
Victoria realised her future position. It is known that for many years
knowledge of her possible accession to the Throne was withheld from
her. When it was determined that she should be enlightened, a Family
Tree was inserted by her governess between the pages of an English
history. The child examined it minutely for some time, and turning to
Baroness Lehzen said, “Then I shall be Queen.”

[238] Daughter of Lieut.-General Francis Grant and widow of Lord George
Murray, Bishop of St. David’s and second son of the second Duke of
Atholl.

[239] The mutiny and riots in Portugal were, it was contended, the
outcome of the appointment of Prince Ferdinand as Commander-in-Chief.
This appointment had been made on the advice of the Duc de Terceira,
the Prime Minister. See _ante_, p. 144.

[240] See _ante_, p. 137.

[241] Madame Malibran (1808–36), daughter of Manuel Garcia. She was
a distinguished singer and a woman of considerable talent. Her first
husband was a French merchant, M. Malibran. At the time of her death
she was married to M. de Bériot.

[242] He was translated to Durham in 1856. In 1860 he became Archbishop
of York and in 1862 Primate of All England.

[243] Charlotte, daughter of the fifth Duke of Northumberland, widow of
the third Earl of Ashburnham.

[244] Afterwards wife of the Rev. Algernon Wodehouse.

[245] Granville George (1786–1857), second Lord Radstock, Vice-Admiral
of the Red.

[246] Charles Noel (1781–1866) had succeeded in his father’s lifetime
to his mother’s barony of Barham. He was created Earl of Gainsborough
in 1841. In 1833 he married his fourth wife, Frances, daughter of the
third Earl of Roden, afterwards a Lady of the Bedchamber to Queen
Victoria.

[247] Hon. Edward Stopford, second son of third Earl of Courtown.

[248] Afterwards Napoleon III.

[249] The Queen had been led to believe that a counter-revolution would
be popular, but the movement was a failure.

[250] The Rt. Hon. John Wilson Croker (1780–1857), M.P. for Downpatrick
and Secretary to the Admiralty. Immortalised in _Coningsby_ as “Mr.
Rigby,” he has remained the type of malignant and meddling politician
that Disraeli desired to expose. His title to respect is that he was
one of the earliest contributors to _The Quarterly Review_, which was
founded by John Murray in 1809.

[251] William Wemyss, afterwards Lieut.-General and Equerry to Queen
Victoria.

[252] Second son of fifth Viscount Torrington, sometime a Commissioner
in the Colonial Audit Office.

[253] A gipsy encampment.

[254] One of the gipsies.

[255] Sir John Malcolm’s _Life of Clive_, a biography now unreadable,
but made famous by Macaulay, who took it as a peg upon which to hang
his Essay.

[256] Richard James Lane (1800–72) had in 1829 made a well-known
portrait of the Princess at ten years old. He was afterwards
distinguished for his skill in lithography, reproducing many works of
well-known artists. The portrait he was painting at this time now hangs
in the Corridor at Windsor.

[257] Lady Blessington (1789–1849) was at the zenith of her career,
editing Books of Beauty, writing novels, and entertaining celebrities
at Gore House, Kensington. She was married when young and beautiful to
Lord Blessington, an elderly and easy-going Peer, whose daughter by his
first wife was the wife of Count d’Orsay. This unfortunate young woman
was eclipsed in the affections of d’Orsay by her stepmother. After
Lord Blessington’s death, d’Orsay and Lady Blessington presided over a
brilliant salon at Kensington Gore, principally attended by the male
sex. Lady Blessington recorded in several volumes her conversations
with Byron. Disraeli, as a young man, flaunted his most elaborate
waistcoats at Gore House.

[258] See _ante_, p. 99.

[259] Eldest daughter of third Earl of Courtown.

[260] Philip Henry, fourth Earl, and Lucy Catherine, daughter of Robert
Low Carrington. Lady Wilhelmina married in 1843 Lord Dalmeny, by whom
she had a son (the present Lord Rosebery) and three other children.
After Lord Dalmeny’s death in 1851, she married in 1854 the fourth
Duke of Cleveland. She was one of the Queen’s train-bearers at her
Coronation. She died in May 1901.

[261] Daughter of the fifth Earl Cowper, and niece to Lord Melbourne.
She afterwards married Lord Jocelyn. She was a great favourite with
Queen Victoria. After the Queen’s marriage and her own marriage she
became one of the Queen’s Ladies of the Bedchamber, and held that post
till shortly before her (Lady Jocelyn’s) death.

[262] Third daughter of the first Earl of Verulam, and afterwards
wife of the fourth Earl of Radnor. The three young ladies mentioned
here were afterwards train-bearers elsewhere to Queen Victoria at her
coronation.

[263] Daughter of Vice-Admiral Josceline Percy, and afterwards wife of
Colonel Charles Bagot.

[264] Marie, Countess of Blebelsberg, born 1806, married Prince Charles
of Leiningen (see p. 95). She died 1880.

[265] Colonel Sibthorp, the eccentric member for Lincoln, whose
personal appearance was much satirised in _Punch_.

[266] Afterwards Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton and Lord Lytton of Knebworth.
He was distinguished as a writer of novels that enjoyed a great vogue,
and as a genuine man of letters. His abilities were of a far higher
order than his writing. His ability was his own, but he wrote for the
public. He earned a considerable fortune by his pen. For a time he
chose to be a politician, and was Secretary for the Colonies in Lord
Derby’s Government. His marriage was famous for its failure. His son
Robert was Viceroy of India, Ambassador in Paris, and a poet of more
than average merit.

[267] Grandson of the twelfth Duke of Norfolk who died in 1842. He
succeeded as fourteenth Duke and died in 1860.

[268] Son of Prince Paul Esterhazy, Austrian Ambassador. See p. 77.

[269] Charles (1815–88), afterwards sixth Duke of Rutland, K.G.; he
died unmarried. A man of grim manners but not unkindly heart.

[270] Arthur Richard (1807–84), afterwards second Duke of Wellington,
K.G. Almost better known by his courtesy title of Lord Douro. Had he
not been the son of the Great Duke, his uncommon talents might have
earned for him a career of distinction. In appearance he singularly
resembled his august father, and late in life he was addicted to a
style of costume which led people to say that he wore his father’s old
clothes. He, however, possessed a pretty wit.

[271] John William (1811–84), seventh Earl of Sandwich, afterwards
Master of the Buckhounds.

[272] Thomas Henry, fourth Lord Foley (1808–69).

[273] Louisa, a daughter of the sixth Duke of Bedford, married James,
second Marquess and first Duke of Abercorn. This Duke and his Duchess
are generally thought to have been meant by the “Duke” and “Duchess” in
Lord Beaconsfield’s novel _Lothair_.

[274] The three remarkable Sheridan sisters (granddaughters of R. B.
Sheridan, the dramatist) were Lady Seymour (afterwards Duchess of
Somerset and Queen of Beauty at the Eglinton Tournament), Lady Dufferin
(the Mrs. Blackwood mentioned above), and Mrs. Norton. They possessed
in an uncommon degree the gift of beauty inherited from Miss Linley,
their grandmother, and gifts of mind inherited from Sheridan. Not
only Mrs. Norton, but also Lady Dufferin, wrote verse and prose with
distinction. _Stuart of Dunleath_, a novel by Mrs. Norton, was much and
justly admired. She inspired George Meredith with the conception of
_Diana of the Crossways_.

[275] Baron Stockmar. See p. 196.

[276] Dr. Howley. See _ante_, p. 68.

[277] Second Marquess. See _ante_, p. 98.

[278] Baron Christian Stockmar (1787–1863), physician to Prince
Leopold, and subsequently his confidential agent. He abandoned medicine
for statecraft, in which he became an expert. He was entrusted by King
Leopold to superintend the education of Prince Albert and guide Queen
Victoria, both of which services he performed with consummate tact and
integrity. He was their devoted friend and counsellor to the end of his
life. See _ante_, p. 154.

[279] William Lamb, Viscount Melbourne (1779–1848), was at this time
Prime Minister and fifty-eight years old.

[280] Ernest Augustus (1771–1851), fifth son of George III. He was
considered unscrupulous, and was certainly most unpopular in this
country. He now succeeded William IV. as King of Hanover. Although
of autocratic temperament, he granted his subjects a democratic
constitution, much to their surprise.

[281] Augustus Frederick (1773–1843), sixth son of George III. His
marriage to Lady Augusta Murray was declared void under the Royal
Marriages Act. He had by her two children, Sir Augustus d’Este and
Mlle. d’Este (afterwards wife of Lord Chancellor Truro). He married,
secondly, Lady Cecilia Buggin (_née_ Gore, daughter of the Earl of
Arran), and to her was granted the title of Duchess of Inverness.

[282] Henry William Paget, first Marquess of Anglesey (1768–1854).
Commanded the Cavalry at Waterloo. When a round shot tore between
him and the Duke of Wellington, he turned to the Duke and said, “By
God! I have lost my leg,” and the Duke replied, “By God! I believe
you have.” This conversation sums up the two men. Lord Anglesey was a
Field-Marshal and Viceroy of Ireland, where he displayed a tendency
to liberal ideas that were not considered in accordance with his
profession or station. There was never a more gallant soldier, and he
“had not a fold in his character.”

[283] Chancellor of the Exchequer. An intelligent politician and
responsible for the adoption of the penny post. He was anxious for the
Speakership, but failed to win the fancy of the House of Commons. He
passed to the House of Lords as Lord Monteagle in 1839 and died in 1866.

[284] James, first Lord Wharncliffe. A Yorkshire magnate and Member of
Parliament. Created a Peer 1826. See _ante_, p. 54.

[285] Alexander Baring, first Lord Ashburton (1774–1848). President of
the Board of Trade in Lord Grey’s Administration.

[286] Sir William Draper Best (1767–1845), first Lord Wynford, formerly
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

[287] A distinguished soldier, at this time Lieut.-General and Master
of the Ordnance. M.P. for Windsor. Afterwards created Lord Vivian
(1841).

[288] Charles Grant, first and only Lord Glenelg (1778–1866), at
this time Secretary for the Colonies. Three years before he had been
proposed as Governor-General of India, but his nomination was rejected
by the Board of Directors.

[289] Afterwards Lord Sydenham (1799–1841). At this time President
of the Board of Trade. In 1839 he was appointed Governor-General of
Canada. He died there, aged forty-one, from a fall from his horse.

[290] Henry George, afterwards third Earl Grey (1802–94), at this
time Secretary-at-War and Colonial Secretary. An honest and fearless
statesman, but a difficult colleague.

[291] Gilbert, second Earl of Minto (1782–1859), First Lord of the
Admiralty. In 1832 he had been sent on a special mission to Berlin “to
mollify the King of Prussia.” This type of mission has always been
popular with the Whigs.

[292] Daughter of George III. She lived at Frogmore and at Clarence
House. See _ante_, p. 61.

[293] Robert Cutlar Ferguson had been counsel for one of the defendants
in the trial of Arthur O’Connor and others for treason at Maidstone
in 1798. O’Connor was acquitted, but the presence in Court of Bow
Street runners to arrest him on a second charge caused a scene of
much confusion, one consequence being the prosecution of Cutlar
Ferguson, Lord Thanet, and others for an attempted rescue. Ferguson was
imprisoned for a year and fined £100. Upon his liberation he went to
Calcutta, where he established himself in large and lucrative practice.
He died in 1838.

[294] Lord John Russell (1792–1878) was at this time forty-five years
old. Home Secretary and Leader of the House of Commons. He was at the
height of his combative powers as a Parliamentarian, and his zeal for
Whig doctrine at home and Liberal statesmanship abroad was undiminished.

[295] Private Secretary to William IV.

[296] Lady C. Jenkinson, daughter of the Earl of Liverpool. See p. 46.

[297] Anna Maria, daughter of the third Earl of Harrington.

[298] Louisa Fox-Strangways, daughter of the second Earl of Ilchester.

[299] He had been executor to the Queen’s father. One of her first acts
was to discharge the debts contracted by the Duke of Kent, which the
Duchess had never been able to pay off. See _ante_, p. 69.

[300] Colonel the Hon. H. F. C. Cavendish (1789–1873), son of Lord
Burlington. Clerk-Marshal to the Queen. Married as his second wife
Frances Susan, sister of Lord Durham.

[301] Queen Adelaide, the Queen Dowager, a Princess of the House of
Saxe-Meiningen. Her attitude towards the young Queen was absolutely
perfect, in its simple dignity and freedom from every taint of envy.

[302] Georgina Howard, daughter of the sixth Earl of Carlisle.

[303] Anne, wife of Francis William, second Earl of Charlemont.

[304] Second son of the fourth Duke of Grafton.

[305] George Byng, afterwards second Earl of Strafford.

[306] Lord Durham, by his charming manners, had overcome certain
prejudice which had been felt in St. Petersburg on his appointment. He
was exceedingly popular with the Emperor. He returned to England, it
was said, “a greater aristocrat than ever.” See _ante_, p. 81.

[307] Lord Mulgrave was created Marquess of Normanby in 1838. A member
of Lord Melbourne’s Administration in 1834, he was sent to Ireland
as Viceroy, and then returned to the Cabinet as Secretary of State.
While the Whigs were in office he was never without a place. He was
subsequently Ambassador in Paris, and under Lord Palmerston supported
Napoleon III. through the stormy days of the _coup d’état_.

[308] Lady Mulgrave was Maria Liddell, eldest daughter of the first
Lord Ravensworth. She had married, in 1818, the second Earl of
Mulgrave, who was created Marquess of Normanby in 1838. See p. 205.

[309] Sarah, daughter of the second Earl Spencer and widow of the third
Lord Lyttelton. Afterwards Lady Superintendent to the Princess Royal
and the Prince of Wales and the other Princes and Princesses. A shrewd
observer and a woman of fine judgment and high ideals.

[310] There is no record of any previous Sovereign wearing the robes
of the Bath on such an occasion. Certainly they have never been worn
since. A little later in her reign the Queen was always reluctant to
exchange the red ribbon of the Bath for the blue ribbon of the Garter.
By the advice of Lord Melbourne, however, she was in the habit of
wearing the red ribbon when holding an investiture of the Order.

[311] He had just been created Earl of Yarborough. Lady Charlotte was
the wife of Sir Joseph Copley. He died in 1846.

[312] The Queen always retained a strong sentiment for Kensington
Palace. Part of the old building had been condemned by the Office of
Works to be pulled down, but the Queen refused her sanction. During
the last year of her reign the Queen made an arrangement with Lord
Salisbury and Sir M. Hicks-Beach that, in consideration of Her Majesty
giving up the use of Bushey House and the Ranger’s House at Greenwich,
the Government should purchase and place at her disposal Schomberg
House, and should restore Kensington Palace. Parliament voted £36,000
for this purpose, on the understanding that the State Rooms should be
opened to the public.

[313] Louisa, daughter of the thirteenth Viscount Dillon, afterwards
wife of Sir Spencer Ponsonby Fane.

[314] These are the rooms now occupied by Queen Mary. The “audience”
room opened out of the sitting-room.

[315] Hon. Harriet Elizabeth Pitt, younger daughter of the third Lord
Rivers. She married in 1841 Charles Dashwood Bruce, nephew of the Earl
of Elgin.

[316] Mary Alicia Spring Rice, eldest daughter of the Chancellor of the
Exchequer. She afterwards married James Garth Marshall of Headingley
and Monk Coniston.

[317] President of the Board of Control. He had enjoyed the friendship
of Byron, travelled with him, and was one of his executors. He was
created Lord Broughton in 1851. His _Recollections of a Long Life_,
edited by his daughter, Lady Dorchester, throw much light on the
political events of his time. He was so strong a partisan that his
judgments of statesmen and political events have to be treated
with reservations; but he was a type of politician, cultivated,
independent, conscientious, and high-minded, that is becoming rarer as
constituencies become less fastidious.

[318] The Queen invariably saw her Ministers in an “audience” room and
never in her private sitting-room. An exception was made in the case of
Lord Melbourne, the Prime Minister.

[319] See _ante_, p. 53.

[320] George William, sixth Duke of Argyll, son of John fifth Duke, and
his wife, one of the beautiful Gunning sisters, Elizabeth, widow of the
sixth Duke of Hamilton. This lady was created Baroness Hamilton in her
own right, and her husband was also accorded a barony of Great Britain,
thus entitling him to a seat in Parliament.

[321] Fourth son of the fourth Duke of Marlborough; a Captain, R.N.
Died at Macao in 1840.

[322] Sigismund Thalberg (1812–71) was now in the full flood of
success. He wrote many fantasias on operatic themes, _e.g._ on _Robert
le Diable_, _Zampa_, etc. In 1845 he married a widow, the daughter of
Lablache. As a composer he never succeeded in emulating his success as
a pianist. Later in life he abandoned music, and became a professional
vine-grower.

[323] Edward Pery Buckley, afterwards General and M.P. See p. 327.

[324] Alexis, Count Orloff, famous both as general and diplomatist. He
had fought in the war of 1829 against Turkey, and signed the Treaty
of Adrianople in 1829. He had been sent to enlist English sympathies
for Holland as against Belgium in 1832. He also was a signatory of the
important treaty of Unkiar Skelessi, and represented Russia in the
Congress of Paris in 1856.

[325] Lady Salisbury was Frances Mary, daughter and heir of Bamber
Gascoyne, grandson of Sir Crisp Gascoyne, Lord Mayor of London 1752. He
was the first Lord Mayor who occupied the Mansion House.

[326] Afterwards an intimate counsellor of the Emperor of Austria,
Hereditary Great Chamberlain, and President of the Council.

[327] See _ante_, p. 192: note on the Sheridan sisters.

[328] Wife of Duke Bernard of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach, younger brother of
Grand Duke Charles Frederick. See p. 125.

[329] At Marlborough House.

[330] Caroline Fanny, daughter of Colonel Cavendish. Maid-of-honour,
and Extra Woman of the Bedchamber.

[331] Caroline Margaret, Maid-of-honour, eldest daughter of John,
afterwards second Earl Somers. She subsequently married Canon
Courtenay, one of the Queen’s chaplains.

[332] Princess Cecile of Sweden, third wife of Grand Duke Augustus of
Oldenbourg.

[333] See _ante_, p. 69.

[334] See _ante_, p. 145.

[335] King William I., who succeeded his father, Frederic, in 1816.

[336] George, seventh Viscount, a Lord-in-waiting.

[337] Wife of M. de Mérode, who was First Minister in Belgium and a
faithful friend to King Leopold.

[338] Lord Broughton (Sir John Hobhouse), in his Reminiscences, refers
to this game of chess, and to the slight confusion there was between
“the two Queens on the board and the two Queens at the table.”

[339] Sir Jeffrey Wyatt (1766–1840), the architect, whose most
important work was the transformation of Windsor Castle, including the
addition of thirty feet to the height of the Round Tower. The principal
feature of this work is the solid and “fortress-like” appearance, which
is conspicuous in the Castle. His name had been originally Wyatt,
but George IV., after laying the foundation-stone of the new work,
sanctioned the curious addition of “ville” to the surname. Although
he was an architect of considerable technical skill, his powers of
destructiveness were quite remarkable. He hardly left a stone of
Windsor Castle unturned.

[340] Equerry to the Queen, son of the first Marquess of Anglesey by
his second marriage with Lady Charlotte Cadogan. Sometime M.P. for
Lichfield and Clerk-Marshal of the Royal Household. Lord Broughton
described him as “a handsome Calmuck-looking young fellow.”

[341] Prince Aloysius Joseph de Lichtenstein succeeded his father, Jean
Joseph, in 1836.

[342] George Villiers (1800–70), British Plenipotentiary at Madrid. In
1838 he became fourth Earl of Clarendon, was Lord Lieutenant of Ireland
in critical times, 1847–52, and afterwards, with great distinction,
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in 1853, again in 1865 and
in 1868. He was not a statesman of very original mind, or of great
initiative, but he was honest and prudent and highly regardful of his
country’s interests. His manners were delightful and his conversation
varied with anecdotes and punctuated by wit. He was one of the
principal attractions in London society during the first half of the
nineteenth century.

[343] This picture hangs in the Corridor at Windsor Castle. The
likenesses are excellent, but the artist has painted the Queen in a
white dress, whereas she wore black. The actual dress worn by the Queen
is now exhibited in the London Museum at Kensington.

[344] Matilda Susannah, daughter of Hon. Berkeley Paget, fifth son of
the first Earl of Uxbridge. She was a Maid of Honour to the Queen, and
died in 1871.

[345] Princess Marie of Orleans, daughter of King Louis Philippe. See
_ante_, p. 78.

[346] These rooms, partly remodelled and redecorated, are now occupied
by Queen Mary. Up to the death of Queen Victoria no material change
was made in them. In 1901 they were much altered, although the main
features remain as before.

[347] Sir Moses Montefiore (1784–1885), created a baronet in 1846.
His life, prolonged for over a hundred years, was one of flawless
generosity and personal kindness to the poor and afflicted of his own
race, especially in the eastern provinces of Russia and in Turkey.
He obtained consideration for poor Jews from the Russian and Turkish
Governments, and his seven pilgrimages to Jerusalem were all undertaken
with a view to improving the questionable lot of the Chosen People.

[348] Princess Augusta of Cambridge. See Vol. II., p. 150.

[349] Princess Mary, afterwards Duchess of Teck.

[350] Henry, fourth Duke. He had been so strenuous an opponent of the
Reform Bill, that, after its rejection, a mob set fire to Nottingham
Castle, his property. Mr. Gladstone was M.P. for Newark owing to the
Duke’s influence, which was withdrawn in 1845 when Mr. Gladstone
supported Peel on the Corn Laws.

[351] Robert Edward, second son of the second Earl of Kingston, born
1773. He was a Lieut.-General and was created Viscount Lorton in the
Irish peerage in 1806. He was a Representative Peer.

[352] See _ante_, p. 188.

[353] Second daughter of Lord Ilchester, afterwards wife of Sir Edward
Clarence Kerrison.

[354] Lady Emily Cowper. She married Lord Ashley, afterwards Earl of
Shaftesbury. She, her sister Lady Fanny, and her brothers Spencer
Cowper and William Cowper (afterwards Cowper-Temple), were children of
the fifth Earl Cowper, whose wife, a sister of Lord Melbourne, married,
secondly, Lord Palmerston in 1839. Spencer Cowper married the widow of
Count d’Orsay, the step-daughter of Lady Blessington.

[355] Edward Sugden (1781–1875). Afterwards Lord St. Leonards, and Lord
Chancellor in the Derby Administration of 1852. A dry but efficient
lawyer, an excellent interpreter of any man’s Will but his own, which
was disputed.

[356] Henry Hunt had been a great agitator, notably in the years
1816–20. He was elected for Preston in 1830.

[357] Lord Brougham, not having been included in the second
Administration of Lord Melbourne, was unsparing in his criticisms of
his old colleagues. As Lord Melbourne once pointed out in reply to
one of Brougham’s brilliant attacks, the reasons for excluding Lord
Brougham from any Ministry must have been very grave, if measured by
the obvious reasons for including him.

[358] George, third Lord Boston (1777–1869).

[359] Frederick, second Lord Boston (1749–1825).

[360] Daughter of the second Earl of Chichester; married in October
1837 to the Rev. and Hon. L. J. Barrington.

[361] Lady Melbourne was a daughter of Sir Ralph Milbanke, and William
Lamb was her favourite son. When Peniston, her eldest son, died, she
encouraged William to devote himself to politics and to abandon the Bar.

[362] The Canadian question was one of the most difficult of the
early years of the Queen’s reign. Upper and Lower Canada were totally
dissimilar in race, tradition, and natural position. Lower Canada was
peopled mainly by French Roman Catholics, Upper Canada by Scottish
Protestants, and the mode of Government in both was as cumbrous and
inappropriate as it could well be, and afforded unquestionable ground
for grievance on the part of the inhabitants. In 1836 a rebellion broke
out in the Lower Province headed by Papineau, who had been Speaker
of the Assembly. This was followed by an insurrection in the Upper
Province, which was quelled in a striking and almost quixotic manner
by Sir Francis Head, the Governor, who, dismissing all his regular
troops to the Lower Province, trusted to the people to put down the
malcontents, and succeeded. Lord Durham was sent out in 1838 as High
Commissioner and Governor-General. His report on the proper method
of administering the Colony is historical, and ultimately formed the
basis of settlement. His acts were not approved by the Whig Government
and were annulled by them. He anticipated his recall by resigning and
coming home before the end of 1838.

[363] Charles, second son of Lord Grey, the ex-Premier. He was Equerry
to the Queen, and had a year or two earlier defeated Disraeli at the
High Wycombe election. He became Private Secretary to Prince Albert and
later to the Queen. He spent all the years of his life in the Queen’s
service, and was always helpful, wise, and unbiassed in the advice he
tendered her. The present Earl Grey, Lady Victoria Dawnay, Lady Antrim,
and Lady Minto are his surviving children. Many good judges considered
his abilities of a higher order than those of his father.

[364] Lady Caroline Ponsonby, daughter of the third Earl of
Bessborough, a lady of eccentric mind and habits. She was thrown off
her mental and moral balance by her acquaintance with Lord Byron, not
perhaps so surprising as the fact that she never recovered either even
after Byron’s death.

[365] Lord Melbourne’s brother, afterwards Lord Beauvale, Ambassador
Extraordinary at Vienna. As a diplomatist he was irreproachable,
handsome, agreeable, and adroit. In private life he was not altogether
_sans reproche_. Without his brother William’s literary acquirements,
and with less sarcasm and pungent wit, he yet had a vigorous
understanding, much information, and no little capacity for affairs. At
sixty years of age, and in broken health, he married a very young lady,
the daughter of Count Maltzahn, the Prussian Minister at Vienna.

[366] Henry Richard, third Lord Holland of the 1762 creation, was
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. Under the auspices of his wife,
Holland House, Kensington, was for many years the Zoar of weary Whig
politicians. See _ante_, p. 101, note.

[367] Amelia, daughter of the Grand Duke of Oldenbourg, married to Otho
I., King of Greece.

[368] Uncle of the Emperor.

[369] Nicholas I., reigned 1826–55.

[370] Ferdinand I., born in 1793, succeeded his father, Francis I., in
1835. He was brother to Napoleon’s second wife, Marie Louise.

[371] Charles, fourth Earl of Harrington, married Maria, daughter of
Samuel Foote the actor.

[372] William, first Earl of Craven, married Louisa, an undistinguished
actress, daughter of John Brunton of Norwich.

[373] Edward, twelfth Earl of Derby, married Elizabeth Farren, a
Haymarket actress of considerable beauty and charm.

[374] Afterwards Field-Marshal and first Lord Seaton. He was one
of Wellington’s generals in the Peninsula and at Waterloo. He was
Lieutenant-Governor of Upper Canada, and on Lord Durham’s recall was
nominated to succeed him.

[375] Lord Francis Egerton was the second son of George Granville,
first Duke of Sutherland. The immense fortune of Francis, third and
last Duke of Bridgewater (the father of English inland navigation and,
in conjunction with Brindley, constructor of the canal which bears
his name) was devised to the first Duke of Sutherland for life, and
thereafter to Lord Francis, who on attaining possession assumed the
surname of Egerton, in lieu of Leveson-Gower. A “condition subsequent”
tending to divest the property in a certain event was decided to be
opposed to “public policy.” Lord Francis was created Earl of Ellesmere
in 1846.

[376] Lady Falkland. Amelia Fitzclarence, daughter of William IV. See
_ante_, p. 113.

[377] Edward Berkeley Portman, representative of an old Dorsetshire and
Somersetshire family, was created Baron Portman in 1837. In 1827 he
married Emma, third daughter of the Earl of Harewood, who was at this
time one of the Ladies of the Bedchamber to Queen Victoria.

[378] This high Constitutional doctrine was certain to meet with the
approval of a Whig like Lord Melbourne. It has been the secret of
ministerial responsibility and of executive power in the Constitution
of this country, and its working has been admired by many foreign
observers.

[379] Baron Alexander von Munchausen, a Hanoverian diplomatist, was
then about twenty-five. He was _not_ the hero of a celebrated romance.

[380] That the Queen always retained a sentiment for her dolls may
be realised from the care with which they were preserved. They are
exhibited in the London Museum at Kensington, arranged and ticketed
with the names given to them by Princess Victoria.

[381] Letitia, wife of Sir Hussey (afterwards Lord) Vivian. The child
Lalage married, in 1857, Henry Hyde Nugent Bankes, son of the Right
Hon. George Bankes.

[382] See _ante_, p. 73.

[383] Mr. (afterwards Rt. Hon.) John Arthur Roebuck. A Liberal “free
lance,” who earned the _sobriquet_ of “Tear-’em.” Lord John Russell had
brought in a Bill for suspending the Constitution of Canada, and Mr.
Roebuck, who was not at the time in Parliament, claimed to be heard at
the bar of both Houses as agent for the Lower Province. He made a very
able but bitter speech.

[384] Catherine, widow of the twelfth Earl of Desmond, died in 1604,
having survived her husband seventy years. There seems much doubt
about the principal dates of her life, _e.g._ those of her birth and
marriage, but she is _said_ to have attained the remarkable age of
140 years, and to have died by a fall from a cherry-tree. Sir Walter
Raleigh records that he knew her and that she “was married in Edward
IV.’s time.”

[385] Henry Brooke Parnell had been member for Maryborough in the
Irish House of Commons, and was now member for Dundee. He was made
Paymaster-General on that office being constituted in 1838. Afterwards
created Lord Congleton.

[386] The Duke never allowed political feeling to interfere with what
he considered public duty. As a politician he was a Tory; but as a
soldier he had no politics.

[387] Lord Ellenborough (1790–1871) was a son of the Chief Justice,
and sat in several Conservative Cabinets. He was Governor-General of
India in 1844, and recalled from his post by the directors of the East
India Company in opposition to the wish of the Cabinet, who at once
recommended him for an earldom. He was too imaginative and daring for
the post of Governor-General at this period of Indian administrative
history; but his memory was often revived in the person of a more
daring and more brilliant successor in that high office.

[388] Alexander, first Lord Ashburton, had been President of the Board
of Trade in the brief Peel Administration of 1834–5. He married Miss
Bingham of Philadelphia. See _ante_, p. 199.

[389] David William, third Earl of Mansfield (1777–1840).

[390] Charles William, fifth Earl (1786–1857).

[391] See _ante_, p. 261. Lady Francis was Harriet, eldest daughter of
Charles Greville, the father of the diarist.

[392] Stafford House was built by the Duke of York. It is Crown
property vested in the Commission of Woods and Forests. The present
(1912) Duke of Sutherland obtained an extension of the Crown lease a
few years ago.

[393] Charles Philip, fourth Earl of Hardwicke, had married Susan,
daughter of the first Lord Ravensworth. See _ante_, p. 84, n.

[394] _Tempora mutantur._

[395] At the opening of the Queen’s first Parliament in 1837 Lord
Leveson [afterwards Lord Granville and Foreign Secretary] had moved in
the House of Commons the address in reply to her speech, looking, wrote
Disraeli, himself also a new member, “like a child.” Lord Leveson was
twenty-two years old, and the Queen had met him a few years earlier
at Christ Church. See _ante_, p. 60. His mother, Lady Granville, was
Henrietta, daughter of the fifth Duke of Devonshire.

[396] Lady Lilford was a daughter of Lord and Lady Holland.

[397] Charles Christopher, first Lord Cottenham. On Lord Melbourne
forming his second Ministry, the Great Seal was not offered to
Brougham, but at first put into Commission. Pepys, Master of the Rolls,
was one of the Commissioners, and became a little later Chancellor.

[398] William Henry, second Earl of Dunraven (1782–1850).

[399] See _ante_, p. 278.

[400] She was Louisa Elizabeth, daughter of Lord Grey the ex-Premier,
mother of the “Master Lambton” of Lawrence’s portrait, who died, aged
fourteen, and grandmother of the present Earl of Durham, K.G.

[401] King Otho had accepted the throne of Greece in October 1832, and
ascended it three months later. This was done in virtue of a request
from Greece to Great Britain, France, and Russia.

[402] Mahmud II., Sultan (1808–39), succeeded in the latter year by
Abdul-Medjid.

[403] Of some fame, but little merit. He managed the stables of George
IV., when Prince of Wales.

[404] This rule was followed with invariable and prudent strictness
by the Queen throughout her reign. She was never swayed in action by
gossip, however subtle or ill-natured—she required proof; and this rule
governed her decision in regard to disputes as to the eligibility of
all persons to be invited to Court.

[405] Lord Howe’s attitude was one of hostility to the Government. See
_ante_, p. 113.

[406] George Bartley (died in 1858), a Shakespearean actor who could
play Orlando as well as Falstaff. For a time stage-manager at Covent
Garden.

[407] Drinkwater Meadows (1799–1869), an excellent performer in comedy
of the more eccentric type.

[408] Edgar William Elton (1794–1843) created this part of Beauséant;
he also played Romeo, and (with much success) Edgar in _Lear_.

[409] The disposal of these prisoners was a difficult matter which
became acute in the _interregnum_ between the departure of Lord Gosford
and the arrival of Lord Durham. Sir John Colborne postponed a decision
of the matter, and ultimately the prisoners were dealt with according
to the gravity of the case, some being merely bound over, others
deported to Bermuda.

[410] Great complaints were being made of the cruelty of the Jamaica
planters to their negro apprentices, and Brougham had put himself
at the head of an agitation in favour of immediate emancipation.
Accordingly the Government introduced a Bill regulating the hours
of labour, erecting arbitration tribunals for appraising the value
of apprentices desiring a discharge, and forbidding the whipping or
cutting the hair of female apprentices, or their being placed on a
treadmill, or in the chair of a penal gang.

[411] Street riots had broken out at Lisbon, but the Queen behaved
with great courage, and, after Costa Cabral had been installed as
Civil Governor of the city, the insurgent forces were dispersed. The
occurrence of Donna Maria’s nineteenth birthday on 4th April was marked
by an amnesty, purporting to blot out the revolutionary actions of the
last eighteen months.

[412] John, second Marquess and fifth Earl of Breadalbane, F.R.S.
(1796–1862).

[413] A distinguished Peninsular officer, who had commanded the
Portuguese division at Vittoria; Commander-in-chief at Bombay 1825–9.

[414] John, afterwards eleventh Earl of Westmorland, son of John, tenth
Earl and Sarah Anne his wife, only daughter and heir of Robert Child of
Osterley Park. His sister, Lady Jersey (who died in 1867), succeeded to
the banker’s great fortune. See _ante_, p. 149.

[415] Major-General Sir A. Dickson, R.A., had been Superintendent of
Artillery Operations in the Peninsula, and fought at Waterloo, and was
Director-General of the Field-train Department.

[416] Vice-Admiral Sir Thomas Hardy (1769–1839), Captain of the
_Victory_ at Trafalgar. In 1830 he was First Sea Lord, and, later,
Governor of Greenwich Hospital, a post he was holding at this time.

[417] Lord Minto. See _ante_, p. 200.

[418] Lord Howick. See _ante_, p. 200.

[419] “Your Majesty’s most affectionate Friend, Aunt, and Subject,
Adelaide.”

[420] Lord Melbourne’s sister, afterwards Lady Palmerston. See p. 242.

[421] Dietz had been Governor to Prince Ferdinand, and accompanied him
to Portugal, where he took a considerable part in political affairs.

[422] George, Lord Byron, succeeded his cousin the poet in 1824. He was
an extra Lord-in-waiting to the Queen.

[423] It was altered by King Edward in 1905, and the Prime Minister now
takes rank immediately after the Archbishop of York.

[424] Whig M.P. for West Riding of Yorkshire.

[425] Joseph Pease, M.P. for South Durham, had been a pioneer of
railway construction, and had assisted his father in forming (upon the
persuasion of George Stephenson) the Stockton and Darlington line.

[426] Sir George Grey of Falloden, Northumberland, second Baronet
(1799–1882), Under-Secretary for the Colonies. Appointed Judge
Advocate-General in 1839, and in 1846 Home Secretary under Lord John
Russell, an office which he held for nearly twenty years. He was a
man of fine presence and great social charm. His high moral qualities
and freedom from personal ambition gained for him the esteem of both
political parties and the confidence of his countrymen. He has been
worthily succeeded in his title and all else by his grandson, Sir
Edward Grey, K.G.

[427] This brilliant advocate, who died at the age of forty-seven, had
been Peel’s Solicitor-General, and became Attorney-General in 1841. He
appeared for Norton in his action for _crim. con._ against Melbourne,
without any success, for the charge was triumphantly refuted.

[428] See _ante_, p. 149.

[429] The Hon. F. G. Byng, sometime Gentleman Usher of the Privy
Chamber.

[430] He would have been 50 on January 22, 1838.

[431] She was an illegitimate daughter of Edward Walpole (second son
of Sir Robert) by Mary Clement, a sempstress in Pall Mall. Their two
other daughters became Countess of Albemarle and Countess of Dysart
respectively.

[432] Married her cousin George, seventh Earl Waldegrave.

[433] Wife of George, second Duke of Grafton.

[434] Father of the Admiral, Sir Beauchamp Seymour, Lord Alcester.

[435] To William, second Earl, when Lord Cavendish.

[436] Holland House was built by Sir Walter Cope in 1607. His daughter
and co-heiress married Henry Rich, first Earl of Holland.

[437] Wife of James Howard, afterwards third Earl of Malmesbury.

[438] Sir William Knighton had been physician to George IV., when
Prince of Wales, and was private secretary and Keeper of his Privy
Purse when King. The King employed him in various confidential matters.

[439] Queen Victoria in 1872 wrote of Louis as “the former faithful and
devoted friend of Princess Charlotte—beloved and respected by all who
knew her—and who doted on the little Princess who was too much an idol
in the House. This dear old lady was visited by every one, and was the
only really devoted attendant of the poor Princess, whose governesses
paid little real attention to her, and who never left her, and was with
her when she died.” See p. 62.

[440] Marshal Soult, Duke of Dalmatia, was appointed Ambassador of
the King of the French at Queen Victoria’s Coronation. He had been
Wellington’s antagonist in the Peninsula, and this added to his
popularity with the masses of the London streets.

[441] General Sir Frederick Cavendish Ponsonby, K.C.B., G.C.M.G.,
second son of the third Earl of Bessborough, and brother of Lady
Caroline Lamb. He was the father of the late Sir Henry Ponsonby, Queen
Victoria’s private secretary and Keeper of her Privy Purse.

[442] Lady Charlotte Campbell, daughter of the fifth Duke of Argyll,
married, first, Colonel Campbell, and second, Rev. E. J. Bury; was
Lady-in-Waiting to Caroline, Princess of Wales. She was a friend and
patroness of Sir W. Scott, and wrote several novels. In 1838 appeared
_A Diary illustrative of the Times of George IV._, which was attributed
to her by Lord Brougham—a charge which was never denied. The work was
severely criticised.

[443] Francis Charles, third Marquess (1777–1842), the “Lord Monmouth”
of _Coningsby_. His son, here called Lord Yarmouth, succeeded him and
died unmarried in 1870. The fourth Marquess was the founder of the
magnificent collections now the property of the nation at Hertford
House.

[444] Her paternity was in dispute between the Duke of Queensberry and
George Selwyn.

[445] Lord Yarmouth, afterwards fourth Marquess, and his brother Lord
Henry Seymour always lived in Paris. Lord Hertford possessed a fine
apartment at the corner of the Rue Lafite and a country place called
“Bagatelle” in the Bois de Boulogne. Subsequently they passed to Sir
R. Wallace and later to Sir John Murray Scott. Bagatelle is now the
property of the Municipality of Paris.

[446] Hortense Eugenie Claire, daughter of Duc de Bassano, Minister
of Napoleon I., married 1833 to Francis Baring, afterwards third Lord
Ashburton.

[447] Comte de Flahaut, son of Comtesse de Flahaut Adele, who was
afterwards Baronne de Souza, had once been French Ambassador in London,
as Sebastiani now was, but there was a competition between Flahaut and
Soult as to which should be specially appointed to represent the King
of the French at the Coronation. His likeness to Napoleon III. was
considered remarkable and significant.

[448] Wife of Major-General Sir Guy Campbell, Bart., and daughter of
Lord Edward Fitzgerald and his wife Pamela, daughter of Madame de
Genlis.

[449] Afterwards George IV.

[450] Garth was an eminent physician in the time of William III. and
Queen Anne. He wrote occasional verses fluently, and his poem “The
Dispensary” had a great vogue for fifty years.

[451] Elizabeth, wife of Peregrine, third Duke of Ancaster.

[452] Georgiana, daughter of the third Duke of Ancaster, and widow of
the first Marquess of Cholmondeley.

[453] Priscilla, also daughter of the third Duke of Ancaster. On the
death of their brother unmarried, the barony of Willoughby de Eresby
fell into abeyance between the sisters, which was terminated by the
Crown in favour of Priscilla, the elder, in 1780.

[454] The barony of Fauconberg, of an earlier creation, was revived in
1903 in favour of the present (1912) Countess of Yarborough, daughter
and co-heir of the twelfth Lord Conyers.

[455] Cromwell’s son-in-law was promoted from Viscount to be Earl
Fauconberg. He left no child. His great-nephew was again created Earl,
and married a sister of Peniston, first Viscount Melbourne. Their
daughters married as follows: Lady Charlotte Bellasyse to Thomas Edward
Wynn, Anne to Sir George Wombwell, Elizabeth successively to the Duke
of Norfolk and Lord Lucan.

[456] Henry Fox (afterwards fourth and last Lord Holland) married Lady
Augusta Coventry; at her death in 1889, Holland House, Kensington,
became the property of Lord Ilchester.

[457] 21st December, 1785.

[458] Daniel Maclise (1806–70). His first success was a sketch of Sir
Walter Scott drawn by him unobserved. His best-known works are the two
cartoons in the Royal Gallery of the House of Lords. He was elected to
the Royal Academy in 1840.

[459] John, sixteenth Earl of Shrewsbury, Premier Earl of England. This
question of the oath to be taken by Roman Catholic peers and members
had been repeatedly brought forward by the Bishop of Exeter. It pledged
the jurant to do nothing to “disturb or weaken the Protestant Religion
or Protestant Government, or to subvert the Church establishment.” A
gentleman wrote to the Bishop to say that he could not take the oath,
as his wish was to upset the Church establishment, and he was therefore
excluded from Parliament. See _ante_, p. 56.

[460] Prince George of Cambridge. See _ante_, p. 77.

[461] Eldest son of the third Earl of Roden, and died in his father’s
lifetime. In 1841 he married Lady Fanny Cowper. See _ante_, p. 188.

[462] Grandson of the Duke of Norfolk. See _ante_, p. 190.

[463] Afterwards fourth Earl of Radnor. See _ante_, p. 60.

[464] Edward Vernon, fourth Lord Suffield (1813–53).

[465] Georgiana, Lady Seymour, Queen of Beauty at the Eglinton
Tournament. One of the Sheridan sisters. See _ante_, p. 192.

[466] Daughter of Mr. Canning, the Prime Minister, and wife of the
first Marquess of Clanricarde. See Vol. II. pp. 75 and 261.

[467] Daughter of the second Earl de Grey, K.G., and sister of Lady
Cowper. She was married to Mr. Henry Vyner.

[468] Daughter of G. G. Vernon Harcourt, M.P. Lord Norreys succeeded in
1854 to the earldom of Abingdon. See _ante_, p. 132.

[469] Daughter of the eleventh Earl of Pembroke, afterwards wife of
Viscount de Vesci. See _ante_, p. 77.

[470] Sister of Lady Emma Herbert, and wife of the third Earl of
Clanwilliam.

[471] Daughter of the first Earl of Verulam. She married Lord
Folkestone (see preceding page) in 1840. See _ante_, p. 189.

[472] Sister of Lord Jocelyn (see preceding page) and wife of the sixth
Viscount Powerscourt.

[473] Daughter of the third Viscount Hawarden.

[474] Clementina, sister of the fourteenth Lord Elphinstone, afterwards
wife of the fourth Viscount Hawarden.

[475] Daughter of Lord Anglesey, and sister of Lord Uxbridge. She
married in 1851 Frederick, son of the third Earl Cadogan.

[476] Sir Thomas Acland, tenth Bart.

[477] Alexander, tenth Duke (1767–1852).

[478] Edward Adolphus, eleventh Duke. See _ante_, p. 68.

[479] James, sixth Duke (1816–1879).

[480] To rescind the Irish Church resolution of 1835.

[481] Charles William, third Marquess, half-brother of the eminent
statesman, better remembered as Lord Castlereagh. Lord Londonderry was
a soldier and diplomatist.

[482] George O’Brien, third Earl of Egremont, died unmarried in
November 1837, aged eighty-six. Lady Munster was his illegitimate
daughter, but his estates in Sussex and Cumberland were devised to
other adopted heirs.

[483] An extreme instance of this partiality is described in Warren’s
_Ten Thousand a Year_. In 1868 the jurisdiction to decide disputed
elections was transferred to the Court of Common Pleas.

[484] John Thomas, first and only Earl of Redesdale (1805–86), Chairman
of Committees in the House of Lords, 1851–86. Lord Redesdale was one
of the last men in England who wore habitually in the daytime the
old-fashioned “tail-coat.”

[485] Lady Catharine was daughter of the third Earl of Radnor, and
Victor was her fifth son. See _ante_, p. 219.

[486] There is a portrait of the Queen by John Partridge in King
George’s room at Buckingham Palace showing the hair done in this
fashion.

[487] Charles, second Viscount Townshend, K.G., married Dorothy, sister
of Sir Robert Walpole. Townshend was President of the Council 1720,
and afterwards Secretary of State. There was jealousy between the
brothers-in-law, and Horace Walpole sarcastically observed that things
went well or ill according as the style of the firm was _Townshend and
Walpole_ or _Walpole and Townshend_.

[488] Henry Francis, fourteenth Baron Teynham (1768–1842).

[489] At the festival of the 14th July, 1790, held in the Champ de Mars
he officiated at the altar. It was his last celebration of the Mass.

[490] Prince George of Cambridge.

[491] Sixth son of Lord Anglesey. He was second in command, to Lord
Cardigan, of the Light Cavalry Brigade in the Crimea; he subsequently
became Inspector of Cavalry, and later M.P. for Beaumaris.

[492] Eldest son of the fifth Earl de la Warr. See _ante_, p. 60.

[493] Afterwards sixth Earl Fitzwilliam, K.G., and A.D.C. to the Queen.

[494] She was younger daughter of the second Earl Talbot, and wife of
the seventh Marquess of Lothian.

[495] Prince George, born 1819, succeeded his father on the throne of
Hanover in 1851. He ultimately suffered from total blindness, caused by
swinging a bunch of keys attached to a chain, that struck accidentally
one of his eyes. He sided with Austria in 1866 against Prussia, and
after Sadowa his kingdom was annexed to Prussia by decree. King George
was a Knight of the Garter and Duke of Cumberland. He was a Prince of
amiable disposition and simple manners. At his death he was succeeded
in the dukedom by his eldest son, who married the younger sister of
Queen Alexandra.

[496] According to the Royal Marriages Act, none of the Royal Family
can marry without the Sovereign’s consent. See _post_, p. 390.

[497] Lord Mulgrave and Lord Dundas were created respectively Marquis
of Normanby and Earl of Zetland, but Lord Barham was not made Earl of
Gainsborough till 1841.

[498] Afterwards wife of the eighth Earl of Elgin, Viceroy of India.

[499] Son of Lord Duncannon, and grandson of the Earl of Bessborough.

[500] Hon. Charles Augustus Murray. See Vol. II., p. 94.

[501] _I.e._, Mutiny at the Nore, May 1797.

[502] This is now proved not to have been the case. He suffered from
infantile paralysis of one leg which was badly treated and developed
into permanent lameness. Miss Chaworth’s words, which were either
overheard by or repeated to Byron, were, “Do you think I could care
anything for that lame boy?” He did see her on more than one occasion
in later years.

[503] Her grand-uncle was killed as described by William, fifth Lord
Byron, in 1765.

[504] Dr. Goodall. See _ante_, p. 119.

[505] The Head Master. See _ante_, p. 119.

[506] She was Jane, daughter of the second Marquess Cornwallis and wife
of the third Lord Braybrooke.

[507] Son of Duke Charles Bernard and Duchess Ida (a sister of Queen
Adelaide). Prince Edward was A.D.C. to Lord Raglan in the Crimea, and
ultimately Commander of the Forces in Ireland.

[508] Charles Wood (afterwards Lord Halifax). At this time Secretary to
the Admiralty. See _ante_, p. 99.

[509] These portraits were among those which by custom were presented
to the Headmaster of Eton by certain distinguished Etonians on leaving
school. The gift of a portrait was usually made by request. A boy was
considered honoured by being asked to leave his portrait to the school.
The custom lapsed about forty years since. This collection was recently
overhauled by Mr. Lionel Cust. It is now in fine order, carefully
arranged in the Provost’s Lodge at Eton. The portraits have been
engraved and collected in the form of a sumptuous volume.

[510] This may be the portrait now in the Corridor at Windsor Castle.

[511] W. F. Chambers, Physician-in-Ordinary to King William and Queen
Adelaide, and afterwards to Queen Victoria and the Duchess of Kent.

[512] Sir Michael O’Loghlen did not, however, leave the Rolls. The new
Chief Baron was Mr. Stephen Woulfe, the Irish Attorney-General.

[513] She married Lord Sandwich (see p. 191) in the following September.

[514] Lady Adelaide Paget (afterwards Lady Adelaide Cadogan). See
_ante_, p. 319.

[515] The Marriage Act of 1835 made null and void all marriages within
the prohibited degrees of consanguinity or affinity. Before they had
only been voidable.

[516] In this case the two wives were _half_ sisters, daughters of the
Duke of Wellington’s sister by different husbands.

[517] The Prince Consort was strongly in favour of legalising these
marriages, and King Edward (then Prince of Wales) always voted in
favour of the Bills introduced for the purpose of amending the law.

[518] This custom has now unfortunately fallen into disuse.

[519] No one has a prescriptive or _ex officio_ right to wear the
“Windsor uniform.” It is an honour conferred personally by the
Sovereign. Of recent Prime Ministers, this privilege has been enjoyed
by Lord Salisbury, Lord Rosebery, and Mr. Balfour.

[520] Sunderland’s Ministry in 1718 introduced a measure to limit the
creation of peers, the object being to prevent the Prince of Wales
(when King) from swamping the Lords with his partisans. Walpole spoke
and wrote vigorously against the Bill, and organised the opposition
to it in anticipation of the time when it should reach the Commons.
He succeeded in altering the public attitude to the Bill, and it was
rejected by a large majority.

[521] After this date, that is to say, the early part of the Queen’s
reign, the Order of the Bath began to be somewhat neglected. It was
partly owing to the creation of new Orders, such as the Star of India
and the St. Michael and George. It has, however, recently been ordained
by King George V. that the annual service for the Order of the Bath in
Westminster Abbey shall be revived, and the banners and shields of the
Knights Grand Cross be affixed to their stalls in Henry VIIth.’s chapel.

[522] See _ante_, p. 205.

[523] Sir Peter King, who became Lord Chancellor, was created Lord
King of Ockham in 1725. The present baron (eighth holder of the title)
had married in 1835, Ada, the only child of Lord Byron. Lord King now
became Earl of Lovelace.

[524] Eldest son of the Duke of Leeds, who died in the following month.

[525] In 1847, when the offer was repeated, Lord Melbourne wrote to the
Queen that “for a long time he had found himself much straitened in his
circumstances” and that “he knows that the expense of accepting the
ribbon amounts to £1,000, and there has been of late years no period at
which it would not have been seriously inconvenient to him to pay down
such a sum.”

[526] With the exception of Lord Beaconsfield and Lord Palmerston, no
Prime Minister, as such, has accepted the Garter in recent times.

[527] Sir Sotherton Peckham-Micklethwait, of Iridge Place, Sussex.
Created a baronet “for a personal service rendered to Her Majesty and
the Duchess of Kent at St. Leonards in Nov. 1834.” See _ante_, p. 104.

[528] Clarenceux King-of-Arms, afterwards Garter.

[529] Edward Maltby (1770–1859), Bishop of Durham, to which he had been
recently translated from Chichester.

[530] The ceremonial as described by the Queen does not compare
favourably with those of King Edward or King George, when hardly
a mistake was made by any of those officiating. The ritual at the
Coronation of King Edward was especially difficult, owing to the age
and infirmities of Archbishop Temple.

[531] Lord Surrey was son and heir of the Earl Marshal, the twelfth
Duke of Norfolk, whom he succeeded in 1842. He married Charlotte
Sophia, daughter of the first Duke of Sutherland.

[532] The Litany was omitted at the Coronation of King Edward VII., and
reintroduced at the Coronation of King George V.

[533] The robe is exhibited in the London Museum at Kensington Palace.

[534] Second son of Louis Philippe. He was offered two thrones, Belgium
in 1831 and Greece in 1832, but declined both. See _ante_, p. 130.

[535] This has been remedied by the recent custom of giving a
Viscountcy to any Secretary of State who is raised to the Peerage.

[536] Nicholas, third Baron Audley by writ and tenth by tenure, fought
in the wars with France 1359 and 1372. His sister Joan married Sir John
Tuchet, killed at Rochelle, 1371, and her grandson succeeded to the
title. On the death, in 1872, of the twenty-first Baron (son of George
Edward Thicknesse Touchet, twentieth Baron, whom the Queen and Lord
Melbourne were discussing), the barony fell into abeyance between his
daughters.

[537] Eldest son of the Duke of Sutherland, and nine years old. He
succeeded his father as third Duke in 1861.

[538] Eldest son of Lord Conyngham, and thirteen years old. Succeeded
as third Marquess in 1876, and died in 1882.

[539] Eldest son of Lord Uxbridge, seventeen years old. Died in 1880.

[540] This was certainly an error of judgment on the part of Lord
Melbourne. The Queen’s appearance on horseback, in the uniform still to
be seen in the London Museum at Kensington Palace, was extraordinarily
fascinating, and added greatly to the interest of any Review at which
she appeared.

[541] The Queen evidently did not grasp a name unfamiliar to her.
The ratification of the Treaty of Amiens was sent over by Napoleon
in charge of Colonel Lauriston, his A.D.C. When this officer left
the house of M. Otto in London to deliver his credentials to Lord
Hawkesbury, the scene occurred which the Queen here describes. The
carriage was accompanied to Downing Street by a guard of honour of the
Household Cavalry.

[542] Afterwards first Baron Lyons of Christchurch (1790–1858). At
this time Minister Plenipotentiary at Athens. In 1853, war with Russia
being imminent, he was appointed second in command of the fleet in the
Mediterranean, and displayed boldness and initiative in the attack on
the sea defences of Sebastopol. He became Commander-in-Chief in 1855,
and, on the termination of the war, a Peer.

[543] The dukedom of Montagu, created in 1766, become extinct at the
death of the first Duke in 1790.

[544] In later years Edward Geoffrey, fourteenth Earl of Derby, three
times Prime Minister, was reported to have refused a dukedom, on the
ground that he would not exchange his Earl’s coronet, which dated from
the fifteenth century, for a set of new strawberry leaves.

[545] Lord Melbourne’s private secretary. He afterwards served Prince
Albert in a similar capacity. See Vol. II. p. 37.

[546] He was for a time _Attaché_ to the British Embassy in Paris, and
died in 1847.

[547] A lovely portrait of her by Gainsborough is the property of Lord
Rothschild at Tring Park.

[548] Lord Seymour bore, by courtesy, the only other title of his
father, the Duke of Somerset. So there was not a third title available
for the grandson, as is the case in other families of ducal rank.

[549] Thomas Sheridan, actor and lecturer on elocution. Published in
1780 a General Dictionary of the English Language with a special view
to teaching pronunciation. A work of phonetic rather than philological
value.

[550] Eldest surviving son of the third Marquess of Lansdowne, and
afterwards fourth Marquess. The elder brother (Lord Kerry) had died
without male issue.

[551] Aunt of Lord Shelburne. She was a daughter of the fourth Earl of
Bessborough.

[552] Lord Shelburne married in 1840 Lady Georgina Herbert, daughter
of the eleventh Earl of Pembroke. She died in the following year. In
1843 he married the Hon. Emily Elphinstone-de-Flahaut, in her own right
Baroness Nairne.

[553] Formerly Lady Cavendish. Her husband had succeeded as second Earl
of Burlington in 1834. See _ante_, p. 53. She died in 1840.

[554] George, fifth Earl of Essex (1757–1839).

[555] Ladies of unblemished character, retired from the stage, were
permitted to appear at Court.

[556] Charles, Earl Grey, the ex-Prime Minister, who rarely came to
town at this period of his life, and must have been a novelty for the
Queen.

[557] Count Stroganoff was the special representative of the Czar at
the Coronation.

[558] His son who died, aged four years, in 1783.

[559] Lady Sarah Lennox, who was a daughter of the second Duke of
Richmond, married first, Sir Thomas Charles Bunbury, secondly the Hon.
George Napier. George III. was undoubtedly much attracted by this
lady. By her second marriage she became the “Mother of the Napiers,” a
designation almost as famous in the British history of the Napoleonic
Wars as the “Mother of the Gracchi” in Republican Rome.

[560] Daughters of John Gunning, of Castle Coote. See _ante_, p. 215.

[561] Lord Alfred Paget. See _ante_, p. 226.

[562] See _ante_, p. 310.

[563] Mehemet Ali, the Pasha, having announced his intention to pay no
more tribute to the Porte (an action equivalent to a declaration of
independence), great efforts were made by the representatives of the
Powers to induce him to reconsider his decision.

[564] The French Ambassador in London.

[565] Baron Heinrich von Bülow, many years Prussian representative in
London, afterwards Prussian Minister for Foreign Affairs.

[566] The adjustment of the debt between Holland and Belgium.

[567] The equestrian statue of the Duke of Wellington stood on the arch
at Hyde Park Corner from 1846 to 1883. It excited much ridicule at the
time of its erection. There was a question of its removal, but the Duke
of Wellington strongly opposed the suggestion. He said that he never
wished his statue to be put upon the Arch, but once there, there it
should remain. It was removed nearly forty years later to Aldershot.
Recently some prancing horses and a chariot have taken the place of old
Copenhagen and the Duke.

[568] As an illustration of the vagaries of “taste” in Art, it may be
mentioned that this statue is now considered one of the most successful
in London.

[569] This refers to the reading by the Queen of her “Speech.”

[570] All this paragraph refers to the disputes between Belgium and
Holland over their respective financial responsibilities.

[571] Afterwards Sir John MacNeill. He had been sent as Envoy to
Teheran to try to prevent the Shah attacking the Afghans.

[572] Lord Melbourne was a “low Churchman and an Erastian,” like so
many of the Whigs of that day.

[573] This love of straight dealing and dislike of flattery were
lifelong characteristics of the Queen.

[574] In 1815 Belgium and Holland were, by the action of the European
Powers at the Congress of Vienna, united into one Kingdom. This led to
constant friction and even to open hostilities between the two nations,
and in 1831 a Conference of the Powers decreed a dissolution of the
Union, and drew up a Treaty, but the division of territory again led
to a war which is chiefly notable for the siege of Antwerp in 1832. In
1838 Holland announced for the first time her readiness to accede to
the provisions of the Treaty of 1832. The Belgians claimed that this
acquiescence came too late, but under pressure of the Powers she had
in the end to give her assent. During this excitement the failure of
the Bank of Brussels produced a financial crisis which caused great
distress among the people.

[575] Count von Senfft Pilsach was Austrian Minister at The Hague, and
came to England in 1838 as Austrian Plenipotentiary at the Conference
which took place in London to settle the Separation of Holland and
Belgium. He signed the Treaty of 1839 on behalf of Austria.

[576] Member for Oxford University. He had displaced Sir Robert Peel at
the time of the Tory split on Catholic Emancipation.

[577] This was common Whig doctrine up to the Crimean War, when the
unreadiness of the Military Authorities caused a reaction, which
indirectly led to the fall of the Aberdeen Government.

[578] Wife of Warren Hastings.

[579] Melbourne House stood on the site of the Albany. See Vol. II., p.
96.

[580] In 1771 the Duke of Cumberland secretly married Anne, daughter
of Lord Irnham (afterwards Earl of Carhampton) and widow of Andrew
Horton. Her brother was Colonel Luttrell, the opponent of Wilkes. Not
long afterwards, the Duke of Gloucester made public the fact of his
marriage to the Dowager Countess Waldegrave. These two marriages led
to the passing of the Royal Marriage Act, which governs (with certain
exceptions) the marriages of all descendants of George II. See _ante_,
p. 333, and Vol. II., p. 43.

[581] Lord Melbourne modified this opinion next day.

[582] Partly in consequence of his intrigues with the Prince of Wales
against Pitt in the matter of the Regency Bill.

[583] Brownlow North, Bishop successively of Lichfield, Worcester, and
Winchester.

[584] See note, _post_, p. 397.

[585] Mary, daughter of the first Viscount Galway, married, as his
second wife, Edmund, seventh Earl of Cork. She died in 1840.

[586] _Remarks on an Article for the “Edinburgh Review” on the Times
of George III. and George IV._, by General Sir Herbert Taylor, who had
been Secretary successively to the Duke of York, George III., Queen
Charlotte, and William IV.

[587] _A Diary illustrative of the Times of George IV._, published in
1838. See _ante_, p. 310.

[588] Lady Anne Hamilton was a lady-in-waiting of Caroline, wife of
George IV., whom she accompanied to England in 1820. _The Secret
History of the Court_ was published without her name, but the
authorship was never disputed.

[589] Lord Guilford was the son of Lord North, George III.’s Minister,
and his sister, here mentioned, was Lady Charlotte Lindsay, wife of
Lieut.-Col. Hon. John Lindsay. See _ante_, p. 392.

[590] James Kenney (1780–1849), a successful dramatist. He was the
original Jeremy Diddler in his own _Raising the Wind_, when it was
acted by amateurs. The play was subsequently performed at Covent Garden.

[591] Granville Penn (1761–1844), grandson of William Penn, the founder
of Pennsylvania.

[592] Lady Emmeline Wortley, daughter of the fifth Duke of Rutland,
wife of Charles Stuart Wortley. Her daughter, Victoria, goddaughter
of the Duchess of Kent, afterwards Lady Welby-Gregory, was sometime a
maid-of-honour to the Queen.

[593] Granville, Earl Gower (1721–1803), had sat for Westminster before
his accession to the Peerage. Thereafter he was Lord Privy Seal, Lord
Chamberlain and President of the Council. He was created Marquess
of Stafford, and K.G. He married Lady Louisa Egerton, daughter and
co-heiress of Scrope, first Duke of Bridgwater.




                          Transcriber’s Notes:

  • Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).
  • Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIRLHOOD OF QUEEN VICTORIA, VOL. 1 (OF 2) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


