The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Norwich Directory [1802]
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Norwich Directory [1802]

Author: Thomas Peck

Release date: January 19, 2014 [eBook #44709]

Language: English

Credits: Transcribed from the 1802 Thomas Peck edition by David Price. Many thanks to Norfolk and Norwich Millennium Library, UK, for kindly allowing their copy to be used for this transcription


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NORWICH DIRECTORY [1802] ***


Transcribed from the 1802 Thomas Peck edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org.  Many thanks to Norfolk and Norwich Millennium Library,
UK, for kindly allowing their copy to be used for this transcription.





                                   THE
                           _Norwich Directory_;


                                CONTAINING

         An Alphabetical List of the Principal Inhabitants, their
                      Address, Profession, or Trade.

                               _A CONCISE_
                           HISTORY of NORWICH;

        _Pointing out the most remarkable Places in it worthy the_
                        _Attention of Strangers_.

                        WITH THE FOLLOWING TABLES:

Streets, lanes, markets, churches, meeting-house, and public buildings.
Court of aldermen, sheriffs, common-council, city officers, and
committees.  The bishop’s, dean and chapter’s, excise, stamp, and post
office.  Court of Request, Hospitals, treasurers, and court of guardians.
Bankers, physicians, surgeons, attorneys, Saturday merchants, &c.  Inns,
coffee-houses, coaches, waggons, carriers.  Lodges of free masons.  Fairs
in Norfolk.  Boarding schools, boarding and lodging houses, &c.  The
population of Norwich.  London and Hull traders, and pack-ships from
Yarmouth.

                            TO WHICH IS ADDED,

                 A RETROSPECT of the PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS,

            _Proposed by a Committee formed for that purpose_.

                             WITH AN ENGRAVED
                  _PLAN of the CITY_, _with REFERENCES_.

                                * * * * *

                              BY THOMAS PECK

                                * * * * *

                                 Norwich

          PRINTED AND SOLD BY J. PAYNE, BOOKSELLER, 22, MARKET-
                                  PLACE.




DEDICATION


                     _To Jeremiah Ives_, _jun. Esq._

_SIR_,

_The High Office of Mayor of this City_, _so honourably filled by
yourself_, _claims the respectful acknowledgement of the Publisher of
this work_, _who is happy to receive permission of dedicating to you this
publication_; _and is_, _with all due respect_,

                                                       _Your very Obliged_
                                                   _and Obedient Servant_,
                                                            _THOMAS PECK_.




INTRODUCTION.


The difficulty of finding the precise Address of the Inhabitants of so
populous a city as Norwich, the general utility of a Directory, and the
spirit of Public Improvement which has of late appeared, have, at the
present period, rendered this publication peculiarly necessary.

The contents are fully expressed in the title-page, the arrangement is
adapted to every capacity, and will be found to answer every useful
purpose.

The houses in each street are all regularly numbered, beginning on the
right hand, and returning on the left, with a few exceptions for the sake
of convenience.

The boards, with the names of the streets, lanes, and thorough-fares,
which are now correctly painting, will be put up at the corner, or
entrance of each; and the whole will be completed as soon as possible.

It is with the greatest pleasure we review the many alterations for
public convenience which have been recently made: in particular—

The Reservoir in Chapel-field, which, by the aid of a steam-engine, is
always filled, and supplies the highest parts of the city with water.

The taking down of Brazen-doors, St. Stephen’s, St. Giles’, St.
Benedict’s, St. Augustine’s, Pockthorpe, Bishop, and King-street Gates;
thereby admitting a current of salubrious air; and if such parts of the
wall round as are not built against were to be removed, it would be still
more complete.

The Paving of the Gentlemen’s Walk with Scotch granate.

The taking down of the cumbrous Weigh-house in the Hay-market, which
ought now to bear another title, and erecting a house for the purpose on
the Castle-Dykes, with an elegant engine, which acts with a steel-yard
under ground, and the carriage placed on the level above.

The widening of the street, now Orford-street, leading from Hog-hill to
the Castle-dykes.

The opening from off the Castle-meadow into King-street.

The levelling of the old houses at the back of Messrs. Gurney’s, at the
foot of the Castle hill.

The new Flour Mill, worked by steam, which is erected, by subscription,
near Black Friar’s Bridge, for better supplying the city with flour.

And the new Horse Barracks, without Pockthorpe.

Not to mention the superior appearance which the Shops in the
Market-place, London-lane, and other parts of the city, now assume.

We have authority to say, that, the two Old Workhouses being in a ruinous
state, it is the intention of the Court of Guardians to apply to
Parliament for an Act to enable them to build One New and Complete
Workhouse—the spot fixed on is the Gilden-croft.

Much has been done under the gloomy aspect of War; but from the
establishment of Peace, we ardently hope to see our native Commerce
revived, every necessary improvement carried into effect, and the
splendour of our ancient city equal to its opulence.

                      [Picture: Decorative divider]

 _We here present our Readers with a Retrospect of the_ PROPOSED _Public
                              Improvements_.

On the 23d of January, 1800, John Herring, Esq. then Mayor, summoned a
General Meeting of the Inhabitants, at the Guildhall, to consider of the
propriety of applying to Parliament for an Act for the better paving,
cleaning, lighting, and watching of the city; for removing and preventing
annoyances and obstructions, and for regulating hackney coaches.

At this meeting, a committee of twenty-one gentlemen was appointed to
consider of the plan proposed by the Mayor, and to make a report, to a
future general meeting, of the result of its opinion.

This committee had several meetings, in which it very minutely
investigated the subject submitted to its consideration: it employed
proper persons to estimate the expence of paving a particular district,
and stationed men at fourteen entrances into the city, to ascertain the
actual number of carriages, horses, &c. of every description, which
passed and repassed during a week, that a fair calculation might be made
of the expence to be incurred, and of the funds to meet it.

The result of the labours of this committee was laid before a general
meeting of Inhabitants, on the 3d of March following, in a report, which
stated the expediency of applying for an Act for the following purposes:

I.  To empower a Deputy Mayor to be appointed in certain cases.

II.  To empower the Mayor, or the Deputy Mayor, with one Justice, to
adjourn the Sessions in the absence of the Recorder and Steward.

III.  To better regulate the watch.

IV.  To better light the city.

V.  To better regulate the sweeping and cleansing of the city.

                                                                 _£_
The present expence
                                          of lighting              632
                                          of watching              550
                                          of sweeping              700
                                                                  1882
The future expence, under the new regulations
proposed by the committee,
                                             Lighting     840
                                             Watching     730     1770
                                             Sweeping     200
would amount to a saving of                                        112

And on a supposition that scavengers would undertake the sweeping, &c.
for the produce of the muck, the saving would be £312.

VI.  To new pave the city.

The expence of the new pavement, with foot paths on each side of the
streets, the middle of the streets crowning, and the removing of all
obstructions, was estimated at £55,000, on an actual survey and
valuation, made by Messrs. Stannard and Athow; and this estimate was, in
the opinion of Mr. Hamerton, an eminent Paviour in London, very fair and
correct.

To defray such an apparent heavy expence, the committee, proposed levying
a toll on carriages, horses, &c. coming to and going from the city, in
the following proportions:

                                    _d._
One horse                          0½
Cart with one horse                1
Cart with three or more horses     1½
A one-horse chaise or gig          1½
A waggon                           2
A four-wheel carriage              2
A score beasts, &c.                2

The annual produce of these tolls, deducing the expence of Houses,
Collectors, &c. was estimated at £1715.

The committee likewise proposed a rate, not exceeding 6d. in the pound,
per quarter, on the landlords and occupiers of houses, &c. within the
city (exclusive of the hamlets), the annual produce of which was
calculated at £3000; so that the whole expence, under the proposed bill,
would have stood thus:

                                                         £        £
For lighting, watching, and cleansing                    1770
For keeping in repair such parts of the city as          1000     2770
could not be immediately paved
                                    Produce of tolls     1715
                                             of rate     3000     4715

Leaving for the immediate commencement of paving, the sum of £1945; which
sum would have been increased by the annual payment of a certain sum by
the Corporation, the Bishop, and Dean and Chapter, for such parts of the
city now repaired by them; and by the annual decrease of the sum of
£1000, in proportion as the new pavement was completed.

The committee concluded this well-digested report by stating its opinion,
that no time should be lost in applying to Parliament; but as it had
several other matters under consideration, it begged leave to be
permitted to make a final report at some future time.

The general meeting concurred, after some deliberation, with the
committee; and a petition was signed by most of the Inhabitants of the
city, for leave to bring in a bill for the several purposes mentioned in
the report.

Unfortunately, however, the petition could not, from some unforeseen
circumstances, be presented that sessions; it being a standing order of
the House of Commons, that no such bill could be brought before
Parliament, unless notice of it had been given at the preceding
Michaelmas sessions: but it was suggested, seemingly from authority, that
such notice, in the present instance, might be dispensed with, provided
the city would abandon the toll, or a tonnage on goods.

To such a restriction, the committee would not submit; it therefore
resolved to postpone the petition to the next sessions of Parliament,
and, in the mean time, that a committee of Country Gentlemen, to be
appointed at the ensuing sessions, should be requested to meet a
sub-committee of the city, to hold a conference on the subject.

This conference took place, and after a number of queries had been
proposed by the Country Gentlemen, to all of which satisfactory answers
were returned in writing; notice of the intended application to
Parliament was ordered to be affixed on the doors of the Sessions Hall,
both in the county and city.

The committee however soon found, notwithstanding it had given what if
deemed the most satisfactory answers to the queries suggested by the
Country Gentlemen, that the bill would meet with the most determined
opposition from the county; nor did it appear that the opposition could
be obviated, unless the whole expence to be incurred by any intended
improvements was confined to the city only.  With such an opposition, the
committee had no hopes of success; and whatever sentiments it might
entertain of the liberality of the Country Gentlemen, who would, with the
county at large, have materially partaken of the benefits and advantages
attending the improvements, though they were unwilling to bear the most
trifling part of the expence of them, it did not choose to hazard the
experiment of a contest.

The committee, however, had the object entrusted to it too much at heart
to abandon it entirely: it therefore relinquished all the former part of
the proposed regulations, and confined itself solely to what it deemed
the most expedient—the New Pavement.  The Committee submitted a report on
that subject only to a general meeting, on the 15th of December, 1800,
the substance of which was, that, to carry the plan proposed into
execution, a rate not exceeding 3d. in the pound, per quarter, on the
rack-rent, should be levied on the Inhabitants of the city, at such times
only when the poor rate was within 6s. per pound, per quarter, for three
successive quarters.

At length, from considerations of the distress of the times, this truly
interesting business was deferred, but we have authority, and are happy
to say, that it will be resumed in a more favourable season.

We cannot quit this subject without observing, that the arduous and
unremitted assiduity of the Gentlemen forming the Committee, met the
warmest approbation of their fellow citizens, and afforded a prospect
that, at a future period, their labours for so desirable an object would
ultimately be accomplished.




References to the Churches in the Plan. {0}

A     St. Martin’s at Oak       S         St. Peter’s Hungate
B     St. Augustine’s           T         St. Michaels at Plea
C     St. Mary’s                U         St. George’s Tombland
D     St. George’s Colegate     V         St. Simon and Jude’s
E     St. Saviour’s             W         St. Martin’s by Palace
F     St. Paul’s                X         St. Helen’s
G     St. James’                Y         St. Giles’
H     St. Edmund’s              Z         St. Peter’s Mancroft
I     St. Clement’s             I.        St. Stephen’s
K     St. Michael’s Coslany     II.       St. John’s Timberhill
L     St. Swithin’s             III.      All Saints’
M     St. Margaret’s            IV.       St Michael’s at Thorn
N     St. Lawrence’             V.        St. John’s Sepulchre
O     St. Benedict’s            VI.       St. Peter’s Southgate
P     St. Gregory’s             VII.      St. Etheldred’s
Q     St. John’s Maddermarket   VIII.     St. Julian’s
R     St. Andrew’s              IX.       St. Peter’s per Mountergate

Public Buildings and Offices.

French church                Quakers’ meeting
Dutch church                 Guildhall
Grammar school               Fish-market
Methodist meeting            Stamp office
Deanery                      Bethel
Excise office                Theatre-Royal
St. Giles’ hospital          Assembly house
Boys’ hospital               Castle, county gaol, and shire-house
Girls’ hospital              Norfolk and Norwich hospital
Doughty’s hospital           Private lunatic house
Court of Request office      Bridewell
Presbyterian new meeting     Post office
Independent meeting          St. Andrew’s work-house
Anabaptist meeting           Roman Catholic chapel
Duke’s Palace work-house     St. John’s work-house
City gaol

Alphabetical List of the Streets, Lanes, &c. in the City of Norwich.

All Saints’ Green       Fye-bridge-street       Peacock-street
Almhouse lane           Fye-bridge-quay         Pigg-street
Andrew’s St.            George’s St.            Pitt-lane
Bridge-str.             Bridge-str.
— Chancel-str.          George’s St. Ch.        Pottergate-street
                        alley
— Plain                 Gildencroft             Privy-lane
— Steps                 Gildencroft-lane        Pudding-lane
Anne’s lane             Gildengate-street       Queen-street
— steps                 Giles’ St. Hill         Rampant Horse Back
                                                str.
Augustine’s St. Ch.     Giles’ St. street       Rampant Horse street
row
— street                Giles’ St.              Red-Lion-lane
                        Back-street
Back of the Inns        Giles’ St.              Red-Well-street
                        Broad-street
Bank-place              Giles’ St. road         Rising-Sun-lane
Barrack-street          Goat lane Upper         Rose lane
Ber-street              Goat lane Lower         Rosemary-lane
Bethel-street           Golden-Ball-lane        St. Saviour’s lane
Bishopgate-street       Golden-Dog lane         St. Saviour’s Church
                                                lane
Botolph-street          Green’s lane            St. Saviour’s Ch.
                                                alley
Bracondale              Gregory’s St. Ch.       Scole’s Green
                        alley
Bridewell-alley         Griffin-lane            Shuttle lane
Briggs’ lane            Gun-lane                Snailgate-street
Buff-coat-lane          Hall’s End              Southgate-street
Bull-lane               Haymarket               St. Stephen’s street
Butcher’s market        Heigham-street          St. Stephen’s
                                                Back-street
Castle-dykes            Hog hill                St. Stephen’s Ch.
                                                alley
Castle meadow           Horn’s lane             St Stephen’s road
Chapel-field            Hungate-street          Stepping-lane
Chapel-field-lane       John’s St. Timberhill   Surry street
Chapel street           Jail hill               Surry-street mewse
Charing-cross           Jenkin’s lane           Surry-street Upper
Cherry-lane             King-street             Swan-lane
Clement’s St. Ch.       Lady’s lane             St. Swithin’s lane
alley
Close Upper             Lady’s row              St. Swithin’s Church
                                                lane
Close Lower             Lawrence St. Ch.        St. Swithin’s Church
                        alley                   alley
Cockey-lane             Lawrence St. lane       Theatre-square
Cockey-lane Little      Life’s Green            Timberhill street
Cockril lane            London lane             Tombland
Colegate-street         Maddermarket street     Tooley-street
Common Pump             Magdalen-street         Upper market
Common Pump-street      Margaret’s St. lane     Upper market-street
Common Staithe Old      Margaret’s St. Ch.      Wastlegate-street
                        alley
Common Staithe New      Mariner’s lane          Water-lane, St
                                                George’s
Cook’s lane             Market-lane             Water-lane, St James’
Coslany-street          Market place            Water-lane,
                                                King-street
Coslany Bridge-street   Martin’s St. street     Water-lane, St
                                                Martin’s
Cow-hill                Martin’s St. lane       Weaver’s lane
Cowgate-street          Martin’s St. by Pal.    Westwick street Lower
                        plain
Cross lane              Martin’s St. by Pal.    Westwick street Upper
                        str.
Dove-lane               Mary’s St. Plain        Westwick Back-street
Duke’s Palace           Mary’s St. Church       Wherry-staithe
                        alley
Elmhill-street          Mich St. Cos. Ch.       White Friars’ Bridge
                        alley                   st.
Elmhill-lane            Michael’s St. Thorn     White-Lion-lane
                        lane
Faith’s St. lane        Music-House-staithe     Wilkes’s lane
Field-square            Muspole-street          Willow-lane
Finket-street           Nailor’s lane           World’s End lane
Fish-market             New-Mills’-lane         Wymer-street
Fisher’s lane           Orford-street
Fishgate-street




THE NORWICH DIRECTORY.


ABBS Z. Boot and Shoe Maker, No. 72, Coslany-Street

Abel Anthony, Cabinet-Maker, 5, Upper Westwick street

Abram John, Patten-maker, 27, Magdalen-street

Adair William, Esq. Trowse Newton and Caldecot Bucks

Adams and Bacon, Coach makers, 3, St. Stephen’s road

Adcock and Gapp, Dyers, 7, Coslany-Bridge-street

Adcock James, Royal-Oak, 27, St. Augustine’s road

Adcock William, Hair-dresser, 60, St. Giles’

Addey John, Linen-Draper, 4, London-lane

Adlam John, Gardner, 18, St. Augustine’s street

Aggs John Gurney, Iron-Foundery, St. Faith’s lane

Aggs Thomas, Linen-Manufacturer, 10, Pitt-street

Alden Thomas, Butcher, 9, Fish-Market

Alderson James, M.D. 3, Snailgate-street

Alderson Mrs. 11, Gildengate-street

Alderson John, Plumber, &c. 20, Upper-Market

Alderson J. K. Plumber, &c. 6, Hog-hill

Alderson William, Mounter, 18, ditto

Aldhouse Stephen, Surgeon, &c. 2, Wymer-street

Aldhouse Stephen, 92, Upper Heigham

Aldhouse Stephen, at the Lamb. 51, Coslany-street

Aldis John, Baker, 7, St. Margaret’s Church

Aldred James, Hemp-cloth Manufacturer, Shuttle-lane, and in Weaver’s lane
on Saturdays

Aldrich John, Whitesmith, 15, Dove-lane

Alexander Stephen, Shoemaker, St. Stephen’s road

Allman Samuel, Baker, 67, Coslany-street

Allen Richard, Tailor and Draper, 21, London-lane

Allen Charles, Esq. 4, Upper Surry-street

Allen Robert, Tailor, &c. 36, Pottergate-street

Allen William, Boot and Shoe maker, 48, St. Stephen street

Allum John, Tea-Dealer and Confectioner, 57, Bethel-street

Allwood Thomas, Shopkeeper, 22, Lower Close

Ames Daniel, 19, St. Martin’s Plain

Amyott Thomas, Attorney, 13, Upper Close

Amy Thomas, Cooper, 99, Magdalen-street

Anderson John Fullick, at the Norwich Volunteer, 29, All Saint’s Green

Andrews William, 44, St. Stephen’s street

Angel John and Son, Curriers, 5, Golden Ball-lane

Angell Joseph, King’s Head, 12, Gildengate-street

Angier James, Merchant, Dwelling-House, 42, Snailgate-str.

Anguish Rev. 12, Upper Close

Annis John, Bookseller, 5, London-lane

Ansell John, Plumber, &c. 12, Dove-lane

Appleton John, Hatter, &c. 5, Back of the Inns

Arnold William, 10 and 11, St. Stephen’s road

Artis John, Boot and Shoe maker, 24, Rampant-Horse-street

Athow John, jun. Stone and Marble Mason, 12, Back of the Inns

Atkins William, Shawl Manufacturer, 28, Lower Westwick-street

Atkinson John, Attorney, 191, King-street

Aves Jeremiah, Trumpet Inn, 40, St. Stephen’s street

Ayton William, Coppersmith, Brazier, and Tin-plate Worker, 4, Briggs’
lane



B


Back Thomas and Co. Grocers, Tea-Dealers, and Tallow-Chandlers, 3 and 4,
Hay-market

Back James, Importer of Foreign Wines and Spirits, 3, Hog-hill

Back William, Surgeon, Wilkes’s lane, near Bank-place

Back Mrs. 4, Bowling-green house, Chapel-field house

Bacon Richard, Auctioneer, Appraiser, Printer, Bookseller, Binder, and
Stationer, 12, Cockey-lane

Bacon Leonard, Wine-Merchant, 30, St. Giles’s Wine Vaults, in
Chapel-field

Bacon Thomas, Ginger-bread Baker, 4, St. Stephen’s street

Bailey William, Shawl and Bombazine Manufacturer, 5, White-Lion-lane

Baker Henry, Gold and Silver smith, 15, Market-place

Baker Benjamin, Gardner and Seedsman, 5, Queen-street

Baldy Edmund, Dyer, 62, Gildengate-street

Baletti Anthony, Frame-maker, 13, Pottergate-street

Balls Thomas, House-Broker, 7, St. Martin’s by Palace

Balls James, Tailor, 2, Snail-gate-street

Banham James, Pump-maker, 146, King-street

Banton John, at the Crown, 29, St. George’s Bridge street

Barber Thomas, Attorney, 2, St. Stephen’s Back-street

Barber George, Silversmith, 3, London-lane

Bardwell Edward, Boot and Shoe maker, 13, Lower Close

Barker Mrs. Brandy and Wine Vaults, Dove-Tavern, 24, Market-place

Barker Jeremiah, Pawn-Broker, 14, Lower Westwick-str.

Barker Christopher, Wool-pack, 46, Botolph-street

Barker Mary, Weigh-house, 20, Castle Ditches

Barker Thomas, Whitesmith, 13, Red-Lion-lane

Barlow James, Worsted Manufacturer, 9, Timberhill-street

Barlow Robert, Gent. 18, Bethel-street

Barlow John, Shawl-Manufacturer, St. Margaret’s Churchyard

Barlow John, Hair-dresser, 12, Magdalen-street

Barnard I. C. 19, Botolph-street

Barnard I. Angier, and Barnards, Merchants, 19, Botolph-street

Barnard Abraham, 41, Botolph-street

Barnard William and Sons, Merchants, 9, Muspole-street

Barnes Philip, Bricklayer, 18, All Saints’ Green

Barnham John, Pawn-Broker, 189, King-street

Barrett and Brooks, Curriers and Leather Cutters, 2 and 3, Lower
Goat-lane

Barrow Edward, Gent. 13, Pitt-street

Barrow Isaac, Gent. 3, Upper Surry-street, Mews

Barrow and Scott, Cotton-Manufacturers, 50, Colegate street

Barrows Messdms. Tea-Dealers, 5, Briggs’ lane

Barton William, Corn and Coal Merchant, 164, King-street

Barwell John, Importer and Dealer in Foreign Wines, &c. 7, St Stephen’s
street

Barwick George, Gun-Maker, 113, Pottergate-street

Basey Charles, Broker, 15, Soutergate-street

Basham Charles, Appraiser and Auctioneer, St. Stephen’s str.

Bassley William, Leather-dresser, 2, Colegate-street

Bates Benjamin, Grocer, &c. 26, Westwick-street

Bath Francis and Co. Stay and Habit makers, 24, Bethel-str.

Bayfield Thomas, Ironmonger, Oil and Colour Man, 32, Magdalen-street

Bayfield Thomas, Baker, 34, Coslany-street

Beane Joseph, Master of Doughty’s Hospital, Snailgate street

Beane Robert, Bull’s Head, 62, Ber-street

Beare William, Boot and Shoe maker, 11, St. Peter’s

Beare Thomas, Currier and Leather Cutter, 26, St. George’s Bridge-street

Beare John, Boot and Shoe maker, 27, St. George’s Bridge-street

Beatley William, Eating-house, 5, Lower Goat-lane

Beatniffe Richard, Bookseller, Binder, and Stationer, 6, Cockey-lane

Beesley George, Boot and Shoe maker, 7, Coslany-street

Beavor James, Esq. 88, Magdalen-street

Beavor William, Carpenter, &c. 46, St. Stephen’s street

Beevor James, Esq. 72, St. Giles’s Broad-street

Beevor Rev. John, Willow-lane, St. Giles’

Beevor Henry, 58, St. Giles’

Beckham Edward, Cooper, 9, St. George’s Bridge-street

Beckwith Mrs. 6, Lower Close

Beckwith Rev. Thomas, 10, St. Martin’s by Palace

Beckwith John, Musician, 25, Lower Close

Bedford Charles, Coppersmith, 6, Pottergate-street

Begg John, Attorney, Surveyor of the Window-Lights, &c. for Yarmouth
District, 40, Pottergate-street

Bell Thomas, Carpenter, &c. King street

Bell John, Yarn-Manufacturer, Fishgate-street

Beloe James, Basket-maker, Trowse

Bennett James, Clock and Watch Maker, 2, Briggs’ lane

Bensley Edward, 25, Cock, Rampant Horse street

Bensley Robert, Baker, 8, St. Stephen’s street

Bensley John, Carpenter, 23, All Saints’ Green

Bensley and Dale, Wholesale Linen-Drapers and Haberdashers, 9 and 10,
London-lane, and 3, St. Andrew’s Steps

Berry and Rochester, Booksellers and Stationers, 11, Dove-lane

Bexfield Richard, Cabinet-maker, at the Goat, 14, Upper Goat-lane

Bidwell Richard, Draper and Hosier, 6, St. George’s Bridge-street

Bidwell and Co. Sack-Manufacturers, Colegate street

Bignold Thomas, Brandy, Wine, and Hop Merchant, 18, Market-place

Bird Bailey, Land-Surveyor, Red-Lion-lane

Bird William, Broker, 9, ditto

Bishop’s Office, 20, Upper Close—Mr. Charles Kitson, 8, Upper Close,
Deputy-Register

Black Thomas, Gent. 3, Upper Close

Black Thomas and William, Confectioners, 1, Hay-market

Blackburn John, Stone and Marble Mason, 3, Castle-Meadow

Blake Thomas, jun. Esq. Barrister at Law, 5, Queen-street

Blake John, House-Steward, 28, Bethel-street

Blake Hammond, Hemp-Cloth Manufacturer, 54, Magdalen-street

Blake Robert, Cotton-Manufacturer, 24, Heigham-street

Blake Isaac, Hotpresser, 35, Snailgate-street

Blake William, Pork-Butcher, 11, Coslany-bridge

Blakley Elijah, Cotton-Manufacturer, Colegate-street

Bland Thomas, Gent. 18, Botolph-street

Bland Michael, Gent. 9, ditto

Blogg Samuel, Lime Burner and Brick Maker, Brick-Ground, Surry road

Bloom D. and Co. Merchants, 2, Duke’s Palace, and Trowse Mills

Blowfield, Peter, Carpenter, &c. 52, St. Martin’s street

Blyth Samuel, Plasterer, 87, Pottergate-street

Boardman John, Hatter and Hosier, 1, Market-place, and 1, Cockey-lane

Boardman Benjamin, Woollen-Draper, 22, Market-place

Boast Robert, Sawyer, 2, Ber-street

Bokenham Thomas, Surgeon, 10, Upper Westwick-street

Bolingbroke Nathaniel, Silversmith and Haberdasher, 2, Market-place

Bolingbroke J. B. and Co. Woollen-Drapers, 4, St. Peter’s

Bolton John, Corn-Merchant, at Staith, 104, King-street, Dwelling-House,
2, St. Faith’s lane

Bolton John, 11, Woolpack-Inn, St. Giles’s Broad-street

Bolton Ziba, Coach-Master, 14, Hungate-street

Bond William, Surgeon, 8, Tombland

Bond John, Boot and Shoe maker, 46, St. Giles’s Broad-str.

Bone Nicholas, Boot and Shoe Maker, 15, Lower Goat-lane

Booth Mrs. Castle Inn, 13, White-Lion-lane

Booth William, Bookseller, &c. 37, Market-place

Booty William, Shopkeeper, 22, King-street

Borking and Carver, Woolcombers, 66, Gildengate street

Borough Stephen, Dolphin Inn, Upper Heigham

Boswell Thomas, at the Canteen, Horse-Barracks

Botwright William, Grocer, 25, St. George’s Bridge-street

Boulter Thomas, Baker, 15, St. Giles’s Broad-street

Bowen Ann, Stationer, &c. 4, Cockey-lane

Bowles William, Farmer, Eaton, and at the George, St. Stephen’s, on
Saturdays

Boyce James, Attorney at Law, 11, Wymer-street

Bradford Miles, Boot and Shoe maker, 42, London-lane

Bradford William, Esq. 68, Pottergate-street

Brady John, White-Horse, 98, Magdalen-street

Bradley John, Boot and Shoe maker, 6, Fyebridge-street

Bray John, jun. Tailor, &c. St. Andrew’s Bridge-street

Bream Samuel, Gent. 4, Wilkes’s lane, near Bank place

Brereton John, Sadler, 33, Upper Westwick street

Bresley Mrs. Oatmeal-maker, St. Simon’s

Brett William, Wine and Brandy Merchant, 8, Wastlegate-lane, All Saints

Brett John, Baker, 8, Fishgate-street

Brett Robert, Tailor, &c. 31, London-lane

Brewer Marke, 48, Queen’s Head, St. Giles

Brewerton Thomas, Corn-Merchant, Lower Westwick-street

Briggs Cornelius, Millwright, 24, St. Martin’s lane

Briggs James, Coal Merchant, 96, Colegate street

Briggs James, Coal-Merchant, White Friar’s Bridge

Britton Henry, Clock and Watch maker, 9, Briggs’ lane

Britton Richard, New Theatre Inn, 56, Bethel-street

Brooks Richard, Grocer, &c. 32, Coslany street

Brooks John, Dwelling-House, 25, St. Martin’s lane

Browne Robert Ives, Esq. 2, Upper Close

Browne John and Son, Ironmongers, Ironfounders, and Colourmen, 4, Upper
Market

Browne George, Collector of the Post-Horse Duty, 13, St. Giles’

Browne Arthur, Hatter, &c. 10, Cockey-lane

Browne Christopher, Coal and Corn Merchant and Malster, 122, King-street

Brown Robert, Corn and Coal Merchant, 17, Lower Close

Brown John, Millwright and Ironfounder, Timberhill-street

Browns T. and W. Pipe-makers, 30, All Saints’ Green

Browne Thomas, Plumber, &c. 6, Ber street

Browne Elizabeth, Milliner, 61, Bethel-street

Browne Edward, Carpenter, 30, King-street

Browne William, Baker, 59, St. Martin’s street

Browne James, Mounter, 41, Pitt-street

Browne John, Lord Nelson’s Gardens, Bracondale

Brown Thomas, Black Friars, 1, St. George’s Bridge-street

Browne Benjamin, Tailor, 2, St. Clement’s Church-yard

Brown Edward, Carpenter, &c. 7, Chancery-street, St. Andrew’s

Brown Charles, late at the Castle and Lion, St. Peter’s, but now at the
Elephant, Magdalen-street

Brown John, Breeches-maker, 9, Dove-lane

Browne George, Pipe-maker, Gapp’s Yard, Upper Westwick-street

Browne Mary, House-Broker, 8, Bridewell-Alley

Brunton John, Gent. 2, Theatre-Square

Brunton James, Mace-Officer, 35, St. Giles’

Brunton Mrs. Baker, 8, Hungate-street

Buck Robert, Flour-Merchant, Florden, and at the Rampant-Horse, St.
Stephen’s, Norwich, on Saturdays

Buck John, Flour Merchant, St. Clement’s Hill, and at the King’s Head, on
Saturdays

Buck John, Miller, 57, St. Stephen’s street

Buck John, Wheelwright, St. Benedict’s road

Buck Jeremiah, Tailor, &c. Upper Goat-lane

Buckle I. and W. Ironmongers, Tobacconists and Colourmen, 6, Haymaket

Buckenham John, Plumber, 30, St. George’s Bridge-street

Buddry Anthony, Grocer and Tea-Dealer, 19, St. Martin’s by Palace

Bullard James, Master of Bethel, 46

Bullen Joshua, Ironmonger, &c. 44, Market-place

Bullen Joseph, Tailor, &c. 10, White Lion-lane

Burcham Samuel, Tailor, 15, Lower Close

Burdett John, Bricklayer, 36, Snailgate-street

Burrel Thomas, Importer of Spirits, 120, King-street

Burrel Robert, Gent. 21, Upper Close

Burrel James, Boot and Shoe Maker, 24, Magdalen-street

Burrows William, Grocer, Tea-Dealer, and Tobacconist, 10, ditto

Burrows John, Woolcomber, &c. 21, Barrack-street

Burks John, Silk-Dyer, 6, All Saints’, Green—Also a Porter Merchant

Burt William, Upholder, 11, Briggs’ lane

Burton Thomas, Esq. Bracondale-hill

Burton John, Black Horse Inn, 7, Tombland

Bush John, Boot and Shoe maker, 5, Magdalen-street

Buttisant Thomas, Hair-Dresser, 9, Tombland

Butterton James, Dyer, 6, Elm-hill street

Buttivant James, Manufacturer, 16, Castle-Meadow



C


Calthorpe Christoper, Cooper, 13, London-lane

Calthorpe Christopher, Cooper, at the Cherry-tree, 51, Gildengate-street

Campin Robert, Linen-Draper, &c. 2, Cockey-lane

Candler Lawrence and Son, Flour-Merchants, Cringleford, and at the
Rampant-Horse, St. Stephen’s, on Saturdays

Candler Benjamin, Grocer and Tea-Dealer, 8, Little Cockey lane

Cann James, Cabinet-maker, 35, Timberhill-street

Cannel John, Collar and Harness Maker, 3, St. Stephen’s str.

Capon Christopher, Painter, &c. 47, Colegate-street

Capon Christopher, jun. Painter, 37, Bethel-street

Carr William, Boot and Shoe Maker, 59, Coslany-street

Carr William, Boot and Shoe Maker, 26, Botolph-street

Carr Francis, Shoe-maker, 7, St. Augustine’s street

Carman John, Umbrella-maker, 2, Wastlegate-street, All Saints’

Carter Samuel, Pelican, 2, Pitt-street

Carter J. G. Corn-Merchant, Windham, and at the Coach-makers’ Arms, St.
Stephen’s Road, on Saturdays

Carter Joseph, Master-Weaver, 77, St. Giles’

Carter Mary, Broker, 26, Rampant Horse-street

Carter William, Esq. Collector of the Excise, Sampson and Hercules’
Court, Tombland

Carver Mrs. 25, St. Giles’

Carver Daniel, Stuff Manufacturer, 13, Timberhill-street

Catchpole John, Hair-Dresser, 6, Briggs’ lane

Cattermoul Thomas and Son, Wine-Merchants, 1, Red-Well street

Caxton Henry, Innkeeper, 33, Market-place

Challis John, Boot and Shoe maker, 2, Pudding-lane

Chalker Noah, 10, Coach and Horses, Red-Lion-lane

Chambers N. Surgeon, 5, Chapel-field

Chamberlin Peter and Son, Grocers, Tallow-Chandlers, and Tea-Dealers, 1,
Upper Market

Chamberlin Charles, Orange-Merchant, 9, White-Lion-lane

Chamberlin Peter, Linen and Woollen Draper, 23, White-Lion-lane

Chamberlin James, Shopkeeper, 59, King-street

Chamberlin Henry, Shopkeeper, 26, St. Augustine’s street

Chamberlin George, Carpenter, &c. Trowse

Chaplin William, Writing-Master, 17, Pottergate-street

Chapman Rev. 59, ditto

Chapman Gardiner, Attorney, 9, Upper Close

Chapman Spinks, Wine-Vaults, 7, Market-Place

Chapman William George, jun. 15, Hay-market

Chapman Samuel, Baker, 35, Botolph-street

Chapman James, Hempen Cloth Manufacturer, Bungay, and in Weaver’s lane,
Norwich, on Saturdays

Charlesworth Joseph, Duffield Manufacturer, 58, Coslany-str.

Chase James, Importer and Dealer in Foreign Spirits, 29, King-str

Chesnutt Ann, Sadler, &c. 4, Bridge street, St. George’s

Chesnutt Ann, Harness Maker, 28, Magdalen-street

Chettleburgh Robert, Haberdasher, Hosier, and Cutler, 8, Hay Market

Chettleburgh William, Baker, 23, Rampant-Horse street

Chettleburgh Daniel, Sadler, 201, King-street

Chettleburgh Harrison, Plumber, 7, Queen-street

Chipperfield Robert, Half-Moon, Market-place

Chittock William, Tailor, Stay and Habit Maker, 14, Red Lion-lane

Christian Edward, Dancing-Master, 11, Red-Well street

Churchman John, Esq. 12, St. Faith’s lane

Clabourn William, Hosier, 71, St. Stephen’s street

Clabburn William, Hosier, 26, Timberhill-street

Clabburn John, Confectioner, 11, Fyebridge-street

Clabburn Robert, Woolcomber, 2, St. Simon’s

Clarke and Watts, Warehousemen, 3, Chapel-field-lane

Clarke George, Fish-monger, 15, Fish-market

Clarke Daniel, Coal-Merchant, 12, Lower Close

Clarke William, Boot and Shoe Maker, 2, Dove-lane

Clarke John, Black-Bull Inn, 11, Magdalen-street

Clarke Ephraim, Boot and Shoe Maker, 20, ditto

Clarke Robert, Boot and Shoe Maker, 2, Gildengate-street

Clarke William, Kitteringham, and at the Angel, Norwich, on Saturdays

Clary William, Coach-Makers’ Arms, 4, St. Stephen’s road

Claxon John, Lodging-House, St. Stephen’s Church-yard

Clemment’s Francis and Co. Coach-Makers, 7, Back of the Inns

Clift Levold, Throwsterer, 11, Lower Close

Clover Joseph, Gent, 33, Coslany-street

Clover Joseph, jun. 40, Snailgate street

Clowes Mrs. 1, Rampant Horse street

Clowting Henry, 5, Black Prince in Butchery, Market-place

Cock Joseph, Wine-Merchant, 12, Timberhill-street

Cock and Pitchers, Importers of Wine and Foreign Spirits, 7,
White-Lion-lane

Cocksel John, Three Dyers, 67, Lower Westwick-street

Coe John, Broker, 9, Upper Westwick-street

Coes’ (Miss) Boarding-School, 1, Griffin-lane

Coggle William, Shopkeeper, 16, Rosemary-lane

Cogman Benjamin, Baker, 19, Ber-street

Coke Jacob, Vinegar Maker, in Court, St. Giles’

Cole John Hammond, 71, Stamp-Office, St. Giles’

Coles and Co. Wholesale Drapers and Haberdashers, 18, White Lion-lane

Coleby James, Boot and Shoe Maker, 7, St. Peter’s

Coleby Samuel, Gardner, 33, Magdalen-street

Colkett Mrs. Druggist, 70, St. Stephen’s street

Coleman John, Builder, Coslany-street

Coleman George, Bricklayer, 18, St. Martin’s street

Collins David, Boot and Shoe Maker, 12, Lower Westwick-street

Colls William, King’s Head, 116, Magdalen-street

Collumbine Peter and Sons, Merchants, 1, St. Simon’s

Colman Edward, Surgeon, 12, Tombland

Colombine Paul, D.D. 10, Tombland

Colombine David, Esq. 15, Upper Close

Cone Samuel, Throwsterer, Norman’s lane

Connel James, Smith, Trowse

Cook Samuel, Hotpresser, 4 and 5, Peacock-street

Cook George, Esq. 1, St. Gregory’s Church-yard

Cooke Thomas, Esq. 22, Tombland

Cooke William, Grocer, 52, Bridge-street, St. George’s

Cooper Mrs. 202, King-street

Cooper Charles, Gent. 48, Lower Westwick street

Cooper Lewis and Co. Linen-Drapers, 50, Market-place

Cooper Robert, Shopkeeper, 3, Magdalen-street

Cooper Robert, Shopkeeper, 71, Gildengate-street

Coote Thomas, Ironmonger, 8 and 9, Bank-place, and 1 Queen-street

Copeman E. and R. Woollen-Drapers, 48, Market-place

Copeman Edward, Dwelling-House, 54, St. Giles’

Coppin James, Plumber, &c. 20, Hay-market

Coppin Daniel, Painter and Gilder, 6, St Stephen’s street

Copping Mrs. Baker, 62 Upper Westwick street

Coppin Miss, Milliner, 39, Snailgate-street

Corbould John, Esq. 65, St. Giles’

Cordran Edward, White Swan, 16, Upper Market

Corfield Elizabeth, Leather-Cutter, 14, Hog-hill

Corke William, Plumber, &c. 52, Upper Westwick street

Cossey Thomas, Bakers’ Arms, 5, Ber street

Cotman Edmund, Haberdasher and Hosier, 18, Cockey-lane

Cotton Elizabeth, White-Hart Inn, St. Peter’s

Coulsen Ralph, Wool Factor, 7, Muspole-street

Coushen Samuel, White Swan, 28, King street

Cousins John, Leather-Cutter, 3, Upper Market

Cox Daniel, Smith, 19, Fyebridge-street

Cozens John, Grocer and Tea-Dealer, 12, Market-place

Crabtree Grenville, Farmer, Witton, and at the Baker’s Arms, Ber-street,
on Saturdays

Crake Mary, Saleshop, 7 and 9, St. Andrew’s Plain

Crackenthorpe Samuel, Gent. 73, St. Stephen’s street

Craske Peter, Boot and Shoe Maker, 7, St. Gregory’s Church Yard

Craske Christopher, Baker, 48, St. Martin’s street

Creasey and Page, Salesmen, 4, St. Andrew’s Plain

Creed Matthew, White Lion, 23, St. Martin’s by Palace Plain

Cripps George, Grocer and Tea-Dealer, 40, Market-place

Critchfield James, Working-Cutler and Hardwareman, 21, Market-place

Crockett Sarah, Stationer, 17, Fyebridge-street

Crome John, Drawing Master, 17, Gildengate-street

Cropley Richard, Boot and Shoe Maker, 34, Snailgate-street

Cross Joseph, Patten-Maker, 12, Rampant-Horse street

Crotch Michael, Organ Builder, 1, Green’s lane, St. George’s

Crowe James, Esq. Lakenham

Crowe William, Worsted-Manufacturer, 9, Pitt-street

Crowe Spicer, Plumber, 89, Upper Westwick street

Cruttenden William Courtney, Esq. 12, St. Saviour’s lane

Culley Richard and Co. Grocers and Salt-Merchants, 14, Upper Market

Culley John, Cabinet and Chair Maker, 43, London-lane

Culling William, Working-Cutler, 39, Market-place

Cullington James, Prussia Gardens, St. Stephen’s road

Cullington Robert, Hair-Dresser, 2, Timberhill

Cullyer John, Whitesmith, 6, Cow-hill

Culyer William, Cooper, 27, Rampant-Horse-street

Culyer William, licensed to let Post-Horses, Wool-Pack-yard, St. Giles’

Culyer Samuel, Boot and Shoe Maker, 25, Timberhill-street

Cupper Thomas, Brewer, Corn and Coal Merchant, 134, Magdalen-street

Curtis John, Exhibitor of Natural Curiosities, 2, Castle-Ditches

Cushing Samuel, Carver and Gilder, 9, Broad-street, St. Giles’

Cushing John, Bookbinder, 8, Lady’s lane

Cushing Joshua, Stone-Mason, St. Andrew’s Bridge street

Cutler Thomas, Upholder, 8, Dove-lane

Cutten William, Esq. 117, Magdalen-street



D


Dady George, Timber-Merchant, Imperial Arms, 12, King-street

Dady Charles, Eating House, 14, Bridewell-Alley

Daines William, Shopkeer, 84, Magdalen street

Dale John, Hair-Dresser, 4, Bethel-street

Dalrymple William, Surgeon, 40, Colegate-street

Dalrymple John, Brandy-Merchant, 13, Back of the Inns

Damant Francis, Harness-Maker, 118, Magdalen-street

Danton Joseph, Red Lion, 13, London lane

Darby John, Whitesmith, 8, Cross lane, St. George’s street

Darby William, Turner, 14, Rosemary lane

Darby Robert, Wheelwright, Trowse

Darkin Robert, Broker, 2, Red-Lion-lane

Darkin George, Broker, 120, Pottergate-street

Daveney Charles, Grocer and Tea-Dealer, 9, Cockey-lane

Davey Jonathan, Esq. 27, Upper Westwick street

Davey Robert, Clock and Watch Maker, 6, Back of the Inns

Davis John, Gent. Ladies’ Row, St. Stephen’s road

Dawson and Leeds, Scarlet-Dyers, 5, St. Clement’s Churchyard

Day Thomas, Esq. 12, St. Martin’s Plain

Day Rev. Richard, 92, Pottergate-street

Day John, Woolcomber, St. George’s Bridge-street

Day William, Eating-House, 16, St. Stephen’s street

Daydon John, Gent. 35, Cowgate-street

Daynes Mrs. Milliner, 77, Magdalen-street

Daynes Samuel, Basket-Maker, 23, Hay-market

Deacon Rev. John, 19, St. Martin’s lane

Deakin Rev. Thomas, 70, St Giles’

Dean and Chapter’s Office, 30, Lower Close square—Mr. William Utten,
Clerk and Register

Deans James, Corn and Coal Merchant, 32, Wymer-street

De Carle Robert, Stone-Mason, 13, Wymer-street

Deday Thomas, Manufacturer, 49, Coslany-street

Denew Peter, Farmer, Hetherset, and at the George, Hay-market, on
Saturdays

De Hague Elisha, Attorney, 5, Elm hill-street

Delf Thomas, Tuns’ Tavern, Cooper’s Court, Cockey-lane

Delight and Son, Boot and Shoe Makers, 2, White-Lion-lane

Delph Moses, Whitesmith, 5, Little Rampant Horse street

Denham Samuel, Boot and Shoe Maker, 11, Coslany street

Denmark Thomas, Glover, &c. 19, Back of the Inns

Denny Martin, Boot and Shoe Maker, 90, Upper Westwick-street

Devereux Edmund, Plumber, &c. 73 and 4, Gildengate-str.

Dexter Matthew and Co. Hosiers and Lace-Manufacturers, 3, Back of the
Inns

Dickerson Daniel, Watch-Maker, 9, St. Martin’s by Palace

Digby John, Greyhound, 33, Surry-street.

Dilley John, Catharine Wheel, 19, St. Augustine’s street

Dingle John, Throwsterer, 37, Botolph-street

Dingle John, jun. Shawl-Manufacturer, 38, Botolph-street

Dinmore Richard, Gent. 20, Timberhill-street

Ditchell Anthony, Esq. 86, Pottergate-street

Dix William, Shoe-Maker, 26, ditto

Dixon Daniel, Hair-Dresser, 22, Hay-market

Dixon Futter, Shoulder of Mutton, 30, St. Stephen’s street.

Dobson James, Carpenter, 6, Upper Surry street

Dove Susannah, Hat-Maker, 2, Upper Market

Dove Thomas, Carpenter, 4, Scole’s Green

Doyley Henry, Hempnall, Hempen-Cloth Manufacturer, and in Weaver’s lane,
on Saturdays

Drakes Miss, Boarding-School, 31, All Saints’ Green

Drake Robert, White-Horse Inn, 2, Hay-market

Drake Francis, Cooper, 11, St. Martin’s by Palace

Drake Richard, Cabinet-Maker, 2, St. Andrew’s, Chancery-street

Dring George, Baker, 49, Magdalen-street

Dring John, Baker, 31, St. Giles’

Drummond Rev. Thomas, 200, King-street

Duckett Sarah, King’s Head, 25, St. Stephen’s street

Duckett John, Hair-Dresser, 43, Coslany-street

Duckett William, Old Church Stile, 26, Upper Market

Dunham and Yallop, Goldsmiths and Tea-Dealers, 10, Market-place

Dunn Jeremiah, Tailor, &c. Lamb-Inn yard, Hay-market

Dunn George, Three Cranes, 21, Lower Close square

Dunn James, Boot and Shoe Maker, 1, Alms-lane

Dunn John, Baker, 27, Pottergate street

Durrant James, Queen Ann, 17, Colegate-street

Durrant Thomas, Shopkeeper, 20, Heigham-street

Durrant Thomas, Buck, 43, St. Martin’s street

Dyball Thomas, Baker, 74, Magdalen-street

Dye Isaac, Grocer and Tea-Dealer, 53, St. Stephen’s street

Dye James, Fishmonger, 16, Fish-market

Dye Thomas, Coach-Master, 13, St. Martin’s by Palace

Dyson William, at the Cow, Cow-hill street

Dyson Joseph, Dyer, Charlotte-yard, St. Stephen’s



E


Earl Elden, Chair and Cabinet Maker, 13, Rampant-Horse street

Estaugh Nathaniel, Bellman, 39, Bethel-street

Eaton Thomas, Silk-Mercer, 3, Market-place

Ecclestone Richard, Currier, &c. 14, Wymer-street

Edgar William, Fishmonger, 20, Fishmarket

Edwards W. C. Engraver and Drawing-Master, 32, London, lane

Edwards Samuel, Hair-Dresser, 68, St. Stephen’s

Edwards William, Glover, &c. Goodman’s Court, St. Stephen’s

Edwards William, Tailor and Draper, 13, Hog-hill

Edwards John, Carpenter, 3, St. Margaret’s Church-yard

Edwards Edward, Gardner, 5, ditto

Edwards John, Baker, 25, St Augustine’s street

Eldred John, White Lion, 44, Upper Westwick street

Elliott John, Sadler, Ironmonger, 1, London-lane

Ellis John, Gent. 20, Lower Close

Elmer Joseph, Throwsterer, 7, St. Clement’s Church-yard

Elwin Thomas, Esq. 5, Fyebridge-street

Elwin Marsham, Gent. 5, Upper Close

Elwin James, Baker, 45, Pottergate-street

Elwin Mrs. 3, Golden-Dog lane

English James, Writing-Master, 87, Upper Westwick street

English Joseph, Woolcomber, 14, St. Margaret’s Churchyard

English John, Turner, &c. 21, St. Stephen’s street

Evans T. B. Esq. 4, Little Rampant-Horse street



F


Fair Charles, Boot and Shoe Maker, 5, Gildengate-street

Fairhead Charles, Bricklayer, 16, St. Martin’s by Palace str.

Fellows Samuel, Leather-Cutter, 25, Wymer-street

Fenn Abraham, Boot and Shoe-maker, 20, Tombland

Fiddey Henry, Broker, 11, Hog-hill

Fiddey John, Butcher, 1, Butchery-market

Field Elizabeth, Glover, 7, St. Giles’

Finch Peter, Brewer, 41, Coslany-street

Firman William, Baker, 38, Ber-street

Fish Thomas, Cabinet-Maker, &c. 4, Bridewell Alley

Fish John, Shawl and Cotton Manufacturer, Fish-gate street

Fisher George, Tailor, 15, St. Stephen’s road

Fiske Hammond, Deal, Timber Merchant, and Builder, Fishgate-street

Fitt William, Carpenter, 8, Golden Ball lane

Flegg Edward, Schoolmaster, 10, St. Martin’s lane

Fletcher Thomas, Cord and Rope Maker, 4, Dove-lane

Flint Richard, Sack-Manufacturer, Colegate-street

Folliot John, Shopkeeper, 95, Pottergate-street

Foster, Son, Unthank, and Forster, Attorneys, 11, Queen-street

Forster William, Attorney, 6, Little Rampant-Horse street

Foster, Dwelling-House, 15, Castle-Meadow

Forster D. D. Master of the Free Grammar School, Upper-Close

Forster Charles, Plumber and Glazier, 20, King-street

Forster and Waite, Coppersmiths and Braziers, 2, Broad-street, St. Giles’

Forster Richard, Esq. Eaton

Foster John, Bowl-Turner, Trowse

Fort Thomas, Shopkeeper, 12, St George’s Bridge-street

Foulger William, Flour-Merchant, Trowse

Foulsham Mrs. 32, St. Stephen’s road

Foulsham and Nave, Builders, 3, Chapel-field

Fountain Martin, Bricklayer, 10, Tooley-street

Fox John, Plumber, &c. 125, Pottergate-street

Fox William, Engineer to the Water-Works, 44, Lower Westwick street

Francis Samuel, Woolcomber, 8, St. Martin’s by Palace str.

Francis Mrs. Register-Office, 4, Surry-street

Freeman Jeremiah, Carver, Gilder, and Printseller, 2, London-lane

Freeman R. H. Tailor and Salesman, 11 and 13, St. George’s Bridge-street

Freeman Mrs. Throwsterer, 29, Snailgate-street

Freeman John, Cabinet-Maker and Upholder, 11 and 12, Upper-Market

Freeman Edward, Cabinet-Maker, 16, Back of the Inns

Freeman James, Throwsterer, Stepping-lane, near King-str.

Freshfield John, Hop-Merchant, 3, Elm-hill-street

French John, Hair-Dresser, 28, St. George’s Bridge street

Frewer and Son, Sadlers, 11, Hay-market

Fromantel Daniel, Manufacturer, 3, in Court, Chapel-field-lane

Frost Mrs. St. Giles’s road

Frost James, Builder, 41, St. Stephen’s street

Fulcher James, Brush-Maker, 10, Hay-market

Futter John, Farmer, Ketteringham, and at the Angel, on Saturdays



G


Ganning Daniel, Gent. 23, St. Giles’

Gapp James, Merchant, 8, Coslany Bridge-street

Gapp James, Dyer, 60, Coslany-street

Gardiner Richard, Corn-Merchant, 138, King-street

Gardiner Michael, Salesman, 5, St. Andrew’s Plain

Gardiner Thomas, Throwsterer, 2, Soutergate-street

Garland Thomas, Esq. 5, Lower Close

Gatley David, Woolcomber, 14, St. Andrew’s Bridge-street

Gay Robert, Basket-Maker, 15, Tombland

Gaze John, Tanner, 11, Heigham street

Gaze Thomas, Stationer and Broker, 17, Red Lion-lane

Gaze Samuel, Three Compasses, 203, King-street

Gee Benjamin, Crown and Anchor, 29, Gildengate-street

Geldart Joseph and Son, Wine-Merchants, 15, Fyebridge-str.

Geldart Joseph, jun. 2, Fyebridge-street

Gibson Joseph, Master Weaver, 18, St Martin’s by Palace Plain

Gibson David, Tailor, 15, Bridewell-Alley

Gibbs William, Throwsterer, 4, Barrack-street

Gidney James, Fruiterer, 11, Red-Lion-lane

Gidney John, Fruiterer, 10, Queen-street

Gidney Jeremiah, Master of the Boys’ Hospital

Gifford Christopher, Broker, 31, Timberhill-street

Gillman Mrs. Haberdasher, 46, London-lane

Gilman Thomas, Linen-Draper and Haberdasher, 24 Cockey-lane

Gilmer David, Broker, 15 and 16, Maddermarket-street

Gilmore William, Boot and Shoe Maker, 4, Magdalen-street

Gilney Christopher, Cabinet-Maker, 40, Castle-Ditches

Glover Rev. Edward, 91, Pottergate-street

Goal William, Duffield-Maker, 17, St. Martin’s street

Godfry Ann, Milliner, 45, Market-place

Godfrey Sarah, Linen-Draper, 20, Market-place

Golden Frederick, Baker, 184, King-street

Gooch C. Bricklayer, Trowse

Gooch Henry, Yarn-Factor, 9, Maddermarket-street

Goodwin Sibias, Liquor-Merchant, 1, Pudding-lane

Goodwin James, Attorney, 2, Gun-lane

Goodwin Peter, Baker, 27, Wymer street

Goodwin John, Throwsterer, 5, St. Saviour’s lane

Goose R. Horse Dealer, 31, St. Stephen’s road

Gordon Rev. William, 6, St. Faith’s lane

Gordon Capt. 21, Hungate-street

Gosnold Mary, Tailor, &c. 8, St. Giles’s Broad street

Goss John, Dyer, Elm-hill street

Gostling Francis, Merchant, 3, Duke’s Palace

Gostling Francis, Vinegar Yard, 7, St. Faith’s lane

Gostling Edward, Plumber 5, Wymer street

Gotts George, Smith and Farrier, 5, St. Augustine’s street

Goulty Richard, Boot and Shoe Maker, 10, Back of the Inns

Gowen Thomas, Licensed to Let Post Horses, 23, Bethel str.

Graham W. G. Haberdasher, 8, Cockey-lane

Graham George, Glover, &c. 10, Upper Market

Grand John, Attorney, at Mr. Capon’s, 37, Bethel-street

Grant Charles, Tailor and Habit Maker, 27, Tombland

Grant Mrs. Matron at the Hospital

Graver Mountain, Lobster Inn, 24, Pottergate street

Graves Jeremiah, Woollen Draper, 9, Market-place

Graves John and Co. Hotpressers, 16, Tooley street

Gray Robert, Cabinet Maker, 22, Wymer street

Green Ann, Butcher, 8, Fishmarket

Green James, Boot and Shoe Maker, 15, Red Lion lane

Green John, Horse-Dealer, 7, Wastlegate lane, All Saints

Green William, Carpenter, 80, Lower Westwick street

Green John, Bricklayer, 38, Colegate street

Green J. B. Carpenter, Tooley street

Green James, Wroxham, Gent. and at J. Green’s, Bricklayer, Colegate
street, on Saturdays

Greenfield Thomas, Jolly Farmers, 3, Castle Ditches

Gridley H. Woolcomber, 190, King street

Grienfield Daniel, Baker, 18, Golden Ball lane

Grinling James, Woollen Draper, 41, London lane

Grimmer Thomas Carpenter, 18, St. Martin’s lane

Gunton James, Cabinet and Chair Maker, 4, Timberhill str.

Gurney Mrs. Haberdasher, 11, Rampant Horse street

Gurney Richard, Bartlett and Joseph, Bankers, 1, Bank Place

Gurney Bartlett, Esq. 2, Bank Place

Gurney Hudson, Esq. Queen’s street

Gurney Joseph, Esq. at the Grove, St. Stephen’s

Gurney, Webb, and Son, Wool and Yarn Factors, 1, Coslany street

Gurney Samuel, 18, Red Lion lane.



H


Hadman James, Sun and Anchor Tavern, 19, Pottergate str.

Haggard William, Esq. 8, Wymer street

Hall Henry, Gent. 139, Ber street

Hall Samuel, Boot and Shoe Maker, 32, Pottergate street

Hall Thomas, Dyer, 17, Fishgate street

Hammond William, Gent. 46, Pottergate street

Hammond Joseph, Long Stratton, and at Tuck’s Coffee-House, Norwich

Hampp Christopher, Master Weaver, 20, St. Giles’

Hancock Rev. Thomas, 2, Bishopsgate street

Hancock James, Gent. 26, Bethel-street

Hanmant William, Coal Merchant, 97, King-street

Hansell Rev. 10, Upper Close

Hanworth John, Boot and Shoe Maker, 13, Bethel street

Hanks William, jun. Merchant, 31, Colegate-street

Hanks William, Merchant, 26, Colegate-street

Hardy George, Apothecary, at the Hospital

Hardy James and Son, Grocers and Tea-Dealers, 19, Rampant-Horse street

Harcourt William, Hatter, Hosier, and Draper, 7, Hay-market

Harling Benjamin, Baker, 2, Bethel-street

Harmer William, Coal Merchant, 50, St. Stephen’s street

Harmer Henry, Attorney, 6, Chapel-field-lane

Harmer Samuel, Attorney, 6, Chapel-field-lane

Harman Richard, Milliner, 20, White Lion-lane

Harman James, Tailor, &c. 1, Wymer-street

Harmar Rebecca, Milliner, St. Margaret’s-lane

Harper John, Hatter and Hosier, 7, Cockey-lane

Harper William, Hatter and Hosier, 45, London-lane

Harper William, Plumber, Glazier, and Painter, 26, St. Stephen’s street

Harrington John, Butcher, 6, Fish-market

Hart William, Cabinet and Chair Maker, 15, Hog-hill, and 1, Orford-street

Hart Robert, Patten-maker, 7, Lower Westwick-street

Hart Philip, Carpenter, &c. 1, Botolph-street

Harvey Robert, Esq. 31, Surry-street

Harvey Robert, Baker, 4, Ber-street

Harvey and Hudson, Bankers, 198, King-street

Harvey Mrs. G. 6, Bank-Place

Harvey Thomas, Esq. Catton

Harvey Jeremiah, Ives, Esq. Catton

Harvey Robert, Esq. Merchant, 48, Colegate-street

Harwin William, Ironmonger and Colourman, 19, Hog-hill, and Writing
Master, 1, Rose-lane

Hatch Richard, Baker, 53, St. Martin’s street

Hatch William, Trunk-Maker, 6, Little Cockey-lane

Hawkins Thomas, Grocer, 9, Queen street, and 28, Tombland

Haws John, Boot and Shoe Maker, and Leather Cutter, 20, Back of the Inns

Hawes John, Coach Maker, 13, Hungate-street

Hawsham John, at the Arabian Horse, 2, St. Martin’s at Oak street

Haylett Michael, Gardner, at the Pine Apple, 20, St. Martin’s at Oak lane

Hayton Mark, Baker, 6, Upper Market

Heald Henry, Gardner, &c. 13, Rose-lane

Heasell John, Cheesemonger, 18, Hay-market

Heasell Thomas, Woolfactor, 2, Red Well-street

Heasell Thomas, Baker, 67, Gildengate-street

Heigham Richard, Linen Draper, 16, Cockey-lane

Henshaw, Steelyard and Scale-Beam Maker, 20, Golden Ball-lane

Herring Robert, Esq. Bracondale hill

Herring John and Sons, Merchants, 63 and 64, Gildengate-str.

Herring John, jun. Esq. Residence, 4, Colegate-street

Herring James, Woollen-Draper, 5, Hay-market

Herring William, Esq. Merchant, 4, St. Faith’s lane

Hewett Coleby, Boot and Shoe Maker, 12, Red Lion-lane

Hewett John, Hair Dresser, 29, Magdalen-street

Hibgame Rev. Edward, l, Muspole street

Hickling’s (Miss) Boarding School, 8, Chancery street, St. Andrew’s

Higgin Christopher, Shawl Manufacturer, 18, Coslany street

Higgin and Clarke, Woolcombers and Worsted Manufacturers, 18, Coslany
street

Hill Mary, Baker, 50 and 51, Upper Westwick-street

Hilling William, Confectioner, 6 and 7, Lower Goat-lane

Hilton George, Prince of Wales, 83, Upper Westwick-street

Hodgson James, Ladies’ Academy, 6, Wymer-street

Hodgson Charles, Boarding School, 47, Wymer-street

Hogg Edward, Working Cutler, 13, Little Cockey-lane

Holland Samuel, Duffield Maker, 24, Barrack-street

Holland William, Coal Merchant, St. George’s Bridge-street

Hollows Thomas, Hair-Dresser, 48, Coslany street

Holmes Thomas, Shopkeeper, 34, King-street

Holmes William, Tailor, 3, St. Gregory’s Church-yard

Holt Thomas, Tailor, &c. 14, Peacock-street

Hook Edward, Esq. 59, St. Giles’

Horne Francis, Confectioner, 122, Pottergate-street

Horstead Thomas, Boot and Shoe Maker, 15, Back of the Inns

Horth John, Upholder, 17, White Lion-lane

Houghton Mrs. 2, Griffin-lane

Houghton Henry, Ship-builder, Thorpe

Houghton Robert, Butcher, 3, Hall’s End

Howard Adam, White Lion, 36, Bethel-street

Howard John, Baker, 21, Cowgate street

Howard Samuel, Carpenter, &c. 24, Coslany street

Howe John, at the Bear Inn, Market-place

Howell Henry, Hair-Dresser, 1, Castle Ditches

Howes Rev. 2, Cow-Hill

Howes Gordon, Esq. 53, Pottergate-street

Howes William, Hair-Dresser, 17, Hay-market

Howlett James, Wheelwright, &c. 40, St. Martin’s at Oak str.

Hubbard William, Fancy Chair-Maker, 12, Broad street, St. Giles’

Hubbard Charles, Linen Draper, &c. 21, White Lion-lane

Hubbard Robert, China and Glass Warehouse, 6, White Lion lane

Hubbard and Wade, Boot and Shoe Makers, 7, Briggs’ lane

Hubbard James, Cabinet Maker, 12, St. Andrew’s Bridge str.

Hubbard James, Baker, 17, St. Martin’s lane

Hubby Simon, House-Broker, 11, Colegate-street

Huggins John, Currier, &c. St. Benedict’s road

Hugman Benjamin, Tanner, &c. 13, Heigham street

Humphrey Rev. Richard, Thorpe

Hunnock Henry, Circulating Library, 12, Bridewell Alley

Hunt John, Circulating Library, 12, Red-Well street

Hunt John, Worsted Manufacturer, 45, Gildengate-street

Hutchinson Samuel, Baker, 7, Timberhill-street

Hyde John, Esq. Thorpe



I


Isaac Joseph, Grocer, 5, Chapel-street

Ives Jeremiah, Esq. Mayor, Catton

Ives J. J. and Son, and Basely, Merchants, St. Saviour’s Church-lane

Ives Jeremiah, Esq. 1, Colegate-street, and in Town Close

Ives Mrs. 17, Surry street

Ives Mrs. 3, Cook’s lane, King-street

Ivory Thomas, Esq. 1, Bishopsgate-street,

Ivory John, Stone Mason, 13, King-street



J


Jacob and Co. Tobacconists, 23, Upper Market

Jackson, Stewardson and Harper, Manufacturers, 56, St. Stephen’s street

Jackson William, House Broker, 16, Hog-hill

James John, Glass and China Warehouse, 27, Market-place

James William, Throwsterer, 11, Cowgate-street

Jary William, South Walsham, and at the Angel, Norwich, on Saturdays

Jay Joseph, Coal Merchant and Fishmonger, 19, Coslany street

Jay Thomas and Son, Coal Merchants, 137, King-street

Jay Charles, Fishmonger, 19, Fish-market

Jeckell Thomas, Corn and Coal Merchant, 127, Magdalen-street

Jenner Henry, Draper, Mercer, &c. 2, Hay-market

Jermy William, Felmonger, Dwelling house, Lower Westwick street.  Offices
at Sandland’s Ferry, and St Martin’s at Oak

Johnson Lewis, Hair-Dresser, 41, Market-place

Johnson Isaac, Hat-Maker, 8, London-lane

Johnson Mrs. 2, Cook’s lane, King street

Johnson John, Patten Maker, 4, St. Martin’s by Palace

Johnson Benjamin, Grocer, &c. Upper Westwick-street

Johnson Robert, at the Shell-Work, Heigham

Jones George, Hair-Dresser, 6, Gun-lane

Joslin Robert, Sadler, &c. 7, Madder-market-street

Joy Matthew, Linen-Draper and Haberdasher, 3, White-Lion lane



K


Keer John, Duffield Manufacturer, 9, St Martin’s street

Kemp John, Swardestone, and at the Angel, Norwich, on Saturdays

Kent Henry, Boot and Shoe Maker, 22, White-Lion-lane

Keith Christopher, Linen-Draper, 19, Cockey-lane

Kerrison Sir Roger, Knt. and Co. Bankers and Merchants, 8, Back of the
Inns

Kerrison John, Ladies’ Shoe Maker, 61, St. Giles’

Kett and Back, Bankers, 2, Hog-hill

Kett John, Butcher, 115, Ber-street

Kett John, Butcher, 2, Butchery-Market

Kett Mary, Butcher, 12, Fish-market

Kett Edward, Butcher and Fishmonger, 14, Fishmarket

Kettle James, Mahogany and Deal Merchant, 1, St. Ann’s Staith,
King-street

Keymer James, Surgeon, 5, Bethel street

Keymer and Baker, Shawl Manufacturers, 22, Magdalen street

Keymer John, Rose Inn, 2, St. Augustine’s

Kidd William, Grocer and Tea-Dealer, 4, Elm Hill-street

Kiddell Thomas, Shopkeeper, 11, St. Martin’s at Oak street

King Ann, Milliner, &c. 41, Cowgate-street

King James, Throwsterer, 2, St. Swithin’s lane

King George, Sadler, 14, White Lion lane

King Thomas, Carpenter, 7, Cow hill

King Samuel, Yarn Factor, 50, Colegate street

Kinnebrook David, School Master, 1, St. Peter’s

Kitson Roger, Writing Master, 3, St. Andrew’s Plain

Kittle Trivet, Tailor, 20, London-lane

Kittle Richard, Woollen Draper, 25, ditto

Kitton Robert, Grocer, &c. 52, Coslany street

Knights Thomas, Tailor, 1, St. Lawrence Church-yard

Knights John, Tailor, &c. 21, Wastlegate-street, All Saints

Knights, Shawl Manufacturer, Market-place



L


Ladbrook Robert, Drawing Master, 5, Surry street

Ladbrooke Mary, 5, St. Stephen’s street

Ladley Thomas, jun. Hempen-Cloth Manufacturer, 52, Lower Westwick-street

Ladley Francis, Shawl Manufacturer, 38, Lower Westwick street

Lamb Thomas, Butcher, 32, Market-place

Lamb Elizabeth, Butcher, 4, Fish-market

Lamb Susannah, Butcher, 5, Fish-market

Lamb John, Butcher, 13, Fish-market

Lamb William, Butcher, 2, Hall’s End

Lambert Charles, Stay-Maker, 20, Bethel-street

Lambert Ann, Circulating Library, 1, Back of the Inns

Land Matthew, Butcher, 2, Fish-market

Landy and Fitch, Chymists, &c. 46, Market-place

Landy James, Gent. 68, St. Giles’

Lane Nicholas, Woolcomber, 3, Upper Surry-street

Lane William, Stone Mason, 144, Ber-street

Lane Robert, Broker, 92 and 93, Upper Westwick street

Larke John, Star Inn, 9, Hay-market

Larrance Samuel, Upholder, &c. 1, St. Andrew’s Plain

Larter Thomas, Pawnbroker, 28, Wymer-street

Larter Daniel, at the Jolly Gardners, in the Old King’s Head Court, St.
Stephen’s street

Larwood Michael, Cow Keeper, St Stephen’s street

Lathom Henry, Esq. 8, Upper Surry-street

Lathom Francis, Esq. 15, St. Martin’s by Palace street

Lawne Benjamin, Tailor, 84, St. Giles’

Lawne Sarah, Stay Maker, 40, Bethel-street

Laws Charles, Shopkeeper, 2, St George’s Bridge-street

Laws Edward, Gent. 173, King street

Laws William, Waggon and Horses, 3, St Giles’ Broad str.

Lawter Joshua, Under Chamberlain, 52, Bethel-street

Layden Ann, Butcher, 3, Fish-market

Lay Charles, Attorney, 40, St. Giles’

Lea James, Waggon and Horses Inn, 13, Tombland

Leach William, King’s Head Inn, 11, Market-place

Leeds Charles, 11, Nag’s Head Inn, Rampant Horse-street

Leeds Thomas, Oval-Frame Turner, 2, Elm hill-street

Leeds Edward, Brush Maker, and Importer of Foreign Spirits, &c. &c. 123,
Pottergate-street

Leeds John, Coal Merchant, 30, Wymer-street

Leeds Stephen, Tanner, Whitwell, and at the Angel, Norwich, on Saturdays

Leggett John, Tailor, &c. 5, St. Swithin’s lane

Le Grice, Capt. 19, Surry street

Leman Abraham, Grocer and Tea Dealer, 14, London-lane

Lenham John, at the Waterman, 58, King-street

Lenny Isaac, Landsurveyor, 25, Tombland

Lens Mrs. 19, St. Giles’

Letree William, Esq. 13, St. Saviour’s lane

Leverington Robert, Surveyor and Builder, 3, All Saint’s Green

Life James, Shopkeeper, 26, King street

Lillestone Robert, Whitesmith, 56, Coslany-street

Lindley George, Nursery and Seeds Man, Catton

Ling Gouldsmith, Linen-Draper, 13, Market-place

Ling Arthur, Bricklayer, St. Stephen’s Back street

Linstead Henry, Butcher, 46, Ber-street

Linstead Samuel, Butcher, 10, Fish-market

Litchfield George, Post-master, Post-Office, Market-place

Lock Nathaniel, Carpenter and Millwright, 41, Wymer street

Lock John, Accountant, 10, Red Well-street

Love Samuel, Plumber, &c. 115, Magdalen street

Love Robert Plumber &c. 53, Coslany street

Lovick John, Woollen-Draper, Button Seller and Haberdasher, 13,
Cockey-lane

Lowden John, Butcher, 28, Market-place

Lowden James, Butcher, 36, ditto

Lowden John, jun. 6, Willow lane, St. Giles’

Lusher Thomas, Swan, 8, Swan-lane

Lubbock Richard, M. D. 76, St. Giles’

Lubbock Margaret, Baker, 24, Surry-street

Lubbock Thomas, Attorney, 25, Bethel-street

Lyons R. Optician, 1, Gun-lane



M


Mack William and Co. London Stage Waggons, 73, St. Giles’ Broad street

Mack William, Collector of Freightage, &c. 29, St Giles’

Mack James, Pawnbroker, 45, Magdalen street

Mackie W. A. Nurseryman, St. Stephen’s road

Maidwell James, Clock and Watch Maker, 8, Upper Westwick street

Mallet Nicholas, Shawl Manufacturer, 5, Muspole-street

Maltby Thomas, Merchant, 64, Gildengate street

Maltby Daniel, Shopkeeper, 63, Cowgate-street

Mann E. G. Appraiser and Auctioneer, 6, Dove-lane

Mann Robert, Clock and Watch Maker, 5, St. Simon’s

Mann Samuel, Hair-Dresser, 20, Fye-bridge street

Mann Michael, Coppersmith and Brazier, 27, London-lane

Manning John, M. D. 20, Surry-street

Manning Edward, Coppersmith, Brazier, and Tin-plate Worker, 22,
Cockey-lane

Manning John, Baker, 2, Coslany Bridge-street

Margetson Richard, Wheelwright, 16, St. Stephen’s road

Marker Robert, Shopkeeper, 22, St. Augustine’s street

Marley Susannah, Porter and Punch House, 29, Market-place

Marsh Edward, Merchant, 124, Magdalen street

Marsh Robert and Co. London Stage Waggons, 4, Tombland

Marsh James, Attorney, 3, Bank Place

Marshall Z. Ashley, and at the Angel, Norwich, on Saturdays

Marston Robert, Stone Mason, 48, Bethel street

Martlock James, 30, Recruiting Serjeant, Rampant Horse-street

Martin Sarah, Lamb Inn, Hay-market

Martin George Richard, Draper, Haberdasher, and Mercer, 17, Cockey-lane

Martin Edmund, Umbrella-Maker, and China-Man, 38, London-lane

Martin Samuel, Cabinet Maker, 2, Surry-street

Martin Charles, Upholder, 26, Hungate-street

Martin William, Hatter, &c. 2, Little Cockey-lane

Martineau Thomas, Esq. Magdalen-street

Martineau Philip, Surgeon, 192, King-street

Mason Robert, Esq. 70, Pottergate-street

Mason and Tidd, Druggists, &c. 7, Elm hill str.

Massey and Roberts, Shawl Manufacturers, 97, Pottergate-str.

Masters Mrs. Glover, 4, Red Lion-lane

Matcalf William, Shawl Manufacturer, 20, Colegate-street

Matthews William, Importer of Wine and Foreign Spirits, at the Golden
Key, 24, Hay-market

Matthews John, Plumber, &c. 5, St. Stephen’s street

Mays William, Carpenter, &c. 35, Pottergate-street

Mead William, Green Lion, 36, Cowgate-street

Mear Stephen, Builder, &c. 24, St. Stephen’s Back street

Meek James, Plumber, 15, Magdalen-street

Mendham Elizabeth, Milliner, 33, St. Giles’

Mendham Thomas, Gardner, 21, St. Martin’s at Oak street

Merry Peter, Plumber &c. 31, Magdalen street

Merry Robert, Cooper, 115, Pottergate-street

Merriment Jonathan, Throwsterer, 13, Cowgate-street

Middleton Rev. 4, Life’s Green

Middleton Michael, Broker, 10, Bridewell Alley

Mileham Richard, at the Barley Mow, 1, Weaver’s lane

Mileham Peter, Porter Merchant, 42, Wymer-street

Miles Edward, Tailor, 50, Bethel-street

Miles Stephen, Whalebone Staithe, 118, King-street

Millard Rev. Charles, 41, Snailgate street

Millard Rev. Charles, 4, Bracondale hill

Miller Samuel, at the Lamb, 135, Ber-street

Miller James, Hair Dresser, 119, Magdalen-street

Mills William, Upholsterer, Monument Yard, London, and at the Swan,
Norwich

Mingay and Co. Woollen Drapers and Mercers, 22, Rampant Horse street

Mingay Richard, Master of Bridewell

Minner John, Rainbow Inn, 132, King-street

Minns Robert, Boot and Shoe Maker, 3, Back of the Inns

Mitchell Robert, at the Cock, 53, St. Giles’

Mitchell Samuel, Red Lion, 3, Coslany street

Mollet Rising, Whitesmith, Pig-lane

Monday Mrs. Broker, 28, Rampant Horse street

Moore John, Wheelwright, 18, Ber-street

Moore Thomas, Hawker and Pedlar’s Office, 47, Bethel str.

Moore Theodore, Throwsterer, 150, King-street

Moore Stephen, Gent. 4, Lower Close

Moore James and Son, Dyers, 7, Wymer-street

Moore John, Sack Manufacturer, 30, Magdalen-street

Morley Charles, Stover and Throwsterer, 52, Cowgate-street

Morris John, Whitesmith, Appraiser and Auctioneer, at the Black Boys, 44,
Colegate street

Morphew John, Attorney, 2, Wilkes’s lane, near Bank-Place

Moss John, Esq. 7, Upper Surry street, and Porter Brewery, 57, St.
Martin’s at Oak street

Moss Richard, Gent. 19, Upper Close

Moltin Francis, Weather Glass Maker, 11, Lower Westwick street

Mountain Henry, Corn and Coal Merchant, 23, Lower Close

Mountney Thomas, Swan Inn, Upper Market str.

Munney John, Broker, 37, St. Giles’

Murray Mrs. 130, Magdalen street

Murry J. M. Appraiser and Auctioneer, 10, Black Horse Inn, St. Giles’
Broad street

Muskett Thomas, Gressenhall, Tanner

Muskett Joseph, Easton Hall, and at the Swan, Upper Market str. Norwich,
on Saturdays



N


Nash John, Importer and Dealer in Wines, &c. 33, Wymer-street

Neale James, Straw-Hat Manufacturer, 15, Bethel street

Neech Samuel, at the Public Gardens, St. Stephen’s road

Neel Edward, Pastry Cook, &c. 21, Back of the Inns

Neeve William, Bricklayer, 143, Ber-street, late Scole’s Green

Negus Mrs. 19, Lower Close

Nelson Charles, Landsurveyor, 7, Red Lion-lane

Newbegin Ann, Clothes’ Broker, 1, Madder-market-street

Newman Richard, Baker, 126, Magdalen-street

Newson William, Grocer and Tea-Dealer, 101, Stump Cross

Newstead Samuel, Ladies’ Shoe Maker, 17, Madder-market-street

Newstead John, at the Cat and Fiddle, 48, Magdalen-street

Newton Francis, Gent. 10, St. Stephen’s street

Newton Rev. I. W. 16, Lower Close

Nicholas Robert, Hempen Cloth Manufacturer, Beccles, and in Weaver’s
lane, on Saturdays

Nichols Thomas, Rope Maker, 8, St. Augustine’s street

Nickless Isaac, Raven Inn, 32, King-street

Nockles Samuel, Boot and Shoe Maker, 8, Elm hill street

Norgate Elias, Gent. 17, St. Giles’

Norgate and Stafford, Hair-Dressers, 18, Rampant Horse-str.

Norgate John, Grocer and Tea Dealer, 36, Surry-street

Norgate Mary, Glover, &c. 17, Dove-lane

Norman Benjamin, Hempen-Cloth Manufacturer, 4, Hog-hill

Norman James, Smith, 83, Ber-street

Norman John, Duke of York, Castle Ditches

Norman Thomas, at the Pine Apple, Trowse

Norris Jeremiah, Esq. 2, St. Giles’ hill-street

Norris Samuel, Coffin Maker, 133, Magdalen street

Nosworthy James, Jeweller and Toyman, 3, Queen-street

Nudd John, Esq. Bracondale hill

Nunn Sarah, Baker, 10, St. Andrew’s Chancery street

Nutter Sarah, Gingerbread Baker, 15, Cockey-lane



O


Oaker Joseph, Gent. 6, Snailgate-street

Oakley William, Smith, 3, St. Martin’s by Palace street

Oliver Thomas, Gent. 11, Snailgate-street

Ollett George, Sun and Anchor Tavern, 51, Colegate street

Orsborn Mark, Tallow Chandler, 33, Timberhill-street

Orsborn Robert, Sandland’s Ferry

Orsburn Edward, Livery Stables, Gildengate-street

Osborn and Son, Boot and Shoe Makers, 3, Upper Market str.

Osborn James and Co. Sack Manufacturers, 31, Cowgate street

Ownsworth John, Bricklayer, 27, Bethel-street

Oxley John, Hatter and Hosier, 5, Market-place; Dwelling-house, 4,
Gildengate-street

Oxley Joseph, Merchant, 52, Gildengate-street



P


Page and Co. Grocers, 1, Timberhill-street

Page John, Baker, Jack of Newberry yard, Pottergate street

Page William, Accomptant, 22, St. Martin’s at Oak street

Page James Cocksedge, 145, Ber-street

Pairman Jeremiah, Horse Dealer, 4, Orford-street

Painter Henry, Broker, 4, Upper Westwick street

Palmer William, Corn Merchant, 54, King-street

Palmer William, Grocer, &c. 63, Coslany street

Palmer William, Boot and Shoe Maker, 13, Fyebridge street

Parkinson Joseph, Haberdasher, 37, London-lane

Parkerson I. C. Corn and Coal Merchant, 18, St. Martin’s by Palace street

Parkerson John, House-Bell Hanger and Venetian Blind-Maker, 9,
Hungate-street

Parke Luke, Carver and Gilder, 9, Little Cockey-lane

Parlour John, Whitesmith, 15, London-lane

Parmerton John, Miller, Aylsham, and at the Angel, Norwich

Parr Rev. Robert, 67, St. Giles’ Broad street

Parr Thomas, Woollen Draper, 5, Pottergate-street

Parslee Mrs. Bell Inn, 17, Hog hill

Partridge Robert, Esq. 3, Gildengate street

Partridge Rev. Mr. 10, Lower Goat-lane

Paston Mrs. 4, Lady’s lane

Pastons James, Grocer and Tallow Chandler, 116, Ber-street

Patteson John, Esq. 6, Surry street

Pater John, Carpenter, 2, Golden Dog-lane

Paul William, Appraiser, Auctioneer, and House-Broker, 98, Upper
Westwick-street

Payne John, Printer, Bookseller, and Stationer, 22, Market-place

Peck William, Innkeeper, 30, Market-place

Peck James, Turk’s Head, 4, Weaver’s lane

Peck Edward, Butcher, 1, Fish-market

Peck Mary, Butcher, 50, Ber-street

Peele Rev. John, 5, Lady’s lane

Perkins William, Tin-plate Worker, 11, Little Cockey-lane

Perkins William, Coppersmith, 25, Hay-market

Perown James, Boulting Cloth Maker, 15, Coslany-street

Perry Paul, Turner, 13, St. Gregory’s Church yard

Peete Richard, Esq. 22, Surry-street

Phillips William, Peacock, 78, St. Stephen’s street

Phillips John, Griffin Inn, 1, King-street

Pickis Robert, Oatmeal Maker, 6, Castle Ditches

Pigg Joseph, Carpenter and Joiner, Fishgate-street

Pigg Robert, Confectioner, &c. 28, London-lane

Pigg Thomas and Joseph, Carpenters and Joiners, 16, St. Saviour’s lane

Pillans W. C. Esq. 3, Tomland

Pitchford, Surgeon, 26, St. Giles’ Broad street

Pitcher Isaiah, Pawn Broker, 26, Pottergate-street

Pitchers James, Hair Dresser, 10, Upper Market str.

Plaford John, China and Glass Warehouse, 38, Market-place

Platter James, Boot and Shoe Maker, 9, Tooley-street

Playford Robert, Patten and Trunk Maker, 4, Dove-lane

Plumber and Massey, Ironmongers, &c. 124, Pottergate-street

Plumbtree Robert, Esq. 84, Ber-street

Pooley Thomas, Duffield and Rug Maker, 71, Magdalen-street

Pooley Sarah, Duffield Manufacturer, Bird and Hand lane, Heigham

Pope Richard, Carpenter, 86, Upper Westwick-street

Potter Rev. 7, Upper Close

Potter William, Currier, 33, Lower Westwick-street

Potter Charles, Accomptant, St. Martin’s at Oak street

Powell Robert, Woolcomber, 114, Magdalen street

Prentice Samuel, Shakspeare Tavern, 24, London-lane

Prentice Susannah, Wine Vaults, 34, London-lane

Prentice Robert, Importer and Dealer in Wines, &c. 11, Tombland

Prest Robert, Baker, 14, Pitt-street

Preston Elizabeth, White Lion Inn, White Lion-lane

Priest Robert, Grocer and Tea Dealer, 42, Market-place

Priest John Fox, Chymist and Druggist, 1, St. Giles’ Broad str.

Prior William, Horse and Groom, 17, Back of the Inns

Pritchard Jonathan, Baker, 20, Fish-gate street

Pritchard John, Baker, 15, St. George’s Bridge-street

Procter Joseph, D. D. 14, Upper Close

Purland Robert, Chymist, &c. 3, Fyebridge-street

Purland Robert, sen. Surgeon, in Court, 32, Cowgate-street

Purland Matthew, at Whittington and his Cat, 20, Cowgate street

Purnell John, Throwsterer, 12, Cowgate-street

Pye Samuel, Attorney, 22, St. Martin’s by Palace plain

Pye Richard, Tailor, 2, St. Gregory’s Church-yard



Q


Quantrell Robert, Baker, 45, Coslany-street



R


Rackham Matthew, Intwood Hall, and at the Swan, Upper Market str. on
Saturdays

Rackham Elizabeth, Grocer, 34, St. Stephen’s street

Rackham John, Baker, 39, St. Stephen’s street

Rackham Matthew, Bull Inn, 43, ditto

Rackham Mrs. Baker, 6, Upper Goat-lane

Rackham Rebecca, Shopkeeper, 1, Peacock street

Rackham William, Leather Cutter, 71, Coslany-street

Ramm William, Gent. 187, King-street

Rampley George, Crown Inn, 32, Upper Westwick-street

Rand Hewett, Esq. Sampson and Hercules’ Court, Tombland

Rand William Fell, Surgeon, ditto, ditto

Randall Benjamin, Esq. 16, Upper Close

Ransome Thomas, Gent. 14, Castle Meadow

Raymes Thomas, Oatmeal Maker, 18, St. Simon’s

Reeves James, China and Glass Warehouse, 23, Cockey-lane

Reeve Isaac, Duffield and Flushing Manufacturer, 1, Golden Dog lane

Reeve Thomas and Co. Clothiers, 7, Soutergate-street

Reeve John Sayer, Baker, 18 and 19, ditto

Reynolds John, Iron Merchant, 12, Lower Goat-lane

Reynolds Charles, Woollen Draper, 19, Market-place

Reuben William, Cooper, 13, Ber-street

Rice Luke, Tailor, 3, Rampant Horse-street

Richer Nicholas, Bookbinder, 6, St. Giles’ Broad street

Riches William, George Inn, 37, St. Stephen’s street

Riches Thomas, Hair Preparer, &c. 4, Wastlegate str. All Saints

Riches Edward, Hair Dresser, 10, Pottergate-street

Riches Henry, Granaries and Coal Binns, late Burrell’s, 120, King-street

Riches John, Carpenter, Soutergate-street

Richards Edward, Licensed to Let Post Horses, &c. &c. 32, Botolph-street

Richards Robert, Linen Manufacturer, 26, Market-place

Rider Robert, Billiard-Table Maker, 1, King-street

Rigby Edward, Esq. Surgeon, 64, St. Giles’ Broad street

Riggs John, Prince of Wales, 2, Back of the Inns

Riggs John, Brewer’s Arms, 18, London-lane

Ringer Edward, Boot and Shoe Maker, 14, Dove-lane

Rippon James, Tailor, &c. 3, Surry-street

Riseborough John, Coal Merchant, 9, Chapel-field-lane

Rivett S. Silk Dyer, 17, Upper Market

Rix R. and Co. Glass Warehouse, 47, Wymer-street N.B. Agent to the Sun
Fire-Office

Roach Richard, Plumber, &c. 3, St. Simon’s

Roach Edward, Tailor, 129, Magdalen-street

Roberts John, Glover, &c., 17, Golden Ball-lane

Roberts John Whitaker, Hotpresser, 12, Soutergate-street

Robinson James, Surgeon, 16, Lower Goat-lane

Robinson John, Plumber, &c. 9, Snailgate-street

Robinson William, Hotpresser, 15, ditto

Robinson Charles, Lock and White Smith, 21, St. Martin’s at Oak lane

Rodwell John, Dyer, 42, Lower Westwick-street

Roe Robert, Boot and Shoe Maker, 14, Cockey-lane

Roe Bosom, Baker, 7, Fyebridge-street

Roe John, Tailor, &c. 5, Swan-lane

Rogers Mrs. Ladies’ Boarding School, Magdalen-street

Rooks John, Deal, Timber Merchant, and Builder, 12, Fishgate-street

Root James, Whitesmith, 4, St. Saviour’s Church lane

Roope James, Cabinet-Maker, 6, Timberhill-street

Rose Thomas, Cork Cutter, 69, St. Stephen’s street

Rose Mary, Silk Dyer, 3, Swan-lane

Royal Peter, at the Chequers, 67, Coslany-street

Royal Benjamin, Millwright, 18, Tooley-street

Rowe James, Two Quarts, 17, St Stephen’s street

Rudd Robert, Baker, Rising Sun-lane

Rudd John, Shopkeeper, 34, Botolph-street

Rudd John, Shopkeeper, 36, Gildengate street

Russells Mary, Broker, 5, Hog-hill

Rump and Clipperton, Grocers, Tea Dealers and Hop Factors, 13, Hay-market

Rump James, jun. Gent. Catton

Russell Skinner, Attorney, 1, in Court, opposite the Black Horse, St.
Giles’

Russell Jeremiah, Tripeman, 136, Ber-street

Russell Edward, Clock and Watch Maker, 25, Magdalen-street

Rust Edward, Haberdasher, 19, Tombland

Rye William, Linen-Draper, 18, Upper Market



S


Sabbarton James and Co. Woolcombers, 32, Pitt-street

Sadd John, Dyer, 65, Coslany-street

Salmon Richard, Tailor, 3, St. Saviour’s Church-lane

Salmon Thomas, Baker, 52, Ber-street

Salmon Thomas, Baker, 102, Magdalen-street

Sampson Aaron, Confectioner, 11, Lower Goat-lane

Sandby Rev. Paul, D. D. Chancellor, 1, Lower Close square

Saul William, Carpenter, &c. 4, St. Giles’ hill

Say Thomas, Plumber, &c. 14, St. Giles’

Say Thomas, Plumber, &c. St. Martin’s by Palace street

Sawter Peter, Collar-maker, Trowse

Schuldham John, Woollen-Draper and Mercer, 8, Market place

Scott Daniel, Esq. 125, Magdalen-street

Scott Peter, Brush Maker, 19, White Lion-lane

Scott John, Upholder, 15, White Lion-lane

Scott James, Baker, 24, St. Stephen’s street

Scott Thomas, Woollen Manufacturer, 29, Fishgate-street

Scott Robert, Surgeon, 39, ditto

Scott William, Flower in Hand, 15, Tooley-street

Seggins Isaac, King’s Head Inn, 38, St. Giles’

Sewell Joseph, Attorney, 2, Fromanteel’s Court, Chapel-Field-lane

Sewell Robert, Calico Glazier, 4, in Court, opposite the Black Horse, St.
Giles’

Sewell Bartholomew, Merchant, 35, Pitt-street

Sewell John, Bracon Ash, and at the Rampant Horse, St. Stephen’s, on
Saturdays

Sexton Joseph, Shawl Manufacturer, 46, Snailgate-street

Sexton William, Ironmonger, 49, Market-place

Shalders Absalom, Sadler, &c. 8, Upper Market str.

Shalders William, Leather Cutter, 14, Fyebridge-street

Shalders Jacob, Grocer, 3, St. George’s Bridge-street

Sharpe Robert, Tailor and Habit Maker, 29, Rampant Horse street

Sherrell Mary, Milliner, 11, Cockey-lane

Shepard James, House Broker, 17, Rampant Horse street

Shelty Thomas, Gent. 7, Snailgate-street

Shickle James, Plasterer, 22, Hungate-street

Shildrake John, Tailor and Habit Maker, 43, Lower Westwick-street

Shildrake Thomas, Hampshire Hog, 63, Lower Westwick-street

Shreeve Ann, Shopkeeper, 30, St. Augustine’s street

Shreeve and Newton, Silversmiths and Haberdashers, 20, Cockey-lane

Sidel John, Boot and Shoe Maker, 13, Magdalen street

Sidney John, Gardner, Snailgate-street

Siely and Wright, Linen-Drapers, 36, London-lane

Siely Thomas, Furrier, 3, Upper Westwick-street

Sillet William, at the Duke of York, Cow-hill

Sillis Francis, Farmer, Lime Burner, and Brick Maker, Lakenham, and at
the King’s Head, Norwich, on Saturdays.  Brick Kiln, near Brazen Doors

Silvey Robert, Gingerbread Baker, 21, Bethel-street

Sizeland Thomas, Baker, 43, Bethel-street

Sims John, Chymist and Druggist, 26, London-lane

Simpson William, Attorney, 24, St. Giles’

Simpson Robert, 79, Curriers’ Arms, St. Giles’

Skelton Thomas, Broker, 8, Madder-market-street

Skeele Henry, at the Coffee House, late Tuck’s, 4, Market-place

Slater John, Farrier, 16, Hay-market

Sly and Son, Clock and Watch Makers 1, White Lion-lane, and 61,
Gildengate-street

Smith Francis, Cooper, 76, St. Stephen’s street

Smith Thomas, Engraver, 11, Bethel-street

Smith William, Esq. 6, Lady’s lane

Smith Jacob, Baker, 1, Common Pump street

Smith John, Carpenter, 146, Ber street

Smith William, James, and Francis, Woollen-Drapers, 6, Market-place

Smith Thomas, Furrier and Liquor Merchant, 43, Market-place

Smith William, Plumber, &c. 7, Upper Market

Smith James, Ladies’ Shoe Maker, 9, ditto

Smith Daniel, Fishmonger, 17, Fish-market

Smith Thomas, Cabinet Maker, 16, St. Giles’

Smith Samuel, Grocer, 42, ditto

Smith William, Tanner, 2, in Court opposite the Black Horse, St. Giles’.
Tanning Office at Thorpe

Smith Eli, Duffield Maker, 25, St Stephen’s street

Smith Thomas, Tailor and Habit Maker, 16, Hungate-street

Smith James, Attorney, in Goss’s yard, Elm hill-street

Smith John, Hempen-Cloth Manufacturer, 18, Wymer-str.

Smith James, Grocer, 20, Coslany-street

Smith Moses, Pawn Broker, 50, St. Martin’s at Oak-street

Smith Hugh, Gardner and Seedsman, without Brazen Doors

Smith Matthew, Tanner, 7, Heigham-street

Snell I. C. M.D. 172, King-street,

Sothern George, Chymist, &c. 25, Market-place

Sothern Jane, Glass Warehouse, 10, Swan-lane

Southgate John, Plumber, 8, Timberhill-street

Spalding Daniel, Grocer and Liquor Merchant, 4, Elm hill str.

Sparkes Robert, at the Hole in the Wall 43, Wymer-street

Sparkles Edward, Duke of York, 11, Barrack street

Sparks Britton, Licensed to Let Post Horses, &c. 23, Elm hill

Sparshall Edmund, Wine, Rum, Brandy and Hop Merchant, Dealer in Burton
Ale, London Porter, Herefordshire Cyder and Perry, 132, Magdalen-street,
Corner of St. Clement’s Church-yard

Spencer John, New Common Staithe, 123, King-street

Spinks John, Woolpack, 17, Muspole-street

Spooner Thomas, Boot and Shoe Maker, 31, Market-place

Spooner Thomas, Boot and Shoe Maker, 7, Castle Ditches

Spratts Messrs. Coach, Harness and Wheel Manufacturers, 6, Chapel-field

Spratt James, Pawnbroker, 16, Golden Ball-lane

Spratt John, Pawnbroker, 6, Upper Westwick-street

Springall Thomas, Wheat Sheaf, 3, Bethel-street

Springfield Daniel, at the Yarmouth Bridge, 16, Red Lion-lane

Springfield Ann, Moon and Stars, 29, Colegate-street

Springfield Edmund, Pawnbroker, 1, St George’s Church Alley

Spurrell Robert, Grocer, 65, Ber-street

Squire Edward, Corn Merchant, 141, Old Common Staithe, King-street

Squire Edward, Merchant, Dwelling House, 1, Tombland

Stacey George, Chymist, &c. 12, White Lion-lane

Staff John, Grocer and Tallow Chandler, 5, St. Martin’s by Palace-street

Staff John, Baker, 152, King street

Stafford Robert, Shopkeeper, 46, Coslany-street

Stag James, Nurseryman, at Yarmouth, and at Murry’s, Black Horse, St
Giles’

Stannard William, Master of St. Andrew’s Workhouse

Stannard Joseph, Carpenter, 12, Upper Westwick-street

Stannard John, Plumber, &c. 61, ditto

Stannard James, City Engineer, 11, Rose-lane

Stannard Richard, Hosier and Mercer, 14, Market-place

Stannard Joseph and Son, House Builders, 10, Colegate-street

Starling Thomas, Boot and Shoe Maker, 49, Botolph-street

Starling John Parlett, Coal Merchant, Life’s Green

Starry George, Whitesmith, 3, Fishgate-street

Stebbing Henry, Stay Maker, 64, St. Stephen’s street

Stebbing Robert, Sadler, 3, Little Rampant Horse street

Stevenson and Matchett, Printers and Stationers, 47, Market-place

Stevenson William, Esq. Dwelling House, 34, Surry-street

Stevenson William, Farrier, 1, Castle Meadow

Stevens William, Grocer and Tallow Chandler, 13, Madder-market, and
Cabinet and Chair Maker, 14

Steward Robert, Baker, 27, Colegate-street

Steward Charles, Throwsterer, 4, Coslany-street

Stewart Jane and Ann, Haberdashers, 35, London-lane

Steward William, Baker, 39, London-lane

Steward John, Attorney, Upper Heigham, and Agent to the Phœnix Fire
Office, Surry-street

Stewart James, Importer and Dealer in Foreign Spirits, &c. 13, Lower
Close

Stimpson Samuel, Crown Inn, 12, St. Stephen’s street

Stoddart John, Coach Maker, St. Giles’ road

Stone William, Boot and Shoe Maker, 7, Bridewell Alley

Stone Francis, Surveyor and Builder, 135, King-street

Storey J. B. Wharfinger, Music-House Staithe, 139, King-street

Storey John, Farmer, Wymondham, and at the George, St. Stephen’s, on
Saturdays

Storey John, Woolcomber, 23, Coslany-street

Stoughton Thomas, Attorney, 5, King-street

Strange James, Coach-Maker, 34, Timberhill-street

Studwell Elizabeth, Glass and China Warehouse, 35, Market-place

Sturgeon Mrs. 3, Lower Close

Sudbury James and Son, Upholders, 5, Cockey-lane

Sudbury Samuel, Gent. 7, All Saints’ Green

Suffield R. and G. Wine and Liquor Merchants, 45, St. Giles’

Sunstead Daniel, Grocer, 10, Soutergate-street

Sutton Rev. Charles, 197, King-street

Swan William, Tinman and Brazier, 121, Magdalen-street

Swaine and Wright, Plasterers, 18, Gildengate-street

Sword Benjamin, Licensed to Let Post Horses, Chaises, &c. 6, King street

Syder John, Hop Merchant, Importer and Dealer in Foreign Spirits,
Wymondham, and at the Wounded Heart, Upper Market, Norwich, on Saturdays

Syder Haylett, Hosier, &c. Wymondham, and at Mrs. Studwell’s, Market
place, Norwich, on Saturdays

Syer Thomas, at the Dove, 13, Lower Westwick-street

Syer John, Staymaker, 9, Red-Well-street

Symonds William, Master Weaver, 8, St. Andrew’s Bridge str.



T


Tallack John, 1, Duke’s Palace

Tawell Thomas, Esq. Iron Merchant, 22, Upper Close.  N.B. The Iron
Warehouse, 7, Wastlegate-lane, All Saints

Taylor Rev. Thomas, 34, Bethel street

Taylor Adam, Attorney, 21, Hog-hill

Taylor Charles, Upholder, 44, London-lane

Taylor Charles, Dwelling house, 20, Castle Meadow

Taylor Matthew, House Steward, 70, King-street

Taylor Thomas, Upholder, 4, Pottergate-street

Taylor John, Plumber and Glazier, 6, St. Martin’s by Palace street

Taylor Richard, Wool Factor, 72, Upper Westwick-street

Taylor and Barnard, Wool Factors, 12, Muspole-street

Taylor Adam, Swardeston, and at the Angel, Norwich, on Saturdays

Theobald John, Breeches Maker, 21, Cockey-lane

Theobald William, Breeches Maker, &c. 16, White Lion-lane

Theobald S. and A. Milliners, 4, St. George’s Bridge street

Thirtle John, Boot and Shoe Maker, 106, Magdalen-street

Thompson William, Boot and Shoe Maker, 28, St. Giles’

Thompson Peter, Gate-House Inn, Upper Close

Thompson John, Shopkeeper, White Friars’ Bridge street

Thompson John, Shopkeeper, 1, Cowgate-street

Thompson John, Gent. 16, St. Augustine’s street

Thompson John, Porter Merchant, 39, Colegate-street

Thorsby John, Baker, 39, Lower Westwick-street

Thurgar Charles, Ladies’ Boarding School, in Court, Queen’s street

Thurlow Henry, Rope Maker, 39, St Martin’s at Oak-street

Thurlow Rev. E. S. 31, Lower Close

Thurston John, Broker, 12, Wymer-street

Thurston Samuel, Broker, 15, ditto

Thwaites Alexander, Linen Draper, and Hempen Cloth Manufacturer, 22,
London-lane

Tillett William, Confectioner, 18, St. Stephen’s street

Tillet James, Whitesmith, 112, Pottergate-street

Tillett Samuel, Patten Maker, 10, Little Cockey-lane

Tillyard Robert, Manufacturer, 21, Fishgate-street

Tilgat Susannah, Butcher, Fish-market

Tinkler John, Currier, 41, Lower Westwick-street

Tinkler John, jun. and Co. Tanners, 15, Heigham-street

Tipple Thomas, Tailor, &c. 19, Tooley-street

Todd Samuel, Patten Maker, 30, Timberhill-street

Toll John and Co. Woollen and Linen Drapers, 17, Market-place

Toll John, jun. Hatter and Hosier, 23, Market-place

Toll George, Glass and China Warehouse, 12, Hay-market

Toll John, Dwelling House, 11, St. Faith’s lane

Tomlinson Robert, Stay maker, 4, Chancery street, St. Andrew’s

Tomlinson William, Hatter and Hosier, 11, Back of the Inns

Tompson Thomas, Broker and Salesman, 8, White Lion-lane

Tompson Timothy, Common Beer Brewer, 37, King-street

Tompson Thomas and Son, Merchants, 98, ditto

Tompson Rev. John, 7, Bank Place

Town Daniel, Licensed to Let Post Horses, 11, Upper Goat-lane

Trafford Sigismund, Esq. Tuck’s Wood, Lakenham

Treasure William, Rope Maker, 66, Magdalen-street

Trigg Francis, Tailor, 8, Bethel-street

Troughton Thomas, Woolcomber, 8, Colegate-street

Tubby Samuel, Cabinet Maker, 77, St. Stephen’s street

Turner Joseph, D.D. Dean of Norwich

Turner Thomas, Engraver and Jeweller, 17, London-lane

Turner Nicholas, Linen Manufacturer, 8, St. Gregory’s Church-yard

Turner John, Carpenter, &c. 111, Pottergate-street

Turner Thomas, Carpenter, &c. 44, Cowgate-street

Turner Robert, Housebroker, 16, Soutergate-street

Tuthill Charles, Merchant, 38 and 39, Pitt-street

Tuthill John, Esq. 3, Willow-lane, St Giles’



V


Varnish Elizabeth, Butcher, 48, Ber-street

Varnish Edward, Butcher, 34, Market-place

Varnish Benjamin, Butcher, 51, Ber-street

Vincent Edward, Boot and Shoe Maker, 22, Back of the Inns

Vincent William, Boot and Shoe Maker, 9, Lower Westwick street



U


Upcroft William, Shopkeeper, 18, Magdalen-street

Upcroft John, Sawyer’s Arms, 37, Upper Westwick-street

Utton William, Attorney, 6, Tombland



W


Wade John, Shopkeeper, 24, All Saints’ Green

Wade James, Butcher, 24, Upper Market

Wade Christopher, Butcher, 25, Upper Market

Wagstaff John, Miller and Baker, 21, Coslany-street

Waites Elizabeth, Broker, 2, Lower Westwick-street

Waite George, Tailor, 23, London-lane

Waite John, White Hart, 10, Coslany-street

Wall Marke, Hempen-Cloth Manufacturer, 3, Weaver’s lane

Wake Henry, Angel Inn, 16, Market-place—N.B. Since this work was begun,
Mr. John Ball has taken it.

Walker Isaac, Gunsmith, 5, Briggs’-lane

Walker Benjamin, Gent. 2, Goodman’s yard, St. Stephen’s

Walker Rev. John, 24, Lower Close

Walker John, Bricklayer, Lower Westwick-street

Walker Amies, Baker, 70, Coslany-street

Walkington James, Lace Manufacturer, 75, St. Giles’

Walpole William, Bricklayer, 13, Colegate-street

Ward Robert, Butcher, 11, Fish market

Ward Robert, Sadler and Ironmonger, 8, Briggs’ lane; and 9,
Rampant-Horse-street.  Dwelling-house, 19, Castle Meadow

Ward John, Baker, 1, Red Lion-lane

Ward Thomas, Baker, St. Stephen’s road

Ward William, Butcher, 109, Ber-street

Ward John, Patten Maker, 34, Upper Westwick-street

Warden John, Hot-presser, 18, Peacock street

Wardlaw Mrs. Bookseller, 16, Dove-lane

Warne John, Hair-Dresser, 13, Queen-street

Warne George, Musician, 1, Cook’s lane, King-street

Warne L. Clearstarcher, 7, Colegate-street

Warne Benjamin, Staymaker, Gilden Craft lane

Warner William, Smith, 29, St. Stephen’s street

Waters George, Lion and Castle, 11, Timberhill-street

Watering Stephen, Elephant Inn, 108, Magdalen street, N.B. Now kept by
Charles Browne, late of the Lion and Castle Inn, Jail hill

Watling James, Tailor, 51, St. Giles’

Watson John, Baker, 11, White Lion-lane

Watson Edward, Coal Merchant, 2, St. Ann’s Staithe, King-street

Watson John, Tailor, Jack of Newberry yard, Pottergate-street

Watson Richard, Farrier, 109, Pottergate-street

Watson Joseph, Tailor, 2, Maddermarket-street

Watson Thomas, Esq. Merchant, 5, Coslany-street

Watts James, Butcher, 45, Ber-street

Watts Mary, Butcher, 1, Hall’s End

Wayte Thomas, Oatmeal Maker, 6, Wastlegate-lane, All Saints

Weaver William, Shopkeeper, 130, Ber-street

Webster William, Maid’s Head Inn, 1, Fyebridge-street

Webster Rev. Stephen, Ber-street road

Webster James, Boot and Shoe Maker, Cross-lane, St. George’s

Weeks William, Plumber, 20, Botolph-street

Wells Mary, Pawnbroker, 3, St. Martin’s at Oak street

Wells William, Attorney, 1, Theatre square

Wells John, Gent, 2, Queen-street

Wells Rev. John, 4, Upper Close

Weston Charles, Esq. and Co. Bankers, 15, Upper Market

Weston Charles, jun. Esq. Dwelling-House, 12, Queen-street

West John, Linen Draper, 3, Cockey-lane

Wetherley, Whitesmith, All Saints’ Green

Whall Henry, Coach Master, 16, Muspole-street

Wharne Sarah, Shopkeeper, 2, St. Martin’s by Palace street

Wheeler Mrs. 62, St. Giles’

When James, Gingerbread Baker, 6, St. Stephen’s road

Whitaker Mrs. 33, Colegate-street

Whitbrook William, Brazier, 22, Wastlegate-street, All Saints

White Ann, Printer, 11, St. Andrew’s Bridge street

White William, Gent. Thorpe

White William, at the Man Laden with Mischief, 20, St. Saviour’s lane

Whittingham Rev. 3, Life’s Green

Wickes Rice, Farmer, Eaton, and at the Greyhound, St. Stephen’s, on
Wednesdays and Saturdays

Wiffen Abraham, Boot and Shoe Maker, 72, St. Stephen’s street

Wilcocks William, Merchant, 63 and 64, Pottergate-street

Wild William, Shopkeeper, 14, Barrack street

Wiley Thomas, Woolcomber, White Friars’ Bridge street, now No. 2,
Privy-lane

Willement Martin, Merchant, 1, Snailgate-street

Wilkins John, Dwelling-House, 11, St. Martin’s at Oak lane

Wilkins James, Plasterer, St. Benedict’s Church-yard

Wilkin Charles, Lion Cutter, 55, St. Stephen’s street

Wilmot Robert, Hat Maker, 7, Dove-lane

Willmot Joseph, Hosier, 95, Upper Westwick-street

Wilsea Samuel, Cabinet-Maker, &c. 10 and 11, Madder-market-street

Willsea Peter, Plumber, 47, Coslany-street

Wilson Thomas, Baker and Pastry Cook, 18, Tombland

Wilson William, Boot and Shoe Maker, 114, Pottergate-str.

Wilson William, Calico Glazier, 4, Goodman’s Yard, St. Stephen’s street

Wimpres Hannah, Shopkeeper, 9, Bridewell Alley

Windett James, Grocer, 5, London lane

Winter James, Baker, 29, Wymer-street

Wilch John, Baker, 17, St. Martin’s by Palace plain

Witham James, Music and Drawing Master, and Musical Instrument Seller, 7,
London-lane

Witherick Jeremiah, at the Fountain, Briggs’ lane

Woods James, Watch Maker, 2, Upper Market

Wood Hannah, Grocer and Tea Dealer, 74, St. Stephen’s street, and 1,
Surry-street

Woodbine John, Manufacturer, 13 and 14, Soutergate-street

Woodcock John, Hair Dresser, 8, Upper Market

Woodgate Philip, Woolcomber, 86, Magdalen-street

Woodhouse Elizabeth, Shoe Maker, 18, Back of the Inns

Woodhouse Rev. P. 11, Upper Close

Woodrow John, Gent. 4, Snailgate-street

Woods William, Licensed to Let Post Horses, &c. 8, Wilkes’s lane, near
Bank place

Woods John, Fishmonger, 18, Fish-market

Woods John, Cooper, 35, Coslany-street

Woods Thomas, Fearnought Maker, 64, ditto

Woodward John, Eating-House, 36, St. Stephen’s-street

Woolford Joseph, Grocer and Tea Dealer, 47, London-lane

Woolston Mrs. at the Guild-hall Inn, 21, Upper Market

Woolverton William, School-master, 6, Elm hill str.

Worth and Co. Merchants, 14, Gildengate-street

Worth Walter, Dwelling house, 13, ditto

Wright Richard, Hempen Cloth Manufacturer, 2, Post-Office Court

Wright Robert, Grocer, &c. 8, King-street

Wright James, Gunsmith, 6, Queen-street

Wright John, Plasterer, late of Snailgate-street, now No. 75, Upper
Westwick-street

Wright Robert, Bear and Staff, 14, Fisher’s lane

Wright John, Coal Merchant, 36, Botolph-street

Wright Edward, Throwsterer, 6, Coslany-street

Wright Henry John, Plasterer, 37, Snailgate-street

Wright Cotton, Woolcomber, 8, St. Mary’s Church yard

Wyatt Noah, Boot and Shoe Maker, 2, St. Stephen’s street

Wymer George, Attorney, 40, Pottergate-street



Y


Yallop Daniel, at the Dolphin, 26, Coslany street

Yallop James, Unicorn, 42, ditto

Youngs Peter (at the City of Norwich), 5, Wastlegate, All Saints

Youngman Hannah, Tailor, 2, Little Rampant Horse-street

Youngman William, Scarlet Dyer, 33, Pitt street




Merchants, &c. attending at Inns in and near the Market-place, on
Market-days.


Bloom D. and Co. 2, Duke’s Palace, and Trowse Mills

Buck Robert, Florden, at the Rampant Horse, St. Stephen’s

Buck John, St. Clement’s Hill, and at the King’s Head

Candler Lawrence and Son, Cringleford, and at the Rampant Horse, St.
Stephen’s

Carter J. G. Wyndham, and at the Coach-maker’s Arms, St. Stephen’s road

Barton William, Corn and Coal Merchant, 164, King-street

Marshall Z. Ashby, at the Angel

Parmeter John, Aylsham, and at the Angel

Sewell John, Bracon Ash, and at the Rampant Horse, St. Stephen’s

Sillis Francis, Farmer, Lime-burner, and Brick-maker, Lakenham, and at
the King’s Head

Syder John, Hop-merchant, Importer, and Dealer in Foreign Spirits,
Wyndham, and at the Wounded Heart, Upper-market

Foster Peter, Lenwade Mills, White Heart, St. Peter’s

Dowson B. U. Geldestone, Blue Bell, Hog hill

Roper Thomas, Marlingford, White Swan, St. Peter’s

Ames and Parkinson, Hellesdon Mills, at the King’s Head, Market-place

Wright D. Saxlingham Mills, Rampant Horse

Candler and Son, Cringleford, Rampant Horse

Palgrave William and Thomas, Coltishall, Maid’s Head, St. Simon’s

Colls John, Horstead, King’s Head, Magdalen-street

And several other Gentlemen who regularly attend at the Corn-Exchange,
St. Andrews.




List of Bankers in Norwich.


Gurney Richard, Bartlett, and Joseph, l, Bank-place

Harvey and Hudson, 198, King-street

Kerrison Sir Roger, Knt. and Co. 8, Back of the Inns

Kett and Back, 2, Hog-hill

Weston Charles, Esq. and Co. Bankers, 15, Upper-market




List of Surgeons.


Aldhouse Stephen, 2, Wymer-street

Back William, Wilkes’s lane, near Bank-lane

Bokenham Thomas, 10, Upper Westwick-street

Bond William, 8, Tombland

Colman Edward, 12, Tombland

Chambers N. 5, Chapel-field

Dalrymple William, 40, Colegate-street

Donne, Eaton-road, without St. Giles

Keymer James, 5 Bethel-street

Martineau Philip, 192, King-street

Norgate Elias, 17, St. Giles’

Pitchford John, 26, St. Giles’ Broad street

Purland Robert, sen. in Court, 32, Cowgate-street

Rand William Fell, Sampson and Hercules’ Court, Tombland

Rigby Edward, Esq. 64, St. Giles’ Broad street

Robinson James, 16, Lower Goat-lane

Scott Robert, 39, Fishgate-street




Physicians.


Alderson James, 3, Snailgate-street

Lubbock Richard, M.D. 76, St. Giles’ Broad street

Manning John, 20, Surry-street

Beevor James, 72, St. Giles’ Broad street

Beevor Henry, 58, ditto {42}




List of Attorneys at Law.


Amyott Thomas, 13, Upper Close

Atkinson John, 191, King-street

Barber Thomas, 2, St. Stephen’s Back street

Blake Thomas, jun. Esq. 5, Queen-street

Boyce James, 11, Wymer-street

Chapman Gardiner, 9, Upper Close

De Hague Elisha, 5, Elm-hill-street

Foster, Son, Unthank, and Forster, 11, Queen-street

Bigg John, 40, Pottergate-street

Goodwin James, 2, Gun-lane

Ganning Daniel, Esq. 23, St. Giles’

Grand John, 37, Bethel-street

Harmer Henry, 6, Chapel-field-lane

Harmer Samuel, ditto

Hardy Charles, St. Michael’s at Plea Church-Alley

Lay Charles, 40, St. Giles’

Lubbock Thomas, 25, Bethel-street

Marsh James, 3, Bank place

Morphew John, 2, Wilkes’s lane, near Bank place

Pye Samuel, 22, St. Martin’s by Palace plain

Russell Skinner, 1, in Court, opposite the Black Horse St. Giles’

Sewell Joseph, 2, Fromanteel’s Court, Chapel-field-lane

Simpson William, 24, St. Giles’

Smith James, in Goss’s Yard, Elm-hill-street

Stoughton Thomas, 5, King-street

Steward John, Upper-Heigham

Taylor Adam, 21, Hog-hill

Utton William, 6, Tombland

Wells William, 1, Theatre-square

Wymer George, 40, Pottergate-street

Woodcocke —, in Court, Hay hill




List of Boarding Schools for Young Ladies.


Coes (Miss), 1, Griffin-lane

Drakes (Miss), 31, All Saints’ Green

Hickling (Miss), 8, Chancery-street, St. Andrew’s

Hodgson James, 6, Wymer-street

Rogers (Mrs.), Magdalen-street

Thurgar Charles, in Court, Queen-street

Brands (Miss), Bethel-street

Browne (Miss), opposite St. Stephen’s church




`Lodging and Boarding Houses.


Claxton John, St. Stephen’s Church-yard

Pye (Mrs.) St. Gregory’s

Wilson (Mrs.) Pottergate-street




List of Inns, &c.


Castle Inn, Mrs. Booth, 13, White Lion-lane

Black Horse Inn, 7, Tombland—John Burton

King’s Head, 116, Magdalen-street—William Colls

White Hart Inn, St. Peter’s—Elizabeth Cotton

White Horse Inn, 2, Hay-market—Robert Drake

White Lion, 44, Upper Westwick street

Rose Inn, 2, St. Augustine’s—John Keymer

Star Inn, 9, Hay-market—John Larke

Waggon and Horses, 3, St. Giles’ Broad-street—Wm. Laws

Waggon and Horses Inn, 13, Tombland—James Lea

KING’S HEAD INN, 11, Market-place—William Leach

Nag’s Head Inn, 11, Rampant Horse street—Charles Leeds

Swan, 8, Swan-lane—Thomas Lusher

Lamb Inn, Haymarket—Sarah Martin

Swan Inn, Upper Market-street—Thomas Mountney

Raven Inn, 32, King-street—Isaac Nickless

Blue Bell Inn, 17, Hog-hill—Miss Parslee

Griffin Inn, 1, King-street—John Phillips

Bull Inn, 43, St. Stephen’s street—Matthew Rackham

Crown Inn, 32, Upper Westwick-street—George Rampley

King’s Head Inn, 38, St. Giles’—Isaac Seggins

Currier’s Arms, 79, St. Giles’—Simpson Robert

Angel Inn, 16, Market-place—John Balls

Elephant Inn, 108, Magdalen-street—Charles Brown

Maid’s Head Inn, 1, Fyebridge-street—William Webster

Black Horse Inn, 10, St. Giles’ Broad street—J. M. Murry

Black Bull Inn, 11, Magdalen-street—John Clarke

Cock, Rampant Horse-street

George, 15, Hay-market—William Chapman, jun.

Greyhound, Surry-street

Jolly Farmers, Castle-Ditches

Pope’s Head, Upper Market street—Thomas Gooch

Rampant Horse, Rampant Horse street

Wheat Sheaf, Bethel-street

Woolpack, St. Giles’ Broad-street—Bolton

White Horse, Magdalen-street

Wounded Heart, Upper Market




Names and Residence of Persons having Coaches, Post-Chaises, and
Single-Horse Chaises to Let.


Culyer William, Woolpack-yard, St. Giles’—Post Horses

Gowen Thomas, 23, Bethel-street

Richards Edward, 32, Botolph-street—Post Horses

Sparks Britton, 23, Elm-hill—Post Horses, &c.

Sword Benjamin, 6, King-street—Post Horses, Chaises, &c.

Town Daniel, 11, Upper Goat-lane—Post Horses

Woods Wm. 8, Wilkes’s lane, near Bank place—Post Horses, &c.

                       [Picture: Decorative symbol]



List of Fairs in Norfolk.

ACLE, Midsummer-day                 Horning, Monday after August 2
Alburgh, June 21                    Ingham, Monday after Whit-Monday
Attleburgh, Th. bef. East. Th.      Kenninghall, July 18, Sept. 30
bef. Whit Sun. and Aug. 15          (Sheep Show)
Aylsham, March 23, last Tuesday     Kiptonash (Sheep Show), Sept. 4
in Sept. and Oct. 6
Bacton, first Monday in August,     Litcham, Nov. 1
November 30
Banham, Jan. 22                     Loddon, Easter Monday and Monday
                                    after Nov. 22
Binham, July 25                     Ludham, Thurs. after Whitsun-week
Briston, May 26                     Lynn (Mart), Feb. 14, lasts 8
                                    days—Oct. 16
Broomhill, July 7                   Lyng, November 21
Burnham, East. Mon. and Aug. 1      Massingham, Tuesday before
                                    Easter, November 8
Castleacre, April 18, July 25       Mattishall, Tuesday before Holy
                                    Thursday
Cawston, Feb. 1, and last           Methwold, April 25
Wednesday in April and Aug.—Sheep
Show
Cley, last Friday in July           New Buckenham, last Saturday in
                                    May, and November 22
Coltishall, Whit-Monday             Northwalsham, Holy Thursday
Cressingham Magna, Aug. 12          Northwold, Nov. 30
Cromer, Whit-Monday                 Norwich, Day before Good Friday
Dereham, Th. and Fr. before Old     Do. (Bishop-Bridge) Easter Monday
Midsummer, and Th. and Fr. before   and Tuesday
New Michaelmas
Diss, November 8                    Do. (do.) Whit Monday and Tuesday
Downham, May 8, Nov. 13             Oxburgh, March 25
Elmham, April 5                     Pulham St. Mary, Third Thursday
                                    in May
St. Faith’s, October 17             Reepham, June 29
Feltwell, November 20               Rudham, May 17, October 14
Fincham, March 3                    Scole, Easter Tuesday
Forncett, Sept. 11                  Scottow, do.
Foulsham, first, Tuesday in May     Shouldham, Sept. 19, Oct. 10
Frettenham, first Monday in April   Southrepps, July 25
Fring, May 10, December 11          Sprowston (Magdalen), Aug. 2
Gaywood, June 11, at Gaywood, and   Stoke, December 6
Oct. 17, kept at Lynn
Custom-house Quay
Gissing, July 25                    Stowbridge, Saturday after
                                    Whitsunday
Gressinghall, December 6            Stratton, Oct. 12
Harleston, July 5, Sept. 9, and     Swaffham, May 12, July 21, Nov.
Nov. 28, 1 month, for Scotch        3, (Sheep Shows)
cattle
Harling East, May 4, Sept. 16       Thetford, May 14, August 2,
(Sheep Show), Oct. 24               September 25
Harpley, July 24                    Walsingham, Whit-Monday
Hempnall, Whit Monday, Dec. 11      Watton, July 10, October 10,
                                    November 8
Hempton, Whit-Tuesday, Nov. 22      Weasenham, Jan. 25
Heacham, August 3                   Worsted, May 12
Hingham, March 7, Whit-Tuesday,     Wymondham, Feb. 2 and May 6, O.
October 2                           S.
Hockham, Easter Monday              Yarmouth, March 28 and 29.
Hockwold, July 25
Holt, April 25, November 25

CONCISE HISTORY OF NORWICH. {49}


Its latitude, according to Sir Henry Spelman, is 52 degrees, 45 minutes,
North: longitude, 1 degree, 19 minutes, East of the Royal Observatory at
Greenwich:—It is 108 miles from London by Newmarket, 114 by Bury St.
Edmund’s, and 110 by Ipswich and Colchester.

It is rather more than a mile and a half in length, from King-street-gate
to Magdalen-gate; and a mile and a quarter in breadth, from Bishop’s gate
to St. Benedict’s gate.

It has thirty-four churches, besides the cathedral, chapels, and
dissenting meeting-houses; and is encompassed by a ditch, and the remains
of a flint-stone wall, begun in 1294 and finished in 1310, which was
flanked with forty towers, in the ancient method of fortification, and
had twelve gates for entrances on all sides.



THE CASTLE


Is supposed to have been built by King Canute, the Dane, in 1018; and as
far the greater number of his subjects were Saxons, who, at this period,
were the first architects, and most probably employed, it is considered
as one of the most complete Saxon remains in England.

In confirmation of this opinion, all its ornaments are in the true Saxon
style; and the bridge leading to it is unquestionably one of the noblest
and most perfect Saxon arches now extant.

The inside, instead of an open yard, was filled up with floors of most
magnificent and spacious apartments; traces of which may yet be seen by
persons accustomed to examine buildings of this sort.  On the ground
floor they were vaulted over with stone, for a great part of the old
vault still remains; also the great stone arches of the buttresses, and a
stone vaulting where the present chapel is.  It was used as a prison so
early as the reign of Henry I. but not for that purpose solely:—the upper
apartments of these towers, were state apartments, for the residence of
great officers and their attendants.

Its length is 92 feet, 10 inches; the length of the North and South
fronts, 98 feet each: the walls are 50 feet in heighth.

Somewhat resembling the architecture of the Old, is the New Castle,
adjoining to it on the East side, built with Scotch granite in the year
1793; apparently of great strength and durability.

The Castle-Hill appears to have been raised by art, with incredible
labour: it stands nearly in the center of the city, and commands an
agreeable prospect of the surrounding buildings, interspersed with
gardens, which, with the adjacent country and river, form a most
delightful landscape.

Since the addition of the Gardens round the bottom of the Hill, strangers
have acknowledged the view from the summit to be superior to any thing of
the kind in Europe, and have justly styled Norwich ‘The City in an
Orchard.’

In the Shire-House, which adjoins the Castle on the North side, the
Summer Assizes and Quarter-Sessions are held, and other county business
transacted.



THE CATHEDRAL


Was founded by Bishop Herbert in 1096, and was chiefly composed of wood,
which, by various accidents, and the turbulence of the times, was often
greatly damaged.

The present Cathedral is a fine Gothic free-stone building, brought to
the magnificent state in which it now appears by the bounty of numerous
benefactors, at various times, and completed by William Middleton, the
thirty-sixth Bishop, in the year 1284.  The roof is adorned with various
well-carved images, from the historical passages of scripture.  On the
windows at the East end of the church is most curiously painted the
transfiguration, and the twelve apostles, by Dean Lloyd’s lady.

The shaft, or spire, is handsome and well proportioned.  Except
Salisbury, it is the highest in the kingdom, being 105 yards, 2 feet,
from the pavement to the top of the pinnacle, strongly built with
free-stone on the outside and brick within.  The top stone of the spire
consists of half a globe, 1 yard, 2 inches broad, with a channel round
it; whence extend eight leaves of stone, spreading outward, under which
commence the eight rows of crockets, continued down the spire, at 5 feet
distance from each other.  The weather-cock placed here at the
restoration, is three quarters of a yard high, and one yard, two inches
broad, as is also the crossbar.

The Cloister on the South side of the church is the largest quadrangle of
the kind in England, each side measuring 58 yards in length, near 14 feet
in breadth, and 16 feet, 6 inches in heighth;—the stone roof is
ornamented with elegant carvings, representing the visions of the
Revelations, the Crucifixion and Resurrection, the Legends of St.
Christopher, St. Lawrence, &c.

At the South-West corner, the Espousals, or Sacrament of Marriage, are
carved in stone, and at the entrance of the Cloister from hence, on the
left hand, are the two lavatories, where the monks used to wash their
hands.  Over one of them is carved a fox in a pulpit, in the habit of a
secular priest, holding up a goose to has auditory, intended as a
reflection on the secular clergy, or parish priests, to whom the monks
bore an inveterate hatred.

On the North side of the Cathedral stands the Bishop’s Palace, to which
are most elegant gardens.

The Free Grammar school, near this, is a neat, spacious, gothic building,
formerly used as a charnel-house.



ST. ANDREW’S HALL,


Formerly the monastery church of the Black Friars, or Benedictine Monks,
is a beautiful structure, about 50 yards in length, and 30 in width: the
roof is supported by twelve neat and very slender pillars.  It was built
by Sir Thomas Erpingham, Knt. in 1428; and was the place where the
company of St. George used to hold their meetings of business and
pleasure.

The Mayor’s guild-feast is always held here.

Over a clock, in the center of the East end, is carved the effigies of
Justice, and underneath, the royal arms of England.  On each side, the
pictures of Queen Anne, George Prince of Denmark, Robert Earl of Orford,
John Lord Hobart, afterwards Earl of Buckenhamshire, Horatio Walpole,
Esq. Lord Suffield, and two Historical Paintings of Edward and Eleonora,
and the Death of Lady Jane Grey, by Mr. W. Martin, between which is
placed, in a splendid and emblematical frame, a highly-finished portrait
of the brave Lord Nelson, painted by Sir William Beachey, with several
Aldermen and Benefactors to the city.  The figure of St. George killing
the dragon, neatly carved, was placed here in 1686, by order of the St.
George’s Company.  On the walls of the North and South ailes are placed
elegant paintings at full length, superbly framed, of those Gentlemen who
have gone through the public offices of the Corporation with dignity and
honour.

Against the further pillar on the North side, is an Ensign, 60 feet in
length, supported by a flag-staff, near the top of which is an ornamented
Shield, with the following Inscription:

                       “The Ensign of the French Ship,
                                  GENEREUX,
                 Taken in the Mediterranean, Feb. 18th, 1800,
               By His Majesty’s Ship, Foudroyant, and Squadron,
                                 Commanded by
                                 LORD NELSON:
    The Genereux, with the Guillaume Tell, since taken by the Foudroyant,
     Lion, and Penelope, were the only Ships which escaped the memorable
      Victory obtained by Lord Nelson over the French, at the Nile, Aug.
                                  1st, 1798.

    In testimony of his Gratitude for the Honours conferred on him by the
    City of Norwich, this Trophy is presented, in the second Mayoralty of
    Robert Harvey, Esq. by

                            SIR EDWARD BERRY, KNT.
                  Captain of his Majesty’s Ship, Foudroyant,
                                    1800.”

Herein is a handsome room for the city Library, re-built in the Gothic
taste, under the direction of the late Mr. Rawlins.



THE GUILD-HALL.


In this Hall, the assizes and quarter sessions for the city are held.
Also the Mayor’s office, for the daily administration of justice; the
town-clerk’s and chamberlain’s offices: and all elections for Mayor,
Aldermen, Sheriffs and Common-councilmen are here determined.

The windows contained many stories on painted or stained glass, relating
to the administration of justice;—there now remain perfect only one large
and two small windows, to perpetuate the remembrance of this beautiful
art.

The room is adorned with the pictures of King William and Queen Mary,
many eminent men of the county, mayors of the city, and other
benefactors.

Herein is the following inscription, suspended from a Golden Anchor, at
the bottom of which are Lord Nelson’s arms, neatly executed—in the center
_Tria junca in uno_, on one side a Lion, on the other a Sailor, at foot
_Faith and Works_.

    “The Sword of the Spanish Admiral Don Xavier Winthuysen, who died of
    the wounds he received in an engagement with the British Fleet under
    the command of Admiral Earl St. Vincent, 14th Feb. 1797, which ended
    in the most brilliant victory ever obtained by this Country over the
    Enemy at Sea: wherein the heroic Valour and cool determined Courage
    of Rear Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson, K. B. had ample scope for their
    display.  He being a Native of Norfolk, honoured the City by
    presenting this Sword, surrendered to him in that Action.”

The City Prison is directly opposite.



ST. PETER OF MANCROFT CHURCH


Was begun in 1430, and finished in 1455.  It is esteemed a very handsome
parish church: has a fine square tower steeple, 98 feet high, though
designed at first to have been much higher, as appears from the double
buttresses reaching to the top, and the thickness of the walls: this
tower contains an excellent peal of twelve bells, cast by Messrs. Pack
and Chapman, of London, in 1775; the Tenor weighing 41 cwt.  The whole is
covered with lead, and supported by two rows of pillars, remarkably neat
and slender, forming eliptic arches at their top.

The altar-piece, representing the story of St. Peter being delivered out
of prison, was painted by that ingenious artist Mr. Catton, and presented
to the parish by Alderman Starling, in 1768.  The furniture of the altar
is crimson velvet, and the plate exceedingly grand, all but one cup being
double gilt: one piece of it is remarkably curious, being an elegant
standing cup and cover of silver, double gilt, weighing 46 oz. 1 gr. 1
pt. given by Sir Peter Gleane, Knight, whereon is beautifully chased the
story of Abigail bringing presents to David.

In the vestry hangs a neat old painted carving in alabaster, of nine
female saints, probably designed for some altar of St. Margaret, who is
the principal figure, and here represented as holding down a dragon;
among others, St. Hilda, holding a book and pastoral staff; St. Barbara,
a tower and palm-branch.  There is also an octavo manuscript bible upon
vellum, written in 1340, and a folio manuscript much more ancient,
containing all St. Paul’s epistles, with a comment.



THE NORFOLK AND NORWICH HOSPITAL,


St. Stephen’s road, is a very neat edifice: was erected in 1772, and is
still supported by voluntary contributions.

The Public Library is now kept at the building formerly the Roman
Catholic chapel, in Wymer-street, and contains 5000 volumes, where books
are delivered by the Librarian to the subscribers every day between the
hours of eleven and two, Sundays and the following days excepted, 29th of
May, 4th of June, the Guild-day, and the day preceding; 25th of October
and 5th of November.



BRIDEWELL,


Was built by Bartholomew Appleyard, about the year 1370.  William
Appleyard, his son, the first Mayor of Norwich, served his Mayoralty here
in 1403.  The North wall of this Bridewell is encrusted with cut flints,
and is seventy-six feet in length, by about twenty-five high: it is
considered one of the greatest curiosities of the kind in England.  The
flints are squared to such a nicety, that the edge of a knife can
scarcely be insinuated between the joints: most of them are about three
inches square, the surface is very smooth, and no brick-work can appear
more regular.

Several churches and other buildings in the city are thus built.

Mr. Talman says, that the Jews introduced the art of squaring flints: and
Dr. Cromwell Mortimer, Secretary to the Royal Society, in a note on a
paper of Mr. Arderon’s on this very wall, observes, that the gate of the
Austin Friars, at Canterbury, that of St. John’s Abbey, at Colchester,
and the gate near Whitehall, Westminster, are in the same taste.  But the
platform on the top of the Royal Observatory at Paris, which, in instead
of being covered with lead, is paved with flint after this manner, is an
instance that the French have in some measure recovered this art.  Phil.
Trans. Abr. vol. 10. p. 1304.



THE THEATRE


Was built by the late Mr. Thomas Ivory, after the model of old Drury-lane
house; and in 1800 underwent an entire, elegant, and spirited alteration,
under the direction, and highly to the credit of, the present Patentee,
Mr. Wilkins.

The house now contains two circles of Boxes, with side ones on the same
tier as the Gallery.  There are Stage Boxes the same as those of
Drury-lane.  The Stage doors are semi-circular, and a Box over them, both
of these are filled with a triliage of gold and a small pilaster.  The
Boxes are supported by small reeded columns of gold, and the front of
every Box decorated with coloured Raphael ornaments, on a ground of
French grey.  At each column are lamps (patent), in the Grecian style,
suspended from an antique branch of gold, which gives a brilliancy to the
whole.  The general tone of colour is a quiet fawn, which is pleasing to
the eye, and relieves the pannels of coloured ornaments.  The mouldings
are gold and white, which give a lightness to the whole.  From the
entablature or cornice in front, descends a cove, with the Imperial Arms
in the centre, admirably executed, painted yellow, and heightened in
gold, with this motto, _Conabimur_ (we will endeavour); below this is a
rich crimson curtain, with gold fringe, supported by two statues, and on
each side of the stage doors are pilasters of gold, reeded, in which
every reed plays in the light, and produces the most pleasing effect.
There are distinct entrances to each part of the house, Boxes, Pit, and
Gallery, and the Box Lobbies are roomy and commodious.  At the back of
the upper circle is a bar-room, where coffee, tea, sweets, &c. may be
procured.

The Assembly-Rooms next it are spacious and brilliant.

There are five Hospitals: one of them, St Giles’, founded originally for
the entertainment of strangers, was, by Henry VIII. appropriated to the
poor of the city; which maintains 104 poor men and women, who are all
cloathed in grey, and must be sixty years of age.  Another for 16 poor
men and 8 women, whose livery is purple.  Cooke’s Hospital, in the
Rose-lane, maintains 10 poor women; and Doughty’s, which was founded in
1687, supports 24 poor men and 8 women.  The Boys and Girls’ Hospital
contain 30 of each, and the boys are from thence put out apprentices.
Besides 5 Charity Schools, where 111 boys and 22 girls are taught,
clothed, and supplied with books.  A number of Sunday Schools under the
care of the Rev. Lancaster Adkin, where 133 boys and girls receive every
attention, with many advantages—and several other Charity and Sunday
Schools, on foundations, or supported by voluntary contributions from
dissenting meetings, &c. taking the whole together, educating, clothing,
&c. 300 boys and 150 girls.

The City of Norwich has local advantages superior to most cities in the
kingdom: a navigable stream to the port of Yarmouth passes through the
middle of it, with great convenience for the Wharfage and Delivery of
goods of all kinds to and from London.

It is situated on a mixed soil of ground, in a salubrious air, neither
subject to violent or scorching heat, nor to moist or watery vapours.
The upper stratum of earth is light soil, of sufficient depth for the
plough; the under stratum is chalk, gravel, and sand.

It is happily screened and defended from the Easterly winds by a
considerable rising ground, called Moushold Heath, which is higher than
the tops of the churches in the lower parts of the city.

If abounds in springs of water of the purest kind, nearly equal to the
celebrated Bristol water, supplied to the inhabitants by a variety of
public pumps.

The City is governed by a mayor, recorder, steward, 2 sheriffs, 24
aldermen, and 60 common council-men; a town-clerk, sword-bearer, &c.  The
mayor is elected by the freemen on the first day of May, and sworn into
office on the Guild-day, the Tuesday before Midsummer-day; except when
Midsummer-day falls on a Wednesday, and then the Guild is kept on the
Tuesday se’nnight before Midsummer-day.  He is chosen from among the
Aldermen, is justice of the quorum during his mayoralty, and afterwards
justice of the peace for life.

The sheriffs are also annually elected, one by the Aldermen, the other by
the freemen, on the last Tuesday in August, and sworn Sept. 29.

The city is divided into twelve wards, viz. Ber-street, Colegate, North
Conisford, South Conisford, Coslany, Fyebridge, Mancroft, St. Giles, St.
Stephen, East Wymer, Middle Wymer, Weft Wymer; each of which elects two
Aldermen.

These twelve wards are again divided into four great wards;

I.  Conisford ward contains South Conisford, North Conisford, Ber-street,
with the hamlets of Lakenham, Trowse, Milgate, Bracondale, and Carrowe;
which is represented by 12 common council-men.

II.  Mancroft ward contains St. Stephen’s, St. Peter’s of Mancroft, St.
Giles’, with the hamlet of Eaton; and is represented by 16 common
council-men.

III.  Wymer ward contains East Wymer, Middle Wymer, West Wymer, with the
hamlets of Heigham and Earlham; and is represented by 20 common
council-men.

IV.  The Northern Ward Coslany, Colgate, Fye-bridge, with the hamlet of
Pockthorpe; and is represented by 12 common council-men.

The freemen for each ward elect Three Nominees, and the Nominees appoint
the other common council-men.

The city sends two members to parliament, elected by the freeholders and
freemen; the latter are free by inheritance, purchase, or servitude, in
number about 3000.  The freemen must have been admitted to their freedom
twelve months before they are entitled to a vote.

The Markets are on Wednesdays and Saturdays.

                       [Picture: Decorative symbol]




LIST OF THE COURT OF ALDERMEN OF NORWICH, 1801–1802.

_Aldermen’s Names_.   _Time when elected_.          _In the      _Wards_.     _Sheriff_.   _Mayor_
                                                    Room of_
JEREMIAH IVES, jun.   September    25,     1779     Sir H.       East Wymer   1782         1786 1801
Esq. MAYOR.                                         Harbord,
                                                    Bart.
PAST THE CHAIR.
R. Harvey, Esq. D.    January      5,      1768     Wm.          Coslany      1766         1770 1800
M.                                                  Wigget,
                                                    Esq.
Jeremiah Ives, Esq.   July         1,      1766     Thomas       S.           1763         1769 1795
                                                    Vere, Esq.   Conisford
James Crowe, Esq.     July         18,     1772     Thomas       N.           1771         1774 1797
                                                    Harvey,      Conisford
                                                    Esq.
Richard Peete, Esq.   January      25,     1773     Robert       W. Wymer     1772         1775
                                                    Harvey,
                                                    Esq.
Francis Colombine,    April        26,     1774     John Wood,   Colegate     1769         1776
Esq.                                                Esq.
Sir Roger Kerrison,   October      4,      1774     Richard      Mancroft     1774         1778
Knt.                                                Matthews,
                                                    Esq.
John Morse, Esq.      July         1,      1777     Nockold      N.           1779         1781
                                                    Thompson,    Conisford
                                                    Esq.
Starling Day, Esq.    September    23,     1777     John         W. Wymer     1775         1782
                                                    Nuthall,
                                                    Esq.
Jer. I. Harvey,       January      6,      1779     William      Ber-street   1779         1783
Esq.                                                Crowe,
                                                    Esq.
R. Partridge, Esq.    October      6,      1778     Andrew       Ber-street   1780         1784
                                                    Chamber,
                                                    Esq.
Elias Norgate, Esq.   January      22,     1779     John         Mancroft     1781         1785
                                                    Goodman,
                                                    Esq.
R. Harvey, jun.       January      21,     1780     James        East Wymer   1784         1787
Esq.                                                Poole,
                                                    Esq.
John Patteson, Esq.   December     10,     1781     Sir T.       St.          1785         1788
                                                    Churchman,   Stephen’s
                                                    Knt.
Charles Weston,       March        15,     1782     John         Colegate     1785         1789
Esq.                                                Thurlow,
                                                    Esq.
Thomas Watson, Esq.   June         19,     1783     Thomas       Fyebridge    1787         1790
                                                    Rogers,
                                                    Esq.
J. G. Baseley, Esq.   February     20,     1787     Jer. Ives,   Fyebridge    1789         1791
                                                    Esq.
John Harvey, Esq.     July         24,     1787     John Gay,    M. Wymer     1784         1792
                                                    Esq.
John Buckle, Esq.     January      15,     1788     Thomas       St. Giles’   1787         1793
                                                    Starling,
                                                    Esq.
James Hudson, Esq.    October      18,     1791     Knipe        St. Giles’   1788         1794
                                                    Gobbet,
                                                    Esq.
Wm. Herring, Esq.     May          22,     1795     Nathaniel    S.           1786         1796
                                                    Roe, Esq.    Conisford
John Browne, Esq.     March        13,     1798     Charles      St.          1794         1798
                                                    Weston,      Stephen’s
                                                    Esq.
John Herring, Esq.    March        20,     1798     Benj. Day,   Coslany      1786         1799
                                                    Esq.
BELOW THE CHAIR.
Mr. Alderman Leman    August       24,     1797     John         M. Wymer
                                                    Addey,
                                                    Esq.

Sheriffs,


                THOMAS BACK, Jun. and ROBERT WARD, Esqrs.

                      CHARLES HARVEY, Esq.—RECORDER.

                      STEWARD—(_Not yet appointed_).




Common Council


                        MR. HENRY HARMER, SPEAKER.

                       _Conisford Ward_.—12.
When first elected.                    When first elected.
   1772  Mr. James Chase—_Nominee_        1787  Mr. Edward Browne
     75  Thos. Dove—_Nominee_               90  Charles Foster
   1800  T. Tompson—_Nominee_               96  Henry Gridley
   1781  Daniel Bloom                       99  Jas. Page Cocksedge
     82  Mark Osborn                      1801  John Angell, jun.
     86  Jacob Smith                      1801  Thomas Hawkins
                        _Mancroft Ward_.—16.
   1778  Mr. R. Beatniffe—_Nominee_       1799  Mr. J. H. Cole
     89  P. Chamberlin—_Nominee_            99  George Stacey
     94  Chas. Chamberlin                   99  John Horth
     98  Jonathan Matchett                1800  James Bennett
     98  Arthur Browne                    1800  Tho. Barber
     98  John Clipperton                  1800  James Adams
     99  John Stoddart                    1801  James Keymer
     99  S. Day, jun.                     1801  Henry Harmer
                      _Great Wymer Ward_.—20.
   1788  Mr. W. Foster,                   1796  Mr James Marsh
         jun.—_Nominee_
     88  John Staff—_Nominee_               96  Bosom Roe
     89  John Proctor—_Nominee_             97  Samuel Stone
     82  Wm. Foster                         98  Joseph Stannard
     85  Wm. Unthank                        98  Samuel Blogg
     88  Robert Harmer                      98  John Ansell
     90  John Lovick                        98  Benjamin Bates
     91  John Fox                           99  John Huggins
     91  Christopher Berry                1800  Robert Roe
     93  Jonathan Davey                   1800  Robert Prentice
                    _Ward beyond the Water_.—12.
   1795  Mr Cha. Tuthill—_Nominee_        1797  Mr. Edmund Reeve
     86  Rob. Powell—_Nominee_              98  Wm. Newson
     90  John Brittan—_Nominee_             99  Wm. Burrows
     70  James Beevor                     1800  Thomas Barnard
     99  Wm. Barnard                      1800  Joseph Scott
     90  Wm. Powell                       1801  Peter Wilsea

COMMITTEES IN THE CITY OF NORWICH.


Chamberlain’s Council.


Sir Roger Kerrison, John Harvey, James Hudson, and John Browne,
Esqrs.—Messrs. James Marsh, Wm. Newton, Wm. Barnard, and Joseph Scott.



Hospital Committee.


J. Crowe, J. Harvey, J. Hudson, and W. Herring, Esqrs. Messrs. W. Foster,
W. Barnard, J. Marsh, and H. Harmer.



City Committee.


J. Ives, St. Clement’s, R. Harvey, R. Partridge, and J. G. Baseley,
Esqrs.—Messrs. W. Foster, jun. Robert Powell, John Brittan, and Jos.
Stannard.



Market Committee.


J. Buckle, James Hudson, J. Browne, Esqrs. and Mr. Alderman Leman—Messrs.
J. Proctor, J. Ansell, J. Lovick, and Mr. Sheriff Ward.



Clavers.


The Mayor, Mr. Alderman Leman—Mr. Charles Chamberlin, and Mr. Robert Roe.



Auditors.


Francis Colombine, Robert Harvey, jun. John Patteson, and Wm. Herring,
Esqrs.—Messrs. Wm. Unthank, James Chase, Wm. Foster, jun. and Charles
Tuthill.



Tonnage Committee.


R. Harvey, R. Peete, Esqrs. Sir Roger Kerrison, and Starling Day,
Esq.—Messrs. T. Dove, T. Barnard, T. Tompson, and Samuel Stone.



River and Street Committee.


Robert Harvey, John Morse, J. G. Baseley, and Wm. Herring, Esqrs.—Messrs.
Edward Browne, John Staff, Charles Foster, and John Fox.



Committee for inspecting the Assembly Bonds.


J. I. Harvey, C. Weston, T. Watson, and J. Browne, Esqrs.—Messrs. S.
Stone, H. Gridley, S. Blogg, and Wm. Burrows.



Coal Committee.


Jer. Ives, St. Clement’s, John Morse, J. I. Harvey, and John Greene
Baseley, Esqrs.—Messrs. W. Powell, Christopher Berry, Jonathan Matchett,
and Benjamin Bates.



Committee of Appeals to the River Water Assessments.

(BY THE ASSEMBLY.)     (BY THE LESSEES.)
R. Partridge, Esq.     Mr. Daniel Ganning
John Herring, Esq.     John Webb
Mr. John Procter       John Cozens
Arthur Browne          Thomas Hawkins

TREASURERS of the several HOSPITALS, &c.

_Great Hospital_       Sir Roger Kerrison.
_Doughty’s Hospital_   Robert Harvey, Esq.
_Boy’s Hospital_       Charles Weston, Esq.
_Girl’s Hospital_      R. Harvey, jun. Esq.
_Court Bonds_          Sir Roger Kerrison.
_Assembly Bonds_       Charles Weston, Esq.
_Tonnage_              Sir Roger Kerrison.
_City Lamps_           Robert Harvey, jun. Esq.

           Mr. Stephen Aldhouse, Surgeon to the Four Hospitals.

             Mr. B. Bird, Steward to the Estates of the same.



OFFICERS of the CORPORATION.

E. De Hague, Gent. Town Cl.         Messrs. A. Taylor, jun. and J.
                                    Marsh—Under Sheriffs
W. Simpson, Gent. Chamberl          Mr. W. Mack, Ch. Constable
T. Marks, Esq. Coroner              Mr. Rich. Harman, Clerk of the
                                    Market
Jas. Marsh, Gent. Coroner           Mr. J. Dunham, Water Bailiff
Mr. Thos. Lubbock, Sword-bearer     Mr. Samuel Cole, jun. Inspector
                                    of Corn Returns
Mr. Joshua Lawter,
Under-Chamberlain

CITY SURGEONS.


                             Mr. Robert Scott

                             Mr. James Keymer

                            Mr. James Robinson

_The City Surgeons are also Men-Midwives in their respective Districts_.



The CORPORATION of GUARDIANS of the POOR in NORWICH.


                      CHARLES HARVEY, Esq. Governor.

                 ROBERT PARTRIDGE, Esq. Deputy Governor.

                      ROBERT HARVEY, Esq. Treasurer.

 The MAYOR, RECORDER, STEWARD, SHERIFFS, and ALDERMEN for the time being.

    _For the Great Ward of Conisford_, _Ber-street_, _and
                          Trowse_.
       Elected in 1800.                Elected in 1801.
Edward Squire, corn-merch.       Edw. Browne, carpenter
James Chase, liquor-merch.       Francis Sillis, farmer
Thomas Dove, carpenter           John Angell, jun. currier
Thos. Tompson, merchant          Mark Osborn, grocer
              _For the Great Ward of Mancroft_.
Rich. Beatniffe, bookseller      John C. Hampp, merchant
Thomas Back, backer              Peter Chamberlin, grocer
Wm. Burt, upholder               Samuel Harmer, Gent.
John Athow, stone-mason          Mr. Sheriff Ward
               _For the Great Ward of Wymer_.
Jas. Buttivant, manufacturer     John Rodwell, dyer
Richard Bacon, printer           Samuel Blogg, mason
William Unthank, Gent.           Wm. Foster, jun. Gent.
Jonathan Davey, merchant         James Marsh, Gent.
              _For the Ward beyond the Water_.
William Cutting, merchant        John Brittan, woolcomber
James Angier, merchant           John Webb, woolcomber
Robert Powell, woolcomber        Wm. Barnard, merchant
Edward Reeve, grocer             Joseph Scott, merchant

                 Mr. WILLIAM SIMPSON, Clerk of the Court.

                          Mr. J. SWIFT, Beadle.

                  Mr. Thomas Nichols, Assistant Beadle.

                       C. Church, Removal Officer.

                      C. Church, Mayor’s Constable.

                   T. Warren and J. Simonds, Visitors.

N.B. General Courts of the Guardians are held on the first Tuesday in
every Month, at Three o’clock in the afternoon, at the Hall in St.
Andrew’s; and weekly Committees at St. Andrew’s Workhouse, every Friday
in the Afternoon, and at St. John’s Workhouse, every Monday in the
Afternoon.



COURT of REQUEST or CONSCIENCE.


The Commissioners are such of the Court of Aldermen and Common Council as
qualify themselves according to the Act.

                   Mr. SAMUEL KING, Register and Clerk.

                   OFFICE in St. Clement’s Church-yard.

The Court is held every Monday before one Alderman and two of the Common
Council, in St. Andrew’s Hall, at Three o’clock in the afternoon.



EXCISE-OFFICE, ST. GEORGE’S TOMBLAND.


Wm. Carter, Esq. Collector.—Mr. Wm. Flint, Supervisor.

Mr. J. King, Office-keeper.—Mr. T. Sowter, First Clerk.



FIRE INSURANCE OFFICES.


Norwich Insurance-Office, Mr. Adam Taylor, jun. Hog-hill, Secretary.

Union Office, Mr. Thomas Bignold, Gentleman’s Walk, Market-place,
Secretary.

Agent to the Sun Fire-Office.  Mr. John Taylor, at the Glass-warehouse of
the late Mr. Cook, St. Andrew’s.

Royal-Exchange Office, Mr. John Woodrow, St. George’s Colegate.

Phœnix Office, Mr. John Steward, Surry-street.



GOVERNORS of BETHEL.


               JEREMIAH IVES, Esq. St. Clement’s, PRESIDENT

Jere. Ives, Esq. Catton     Mr. John Gurney
William Herring, Esq.       Sigismund Trafford, Esq.
William Foster, Gent.       Rev. Robert Parr

                       Treasurer, Mr. John Gurney.

                 Physicians, Dr. Beevor and Dr. Manning.

                Surgeon and Apothecary, Mr. James Keymer.

        Clerk and Steward, Mr. Charles Nelson, Land-Surveyor, Red

                  Lion lane.—Mr. James Bullard, Master.

        N.B. The Committee Day is the first Monday in every Month.




_Names of the Bishop_, _Dean_, _and Prebendaries_.


                                 BISHOP.
               Right Reverend CHARLES MANNERS SUTTON, D.D.
                                 Palace.

                                  DEAN.
                       JOSEPH TURNER, D.D. Deanry.

                               CHANCELLOR.
               The Rev. G. Sandby, D.D. at Denton, Norfolk.

                              PREBENDARIES.

                     Philip Wodehouse, M.A. Hingham.

                       John Pretyman, D.D. Norwich.

                      Robert Potter, A.M. Lowestoft.

                   Edward South Thurlow, A.M. Norwich.

                 George Anguish, A.M. Gisleham, Suffolk.

             Jos. Procter, D.D. Vice Chancellor of Cambridge.

                   BISHOP’S OFFICE in the Upper Close.

 _Deputy Register_, C. Kitson, Gent. Notary Public and Proctor, Norwich.

 _Proctors_.  William Utten, John Morphew, Charles Kitson, John Steward.

               _Principal Apparitor_, Robert Starkey, Gent.

               DEAN and CHAPTER’S OFFICE, in the Cloister.

                   _Clerk and Register_, Mr. Wm. Utten.

                    ARCHDEACON of NORWICH, his OFFICE,

                      At Mr. Morphew’s, King-street.

                    MEMBERS of PARLIAMENT for NORWICH,

                  Right Hon. William Windham, Vauxhall.

                     John Frere, Esq. Spring-Gardens.

             _Receiver of the land Tax_, Sir Roger Kerrison.

  _Receiver of the Stamp Duty_, J. H. Cole, Esq.—His Deputy, Mr. Samuel
           Cole.  The Stamp-office, in St. Giles’ Broad-street.

     T. Moore, Gent. Bethel-street, Licencer of Hawkers and Pedlars.

              _Commissions of Appeal under the Income Act_.

Robert Fellowes, Esq. Sir Thomas Beevor, Bart. and James Mingay, Esq.—Mr.
Adam Taylor, jun. Secretary.




POST OFFICE.


                  GEORGE LITCHFIELD, GENT.—POST-MASTER.
                        His Clerk Mr. G. CHAPMAN.

The Mails from London arrive every forenoon about eleven o’clock, except
Mondays, and are dispatched every afternoon at half past four, except
Saturdays.

The Mails from Huntingdon, Cambridge, Newmarket, Bury, Thetford, &c.
arrive, and are dispatched every day at the above time.

The Mails from all the intermediate places betwixt London and Ipswich,
betwixt Ipswich and this city and their branches, arrive every day at
twelve at noon, and are dispatched to those parts every day at four in
the afternoon.

The Mails arrive from Yarmouth every afternoon at four, and are
dispatched every day at twelve.

The Mails from Cromer, Aylsham and North Walsham, arrive _every day_ at
ten in the morning, and are dispatched to those places at one in the
afternoon.

N.B. The Office is opened for the delivery of letters about an hour after
the arrival of the different Mails, and is shut _at half-past three
precisely_.




NORFOLK and NORWICH HOSPITAL.


                         OFFICERS of the CHARITY.

                     ROBERT FELLOWES, Esq. Treasurer.

Physicians and Surgeons who attend gratis.

_Physicians_.    _Surgeons_.       _Assistant Surgeons_.
Dr. Manning      Mr. Donne         Mr. Colman
Dr. Hooke        Mr. Rigby         Mr. Aldhouse
Dr. Lubbock      Mr. Martineau     Mr. Bond
Dr. Alderson

Mr. Thomas Barber, Secretary.—Mr. George Hardy, Apothecary.—Mrs. Isabella
Grant, Matron.

The Physicians and Surgeons attend in turn to take in patients, every
Saturday at eleven o’clock in the forenoon; and every Tuesday at the same
hour, to prescribe to the out-patients.




REGULAR LODGES OF FREE MASONS.


                         PROVINCIAL GRAND MASTER,
                          WM. EARLE BULWER, ESQ.

          R. Partridge, Esq. P.D.G.M. Tho. Marks, Gent. P.S.G.W.

               J. Harvey, Esq. P.J.G.W. Jas. Boyce, P.G.S.

   No.
    16  White Swan, St. Peter’s, Norwich, the first Wednesday in the
        Month, constituted May 11, 1724.
    48  King’s Head, Market-place, Norwich, 2d Frid. 1736.
    76  King’s Head, Yarmouth, Monday nearest the full moon.
    78  Angel, Norwich, second Friday, January 5, 1748
    80  Horse and Groom, Norwich, first Tuesday, 1749
    86  Greenland Fishery, St. Mary’s, Norwich, 2d Tues. 1750
    88  Three Tuns, Yarmouth, last Wednesday, June 6, 1751
    99  Jolly Farmers, Castle Meadow, Norwich, third Tuesday, Nov.
        20, 1753.—_Faithful Lodge_.
   105  Castle, Norwich, second Thursday, March 13, 1757
   120  The Wounded Heart, St. Peter’s, Norwich, the fourth Tuesday,
        Sept. 16, 1766.
   133  Norwich Volunteer, All Saints, Norwich, 2d Wednesday.—_Lodge
        of Friendship_.
   136  King’s Head, Coltishall, Norfolk, the Wednesday on or nearest
        the full moon, February 18, 1758
   158  Lodge of Friendship, Crown, Lynn Regis, Norfolk, second
        Friday, from Sept. to May, June 9, 1762
   192  Gate House, Tombland, Norwich, the last Wednesday, Feb. 11,
        1766
   531  Half Moon, Market-place, Yarmouth, on the Monday nearest the
        full moon, Oct. 7, 1793.  _Lodge of Unity_.
   552  Maid’s Head, Lynn, constituted April 25, 1796, the first
        Thursday.—_Lodge of Strict Benevolence_.
   563  Angel Inn, second Friday, June 26, 1797.—_Norwich Theatrical
        Lodge_.
   564  Shakspeare, Yarmouth, second Friday, June 26, 1797.—_United
        Friends of Great Yarmouth_.
   572  Green Dragon, Grass-market, Lynn, the 2d Thursday, Sept. 28,
        1798.—_Lodge of Attention_.

THE POPULATION OF NORWICH,


As taken from the Parochial Returns in the years 1801, 1786, 1752, and
1693.

  _Parishes_.         _Inhab.          _No. of          _Uninha      _Total Souls_     _Souls in_       _Souls in_       _Souls in_
                     Houses_.         families_         Houses_                           1786             1752             1693
St. Peter                     102              132               21             378              507              425              470
Southgate
St Etheldred                   64               66                4             252              254              247              243
St. Julian                    191              197               20             662              846              595              593
St Peter                      298              311               18            1350             1362             1408             1376
Permountergate
St. John                      292              303               20            1144             1114             1004              781
Sepulchre
St. Michael at                353              361               49            1198             1442             1127              865
Thorn
St. John                      228              237                3             888              975              890              668
Timberhill
All Saints                    172              199                4             701              825              578              425
St. Stephen                   509              573               32            2211             2360             2314             1769
St. Peter                     441              493               19            2120             2299             2288             1953
Mancroft
St. Giles                     235              270                4            1076             1117              961              910
St. Benedict                  198              238               29             830              900              715              652
St. Swithin                   113              138                7             503              643              751              496
St. Margaret                  151              186               22             662              859              856              664
St. Lawrence                  245              248               24             899             1018              952              668
St. Gregory                   212              362                9            1057             1113             1202              772
St. John                      148              176               12            1698             1571             1107              657
Maddermarket
St. Andrew                    224              236               11            1858             1773             1334              935
St. Michael at                 72               80                5             446              502              482              479
Plea
St. Peter                      85              103                3             371              394              341              269
Hungate
St. George                    127              186                8             750              720              737              722
Tombland
St. Simon and                  77               83                6             333              443              420              362
Jude
St. Martin at                 226              264               27             936             1109             1083              819
Palace
St. Helen                      74               74                6             393              446              386              338
St. Michael                   224              261               31            1031             1185             1046             1026
Coslany
St. Mary                      277              303               29            1018             1202             1178              949
St. Martin at                 336              413               34            1747             2153             1698             1243
Oak
St. Augustine                 327              338               75            1232             1899             1226              850
St. George                    246              293               37            1132             1272             1295             1154
Colegate
St. Clement                   135              193               11             853              800              816              593
St. Edmund                     90              137                9             446              531              520              370
St. Saviour                   203              235               22             984              593              810              701
St. Paul                      323              375               55            1395             1681             1461              983
St. James                     228              149               23             520              608              696              416
Pockthorpe                    214              255               27             979             1272             1116              732
Heigham                       213              215               14             854              923              653              544
    HAMLETS.
Lakenham                       84               89                5             428              486              165              221
Eaton                          36               57                2             278              260              226              153
Earlham                        12               12                0              95               66               68               50
Hellesdon                      16               16                1              81              108               70               65
Thorpe                         17               17                0              74               82               36               69
Trowse,                        83               88                6             353              348              386              258
Carrowe, Bracon
Precinct of the               156              136                3             616                               700              650
Close
          TOTAL,             8026             9093              747           36832            40051            36196            28881

The decrease in the population of this City, since 1786, is 3219; but it
is to be observed that 1786 was a year of peace, and that in the returns
of 1801, those serving in the Navy, Army, and Militia, are not included.
Norwich, during the present war, has furnished, at least, 4000 recruits.




COACHES, BARGES, and WAGGONS, to and from NORWICH.


THE MAIL CARRIAGES


Set out every day from the King’s Head, in the Market-place, Norwich;
from the Swan with Two Necks, Lad-lane, and Golden-Cross, Charing-Cross
London.  Half an hour allowed at Thetford and Ipswich, both in going up
and coming down; fourteen pounds luggage to each passenger, and all
above, two-pence per pound.

Parcels delivered immediately on their arrival at London and Norwich.

Passengers for these carriages should be at the Golden-Cross at Seven;
and at the Swan at half past seven; or at the General Post-Office,
Lombard-street, just before eight o’clock in the evening.

The MAIL COACH by Ipswich, arrives at the King’s Head Inn, Norwich, at
twelve o’clock at noon, and sets out at four in the afternoon; stops for
breakfast coming down, and for supper going up, at Bamford’s, the Great
White Horse, Ipswich.

The MAIL COACH by Newmarket, arrives at the King’s Head Inn, Norwich,
about eleven o’clock in the morning, and sets out at half past four in
the afternoon; stops for breakfast coming down, and for supper going up,
at Radcliffe’s, the Bell, at Thetford.—Each carriage is well lighted, and
guarded through the whole of the journey by persons who are also
experienced drivers.

The MAIL COACH to YARMOUTH (in three hours), sets out from the King’s
Head Inn, Market-place, Norwich, and Star Tavern, on the Quay, Yarmouth,
every day at twelve o’clock.  By this Coach, passengers and parcels are
likewise booked throughout from Yarmouth to London.

From the Golden Cross, Charing Cross, and Swan, Lad-lane, are mail and
other carriages to every part of the kingdom.

                      The EXPEDITION, by NEWMARKET,

A double-bodied coach, sets out from the White Swan, St. Peter’s,
Harwich, every afternoon at three o’clock, to the White Horse,
Fetter-lane, London; returns from the above Inn daily, at half past three
o’clock; calls at the Bull, Bishopgate-street, going out and coming in.

                        The STAGE COACH, by BURY,

Sets out every Monday and Wednesday, at three in the afternoon, and on
Saturday at half pair three, from the Angel, in the Market-place,
Norwich; and every Tuesday, Thursday, and Sunday, from the Swan with Two
Necks, Lad-lane, London, at four in the afternoon.

                       LYNN and NORWICH EXPEDITION,
                     By WAY of SWAFFHAM and DEREHAM,

Sets out from the Crown Inn, Lynn, every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday
morning, at seven o’clock, to the White-Swan, in St. Peter’s Norwich;
returns from the Swan every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday morning, at
the same hour.  In November, December, and January, this coach goes only
on Tuesdays and Saturdays.

                            YARMOUTH MACHINE,

From the Black Horse, on Tombland, to the Wrestlers in Yarmouth, sets out
twice every day, Saturday excepted, at eight o’clock in the morning, and
three in the afternoon, during the summer, and at nine o’clock each
morning in the winter season only.

N.B. For about two months in the worst part of the winter season the
coach goes once a day only.

                  The LONDON and NORWICH STAGE WAGGONS,

By Messrs. William Mack and Co. St. Giles’ Broad-street, to the Green
Dragon, Bishopsgate-street, set out from Norwich every Monday and Friday
evening, and come in every Monday and Thursday morning.

Messrs. Robert and I. L. Marsh and Sons’ LONDON, CAMBRIDGE, and NORWICH
WAGGONS, set out every Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday Evening, and arrive
every Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday morning.  As they constantly pass
through Cambridge, there is now a regular Conveyance to York, Manchester,
Birmingham, Sheffield, and all the Manufacturing Towns in Yorkshire.

Hadfield’s Old York Waggon is now removed to their Warehouse on Tombland.

                               BURY WAGGON,

From the Star in the Market place, Norwich, comes in on Friday morning,
and sets out in the afternoon of the same day.

                              YORK WAGGONS,

From the Star, in the Market-place, Norwich, in and out every Tuesday and
Friday.

                               LYNN WAGGON,

From the Black Horse, in St. Giles’, comes in and goes out every
Wednesday and Saturday.



BARGES.


The Old Barge goes from the Wherry Staithe, every Monday and Thursday,
for Yarmouth, at ten o’clock, and returns on Tuesday and Friday.

The New Barge goes from the Old Staithe, every Monday and Thursday, for
Yarmouth, at ten o’clock, and returns on Tuesday and Friday.




LONDON TRADERS to and from YARMOUTH.

      FROM SYMOND’S WHARF.              FROM SMART’S QUAY.
Astley, John Elland               Ceres, Robert Lee
Dove, J. P. Horne                 Constant Trader, J. Plowman
New Fair Trader, C. Stewart       Hannah, M. Marshall
Isabella, Charles Taylor          Thomas and Fanny, J. Ferritt
Earl of Leicester, J. Nichols     Yarmouth, James Haill
Providence, R. B. Theobald        Commerce, R. Mansfield
Susanna, Elias Miles
            AGENTS.                           AGENTS.
Mr. Cole, Norwich                 Mr. Story, Norwich
Mr. J. Dryden, Yarmouth           Mr. James Laws, Yarmouth

HULL TRADERS.

Hope,            John Hepworth
Good Intent,     John Wilkinson
Expedition,      James Metcalf

There are eleven Packets from Yarmouth to Cuxhaven, one of which sails
from Yarmouth every Sunday and Thursday morning at nine o’clock.




LIST OF CARRIERS.

_Towns_.           _Miles_   _Carr. Names_.   _Where they set up_.           _Towns they carry   _Time of comg.   _Time of going out_
                                                                             parcels for_.       in_
ACLE                     11  Driver           Golden Lion, St. John’s M.     Thorpe, Blofield,          S             S              1
                                                                             Freethorpe, &c.
                             Church           Black Horse, Tombland          Thorpe, Blofield,
                                                                             Bullingham,
                                                                             Lingwood,
Filby, &c.              W S  W S              2
Aldburgh                 15  Grand            Golden Lion, St. John’s M.     St. Faith’s,               S             S              1
                                                                             Stratton
                                                                             Strawless,
                                                                             Aylsham, &c.
                             Fox              Black Horse, Tombland          St. Faith’s,            F evg.           S             12
                                                                             Aylsham,
                                                                             Ingworth,
                                                                             Erpingham, &c.
                             Randall          Black Horse, St. Giles’        Aylsham,                   S             S             12
                                                                             Ingworth,
                                                                             Erpingham, Alby,
                                                                             &c.
Alderford                 8                   Reepham Carrier
Ashwelthorpe              9  Brown            Red Lion, Red Lion-lane        Swardeston,               W S           W S             2
                                                                             Mulbarton,
                                                                             Braconash, Hethel
Attlebridge               8                   Fakenham Carrier
Attleburgh               15  Rose             George, Hay-market             Wyndham, Old              W S           W S             1
                                                                             Buckenham,
                                                                             Beesthorpe,
                                                                             Morley, and
                                                                             Ellingham
                             Hewitt           Lamb, Hay-market               Wyndham, New              W S           W S             1
                                                                             Buckenham,
                                                                             Ellingham, and
                                                                             Snetterton
Antingham                25                   Southrepps Carrier
Aslacton                 12                   Long Stratton Carrier
Aylsham                  11  Palmer           Wounded Heart, Up. mark.       St. Faith’s,              W S           W S            12
                                                                             Stratton
                                                                             Strawless,
                                                                             Marsham, &c.
Bacton                   18  Watts            Bull, Magdalen-street          Sprowston,              F. evg.          S              1
                                                                             Wroxham,
                                                                             Worstead, &c.
Barningham               16                   Gresham Carrier
Barton Mills             41                   London Wagons
Beccles                  18  Woolner          Star, Market-place             Loddon,                   M F           Tu S           12
                                                                             Lowestoft,
                                                                             Thurlton,
                                                                             Gillingham, &c.
                             Mayhew           White Hart, St. Peter’s        Loddon,                   M F           Tu S            2
                                                                             Lowestoft, &c.
Blakeney                 25                   Holt Carrier
Blickling                13                   Aylsham Carrier
Blofield                  6                   Acle Carrier
Booton                   11  Allden           Moon & Stars, St. M. Cos.      Felthorpe,                W S           W S             1
                                                                             Swannington,
                                                                             Reepham, and Sall
Botesdale                27  Bidwell, Nunn    Pope’s Hd. Mrk. Lamb Mrk.      Long Stratton,          Th F e.         F S         10 11
                                                                             Scole, Ixworth,
                                                                             and Bury
Braconash                 6                   Ashwellthorpe Carrier
Bradfield                16                   Southrepps Carrier
Braintree                74                   Stowmarket Carrier
Briston                  17  Martin           Moon and Stars, St. Mich.      Heydon, Dawling,           F             S             10
                                                                             Swanton, &c
                             Dunn             Recruiting Sergt. St. Mary’s   Heydon,                 Tu evg.          W             11
                                                                             Saxthorpe, &c.
Brockdish                24  Johnson          Wool-pack, St. Giles’          Pulham,                 F evg.           S             11
                                                                             Stradbrook,
                                                                             Wallworth,
                                                                             Brundish, &c.
Brooke                    7                   Bungay Carrier
Buckenham                15  Orford           White Hart, St. Peter’s        Banham,                    F             S             11
                                                                             Wrenningham,
                                                                             Taccolnestone,
                                                                             Forncett,
                                                                             Carlton, Old
                                                                             Buckenham, &c.
Bungay                   14  Rayner           Star, Market-place             Brooke,                   M F           Tu S           12
                                                                             Saxmundham, &c.
                             Day              Lamb, Market-place             Brooke, Earlham,         Tu F           W S            12
                                                                             Woodton, &c.
Bunwell                  11                   Carlton Rode Carrier
Burlingham                8                   Acle Carrier
Bury St. Ed.             43  Palmer           White Hart, St. Peter’s        Wyndham,                  Th             F              2
                                                                             Attleleburgh,
                                                                             Market Harling,
                                                                             Hapton,
                                                                             Barningham, &c.
                             Moulton          Wounded Heart, St. Peter’s     Long Stratton,             F             S             12
                                                                             Scole, Botesdale,
                                                                             Malborough,
                                                                             Stanton, Ixworth,
                                                                             &c.
Burnham                  38  Holmes           Currier’s Arms, St. Giles’     Drayton,                   W             W              4
                                                                             Fakenham, Creak,
                                                                             Middleton, &c.
Cambridge                63                   London Waggons
Carlton Rode             13  Briggs           White Lion, St. Peter’s        Mulbarton,                W S           W S            12
                                                                             Taccolnestone,
                                                                             Buckenham &c.
Castleacre               28                   Watton Carrier
Caston                   18                   Ellingham Carrier
Catfield                 15  Page             Crown, St. George’s            Sprowston,                W S            W              4
                                                                             Rackheath,
                                                                             Wroxham, Hoveton,
                                                                             Horning, Hickling
                                                                             &c.
Cawston                  11  Thurlow          King’s Head, St. George’s      Felthorpe,                 W             WS             2
                                                                             Heveringland,
                                                                             Brandestone &c.
                             Sandall          Ringers, St. Michael’s         Horsford,                 W S           W S             1
                                                                             Haveringland,
                                                                             Brandestone &c.
Cley                     25                   Holt Carrier
Coltishall                7  Leeds            Pope’s Head, Upper-market      Horstead,                M W S         M W S            3
                                                                             Scottow, Belaugh,
                                                                             &c.
                             Cooke            Duke’s Palace                  Crostwick,               M W S         M W S            3
                                                                             Horstead,
                                                                             Tunstead,
                                                                             Scottow, Belaugh,
                                                                             &c.
Colchester               62                   London Waggons
Cromer                   21  Adcock           Duke’s Palace                  Aylsham,                  W S           W S            12
                                                                             Northrepps, &c.
                             Craske           do.                            Aylsham, Gunton,          W S            W              2
                                                                             Roughton, Buston,
                                                                             &c.
Crostwick                 5                   Coltishall Carrier
Dereham                  16  Fox              Pope’s Head, Upper-market      Easton,                   M F            S              2
                                                                             Honingham,
                                                                             Hockering,
                                                                             Tuddenham,
                                                                             Litcham,
                                                                             Massingham, &
                                                                             Bircham
                             Dunn             Woolpack, St. Giles’           Tuddenham,               Tu F           W S            12
                                                                             Hockering,
                                                                             Gressenhall,
                                                                             Yaxham, Swaffham,
                                                                             Castleacre, Lynn
                             Watts            Black Horse, St. Giles’        Do. Wendling, and       Tu Th S       Tu Th S          12
                                                                             Fransham
Dickleburgh              18                   Diss Carrier
Dilham                   13  Amis             Elephant, Magdalen-street      East Ruston,               S             S              1
                                                                             Honing, Walcot,
                                                                             Beeston,
                                                                             Smallborough,
                                                                             Dilham, Stowley
Diss                     22  Holmes           Star, Market-place             Long Stratton,           Tu F           W S            12
                                                                             Dickleburgh, and
                                                                             Ipswich
                             Mason            Rampant Horse, St. Steph.      Long Stratton,           Tu ev           W             12
                                                                             Dickleburgh,
                                                                             Scole, Ipswich,
                                                                             and Bury
Docking                  40                   Thornham Carrier
Downham                  42  Carter           White Lion, St. Benedict’s     Dereham,                W evg.           Th          6 m.
                                                                             Swaffham,
                                                                             Wisbech,
                                                                             Spalding, Baston,
                                                                             and Peterburgh
Earsham                  13                   Harleslon Carrier
Easton                    5                   Mattishall Carrier
Edgfield                 18  Green            White Horse, St. Lawrence      Horsford, Caston        F evg.           S             11
                                                                             Woodrow, &c.
Ellingham                14                   Attleburgh Carrier
Elmham                   18  Amis             Wounded Heart, St. Peter’s     Litcham, Lexham,           F             S             12
                                                                             Brisley,
                                                                             Stanfield, &c.
                             Strutt           Lobster                        Drayton,                W evg.           S              2
                                                                             Attlebridge,
                                                                             Morton,
                                                                             Billingford, &c.
Erpingham                16  Dyke             King’s Head, Magdalen str.     St. Faith’s,               S             S              2
                                                                             Hevingham,
                                                                             Marsham, Aylsham,
                                                                             Ingworth,
                                                                             Calthorpe, Coleby
                                                                             &c.
Eye                      18  Rayson           Woolpack, St. Giles’           Hoxne,                  F evng.          S             11
                                                                             Stradbrook,
                                                                             Claydon,
                                                                             Thorndon,
                                                                             Stalham, &c.
Fakenham                 25  Mitchell         White Hart, St. Peter’s        Hellesdon,              Th evg.          F              2
                                                                             Drayton,
                                                                             Bawdeswell,
                                                                             Foxley, Stibbard,
                                                                             &c.
Felbrigg                 18                   Cromer Carrier
Felmingham               13                   Southrepps Carrier
Field Dalling            22                   Wells Carrier
Forncett                 11  Moore            Two Quarts, St. Stephen’s      Taccolnestone,             S             S              2
                                                                             &c.
Foulsham                 18  Sewell           Wounded Hart, St. Peter’s      Hellesdon,                 F             S             12
                                                                             Drayton,
                                                                             Attlebridge,
                                                                             Sparham,
                                                                             Bawdeswell,
                                                                             Foxley, &c.
Foxley                   15                   Foulsham Carrier                                          S             S             12
Freethorpe               11  Hubbard          White Lion, St. Mart. Pal.     Brundall,               F evng.          S             12
                                                                             Cantley, &c.
Fressingfield            24  Barrett          Greyhound, St. Stephen’s       Trowse, Brooke,
                                                                             Wattle, Lexfield,
                                                                             Hedenham,
                                                                             Harston,
                                                                             Weybread,
                                                                             Stradbrook,
                                                                             Framlingham, &c.
Garboldisham             20  Smith            Crown, St. Stephen’s           Mulbarton,                 S             S              3
                                                                             Bracon,
                                                                             Ashwelthorpe,
                                                                             Bunwell,
                                                                             Buckenham, &c.
Grantham                126                   York Waggons
Gresham                  22  Burton           Wounded Heart, St. Peter’s     Barningham,             F evng.          S             12
                                                                             Baconsthorpe,
                                                                             Alburgh, Aylsham,
                                                                             Itteringham,
                                                                             Plumstead,
                                                                             Matlock, Gresham,
                                                                             Wickmere, &c.
Gunton                   17                   Southrepps Carrier
Harleston                20  Palgrave         White Heart, St. Peter’s       Brooke, Hedenham,          F             S             12
                                                                             Earsham,
                                                                             Redenhall,
                                                                             Denton, Wattle,
                                                                             Weybread, and
                                                                             Aldborough
                             Larter           Pope’s Head, Upper-market      Stratton, Pulham,         Tu             W             11
                                                                             Fersfield,
                                                                             Mendham, &c.
Halesworth               23  Garland          White Heart, St. Peter’s       Brooke, Bungay,            F             S             11
                                                                             &c.
Halifax                 218                   York Waggons
Halstead                 61                   Stowmarket Carrier
Hapton                    8  Walker           George, Haymarket              Swardeston,                S             S              2
                                                                             Mulbarton,
                                                                             Bracon, Forncett,
                                                                             Tharston,
                                                                             Stratton, and
                                                                             Tasborough
Harling                  21                   Kenninghall Carrier
Halvergate               13  Tills            Jolly Farmers, St. Mar. Pa.    Burlingham,                S             S              3
                                                                             Moulton,
                                                                             Freethorpe,
                                                                             Tunstall, and
                                                                             Wickhampton
Hevingham                 8  Hill             Shoulder of Mutton, St. Aug.   St. Faith’s, &c.           S             S              3
Heveringland              9                   Cawston Carrier
Hardwick                 12  Ray              Cock, St. Stephen’s            Long Stratton,            W S           W S             1
                                                                             &c.
                             Coppin           Nag’s Head, St. Stephen’s      Newton, Long              W S           W S             1
                                                                             Stratton,
                                                                             Tasburgh, &c.
Hedenham                 12                   Bungay Carrier
Hempnall                 10  Shreeve          Red-Lion, Red-Lion lane        Lakenham, Stoke,           S             S              2
                                                                             Castor,
                                                                             Shottisham, &c.
Hetherset                 5  Bailey           Two Quarts, St. Stephen’s      Eaton, &c.                 S             S              4
Heydon                   14                   Cawston Carrier
Hickling                 16  Morter           Cat and Fiddle, Mag. str.      Wroxham,                F evng.          S              1
                                                                             Smallburgh,
                                                                             Stalham, &c.
                             Money            Bull, ditto                    Stalham, Beeston,       F evng.          S             12
                                                                             Smallburgh, &c.
Hindringham              22  Thompson         Wounded Heart, St. Peter’s     St. Faith’s,              Tu             W             12
                                                                             Stratton
                                                                             Strawless,
                                                                             Hevingham,
                                                                             Saxthorpe
Hindolveston             18                   Foulsham Carrier
Hingham                  14                   Watton Carrier
Hockham                  19  Rust             Cock, St. Stephen’s            Wyndham,                E evng.          S             12
                                                                             Attleborough,
                                                                             Ellingham,
                                                                             Rockland, Stow,
                                                                             Harling, &c.
Hockering                10                   Dereham Carrier
Holkham                  29                   Wells Carrier
Holt                     21  Wade                                            Aylsham,                Tu evg.          Th            6m
                                                                             Blakeney, Cley,
                                                                             &c.
                             Spencer          Pope’s Head, Upper-market      Aylsham,                   F             S             10
                                                                             Edgefield,
                                                                             Saxthorpe,
                                                                             Thornage, Cley,
                                                                             &c.
Honingham                 7                   Dereham Carrier
Horning                   9                   Ludham Carrier
Houghton                 33                   Thornham Carrier
Hoxne                    22                   Eye Carrier
Ingham                   18  Wagg             King’s Head, Magdalen st.      Sprowston,                 S             S              2
                                                                             Rackheath,
                                                                             Wroxham, Beeston,
                                                                             Stalham, Ingham,
                                                                             Happisburgh,
                                                                             Smallburgh, &c.
Ingworth                 12  Newstead         Bull, Magdalen-street          St. Faith’s,               S             S             11
                                                                             Hevingham,
                                                                             Marsham,
                                                                             Aldborough,
                                                                             Calthorpe, &c.
Ipswich                  43  Green            Currier’s Arms, St. Giles’     Dickleburgh,           Tu evng.          W             12
                                                                             Brockford,
                                                                             Colchester,
                                                                             Woodbridge,
                                                                             Harwich,
                                                                             Dedenham, &c.
Itteringham              15                   Holt Carrier
Ixworth                  35                   Bury Carriers
Kenninghall              20  West             Greyhound, St. Stephen’s       Swardeston,                F             S             10
                                                                             Bracon,
                                                                             Ashwelthorpe,
                                                                             Buckenham, Market
                                                                             Harling,
                                                                             Garboldisham,
                                                                             Market Weston,
                                                                             North and South
                                                                             Lopham, Ixworth,
                                                                             and from thence
                                                                             to Bury
Knapton                  16  Mack             Elephant, Magdalen-street      Coltishall,             F evg.           S             10
                                                                             Scottow, North
                                                                             Walsham, Paston,
                                                                             Trunch,
                                                                             Gillingham
Lammas                    9  Kenney           Bull, Magdalen-street          Frettenham,               W S           W S             3
                                                                             Spixworth,
                                                                             Buxton, &c.
Leeds                   191                   York Waggons
Lingwood                  8                   Acle Carrier
Litcham                  24                   Lynn Carrier
Loddon                    9  Hardy            Greyhound, St. Stephen’s       Framlingham,               S             S              2
                                                                             Yelverton,
                                                                             Thurlton,
                                                                             Langley, &c.
Long Stratton            10  Wright           Cock, St. Stephen’s            Newton, Tasburgh,         W S           W S             1
                                                                             Forncet, &c.
Ludham                   14  Pert             Cat and Fiddle, Mag. str.      Rackheath,                 S             S              1
                                                                             Wroxham, Horning,
                                                                             &c.
Lynn                     42  Tuck             Black Horse, St. Giles’        Gressenhall,              W S           W S             5
                                                                             Elmham, Briston,
                                                                             Litcham,
                                                                             Castleacre,
                                                                             Gayton, Wisbech,
                                                                             Spalding, &c.
                             Reeder           Wounded Heart, Up. mark.       Easton,                    W             Th            12
                                                                             Honingham,
                                                                             Hockering,
                                                                             Tuddenham,
                                                                             Attling, Dereham,
                                                                             Scarning,
                                                                             Wendling, Necton,
                                                                             Swaffham, Bilney,
                                                                             and Middleton
                             Coe              Wool-pack, St. Giles’          Shipdham,               M evg.           Tu            11
                                                                             Swaffham, &c.
                             Brooke           Wounded Heart, St. Peter’s     Gressenhall,               F             S             12
                                                                             Elmham, Litcham,
                                                                             Castleacre,
                                                                             Brisley,
                                                                             Stanfield,
                                                                             Mileham,
                                                                             Wellingham,
                                                                             Guyton, Wisbech,
                                                                             and Peterburgh
Maidenbridge              8                   Swanton Carrier
Marsham                  10  Sutton           Crown, St. George’s            St. Faith’s,               S             S              3
                                                                             Stratton
                                                                             Strawless,
                                                                             Hevingham, &c.
Mattishall               11  Stewart          Prince of Wales, St. Benct.    Easton, East              W S           W S             2
                                                                             Tuddenham,
                                                                             Honingham, &c.
                             Howes            Woolpack, St. Giles’           East Tuddenham,           W S           W S            12
                                                                             &c.
                             Allen            Sun and Anchor, St. Clem.      East Tuddenham,            S             S              3
                                                                             Honingham, &c.
Mendham                  20  Flaxman          Rampant Horse, St. Steph.      Framlingham,               S             S              1
                                                                             Barrow, &c.
Mildenhall               42                   London Waggons
Moulton                  13  Randall          Shoulder of Mutton, St. Ste.   Swardeston,                S             S              3
                                                                             Tasburgh, and
                                                                             Long Stratton
Morley                   12                   Attleborough Carrier
Mulbarton                 5                   Ashwelthrope Carrier
Mundesley                18                   Southrepps Carrier
Necton                   24  Drake            Wounded Heart, Upp. mar.       Mattishall,                F             S             12
                                                                             Shipdham, Yaxham
Neatishead               11  Smith            White Horse, Magdalen-str.     Sprowston,                 S             S              3
                                                                             Rackheath, and
                                                                             Wroxham
Needham                  38                   Stowmarket Carrier
Newmarket                50                   London Waggons
Newton                    6                   Long Stratton Carrier
N. Walsham               14  Bentley          Duke’s Palace                  Catton,                   W S           W S             2
                                                                             Crostwick,
                                                                             Horstead,
                                                                             Coltishall, and
                                                                             Scottow
Oulton                   14  Kidd             Kidd’s, Grocer, Elm hill       Blickling,              F evg.           S             11
                                                                             Wickmere,
                                                                             Hevingham,
                                                                             Marsham, &c.
Pulham                   15  Bailey           Cock, St. Stephen’s            Newton, Tasburgh,       Tu Th S       Tu Th S           2
                                                                             Long Stratton,
                                                                             Wacton
Rackheath                 5                   Ludham Carrier
Raynham                  26                   Thornham Carrier
Reepham                  14  Dennis           Crown and Scepter, St. Mic.    Swannington,              W S           W S             1
                                                                             Whitwell,
                                                                             Hackford, &c.
Reymerstone              12  White            White Lion, St. Benedict’s     Barford, Carlton,       S mng.           S              1
                                                                             Hardingham,
                                                                             Whindbergh, &c.
Rockland                 14  Fielding         Nag’s Head, St. Stephen’s      Wyndham,                F evng.          S             11
                                                                             Attleborough,
                                                                             Ellingham,
                                                                             Caston, and Stow
Saxlingham                7  Brock            Crown, St. Stephen’s           Fritton, Stoke             S             S              2
                                                                             Holy Cross, &c.
                             Dady             Star and Crown, Timberhill     Lakenham, Castor,         W S           W S             1
                                                                             Stoke, and
                                                                             Shottisham
Saxmundham               36                   Halesworth Carrier
Saxthorpe                15                   Briston Carrier
Scole                    20                   Diss Carrier
Scottow                  10                   North Walsham Carrier
Sherringham              20  Johnson          Lobster                        St. Faith’s,              W S           W S            12
                                                                             Aylsham, Cromer,
                                                                             &c.
Shipdham                 20  Mendham          Woolpack, St. Giles’           Hingham, Watton,       F. evng.          S             11
                                                                             Swaffham, &c.
Shottisham                7  Crisp            Lion and Castle, Timberhill    Lakenham, Stoke,          W S           W S             2
                                                                             Castor,
                                                                             Framlingham
Skeyton                  11  Bugden           King’s Head, Magdalen-str.     Frettenham,                S             S              2
                                                                             Felmingham, &c.
Sloley                   10                   Coltishall Carrier
Smallburgh               11  Law              Bull, Magdalen-street          Sprowston,                W S           W S             2
                                                                             Wroxham, Trunch,
                                                                             &c.
Southrepps               18  Jarvis           Ditto                          Antingham,               Tu F           W S             1
                                                                             Felmingham,
                                                                             Mundesley,
                                                                             Northrepps
S. Walsham               10  Catton           White Lion, St. Mar. by Pal.   Blofield,                  S             S              2
                                                                             Hemblington, &c.
                             Ringer           Jolly Farmers, ditto           Ditto.                     S             S              2
Southwold                30  Howlett          Star, Market-place             Wrentham,                 Tu             W             12
                                                                             Benacre,
                                                                             Hempstead,
                                                                             Yarmouth
Spooner Row              13  Childerhouse     Woolpack, St. George’s         Eaton, Hetherset,         W S           W S             3
                                                                             Wyndham, &c.
Stalham                  16                   Hingham Carrier
Stanfield                22                   Elmham Carrier
Stowmarket               35  Hearn            White Hart, St. Peter’s        Long Stratton,            Th             F              2
                                                                             Scole, Thornham,
                                                                             Brockford,
                                                                             Needham, Claydon,
                                                                             Ipswich, from
                                                                             thence to London
Stradbrook               28                   Eye Carrier
Stratton Strawl.          7                   Hevingham Carrier
Strumpshaw                9  Goffin           White Lion, St. Mar. by Pal.   Thorpe, Postwick,        W mg.           W             12
                                                                             Brundle, and
                                                                             Lingwood
Swaffham                 28  Tiffen           White Lion, St. Benedict’s     Dereham, Downham,       Th ev.         F mg.            6
                                                                             Wisbech, &c.
Swainthorpe               5                   Long Stratton Carrier
Swanton                  10  Smith            King’s Head, Magdalen-str.     Scottow, &c.               S             S              2
Swannington               8                   Reepham Carrier
Swanton Abbot            11  Spooner          Keys, Magdalen-street          Scottow,                   S             S              2
                                                                             Westwick,
                                                                             Skeyton,
                                                                             Horstead, &
                                                                             Coltishall
Ditto Morley             13  Lock             Black Horse, St. Giles’                                   S             S              2
Swardeston                5                   Buckenham Carrier
Suffieldthorpe           13                   Southrepps Carrier
Taccolnestone            10  Nicholas         Yarmouth Bridge, R. Ln. lane   Swardeston,                S             S              4
                                                                             Mulbarton,
                                                                             Braconash,
                                                                             Ashwelthorpe, &c.
Tasburgh                  8  Hardy            Crown, St. Stephen’s           Newton, &c.                S             S              2
Themilthorpe             14                   Foulsham Carrier
Thetford                 30                   London Wagons
Thornham                 40  Pointer          Wool-pack, St. Giles’          Drayton,                Tu mg.           Tu             2
                                                                             Attlebridge,
                                                                             Sparham,
                                                                             Bawdeswell,
                                                                             Foxley, Fakenham,
                                                                             Docking, &c.
Trunch                   16                   Southrepps Carrier
Tullington               14                   Skeyton Carrier
Walsingham               27                   Fakenham carrier
Watton                   21  Clarke           Currier’s Arms, St. Giles’     Barford, Hingham,        Tu F           W S            12
                                                                             Swaffham, &c.
Watton                   21  Sayer            Lobster                        Wyndham, Hingham,        Tu F           W S            12
                                                                             Swaffham, Brandon
Wells                    31  Lord             Woolpack, St. Giles’           Bawdeswell,             Tu evg.          W              2
                                                                             Foxley, Snoring,
                                                                             Lenwade Bridge
                             Berrisfield      Pope’s Head, Upper-market      Horsford, Caston          Th          F evng.           6
                                                                             Woodrow,
                                                                             Saxthorpe,
                                                                             Thornage, Field
                                                                             Dalling, &c.
                             Allen            Wounded Heart, Up. mark.       Lenwade Bridge,          Tu Th          W F             4
                                                                             Bawdeswell,
                                                                             Guist, Snoring,
                                                                             &c.
Wyndham                   9  Colman           Nag’s Head, St. Stephen’s      Eaton, Hetherset,        M W S         M W S            3
                                                                             Wicklewood, &c.
                             Foulsham         Fortune of War, St. George’s   Eaton,                    W S           W S             3
                                                                             Cringleford,
                                                                             Hetherset, &c.
                             Carter           Recruiting Sergt. St. Mary’s   Eaton, Hetherset,          S             S              4
                                                                             &c.
                             Rix              Cock, St. Stephen’s            Ditto                    M W S         M W S            3
Wisbech                  54                   Lynn Waggons
Woodbridge               46                   Ipswich Carrier
Woolpit                  40                   Stowmarket Carrier
Woolterton               14                   Erpingham Carrier
Worstead                 12  Adams            White Horse, Magdalen-str.     Sprowston,                 S             S              3
                                                                             Wroxham,
                                                                             Tunstead, &c.
Wrenningham               8                   Buckenham Carrier
York                         Balls            Star, Market-place             Mansfield,               Tu F           Tu F            3
                                                                             Sheffield,
                                                                             Manchester,
                                                                             Birmingham,
                                                                             Nottingham, and
                                                                             the Principal
                                                                             Towns in
                                                                             Yorkshire
Yarmouth                 22                   Acle Carrier
Yaxham                   15                   Dereham Carrier

                                * * * * *

                    PRINTED BY J. PAYNE, MARKET-PLACE.




FOOTNOTES


{0}  There is no map in the copy at Norwich, although this heading
implies there may have originally been a map of some sort.—DP.

{42}  In the Norwich Millennium Library copy someone has written in a
very neat hand at the bottom of page 42: “Hooke Peter, Surry St.”—DP.

{49}  There appear to have never been pages 47 and 48.  From the way the
directory is bound at Norwich the printer probably left a gap in the
pagination to cope with any last minute additions.—DP.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NORWICH DIRECTORY [1802] ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


