The Project Gutenberg eBook of St. Nicholas, Vol. 13, No. 10, August 1886
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: St. Nicholas, Vol. 13, No. 10, August 1886

Author: Various

Editor: Mary Mapes Dodge

Release date: May 5, 2025 [eBook #76023]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: The Century Co, 1886

Credits: Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ST. NICHOLAS, VOL. 13, NO. 10, AUGUST 1886 ***






[Illustration: THE CAPTAIN AND THE CAPTAIN’S MATE.]




                              ST. NICHOLAS.

             VOL. XIII.        AUGUST, 1886.        NO. 10.

                  [Copyright, 1886, by THE CENTURY CO.]




A ROCKY MOUNTAIN HERMIT.

BY ALFRED TERRY BACON.


A few days ago as I was coming out of the dark mouth of a cañon, glad
to be once again in the low afternoon sunshine and the free air, there
rang out from the blooming plum-thicket beside me a clear, low whistle,
repeated often. It was only a curlew hidden down by the brook, under the
sweet-scented canopy of flowers; but the whistle came again so sweetly
and boyishly that my thoughts flew far away; the tired horse fell into a
walk; the reins dropped from my hand over the high Mexican saddle-horn;
the mountains and the flower-covered valley seemed blotted out of sight,
and instead there came up a vision of a little brown-eyed boy, who lives
two thousand miles away—he seemed to be standing before me and looking
up, whistling just as the curlew whistles.

But there was no one near. I was alone among the mountains, twenty miles
away from any man, and twice as far from any whistling lad. It was only a
little vision that the curlew’s note called up for me, but I was grateful
to the hidden bird; for that clear remembrance was like sight, and it was
long since I had seen a human face or heard a voice. The curlew calling
by the brook never knew that it was doing a kindness for a boy far away
on the other side of the continent; but in jogging my memory it reminded
me of a letter, lying tucked away, which had cost its writer a great
deal of hard work—a letter from the brown-eyed lad who thinks the life
of a backwoodsman almost as interesting as the life of Robinson Crusoe
and the other wonderful men in the story-books. Perhaps there are some
other boys who would like to hear how a man lives all alone in the Rocky
Mountains.

Near the central part of the Territory of Wyoming there is a group of
mountains which belong to the Rocky Mountain system, though they are far
separated from the highest range. All the mountains are higher than any
of our Eastern ranges; but standing in the midst of plains that are many
thousand feet above the sea, their general height does not seem great.
They are very beautiful in their covering of heavy pine forests with
countless tall crags and towers and sharp obelisks of natural rock rising
from their summits; and in the center of the group there stands one lofty
peak rising far above all its fellows. While all the mountains around
were gay with spring flowers, its high head was still wrapped in snow;
and now as mid-summer approaches, it is still crowned with a white wreath
which will only melt away in the late summer, to return in the early
autumn.

The Rocky Mountains are unlike the other great ranges of the world, in
having broad, smooth, grassy valleys scattered everywhere among them.
Some of these valleys are of very great size, even among the highest
mountains, and they are so different from other mountain valleys that
they have received a different name; they are generally called parks.
This lower group of mountains also, like the great main range, has these
lovely natural parks of smaller size. The largest and most beautiful
of them all, a mile in width and many miles in length, lies along the
eastern side of the great peak; and just where the evening shadow of
the mountain falls across the park, shutting off an hour or two of late
sunshine, there stands a little lonely log cabin, which is my hermitage.
There I am spending a month or two, far away from men, like Robinson
Crusoe. I have, to be sure, the company of a horse and a dog, but there
is no man—not even a Man Friday; and therefore, as it is not possible for
me to talk to any one, I must do a little talking with my pen, and tell
what a queer sort of a life I lead. For even in this wilderness I have
one great comfort which was denied to poor old Robinson—sometimes, by
taking long rides, I can get letters; though, as the post-office is fifty
miles away, mail days are very scarce. Still, slowly passed along from
ranch to ranch, letters come and go; and so, in time, what I write will
reach the railroad and then the outer world.

[Illustration]

Life in this part of the globe is not always so lonely. On nearly all the
rivers and creeks of Wyoming there are ranches scattered at distances
of ten or twenty miles apart. On the eastern edge of these mountains,
there is a ranch only eight miles away from my hermitage, and there is
another in the foot-hills on the western side, not twenty miles away.
But now all the ranches are deserted, for the only business in all this
region is the raising of cattle, and through the early summer all hands
are hard at work on the “round-ups,” which run over the whole breadth
of the territory, searching for cattle scattered by the storms of the
last winter. Through the cold and the darkness and the deep snows of
winter Crusoe-life would, indeed, be rather too hard to bear. Then, there
were three of us together in the little cabin, and there were sometimes
friendly visits between the men on the distant ranches. But now, alone in
the wilderness, twenty miles from any human being, I feel the loneliness
less than did we three together in the still, dead winter; for the whole
world is alive and beautiful.

No one knows, moreover, how much pleasure there is in the friendship of
an affectionate dog and an intelligent horse, until he is shut off from
all other company, and is obliged to make them his intimate friends.
Gip and Monkey, my dog and my horse, spend so many hours of every day
exploring the mountains with me, that we have grown to be very faithful
friends.

[Illustration]

A hermit, you know, usually has not much work to do. Those old fellows
who used to hide themselves in caves and deserts, in old times, spent
most of their days in solemn meditation; but I am not just that kind
of a hermit. To sit still and think all the time would be the hardest
work in the world for me. The only necessary work that falls to my lot
at present is keeping the camp, preparing food and looking after a small
band of horses that are running at large in the park. My first task is to
ride a few miles up the park and see that the horses are on their proper
range; and after that, all the day is free for reading or writing or
hunting or wandering about through the mountains, finding fresh varieties
of flowers or exploring unknown cañons or climbing the tall crags to look
across the mountains to the vast plains that stretch away as far as the
eye can reach, like a blue sea. In these daily rides through the wild
mountains there is so much that is new and strange to Eastern eyes, so
much that is beautiful and grand, so many kinds of curious wild animals,
such quantities of gay flowers never seen in the States, that there is
enough pleasure in them to make up for all the loneliness of these few
weeks.

[Illustration: SOME OF THE UNSOCIABLE NEIGHBORS.]

We seem to be alone most of the time—Monkey, Gip, and I—and that is why
we are such friends; but we are not alone so much as we seem to be. There
are plenty of neighbors upon the mountain-sides, and some that wander
through the park; but they are so very unsociable that when they see us
coming they walk the other way. But then it is true, to be sure, that
some of them are not always very kindly treated by us when we meet them,
so perhaps we are to blame. There are two families of neighbors, who live
in caves on the mountain, for whom I have a great respect. I would not
give them offense on any account, for they are very powerful, and usually
have things all their own way in the neighborhood. They are the brown
bears and the gray bears. Often I see their great fresh foot-prints in
the mud along the creeks when I go out in the early morning. The tracks
look as if a man with very large, broad feet had been running bare-footed
through the mire. I never follow their trail very far to see where they
have gone, for I prefer to have a friend or two with me when I go to
make the acquaintance of these mighty gentlemen or the members of their
families.

At the nearest ranch on the western side of the mountains, there lives a
German who was the first pioneer to bring cattle in among these valleys.
The encounters that he has had with all the various animals that live
in the forest are very interesting. Not long ago, this old fellow built
a new cabin for himself at the foot of a mountain. Before his house was
finished, he went out one day and killed a fine fat deer. Bringing the
carcass home at night, he hung it up against the back of his house,
and then hanging a blanket over the doorway which was still without a
door, he went to bed. He slept soundly, but there dimly seemed to him to
be some disturbance about the house during the night; and when he went
out in the morning, every bit of his fine deer was gone, and the bear
tracks up and down the mountain-side showed what had become of it. But
game was plentiful, and it was not long before his deer was replaced by
a big-horned sheep, which is the most tender and juicy meat that ever
was eaten. This time he was more careful, and lay awake half the night,
fearing that he should lose his stock of fresh meat. When it was very
late and he was about to give up watching, he at last heard a sound at
the back of the house. Something was at work on his wild mutton. There
was a noise of scratching and tearing. It seemed as if several bears
were making short work with his meat. He seized his loaded rifle and
jumped out of bed with very scanty clothing on. Going to the doorway and
drawing aside the blanket, he saw that the night was cloudy and as dark
as Egypt. He stopped and thought for a moment that it would be impossible
to kill a bear in such darkness, even if he should be able to hit it, for
these beasts are so tough that they will carry a dozen bullets about in
their bodies without much inconvenience, if they are not wounded in the
heart or the brain. So our friend laid down his rifle and took instead a
loaded shot-gun. “This is the thing for them,” he said to himself; “it
will pepper them all over and scare them so they never will come again.”
Then, with gun in hand he silently climbed the projecting logs at the
nearest corner of the cabin, and creeping across the roof, peeped over
the edge above the place where the sheep was hung. Something appeared to
be moving below in the darkness. Taking a random aim, he blazed away.
The shot scattered and evidently took effect; for there arose a chorus
of growls and howls and yells that would have made the bravest man’s
hair stand on end; there was a scampering and shuffling of many feet up
and down, and around the cabin; even in the thick darkness he could see
many great fat creatures running and sniffing angrily about to find who
had attacked them. He saw that he was besieged on his own roof by at
least a dozen furious, hungry bears. “They didn’t scare worth a cent,” he
said. It was not long before they discovered whence the shot had come,
and knowing very well that there is strength in numbers, they determined
to have that man for supper, even if they had to put off their supper
till breakfast-time. So while some sat down here and there, the others
walked about, grunting and growling over their injuries. Bears can climb
quite as well as men, and old Frank stood with fear and trembling in
the middle of the roof, ready to receive with the butt of his gun the
first nose that should rise above the edge. If two had happened to mount
the roof on opposite sides, there would have been a small chance of
life for the poor man. But the bears thought that solid ground was the
safer place for them, so there they staid; and up above sat old Frank
shivering, how long he never knew. It seemed centuries. It was a sharp,
frosty autumn night, and, as he had on very little clothing, Frank was
soon chilled almost to his bones. But the bears’ coats were warm enough.
They were more hungry than they were cold, so there they sat and growled
and waited for their prey to come down and be eaten. Soon a bitterly cold
wind began to blow. Every joint in the poor man’s body stiffened; but it
seemed pleasanter to freeze to death than to be eaten up by those ugly
beasts, so he bore his discomfort as best he could. The hours of that
night seemed to be endless, and the chill grew terrible; but at last a
dull gray streak appeared in the East. No man was ever more glad to see
the first sign of dawn than was that chilly watcher. Bears are very shy
by daylight, and as the twilight little by little grew into broad day,
Frank’s visitors trotted away disappointed and sulky up to their dens on
the mountain. Their victim, more dead than alive, was able at last to
climb down, and kindle a fire to warm himself. He still lives to tell the
story in the same log cabin; but it has a good stout door now, and he
will never again go bear-hunting with a shot-gun.

So you see it is quite as pleasant not to have the bear families too
neighborly. They rarely come out of the woods by daylight, except in late
summer and autumn when the plum-thickets are hanging full of fruit; and
so, fortunately, we do not often see them.

The most sociable of all our wild neighbors is the prong-horned antelope,
of which there are several bands running up and down the park. Every day
as I ride out to the horse range I meet some of them; often, in suddenly
mounting the crest of a ridge, I surprise a little herd grazing just
beyond. Then it is beautiful to watch them as they bound gracefully away
down the slope with the speed of a bird, seeming hardly to touch their
slender limbs to the ground as they fly along. Gip likes nothing better
than to go tearing after them as long as his breath holds out; though
that small dog always finds it a hopeless chase, for only greyhounds and
the swiftest horses can overtake the antelope when it is strong and fat
from feeding freely on the fresh June grass.

[Illustration: HEAD OF THE PRONG-HORNED ANTELOPE.]

Returning a little while ago, after many weeks of civilized life in a
Colorado town, I found the old cabin deserted; for those who had been
my companions there had gone far out on the plains to look after our
wandering cattle. In the late afternoon, when the peak’s shadow fell
across the valley, while I was busy making ready the simple supper, Gip
stood in the doorway on guard, and I heard him give a long, low growl
of suspicion. Looking out, I saw two pretty antelopes standing before
the door, not a stone’s throw away, peering about in a timid, curious
way to see what change had come over the little house which before had
been so quiet. It is not common to see them so very near, and they were
so pretty and graceful that I could only stand and admire them for a
moment, forgetting my need of fresh meat. Their little hook-shaped horns
and dainty hoofs are as black as polished jet; their eyes are very
large and soft and dark; their bodies are a bright tawny color, but the
throat and breast and limbs are snowy white. There are few animals in
the world that are more elegant both in shape and in their movements
than the prong-horned antelope. They came tripping down the slope with
all the airs and graces of two little dandies; now trotting easily
forward; now clearing a fallen tree with a beautiful flying leap; now
stopping a moment to gaze and sniff about for possible danger. It was
quite flattering to a lonely hermit to receive a visit from neighbors as
handsome and stylish as these. But, though a friendly visit would be very
pleasant, a full larder would be still pleasanter. Fortunately for my
shy visitors, all the arms and ammunition had been stowed away while the
house was closed, and could not be procured before the wary creatures had
trotted on out of easy rifle range.

[Illustration: COYOTES, OR PRAIRIE WOLVES.]

Once in two weeks comes the principal event of my backwoods life,—a
horseback ride of about forty miles to carry letters to the nearest
ranch, and to get those that have collected there. After riding a few
miles along the valley and through a pass, I come out upon the open
rolling country that stretches away for hundreds of miles without any
covering of trees or bushes except along the streams; for this western
prairie land is so dry that only grass and cactus and low herbs can grow
upon it. The rolling land is green, and spangled with flowers through May
and June; but after mid-summer it becomes as dry as a desert, and in that
way kind Providence changes the standing grass into hay which will feed
the thousands of cattle and horses and wild creatures through the winter.

[Illustration: PRAIRIE DOGS.]

As I ride out of the pass on these regular journeys for the mail, a
coyote, or prairie wolf, that lives close by among the rocks, often
comes rushing out with a doleful howl, and acts as if wishing to make
acquaintance with Gip. Both the wolf and Gip seem to understand that they
are blood relations. They are nearly of equal size, and they run up to
each other as if they would like to be friends; but when they are close
together, the courage of one or the other always fails. Either Gip turns
tail, allowing the wolf to chase him within a dozen steps of the horse’s
heels,—or the wolf takes alarm, and Gip runs madly after it until it
disappears over a ridge. So the wild dog and the tame one make little
progress in their friendship. Yet it is not a very uncommon thing in the
Far West even for gentle and intelligent dogs to form a friendship with a
pack of wolves, and to go off and live with them, returning now and then
to pay short visits to their old masters. But more often if a dog falls
in with a pack of wolves, he is quickly torn in pieces by them.

[Illustration: THE MOUNTAIN LION.]

[Illustration: THE HOME OF THE BIG CAT.]

Early in the morning, before the peak has begun to gather its cap of
thunder clouds which break in showers every afternoon, and while the air
through the whole valley is cool and very sweet with the perfume of a
million flowers, I start out for my daily ride. First there is a mile
over the rich grassland along the creek where the gay flowers grow in
far greater variety and beauty than in any Eastern fields; then there
is a long stretch of dry, rolling land which is all one great city of
prairie-dogs. At the approach of strangers there is great excitement
through this town of little yellow pigmies. Those which are looking
out from the highest point give a few warning calls. Then there is a
tremendous scattering and scampering in all directions of the fat,
short-legged little bodies in so hot haste that they look like balls
of yellow fur rolling across the gravel. Some have been out feeding,
and more have been about gossiping with their neighbors and making
morning calls, for they are famous little busybodies: but when they
hear the warning, all fly at full speed to their own homes. Then when
every one is sitting at the mouth of its hole, they are ready to defy
the world. For a man and a horse they care little, but at the sight of
a dog, the city is in an uproar; and, feeling perfectly safe by their
own homes, they delight to tease him. There is such a Babel of shrill
little voices chattering, scolding, squealing, and yelping from hundreds
of gravel-heaps, that Gip stands for a minute perplexed, not knowing
on which one to spring first; then like a flash he darts away to the
nearest hole where a jolly little tormentor is chattering its defiance.
The prairie-dog stands still in the doorway of its house, scolding and
twitching its tail as its enemy comes charging down, until Gip’s nose
seems almost upon it; then as quick as a wink, the little tail flies up
and Mr. Prairie-Dog is far away into the earth by the time Gip has fairly
reached the door of his house. Then every dog in the town redoubles its
chattering, and it seems as if a ripple of low laughter ran through the
company at the disappointment of their enemy. But Gip, after ramming his
head as far as it can be forced into the burrow, draws it out with a
sniff of regret and then is off again, full tilt, after the next little
saucy rascal that sits on a neighboring sandheap, making merry over his
perplexity. Again he almost has one; the prairie-dog sits unmoved until
Gip comes within a yard of the hole, and then it vanishes. It seems a
very narrow escape for it; but it is always just so narrow, and yet they
always escape. As long as man and dog are in sight they keep up their
shrill din, like the chattering of a thousand monkeys; and as long as we
are in their village, Gip flies madly from hole to hole, always just so
eager and hopeful, though he has been chasing them all his life and has
never yet caught one.

[Illustration: HEAD OF THE WAPITI.]

The town of the prairie-dogs is in a beautiful situation. It lies in
the broadest part of the park, surrounded by the highest and grandest
of the mountains. A few days ago, as I was riding through it in the
early morning, I saw an animal some distance ahead running hard toward
the woods. Thinking it was a wolf or coyote, I paid little attention at
first, but looking closer, I saw plainly that I was mistaken, for its
legs were short, and its body long and heavy. It went springing over
the grass with long bounds, and its coat of fur was grayish, shading to
yellow brown; and I knew it must be one of the great panthers which are
generally called mountain lions. I had never before met one, though their
great, round footprints, as large as tea-plates, had often been seen in
the soft snow the last winter. Like other cats, they like to sleep in the
day and to prowl at night. Gip took a long, wistful look at the lion; but
he is a small dog, and a very wise one, and he knew his life would be
short if he should approach very near to that great creature, so he went
back to his hard work with the prairie-dogs, and left me to go galloping
off alone for a nearer view of the lion. But Monkey dislikes wild beasts
quite as much as Gip, and would never willingly have carried me very near
to a beast of prey, even if the lion had not run up into the rocks on the
mountain-side before I had seen it very clearly.

Beside the rough confusion of rocks into which the panther ran, there was
a gentle grassy slope which seemed to extend to the top of the mountain.

I wanted to have one more look at the big cat, so Monkey had to climb
the long ascent, much against his will, keeping as near to the rocks as
possible; and very soon Gip plucked up courage to follow; but that was
the last we ever saw of the mountain lion. However, in wandering up near
the top of the mountain, I came on tracks that were quite as interesting
to me as was the lion. They were the marks of a cloven hoof, nearly as
large as the tracks of an ox, but longer and more pointed. As there were
no cattle so high on the mountain, it was plain, at a glance, that they
were footprints of the great wapiti, which, in the West, is always called
an elk. Hurrying on in hope of catching sight of this great king of the
forest, the footprints grew fresher, and soon I came to a glade where the
grass, crushed down in spots, showed that a startled band of elk had just
risen from their rest, and run away; and so, like a will-o’-the-wisp,
they led me on through the forest, always letting me know that they were
near, by their fresh tracks, but never quite near enough to be seen. The
elk and the big-horned sheep are the shyest of all these wild animals;
and the elk have the senses of sight and smell and hearing so very keen,
that they will see a hunter, and will run from him, a dozen times for
every time that he gets a first sight of them. Their great branching
antlers, so large and heavy that a small boy could hardly lift them from
the ground, lie scattered everywhere through the grass in the park, for
they shed them every spring; and everywhere on the mountain-sides we find
their footprints; and yet it is quite a rare event to meet them, and
still more uncommon to kill them.

[Illustration: THE AMERICAN ELK.]

So all day long, with my pony and my dog, I wandered contentedly along
the mountain-side, resting often under cool over-arching rocks or beside
the snow-fed brooks, the banks of which are streaked with the crimson
of the wild cyclamen; and all day long we tried to pay visits to our
shy neighbors; but wherever we called, they were not at home. And, when
the late afternoon began to drop blue, gauzy veils of shadows over the
east-ward slope of the opposite mountain, we turned back toward the
lonely, silent home, which now never hears the sweet sound of human
speech.

I can not now tell you of all the queer inhabitants of these mountains;
but next time I shall have something to say to you about the beaver, the
wild sheep, the buffalo, and some other interesting neighbors of mine.




THE BABY’S DIMPLE.

BY WILLIAM H. HAYNE.


    A south wind sought the baby’s cheek.
      Fresh from a laughing billow,
    And blew in elfish glee against
      The small face on the pillow.




THE MONSTER.

BY MARIA J. HAMMOND.

[Illustration]


I.

    Ho! the great monster, the Sea!
      Rushing and raging about,
    Lashing his tail,—he must be
      Hungry and frantic, no doubt!
    Oh, should he open his lips,—
    Woe to the beautiful ships!
    Beautiful ships, keep away
    From the great monster to-day!
    Ho! the wild creature—the Sea!
    Hungry and fierce he must be!


II.

    Lo! the great monster, asleep,
      Lying so quietly there!
    Hear his low breathings so deep!
      See the wind waving his hair!
    Ho, little children, come near—
    Come now and see him!—Don’t fear.
    Touch his soft mane in your play,—
    He will not harm you to-day.
    Lo! the huge creature asleep—
    Breathing so low and so deep!

[Illustration]




A SAD CASE.

BY MARGARET VANDEGRIFT.

[Illustration]


    Miss Dorothea Dimpleton, whenever she went out,
    Held in her neatly mittened hand a silken reticule;
    When she went to shop, to market, or to visit all about,
    She carried it, as if upon her way to sewing-school.
    ’Twas always full, and yet her dearest friends had never heard
    What ’twas full of, so they all agreed her conduct was absurd.

    Miss Dorothea Dimpleton had early learned to sew;
    She could hem, and fell, and overseam, could gather and could gore;
    And she said, “This is an art that every woman ought to know,
    But, alas! my sex disdains to learn the useful any more!
    Yet I will not be discouraged; I will do my small endeavor,
    And perchance I may prevent the art from being lost forever!”

    So she filled with pretty “hussifs”[1] her ample reticule,
    Each stocked with thimble, needlecase, and scissors, all complete,
    And she stopped the little maidens on their way from morning school,
    And to each of them she kindly gave a “hussif” fresh and neat,
    And the little maids said, “Thank you, Ma’am!” and curtseyed to the
      ground,
    And then went and hid the “hussifs” where they seldom could be found.

    Miss Dorothea Dimpleton felt very sure, at last,
    That every little girl in town was sewing with a will;
    And it was not till at least a year of feeling sure was past,
    That she heard a truth so dreadful that it really made her ill:
    Of all those lovely “hussifs” she had given in the place,
    There had not been a needle in one single needle-case!

    But that, you know, was years ago, before it had been said,
    “Be sure you’re right, and” (please observe the “then”) “_then_ go
      ahead!”

[1] “Hussif” (a contracted form of the word “house-wife”)was formerly
used as a name for a little bag or case for holding sewing materials.




A LITTLE SEAMSTRESS.

BY MARY E. WILKINS.


    She sat in her little rocking-chair, a-sighing and twirling her
      thumbs:
    “Oh, everything for my doll is done, and never to mending comes!
    I haven’t a morsel of sewing!—Dear Mother, in all the town,
    Can’t you find me one doll, no matter how small, who will wear out
      her gown?”




LITTLE LORD FAUNTLEROY.

BY FRANCES HODGSON BURNETT.


CHAPTER XI.

When Mr. Hobbs’s young friend left him to go to Dorincourt Castle and
become Lord Fauntleroy, and the grocery-man had time to realize that
the Atlantic Ocean lay between himself and the small companion who had
spent so many agreeable hours in his society, he really began to feel
very lonely indeed. The fact was, Mr. Hobbs was not a clever man nor even
a bright one; he was, indeed, rather a slow and heavy person, and he
had never made many acquaintances. He was not mentally energetic enough
to know how to amuse himself, and in truth he never did anything of an
entertaining nature but read the newspapers and add up his accounts. It
was not very easy for him to add up his accounts, and sometimes it took
him a long time to bring them out right; and in the old days, little Lord
Fauntleroy, who had learned how to add up quite nicely with his fingers
and a slate and pencil, had sometimes even gone to the length of trying
to help him; and, then too, he had been so good a listener and had taken
such an interest in what the newspaper said, and he and Mr. Hobbs had
held such long conversations about the Revolution and the British and
the elections and the Republican party, that it was no wonder his going
left a blank in the grocery store. At first it seemed to Mr. Hobbs that
Cedric was not really far away, and would come back again; that some day
he would look up from his paper and see the lad standing in the doorway,
in his white suit and red stockings, and with his straw hat on the back
of his head, and would hear him say in his cheerful little voice: “Hello,
Mr. Hobbs! This is a hot day—isn’t it?” But as the days passed on and
this did not happen, Mr. Hobbs felt very dull and uneasy. He did not even
enjoy his newspaper as much as he used to. He would put the paper down
on his knee after reading it, and sit and stare at the high stool for a
long time. There were some marks on the long legs which made him feel
quite dejected and melancholy. They were marks made by the heels of the
next Earl of Dorincourt, when he kicked and talked at the same time. It
seems that even youthful earls kick the legs of things they sit on;—noble
blood and lofty lineage do not prevent it. After looking at those marks,
Mr. Hobbs would take out his gold watch and open it and stare at the
inscription: “From his oldest friend, Lord Fauntleroy, to Mr. Hobbs.
When this you see, remember me.” And after staring at it awhile, he would
shut it up with a loud snap, and sigh and get up and go and stand in the
doorway—between the box of potatoes and the barrel of apples—and look
up the street. At night, when the store was closed, he would light his
pipe and walk slowly along the pavement until he reached the house where
Cedric had lived, on which there was a sign that read, “This House to
Let”; and he would stop near it and look up and shake his head, and puff
at his pipe very hard, and after a while walk mournfully back again.

This went on for two or three weeks before any new idea came to him.
Being slow and ponderous, it always took him a long time to reach a new
idea. As a rule he did not like new ideas, but preferred old ones. After
two or three weeks, however, during which, instead of getting better,
matters really grew worse, a novel plan slowly and deliberately dawned
upon him. He would go to see Dick. He smoked a great many pipes before he
arrived at the conclusion, but finally he did arrive at it. He would go
to see Dick. He knew all about Dick. Cedric had told him, and his idea
was that perhaps Dick might be some comfort to him in the way of talking
things over.

So one day when Dick was very hard at work blacking a customer’s boots,
a short, stout man with a heavy face and a bald head, stopped on the
pavement and stared for two or three minutes at the bootblack’s sign,
which read:

                          “PROFESSOR DICK TIPTON
                             CAN’T BE BEAT.”

He stared at it so long that Dick began to take a lively interest in him,
and when he had put the finishing touch to his customer’s boots, he said:

“Want a shine, sir?”

The stout man came forward deliberately and put his foot on the rest.

“Yes,” he said.

Then when Dick fell to work, the stout man looked from Dick to the sign
and from the sign to Dick.

“Where did you get that?” he asked.

“From a friend o’ mine,” said Dick,—“a little feller. He guv’ me the
whole outfit. He was the best little feller ye ever saw. He’s in England
now. Gone to be one o’ those lords.”

“Lord—Lord—”asked Mr. Hobbs, with ponderous slowness, “Lord
Fauntleroy—Goin’ to be Earl of Dorincourt?”

Dick almost dropped his brush.

“Why, boss!”he exclaimed, “d’ye know him yerself?”

“I’ve known him.” answered Mr. Hobbs, wiping his warm forehead, “ever
since he was born. We were lifetime acquaintances—that’s what _we_ were.”

It really made him feel quite agitated to speak of it. He pulled the
splendid gold watch out of his pocket and opened it, and showed the
inside of the case to Dick.

“‘When this you see, remember me,’” he read.

“That was his parting keepsake to me. ‘I don’t want you to forget
me’—those were his words—I’d ha’ remembered him,” he went on, shaking his
head, “if he hadn’t given me a thing, an’ I hadn’t seen hide nor hair on
him again. He was a companion as _any_ man would remember.”

“He was the nicest little feller I ever see,” said Dick. “An’ as to
sand—I never ha’ seen so much sand to a little feller. I thought a heap
o’ him, I did,—an’ we was friends, too—we was sort o’ chums from the
fust, that little young un an’ me. I grabbed his ball from under a stage
fur him, an’ he never forgot it; an’ he’d come down here, he would, with
his mother or his nuss an’ he’d holler: ‘Hello, Dick!’ at me, as friendly
as if he was six feet high, when he warn’t knee high to a grasshopper,
and was dressed in gal’s clo’es. He was a gay little chap, and when you
was down on your luck, it did you good to talk to him.”

“That’s so,” said Mr. Hobbs. “It was a pity to make an earl out of _him_.
He would have _shone_ in the grocery business—or dry goods either; he
would have _shone_!” And he shook his head with deeper regret than ever.

It proved that they had so much to say to each other that it was not
possible to say it all at one time, and so it was agreed that the next
night Dick should make a visit to the store and keep Mr. Hobbs company.
The plan pleased Dick well enough. He had been a street waif nearly
all his life, but he had never been a bad boy, and he had always had a
private yearning for a more respectable kind of existence. Since he had
been in business for himself, he had made enough money to enable him to
sleep under a roof instead of out in the streets, and he had begun to
hope he might reach even a higher plane, in time. So, to be invited to
call on a stout, respectable man who owned a corner store, and even had a
horse and wagon, seemed to him quite an event.

“Do you know anything about earls and castles?” Mr. Hobbs inquired. “I’d
like to know more of the particklars.”

“There’s a story about some on ’em in the _Penny Story Gazette_,” said
Dick. “It’s called the ‘Crime of a Coronet; or, the Revenge of the
Countess May.’ It’s a boss thing, too. Some of us boys’re takin’ it to
read.”

“Bring it up when you come,” said Mr. Hobbs, “an’ I’ll pay for it. Bring
all you can find that have any earls in ’em. If there aren’t earls,
markises ’ll do, or dooks—though _he_ never made mention of any dooks or
markises. We did go over coronets a little, but I never happened to see
any. I guess they don’t keep ’em ’round here.”

“Tiffany’d have ’em if anybody did,” said Dick, “but I don’t know as I’d
know one if I saw it.”

Mr. Hobbs did not explain that he would not have known one if he saw it.
He merely shook his head ponderously.

“I s’pose there is very little call for ’em,” he said, and that ended the
matter.

This was the beginning of quite a substantial friendship. When Dick went
up to the store, Mr. Hobbs received him with great hospitality. He gave
him a chair tilted against the door, near a barrel of apples, and after
his young visitor was seated, he made a jerk at them with the hand in
which he held his pipe, saying:

“Help yerself.”

Then he looked at the story papers, and after that they read, and
discussed the British aristocracy; and Mr. Hobbs smoked his pipe very
hard and shook his head a great deal. He shook it most when he pointed
out the high stool with the marks on its legs.

“There’s his very kicks,” he said impressively; “his very kicks. I sit
and look at ’em by the hour. This is a world of ups an’ it’s a world of
downs. Why, he’d set there, an’ eat crackers out of a box, an’ apples out
of a barrel, an’ pitch his cores into the street; an’ now he’s a lord
a-livin’ in a castle. Those are a lord’s kicks; they’ll be an earl’s
kicks some day. Sometimes I says to myself, says I, ‘Well, I’ll be
jiggered!’”

He seemed to derive a great deal of comfort from his reflections and
Dick’s visit. Before Dick went home, they had a supper in the small
backroom; they had crackers and cheese and sardines, and other canned
things out of the store, and Mr. Hobbs solemnly opened two bottles of
ginger ale, and pouring out two glasses, proposed a toast.

“Here’s to _him_!” he said, lifting his glass, “an’ may he teach ’em a
lesson—earls an’ markises an’ dooks an’ all!”

After that night, the two saw each other often, and Mr. Hobbs was much
more comfortable and less desolate. They read the _Penny Story Gazette_,
and many other interesting things, and gained a knowledge of the habits
of the nobility and gentry which would have surprised those despised
classes if they had realized it. One day Mr. Hobbs made a pilgrimage to a
book store down town, for the express purpose of adding to their library.
He went to a clerk and leaned over the counter to speak to him.

“I want,” he said, “a book about earls.”

“What!” exclaimed the clerk.

“A book,” repeated the grocery-man, “about earls.”

“I’m afraid,” said the clerk, looking rather queer, “that we haven’t what
you want.”

“Haven’t?” said Mr. Hobbs, anxiously. “Well, say markises then—or dooks.”

“I know of no such book,” answered the clerk.

Mr. Hobbs was much disturbed. He looked down on the floor,—then he looked
up.

“None about female earls?” he inquired.

“I’m afraid not,” said the clerk, with a smile.

“Well,” exclaimed Mr. Hobbs, “I’ll be jiggered!”

He was just going out of the store, when the clerk called him back and
asked him if a story in which the nobility were chief characters would
do. Mr. Hobbs said it would—if he could not get an entire volume devoted
to earls. So the clerk sold him a book called “The Tower of London,”
written by Mr. Harrison Ainsworth, and he carried it home.

When Dick came they began to read it. It was a very wonderful and
exciting book, and the scene was laid in the reign of the famous English
queen who is called by some people Bloody Mary. And as Mr. Hobbs heard
of Queen Mary’s deeds and the habit she had of chopping people’s heads
off, putting them to the torture, and burning them alive, he became very
much excited. He took his pipe out of his mouth and stared at Dick, and
at last he was obliged to mop the perspiration from his brow with his red
pocket handkerchief.

[Illustration: “WHY, BOSS!” EXCLAIMED DICK, “DO YOU KNOW HIM YOURSELF?”]

“Why, he aint safe!” he said. “He aint safe! If the women folks can sit
up on their thrones an’ give the word for things like that to be done,
who’s to know what’s happening to him this very minute? He’s no more safe
than nothing? Just let a woman like that get mad, an’ no one’s safe!”

“Well,” said Dick, though he looked rather anxious himself; “ye see this
’ere un isn’t the one that’s bossin’ things now. I know her name’s
Victohry, an’ this un here in the book,—her name’s Mary.”

“So it is,” said Mr. Hobbs, still mopping his forehead; “so it is. An’
the newspapers are not sayin’ anything about any racks, thumbscrews,
or stake-burnin’s,—but still it doesn’t seem as if ’twas safe for him
over there with those queer folks. Why, they tell me they don’t keep the
Fourth o’ July!”

He was privately uneasy for several days; and it was not until he
received Fauntleroy’s letter and had read it several times, both to
himself and to Dick, and had also read the letter Dick got about the same
time, that he became composed again.

But they both found great pleasure in their letters. They read and
re-read them, and talked them over and enjoyed every word of them. And
they spent days over the answers they sent, and read them over almost as
often as the letters they had received.

It was rather a labor for Dick to write his. All his knowledge of reading
and writing he had gained during a few months when he had lived with his
elder brother, and had gone to a night-school; but, being a sharp boy,
he had made the most of that brief education, and had spelled out things
in newspapers since then, and practiced writing with bits of chalk on
pavements or walls or fences. He told Mr. Hobbs all about his life and
about his elder brother, who had been rather good to him after their
mother died, when Dick was quite a little fellow. Their father had died
some time before. The brother’s name was Ben, and he had taken care of
Dick as well as he could, until the boy was old enough to sell newspapers
and run errands. They had lived together, and as he grew older Ben had
managed to get along until he had quite a decent place in a store.

“And then,” exclaimed Dick with disgust, “blest if he didn’t go an’ marry
a gal! Just went and got spoony, an’ hadn’t any more sense left! Married
her, an’ set up housekeepin’ in two back rooms. An’ a hefty un she was,—a
regular tiger-cat. She’d tear things to pieces when she got mad,—and she
was mad _all_ the time. Had a baby just like her,—yell day ’n’ night! An’
if I didn’t have to ’tend it! an’ when it screamed, she’d fire things
at me. She fired a plate at me one day, an’ hit the baby—cut its chin.
Doctor said he’d carry the mark till he died. A nice mother she was!
Crackey! but didn’t we have a time—Ben ’n’ mehself ’n’ the young un. She
was mad at Ben because he didn’t make money faster; ’n’ at last he went
out West with a man to set up a cattle ranch. An’ he hadn’t been gone a
week ’fore, one night, I got home from sellin’ my papers, ’n’ the rooms
wus locked up ’n’ empty, ’n’ the woman o’ the house, she told me Minna’d
gone—shown a clean pair o’ heels. Some un else said she’d gone across the
water to be nuss to a lady as had a little baby, too. Never heard a word
of her since—nuther has Ben. If I’d ha’ bin him, I wouldn’t ha’ fretted
a bit—’n’ I guess he didn’t. But he thought a heap o’ her at the start.
Tell you, he was spoons on her. She was a daisy-lookin’ gal, too, when
she was dressed up, ’n’ not mad. She’d big black eyes ’n’ black hair down
to her knees; she’d make it into a rope as big as your arm, and twist it
’round ’n’ ’round her head; ’n’ I tell you her eyes’d snap! Folks used to
say she was part _I_tali-un—said her mother or father’d come from there,
’n’ it made her queer. I tell ye, she was one of ’em—she was!”

He often told Mr. Hobbs stories of her and of his brother Ben, who, since
his going out West, had written once or twice to Dick. Ben’s luck had not
been good, and he had wandered from place to place; but at last he had
settled on a ranch in California, where he was at work at the time when
Dick became acquainted with Mr. Hobbs.

“That gal,” said Dick one day, “she took all the grit out o’ him. I
couldn’t help feelin’ sorry for him sometimes.”

They were sitting in the store door-way together, and Mr. Hobbs was
filling his pipe.

“He oughtn’t to ’ve married,” he said solemnly, as he rose to get a
match. “Women—I never could see any use in ’em, myself.”

As he took the match from its box, he stopped and looked down on the
counter.

“Why!” he said, “if here isn’t a letter! I didn’t see it before. The
postman must have laid it down when I wasn’t noticin’, or the newspaper
slipped over it.”

He picked it up and looked at it carefully.

“It’s from _him_!” he exclaimed. “That’s the very one it’s from!”

He forgot his pipe altogether. He went back to his chair quite excited
and took his pocket-knife and opened the envelope.

“I wonder what news there is this time,” he said.

And then he unfolded the letter and read as follows:

                                                  “DORINCOURT CASTLE

    “My dear Mr Hobbs

    “i write this in a great hury becaus i have something curous to
    tell you i know you will be very mutch suprised my dear frend
    when i tel you. It is all a mistake and i am not a lord and i
    shall not have to be an earl there is a lady whitch was marid
    to my uncle bevis who is dead and she has a little boy and he
    is lord fauntleroy becaus that is the way it is in England
    the earls eldest sons little boy is the earl if every body
    else is dead i mean if his farther and grandfarther are dead
    my grandfarther is not dead but my uncle bevis is and so his
    boy is lord Fauntleroy and I am not becaus my papa was the
    youngest son and my name is Cedric Errol like it was when I was
    in New York and all the things will belong to the other boy i
    thought at first i should have to give him my pony and cart but
    my grandfarther says i need not my grandfarther is very sorry
    and i think he does not like the lady but preaps he thinks
    dearest and i are sorry becaus i shall not be an earl i would
    like to be an earl now better than i thout i would at first
    becaus this is a beautifle castle and i like every body so
    and when you are rich you can do so many things i am not rich
    now becaus when your papa is only the youngest son he is not
    very rich i am going to learn to work so that I can take care
    of dearest i have been asking Wilkins about grooming horses
    preaps i might be a groom or a coachman, the lady brought her
    little boy to the castle and my grandfarther and Mr. Havisham
    talked to her i think she was angry she talked loud and my
    grandfarther was angry too i never saw him angry before i wish
    it did not make them all mad i thort i would tell you and Dick
    right away becaus you would be intrusted so no more at present
    with love from

                            “your old frend

                               “CEDRIC ERROL (Not lord Fauntleroy).”

Mr. Hobbs fell back in his chair, the letter dropped on his knee, his
penknife slipped to the floor, and so did the envelope.

“Well!” he ejaculated, “I am jiggered!”

He was so dumbfounded that he actually changed his exclamation. It had
always been his habit to say, “I _will_ be jiggered,” but this time he
said, “I _am_ jiggered.” Perhaps he really _was_ jiggered. There is no
knowing.

“Well,” said Dick, “the whole thing’s bust up, hasn’t it?”

“Bust!” said Mr. Hobbs. “It’s my opinion it’s all a put-up job o’ the
British ’ristycrats to rob him of his rights because he’s an American.
They’ve had a spite agin us ever since the Revolution, an’ they’re takin’
it out on him. I told you he wasn’t safe, an’ see what’s happened! Like
as not, the whole gover’ment’s got together to rob him of his lawful
ownin’s.”

He was very much agitated. He had not approved of the change in his young
friend’s circumstances at first, but lately he had become more reconciled
to it, and after the receipt of Cedric’s letter he had perhaps even felt
some secret pride in his young friend’s magnificence. He might not have
a good opinion of earls, but he knew that even in America money was
considered rather an agreeable thing, and if all the wealth and grandeur
were to go with the title, it must be rather hard to lose it.

“They’re trying to rob him!” he said, “that’s what they’re doing, and
folks that have money ought to look after him.”

And he kept Dick with him until quite a late hour to talk it over, and
when that young man left, he went with him to the corner of the street;
and on his way back he stopped opposite the empty house for some time,
staring at the “To Let,” and smoking his pipe, in much disturbance of
mind.

(_To be continued._)

[Illustration: WAITING FOR A COLD WAVE.]




A ROYAL FISH.

BY RIPLEY HITCHCOCK.

[Illustration]


When the Hudson River was first seen by St. Nicholas, or rather by his
image, which was the figure-head of the Dutch ship Goode Vrouw, there
were more salmon in the water than there were wild grapes about the
Indian wigwams which stood where New York City stands to-day. That was a
few years after the rediscovery of the river by Henry Hudson in 1609.[2]
But, in course of time, the salmon went the way of the Indians. The last
native Hudson River salmon was caught in a net in New York bay about
1844; but, more recently, attempts have been made artificially to stock
that river and others with this fish, and within two years a few have
been caught, the only salmon taken from the Hudson in forty years.[3]
When St. Nicholas made his first visit to our shores, there were salmon
in every river along the Atlantic coast, north of the Delaware. But, as
fishermen became numerous, as dams were built across the rivers, and as
the water was made impure by town and city drainage, the salmon were
driven northward, just as the Indians were driven westward. The salmon
were forced to leave the Connecticut—another river into which there has
been hope of introducing them again; they left the Merrimac when it was
given over to manufactories; and now few salmon are to be found south of
the rivers of eastern Maine. Beyond, they visit the rivers of the British
Provinces, Labrador, the Hudson Bay country, and even Greenland,—for
one variety of salmon is a fearless Arctic explorer, and penetrates the
Arctic Circle. The salmon is as much at home in Iceland and Norway as in
England, Scotland, and Ireland. On the north-western American coast, from
northern California, Oregon, and Washington, to Alaska and beyond, there
have always been vast numbers of this wonderful fish.

I say wonderful, because the salmon is the king of all game fishes, and
because he goes under so many names, and has habits so curious that he
has puzzled naturalists for hundreds of years. And his pink flesh is so
prized that the salmon fisheries on this continent alone yield millions
of dollars every year.

[Illustration]

The gamy qualities of the salmon, which cause the fly-fisherman to
rate him above all other fishes, are his enduring strength and his
great activity. The salmon and the blue-fish are the strongest game
fishes known, and the former reaches a far larger size than the latter.
According to one writer, “the salmon and the sword-fish are the fastest
swimmers of all the forked-tail fishes.” Only a fast running-horse could
outstrip a salmon; for it is estimated that the salmon swims a mile in
less than two minutes. But the horse would be left behind in a long race,
for the fish can cover thirty miles in an hour. When leisurely ascending
rivers, with frequent rests in attractive pools, the salmon averages
from fifteen to twenty-five miles a day. In leaping, the salmon can
easily beat the horse, for salmon have leaped up waterfalls twelve feet
high. It was formerly supposed that the salmon, when about to jump, bent
himself double, and took his tail in his mouth, so that he was like an
elastic bow drawn tight. Then it was thought that he suddenly let go, his
tail striking the water with great force, and away he went through the
air. But now we know that the salmon prepares for a leap just as a boy
does, with a short, sharp run. If the water at the foot of the dam or
fall is not deep enough to allow this preparatory run, the salmon can not
jump. If there is water enough, he starts from the bottom, his powerful
tail working as rapidly as the propeller-screw of a steamship. Aided
by the pectoral fins, the upward movement grows quicker and quicker,
until with a last muscular effort the salmon shoots from the water, his
tail still vibrating for an instant, then becoming motionless, as the
fish curves through the air and comes down above the obstacle. If a dam
be built so high as to be impassable, the salmon will leave the river
altogether, for instinct always leads them to the head-waters, where
they lay their eggs. So fish-ladders and fish-ways of various kinds
have been invented to help salmon and other fishes to surmount natural
or artificial barriers. Fish-ladders have been constructed by the aid
of which salmon ascend falls over thirty feet high. As soon as salmon
enter rivers on their way from the sea they begin to jump, like a crowd
of boys just let out of school. Standing on the shore of a salmon river
in June or July, you will every now and then see the fish leap four or
five feet out of water, glistening like polished silver, then curving
over and falling with a heavy splash. Or sometimes their back fins will
roll lazily out of the water, and you will be reminded of a school of
porpoises. But there is nothing lazy about the salmon when once he is
hooked. If there is a twenty-five pound salmon at the end of your line,
jumping nearly as high as your head in his struggles to rid himself of
the hook, you will be sure to think of nothing except that fish.

[Illustration: SALMON FLIES.]

But before the salmon reaches a weight of twenty-five pounds, he appears
in so many and so different forms that very wise men have been unable
to recognize him. When the salmon is just hatched, he is known as fry,
or fingerling. Then he becomes a parr, or samlet, also called pink, or
brandling, on some foreign rivers. The parr changes to a smolt, the
smolt to a grilse, and the grilse finally develops into the salmon. The
latter, when running fresh from the sea, are called white salmon, and
when they are descending rivers after spawning, they are termed kelts,
or black salmon. Other names given to salmon after spawning-time are
kippers and baggits, or shedders. So the salmon, like the royal fish
that he is, has as many names as a prince of one of the royal families
of Europe. The alevin, or baby salmon, is hatched in from thirty to one
hundred days after the eggs are laid in furrows in gravelly beds which
are scooped out by the parent fish, near the head-waters of cold, clear
rivers. Presently the alevin grows into the fry, or pink, which is an
absurd little fish about an inch long, goggle-eyed, and with dark bars on
its sides. When some three months old, the fry makes a change like that
of a chrysalis into a butterfly. It becomes a shapely little fish with a
forked tail, and brilliant carmine spots shine out on its sides. Its back
is of a dark slaty color, and the bars are less strongly marked as the
parr grows older. The greediest of trout is not more hungry and active. I
have often seen a dozen tiny parr jump from the water at my flies. Once,
when coming down the Restigouche in a canoe, with our rods laid aside,
and the flies dangling just over the water, two parr leaped together and
hooked themselves, although they were hardly four inches long. These
pretty little fishes, which one might readily mistake for trout, were
once supposed to belong to a species entirely distinct from the salmon.
Naturalists were also puzzled by finding that some parr remain for nearly
three years in fresh water. So they concluded that these latter parr
never went to sea at all, and considered them a species by themselves,
which they called _Salmo samulus_. But nature was finally seen to be
wiser than the naturalists. Nature has decreed that only half the parr
hatched in a given winter shall go down to the sea at one time, and in
this way protects the race from the chance of wholesale destruction. So
we are now told that some of the parr develop more rapidly than others,
and migrate to the sea in their second spring, while others remain in the
river a year longer, and some for still another year.

[Illustration: A FISH-LADDER AROUND A DAM.]

When the time for this migration approaches, the parr, which has been
steadily growing plumper, undergoes another curious change. The carmine
spots fade out, and the soft skin becomes covered with silvery scales
which obscure the dark bars on the sides, although the scales can easily
be rubbed away. At this period the young salmon is called a smolt, and
the smolt was also a riddle to wise men, for a long time. It was thought
that smolts which went down to the sea weighing three or four ounces,
returned to the rivers in three months weighing six or eight pounds. Of
course, such a gain as this was a very wonderful, indeed an unequaled
performance, like the “swellin’ wisibly” of the Fat Boy in the “Pickwick
Papers.” It is now believed, however, that the smolt requires a year or
fifteen months at sea for this great gain in weight. Then he returns
to his native river, no longer an insignificant smolt, but a vigorous,
beautiful grilse. The grilse is more slender than the salmon, the tail
more forked, the scales more easily removed, and the top of the head
and of the fins is not quite so black. But the grilse’s sheeny, satiny
sides are even more brilliant than the salmon’s, and it is more playful
and active, although its strength is less enduring. After the grilse has
frolicked its way to the head of the river and spawned, it returns to
the sea. When it visits the river again, the next year, it has become a
full-grown salmon. These are the successive stages of the salmon’s life.

But, even in the last and most familiar stage, the salmon’s habits are
not fully understood. It is known that both young and old salmon, after
descending a river, remain for a time in the brackish water at the
river’s mouth, where they get rid of fresh-water parasites which have
become attached to their sides, and where their scales are hardened by
a diet of small fish; but where in the sea salmon go, no one knows.
After leaving the coast, they disappear. They have been found in very
deep water hundreds of miles from any salmon river; but their marine
feeding-grounds are still undiscovered. In the spring they suddenly
re-appear at the mouths of rivers, where they linger to free themselves
from marine parasites. While in salt water, they will never jump at a
fly; but as soon as they enter the fresh water of the Canadian rivers,
in June, the waiting Indians and fishermen see them rising freely out of
the water. Yet much of this leaping is plainly only for sport, and many
people claim that salmon actually eat nothing at all during the time that
they are going up rivers. These rivers offer a succession of pools and
rapids. In almost every pool, during the day-time in summer, there are
salmon resting from the labor of stemming the current. It is said that
at night they are often to be found on the bars in the shallow rapids
above the pools. If the water is low they ascend very slowly, but any
rise in the river stimulates them into a rapid movement upward. When they
descend rivers, they fall back much of the way tail foremost, although
the distance may be over a hundred miles. Even a salmon can be drowned in
swiftly running water. Often they make short runs down river, but they
quickly wheel about and usually lie with their heads to the current.
When they are descending, they are thin and ravenous; but they rapidly
gain in plumpness after reaching the sea. In weight the salmon of the
Canadian rivers average between twenty and twenty-five pounds. I suppose
a season’s catch would hardly average more than twenty pounds, for it
would include many grilse of from eight to ten pounds weight, and salmon
weighing only five or six pounds more. A thirty-pound salmon is very
large, and a forty-pound fish will be talked of throughout the season,
although it is said that salmon weighing fifty pounds have been caught
in the Restigouche,—one, indeed, was said to weigh fifty-four pounds.
The Princess Louise, the daughter of the Queen of England and the wife
of the Marquis of Lorne, the former Governor-general of Canada, caught a
forty-pound salmon in the Causapscal river, in the province of Quebec, a
few years ago. Last summer I employed one of the two canoe-men who were
with the Princess at the time, and he had a great deal to say about her
skill in handling that salmon. I don’t think he cared much about other
members of the royal family, but “The Princess, sir, she was a good un
with the rod.” Salmon weighing sixty pounds are taken now and then in
Scotch rivers, and a few rivers in England still yield large fish. Sir
John Hawkins speaks of a salmon caught in an English river in April,
1789, which was four feet long, three feet around the body, and weighed
seventy pounds. There is a story told of a Highlander who hooked a salmon
in the River Awe, and played the fish for hours, until night came on
without his being able to tire it out. Then, as the fish was sulking
quietly at the bottom, he lay down, took the line in his teeth, that
any motion might waken him, and went to sleep. The Highlander slept and
the salmon sulked until three o’clock in the morning, when some friends
of the former came to look for him. With their help he managed to land
the fish about daybreak, and it weighed seventy-three pounds. That was
certainly a giant, but a salmon weighing eighty-three pounds is reported
once to have been sent to the London market. It would be a serious matter
for any of ST. NICHOLAS’S readers to make fast to a salmon as large as
that. But it will not happen on this side of the ocean.

[Illustration: A SALMON POOL.]

[Illustration: SHOOTING THE RAPIDS.]

There is only one way in which a true sports-man will catch a salmon,
and that is by fly-fishing. But there are a great many other ways, some
of which, although unfair, are rather curious. Salmon have been caught
with an ax, with a pitchfork, with a wheel, with many forms of nets and
spears, by trolling, and by still-bait fishing. Captain Charles Kendall,
an old Boston sailor, used to say that he once explored a Canadian salmon
river nearly to its head and met a multitude of salmon coming down in
water so shallow that their backs were exposed, and he killed scores
with an ax, as they tried to rush between his legs. The poor fishes were
also attacked by birds of prey. This is the only instance recorded of
killing salmon with an ax, but when I visited the valley of the Puyallup
River, in Washington Territory, three years ago, I was assured that
salmon sometimes crowded that shallow stream so thickly that farmers
lifted them out with pitchforks and used them as fertilizers on the
field. These, however, were an inferior kind of salmon. One of the most
cruel and destructive methods of catching salmon was by water-wheels,
at the cascades of the Columbia River. In former times, the Indians
gathered at the cascades at certain seasons, picketed their ponies, built
wigwams, and remained for days, and often weeks, spearing and netting
the ascending salmon all along the shores. But white men found a way of
destroying a far larger number of these noble fish. Salmon when coming up
the rapids swim near shore. Wheels were built, and suspended partly in
the water so that the paddles were rapidly turned by the swift current.
The salmon swimming against these paddles were struck with great force,
lifted clear of the water, and thrown into tanks arranged near by. The
murderous wheels kept on revolving, throwing up every fish within reach,
and there was nothing for the owners to do but to gather the quantities
of salmon out of the tanks and use them in their salmon-canning
establishment. It is not strange that a strong popular feeling soon grew
up against this wholesale slaughter.

[Illustration: JUNCTION OF THE METAPEDIA AND RESTIGOUCHE RIVERS,—A FAMOUS
SALMON POOL.]

At the mouth of the same river, the Columbia, net-fishing for salmon is
carried on in a larger way than anywhere else on this continent. In the
fisheries and canneries nearly seven thousand men are employed—Swedes,
Russians, Norwegians, Finns, Italians, Portuguese, Greeks, and Chinamen,
a curious mingling of races. Much of this net-fishing is done at night,
the sail boats starting from Astoria toward evening and returning in
the morning. Sometimes the capsized boats drift ashore alone, for the
breakers where the currents of river and ocean meet frequently swamp
them, and each season many men are drowned. Between three and four
million dollars’ worth of salmon have been sent from the Columbia in a
year. In the North-east a great many salmon are caught in nets at the
mouths of the St. Lawrence and other Canadian rivers, many more indeed
than anglers would allow if they could control the net-fishing. Most of
these salmon are artificially frozen and sent to our Eastern markets,
where they now have to compete with Oregon salmon. Spearing salmon is
very properly forbidden by law in Canada. I have read an account of an
odd method of harpooning salmon, which was practiced on a river in the
Inverness district in Scotland. At one spot the river falls in a cascade
through a narrow cleft in the rocks. Sitting beside this, the fisherman,
who had a line attached to his spear, struck a salmon as it tried to
leap up, let go his spear, keeping hold of the line, and then, climbing
down to the pool below, drew in the exhausted fish at his leisure. This
reminded me of an Indian on the Restigouche, who, I was told, used to
throw his short spruce pole into the water after hooking a salmon, and
paddle after it in his canoe, until the fish was so wearied by dragging
the pole about, that the fisherman could easily land it. Still more
curious is Sir Walter Scott’s account in his novel, “Red Gauntlet,” of
salmon-spearing on the Solway Frith, an arm of the sea between England
and Scotland. He describes a company of horsemen riding over the sands
and striking with their spears at the salmon which darted about in
the pools, where they had been left by the ebbing tide. This kind of
salmon-fishing on horseback must have been very like “pig-sticking” in
India.

[Illustration: A SALMON RISING TO THE FLY.]

On this side of the ocean, trolling for salmon is unknown; there is very
little, if any, bait-fishing, and a salmon-spear, in the North-east
at least, is only to be found in the hands of a red or white poacher.
Poaching on Canadian rivers has diminished, but the law is still broken
on the sly; and many odd stories are told of poachers’ tricks. Nearly all
these rivers are watched by two sets of wardens. There are the Government
wardens appointed to prevent illegal fishing with nets or spears, or out
of season, and there are wardens employed by private persons to watch
the water which they lease; for every pool in a salmon river is valuable
property. Once the Government claimed the fishing privileges, but it was
decided that the owners of lands along the rivers controlled the water;
and now the farmer’s income from his water is sometimes larger than that
from his land; and the limits of each ownership are as carefully marked
off as are limits of farms or of town lots. The unlawful act which the
wardens most carefully guard against is “drifting.” One or two poachers
will steal out at night carrying a peculiarly made net in their canoes.
They stretch this across the head of a pool; and it is so weighted and
buoyed that it stands upright, reaching nearly to the bottom. As the
current causes the net to drift down stream, one canoe stays at each
end to keep it straight. There is usually a white rope at the bottom of
the net. Seeing this, the salmon raise themselves a little, only to be
caught by the gills in the meshes. When the shaking of the net shows that
one is caught, the poacher quickly paddles to the spot, raises the net,
kills the fish with a blow on its head, and throws it into the canoe. In
this sneaking way, nearly all the salmon in a pool may be netted out in
a night. If the wardens happen to come along in their dug-outs, they try
to seize the net and identify the poachers. Then there may be a fight,
and perhaps a canoe will be sunk, and a poacher or a warden will get a
cold bath. On one river, the poachers used to station a boy on an island
below them, with a horn which he blew whenever the wardens approached.
One of the latter was so active that the poachers resolved to punish
him. They took an old worthless net and stretched it out into the river
from a rock on the bank. A rope was rove through the net and the shore
end made fast over a pulley to the traces of a horse. A boy stood beside
the horse, and two poachers in a canoe held the outer end of the net.
Down came the warden, poling along in his dug-out, and pulled the end of
the net away from the seemingly unwilling poachers. He began taking it
into his dug-out, congratulating himself on his prize, and had hauled it
halfway in, when the boy on shore struck the horse, which started on a
full gallop up the bank, jerking the net after it. In a flash the net was
pulled out of the dug-out, the latter upset, and the astonished warden
pitched into the river. But I hope the poachers were punished in their
turn. For if these lawless men had their way, there would be no salmon
left in the rivers, and no such glorious sport as fly-fishing.

It is for this that hundreds of Americans go away down East every
summer. At the junction of the Metapedia and Restigouche rivers are the
comfortable buildings of the Restigouche Salmon Club, which is composed
of New York gentlemen. In front of the club-house is the finest pool on
the river, and the club owns land and water for some miles above. Below,
several pools are leased by a small American club, and Americans pay
thousands of dollars for fishing privileges on rivers all the way from
Nova Scotia to Labrador. Some of my boy readers may have accompanied
their fathers or big brothers to Canadian salmon rivers, and themselves
landed salmon. If not, I hope they may do so soon.

[Illustration: “RIGHT BEFORE YOUR EYES, THE GREAT FISH LEAPS FOUR FEET
FROM THE WATER.”]

For this fishing, a boy should use a rod not over sixteen feet long, and
weighing about twenty-seven ounces. Split bamboo is the finest material,
but satisfactory rods are made of ash and lancewood or greenheart. The
heavy reel holds a hundred or a hundred and fifty yards of braided silk
line. Usually a gut leader, also called a casting-line, which is about
nine feet long, is fastened directly to the silk line. Only one of the
large gaudy salmon flies is used on the leader at one time. Suppose
yourself thus equipped, sitting in the middle of a cranky birch-bark
canoe, on the Restigouche, with an Indian at the bow and another at the
stern, paddling to the head of a salmon pool, as the morning mists rise
from the mountains. Just below the rapids, the Indians turn the canoe
into midstream and drop the anchor, which clinks musically upon the
stones of the bottom. You take up the rod, which will seem awkward if
you have been using a seven or eight ounce trout-rod, and holding it in
both hands, one above and one below the reel, begin to make short casts
in front and on either side. It is always well to whip the water near
the canoe, for there is no telling where a salmon may be. Once I looked
down over the side of my canoe into the very eyes of a large salmon.
He lay at the bottom, looking up at me for a moment, then flirted his
tail scornfully and disappeared. I should like to have seen more of him.
You will lengthen out the line a few feet at a time, as you continue
casting, and you will always keep the point of your rod moving a little
up and down, so that your fly shall be in motion in the water. Possibly
the longed-for salmon will jump out of water at the fly. If so, he will
probably miss it. More likely, you will suddenly see a mighty swirl in
the water, catch a glimpse of a head, perhaps, and feel a tug—at least
you are likely to, if you “strike” when you see the swirl.

Then all in the same instant the reel begins to scream and your heart to
beat like a trip-hammer. Up comes the anchor, the Indians paddle over to
one side of the river, and you manfully keep the rod pointing upward,
clutching it with your left hand above the reel, the end of the butt
pressed against your waistcoat buttons, and your right hand ready to reel
in line if the fish comes toward you or sulks at the bottom.

All at once something happens which takes away your breath. Right before
your eyes the great fish leaps four feet from the water, his writhing
body curved like a silver bow, and glistening in the sunlight until he
falls back with a splash that almost makes your heart stop beating, for
fear he has broken loose. But no! You instinctively lowered the tip of
your rod when he jumped, and he did not fall upon a taut line, as he
hoped, and break away. The reel screams again as the salmon darts off
down river; and as the canoe-men paddle after, you think of the Indian
who lassoed the locomotive. Perhaps he will rush through the lower rapids
into the pool below. Never fear! He is well hooked, and the strain of
the rod is telling. Backward and forward he darts, while the line cuts
the water, now sulking quietly, again startling you by a wild leap. At
last he begins to yield. The canoe-men paddle you to a beach where you
cautiously step out, keeping your face to the foe. Slowly, carefully
you reel in line, straining the fish toward you. The Indians wait with
the gaff, a large steel hook in the end of a stout pole. Now the salmon
makes a despairing run, then, growing weaker, he obeys your strain. You
can see him plainly as he comes into shallow water. What if you should
lose him now! The Indians, bent double, ankle-deep in water, watch his
every motion. One strikes at him, but misses, and the gallant fish makes
another fight for life. But now he is within reach. The gaff is raised
carefully, you hold your breath, and this time the steel pierces that
silvery side, and out of the foaming water the gaff draws a noble salmon,
your first—and let me hope a forty-pounder. Perhaps twenty minutes have
passed since you hooked him,—perhaps an hour; but you have lived an age.

May all the boy readers of ST. NICHOLAS some time know such thrilling
sport as this! And the girls, too, may emulate their brothers, and each
some time land a salmon. At least they can have the sport without holding
the rod. One of the prettiest sights which I saw on the Restigouche was
the eager face of a little girl in a canoe, with her father, who was
fighting a twenty-five-pound salmon. Looking at her parted lips and
wide-open eyes, I felt sure that girls as well as boys could feel the
fascination of that most exciting of all forms of angling, salmon-fishing.

[Illustration]

[2] Verrazani, a Florentine navigator, is now believed to have been the
original discoverer of the Hudson, about 1525.

[3] About three hundred thousand salmon fry have been planted in the
upper waters of the Hudson each year, since 1882. In 1884, a salmon
weighing four pounds was taken near Hudson, New York, and several
yearling salmon were caught, a year ago, in a stream tributary to the
Hudson. Last spring, a salmon weighing ten pounds was taken in Gravesend
Bay, and there have been other similar results from the work done by
Mr. Fred Mather, Superintendent of the New York Fish Commission, in
charge of the station at Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island. It is thought
that the Hudson was never much frequented by salmon for the purpose of
spawning, on account of Cohoes’ and Miller’s Falls. But the fish were
formerly taken near the mouth of the river, and it is hoped that the
entire river may be made a salmon stream, if it will “grow salmon,” by
the construction of fish-ways which will enable the salmon to ascend
the falls. Professor Baird, the United States Commissioner of Fish and
Fisheries, restocked the Connecticut, where no salmon had been for
twenty-five years, with such success that “Connecticut River salmon”
were regularly quoted in the markets. But the fishermen caught out the
spawning fish and foolishly depopulated the river so that the work
was stopped, although I understand that another effort has been made
recently. In the Penobscot River, in Maine, salmon have been hatched
and cared for, until, this very season, there has been excellent salmon
fishing in the neighborhood of the city of Bangor.—R. H.




THE OWL, THE BAT, AND THE BUMBLE-BEE.

(_A Nonsense Rhyme._)

BY LAURA E. RICHARDS.

[Illustration]


    The brown owl sat on the caraway tree,
      A ruffed-up, great big owl.
    Who so learnéd and wise as he?
      A puffed-up, eminent fowl.
    The black bat hung by a twig of the tree,
      A blinking, blind old bat.
    And buzzing anear was the bumble-bee,
      Crinkling, yellow, and fat.

      “Ho!” said the owl, “but the sun is so bright,
    So torrid, blazing away!”
      “Oh,” said the bat, “for the shades of night,
    This horrid dazzling day!”
      “Psho!” said the bee. “If that is all,
    Blundery, blind old bat,
    Yonder’s a cloud coming up at your call,—
    Thundery,—black as a hat.”

    “Ah!” cried the bat and the owl together,
      “Tumbling great black Cloud,
    Bring us some fine dark thundery weather,
      Rumbling fierce and loud!”

    Up came the cloud, flying far and wide,
      Wizardly weird and strong,—
    Brisk little hurricane sitting inside,
      Blizzardly bowling along.

    Off went the owl like a thistle-down puff,
      Ruffled-up, rolled in a ball!
    Off went the bat like a candle-snuff,
      Shuffled-up, toes and all!
    Off went the twig and off went the tree,
      Scurrying down to the ground!
    Nothing was left, save the bumble-bee,
      Worrying thus to be found;
    Yet snug as a bug in the roots of the tree,
    Where he grumbled; “What a catastrophe!
    I was simply thunder-struck!” said he.
    “And I’m very sure I prefer the glare
    Of the hottest day to that whirling air!
    Such a draught! I hope I have not caught cold!
    But I know I was over and over rolled.
      Am I really safe and sound?”

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

    Ho! ho! quoth a jolly old knight,
    Pray what is the meaning of Fright?
    But his friends only smile
    For they know all the while
    He is sadly addicted to—

                           Flight.




THE NOTIONAL NIGHTINGALE.

BY A. R. WELLS.

[Illustration]


    King Hubert, he went to the forest in state,
    In glitter and gold, on a sun-shiny day,
    And commanded his train in the shadow to wait,
    While a herald proclaimed in the following way:

        “His Imperial Majesty, Hubert the Second,
    Since the nightingale’s voice is quite musical reckoned,
    Is graciously pleased, as the day seems too long,
    To command that the nightingale sing him a song!”

    The court all stood waiting for what might befall;
    But somehow, no nightingale answered the call.




NAN’S REVOLT.

BY ROSE LATTIMORE ALLING.


CHAPTER III.

For two days following that bright morning in September, the skies
dropped discouragement on all enthusiasms, and dampened any ardor for
aggressive change. What feminine heart has the courage to go forth
gloriously to conquer or to die—in overshoes and a gossamer?

In the meantime, the girls had not met again, but new thoughts sprouted
in their brains, while feeble plans budded and dropped unfruitful from
the bough.

Nan lighted a fire in the grate in her room, and re-read and burned
package upon package of old letters, tossing away with special vigor all
those tied with that badge of sentimental girlhood—a blue ribbon. Why
always blue?

“There!” she exclaimed, as the last mouse-colored fragment fluttered up
the chimney; “there is nothing like beginning again at the foundation, in
every way.”

This heroic sacrifice completed, she sewed on some loose shoe-buttons
with as much vigor as though she contemplated setting out on foot to
seek her fortune. After that, she pressed her forehead against the
window-pane, and wished drearily that it would stop raining.

Evelyn, after an hour’s interview with her mother, began to rip up an old
dress, though she was evidently busied also with serious thoughts.

Cathy, left to herself, and without the stimulating influence of her
friends, decided with placid regret that there was no way to improve her
existence; she felt like the man who tried to lift himself over the fence
by pulling at his boot-straps.

Bert shut herself up and wrestled with a long column of very symmetrical
figures. The result of the addition seemed to dismay her. She clutched
her bang with one hand, while she carefully went over the list again.

Bert had lain awake hours and hours the night before, rehearsing the
various parts she might assume as a lady-like peddler of different wares
to a paying public; but she surveyed her small pack of accomplishments
with the sad conviction that she “hadn’t a faculty that anybody would
give two cents for.” “If some one would kindly hire me to read all the
new novels, or should desire my services as assistant hostess at endless
dinners and luncheons, I think I might command quite a salary,” sighed
she, knowing well her own self-poise and general success in those
unremunerative employments.

“Or, there is my other little stock-in-trade,” she continued with
disconsolate amusement—“writing letters! I do think I can write a letter.”

And she could, because she always wrote with the keen mental enjoyment
of exercising her own fluent powers of expression. “But,” she reflected,
“who is going to pay my dress-maker for the intense pleasure of being
allowed to receive my epistles? No, letter-writing hasn’t any market
value—But—but _hasn’t_ it?”

Ah, now she was really thinking! For she sat motionless, with raised
eyebrows and parted lips; then she started to her feet, walked excitedly
up and down her room a few times, surveyed herself in the glass, and
laughed and chuckled in a mysterious way as she put on her overshoes and
hoisted her umbrella.

Mr. Mitchell was a very busy man—too busy to know his daughter very
well; and, as is far too common with busy men, he regarded a girl as an
entirely useless, rather expensive but withal pleasant factor of his
establishment. So, as may be imagined, he was somewhat surprised as he
sat in his private office on that particular drizzly day, hurriedly
writing a business letter, when Bert, bright and emphatic, suddenly
appeared.

Her father, without stopping his rapid pen, looked up, between sentences,
long enough to say with good-natured bewilderment, “Why, Bert, what has
brought you _here_? Do you need some more money?”

Bert flushed at that question. Some thoughts with which she had been
exercising her mind had made it a trifle sore; and in the mood occasioned
by those thoughts, her father’s evident surprise at her appearance, his
slight emphasis on “here,” and his seemingly natural conclusion as to the
cause of the phenomenon, rather hurt her feelings.

“Money?” she said, with some heat, “No, sir! Do you regard me as only a
creature with an all-devouring greed for gold?”

Then, laughing pleasantly as she deposited her umbrella in the rack, she
added, “No, Papa dear, not _just_ now. I thought you would be going home
soon and I’d like to walk up with you.”

Mr. Mitchell paused a moment, in the act of clapping on another stamp, to
survey his tall daughter through his eye-glasses.

“Eh! That’s good. I can’t go for half an hour though—six or seven more
letters to write.”

He said this a little wearily, and proceeded to date another sheet of
paper, running his left hand through his thin hair, as though he had
already forgotten his daughter’s presence in the absorbing nature of his
relations with “Messrs. Hutton, Wells & Co.”

Bert sat down in an office chair and looked about her. Not that she had
never been in her father’s office before, but never before had she looked
at it with the same mental vision that now surveyed the dingy windows,
dusty writing-desk, and generally unkempt and dismal aspect of the place
where her father spent so much of his life.

[Illustration: BERT AND HER FATHER HAVE A BUSINESS INTERVIEW.]

“Dear me,” she thought, “how soon I could brighten up things! I wonder if
he would like it if I should try?”

Presently Mr. Mitchell collected a heap of letters, shut up his inkstand,
and wheeled his chair slowly about, as he carefully counted them over.

Bert, who had been contemplating in her mind’s eye the effect of a rug on
the floor, looked up and remarked, “What a lot of letters!”

“Yes,” answered her father with a sigh, “since Nelson went I have had my
hands full. It is hard to fill his place.”

“Why?” asked Bert, with interest.

“Because,” said Mr. Mitchell slowly, “good stenographers do not grow on
every bush; and it is difficult to find any one to whom I can intrust my
private correspondence.”

He took his coat from the hook and slowly put it on his shoulders, while
Bert sat still, looking very lugubrious.

“Oh,” she said slowly, “would your amanuensis have to know short-hand?”

“Of course,” her father replied, looking somewhat surprised at the
unusual interest in such affairs exhibited by his brilliant daughter, of
whom he had perhaps been rather more proud than fond.

“You see,” he continued, “I might as well write them myself as wait for
him to write out my dictation in long hand.”

Mr. Mitchell stepped into the general office to give a direction to
one of the many clerks, all of whom were getting their hats with great
promptness as the minute-hand neared six.

Bert sat looking thoughtfully at a fantastic cobweb in the corner.

When her father returned and asked her if she were ready to start, she
still did not offer to stir; but, planting her umbrella firmly on the
floor, she said in a very serious voice, but with a gleam in her eyes:

“Sir, I called strictly on business. Hearing that your confidential clerk
had gone South because of weak lungs, I came to apply—pray take a seat,
sir; you seem about to faint—to apply for the place.”

Mr. Mitchell sat down.

“To be frank, sir, I must own that I am not _thoroughly_ conversant with
short-hand, but I should immediately go to work to perfect my knowledge,
and in the meantime I should endeavor to be of valuable assistance to
you.”

By this time, the senior member of the firm looked so helplessly confused
that Bert began to laugh, breaking down utterly in her commercial tone
of voice. Then she added in a rush of words, as she made a dash at her
father and clasped her hands behind his neck: “Oh, _do_ let me, Papa!—I’d
be _very_ confidential, and I’m just wild to earn some money!”

At this last remark, the astounded man probably would have gasped, had
not his daughter prevented such an expression by a kiss.

“You poor dazed man!” she laughed. “Now please sit down, and it will take
me just two minutes to explain my strange conduct; you will accept me as
your helper in one second more; and then I shall commit my first act of
indiscretion as your clerk, by walking home arm-in-arm with my employer.”

By this time Mr. Mitchell had risen equal to the joke, as he still
considered the entire comedy, and demanded references as to her
epistolary ability. Bert at once deafened him with an avalanche of names;
but she immediately grew serious again, and began to explain frankly her
new thoughts and desires.

Of course she was met by the usual discouragements with which the
masculine mind teems, but she silenced them all by an earnest request for
the privilege of a trial, like any other applicant for a clerkship.

At last, after much talking and earnest arguments, it was finally settled
as they walked home under one umbrella, with a strange new sense of
comradeship, that Bert should present herself at her father’s office next
morning in time for the opening of the mail.


CHAPTER IV.

    “‘So let the wide world wag as it will,
    I’ll be gay and happy still,
    Gay and happy,
    Gay and hap——’”

“No doubt of it, Nan!” called Bert from the foot of the Ferrises’ stairs,
early next morning.

Nan suddenly ceased expressing her intentions in song, and appeared
leaning over the balustrade, with a blue veil tied over her head, waving
a dust-cloth. When she saw that it was Bert, who had interrupted her
strain of melody, she proceeded to finish the verse, ignoring the break,
and singing:

    “‘——py,
    I’ll be gay and happy still!’”

Then she cried: “Why, Bert! what brought you over at such an unearthly
hour in the morning?” But, without waiting for an explanation of so
startling an event, she went on, “Oh, come up-stairs—I’ve changed my room
all about, and it is very much prettier.”

Bert looked fresh and alert as she took out her watch and said laughing:

“I can’t, thank you; haven’t time; besides, I’m afraid my enthusiasm
wouldn’t come up to your expectations, as I think I’ve missed one or two
of your Friday revolutions, and probably all your things are back again
where I last saw them.”

“Oh, no!” Nan retorted; “this combination has never before been offered
to an American public!”

“What! Have you turned your mirror to the wall and your bed up-side-down?”

“Bert, you’re saucy!” cried Nan. “But why are you in such a hurry?”

“Because,” Bert began sententiously, “a business woman can’t waste
mornings at this rate. _My_ oysters and salad are earned by the labor
of my hands, and depend upon a faithful discharge of my duties.
Good-morning, idle worms! I am off; my employer will be expecting me,”
and the lofty confidential clerk stalked tragically toward the door.

“Your _what_?” cried Nan, while Evelyn flew out of her room and demanded,
“What under the sun are you talking about, Bert?”

Bert was now leaning against the newel-post in a paroxysm of laughter.

“Girls,” she said with great impressiveness, “I mean exactly what I
say—I’m ahead of you all! Aha, my precious Nan! I am due this morning
at the office of ‘N. F. Mitchell & Company, wholesale and retail seed
house,’ in the capacity of private secretary!”

“Oh, Bert,” commented Evelyn with sympathetic pride in her friend. “Oh,
you dear, brave Bert!”

Nan was silent for a moment, but her shining eyes were eloquent with
surprise and delight; finally she said slowly, with returning incredulity:

“No, Bert—you don’t really mean it—you are jesting.”

“Jesting! Please come and see me perched on a stool six feet high, with
an inky streak across my nose, and my fingers a sight to behold! Well,”
glancing again with a business-like air at her watch, “call at the
office, since you have nothing else to do, and look in, but don’t dare to
speak to me. Good-bye!” she said as she opened the door; “good-bye!” she
shouted from the front steps, and “good-bye!” again at the gate; while
Nan and Evelyn gazed after her and then at each other.

“‘I’m struck spachless,’ as the Irishman said,” murmured Nan, sinking
upon the top step.

“I think it’s grand news,” asserted Evelyn, with a deep sigh of
gratification; “let’s hurry up with our work, and go to Cathy’s this
afternoon! Wont she be astonished!”

And away they sped to their own rooms and their own plans.

Not that these two sisters led lives apart, for they were the best of
friends, and had already discussed their respective hopes and fears.
The fears were usually monopolized by Evelyn, who was of a timid,
self-distrustful nature and hesitated to attempt many things where Nan
rushed boldly in. But if she was not made to lead, she was well adapted
to follow, if only she were encouraged by a more dauntless spirit. Nan
was such a spirit; yet Evelyn, in her quiet way, often held her impulsive
sister to a purpose when the dull reaction from high enthusiasms set in
with Nan.

And so it came about that when Nan flattened her nose against the
window-pane on that rainy day, she also flattened her spirits by a
deliberate survey of her available accomplishments; and when, half an
hour later, Evelyn came in, it was to find her younger sister, the
stalwart ex-champion of independence and fun, with a shiny nose and
moist-looking eyes!

“Why, my dear Nannie,” said Evelyn, tenderly, hastening to her sister’s
side and putting her arms about her, “what troubles you?”

This sympathy caused a fresh sniffle, to be duly smothered in the damp
handkerchief, while the meek sufferer moaned, “Oh, I’m _mad_!”

[Illustration: THE CHAMPION NEEDS ENCOURAGEMENT.]

Evelyn smiled, for she knew that when Nan thought how “mad” she was, she
would stop crying.

“Yes,” she resumed brokenly, though her voice gained strength as she went
on, “I am about as disgusted and angry as I can be!”

“For what reason?” asked her sister.

“Because,” replied Nan, with a catch in her breath, “because I’m not
a _man_—if you must know! Here only yesterday I had enough courage
and determination to start two boys in a good lucrative business, and
now to-day I face the fact that nobody has expected me to do or to
be anything in particular, and that all my expensive education hasn’t
provided me with a single weapon to fight my way with, if I had to fight.
Why, even if I were reduced to begging,” she added, with a sniff, “I
shouldn’t know enough to warm over the cold pieces I received! Don’t you
think it is just too bad to be a girl?”

“I used to think so,” Evelyn answered slowly, turning her head away
to arrange the draping of a curtain. But in a moment she resumed her
elderly-sister fashion of speech—she was three years Nan’s senior—“No,
Nannie, if you really wish to be brave and self-reliant, you have full
opportunity to be so, as you are.”

“But what can I _do_?” broke in Nan, stormily; “boys always have some
occupation ready and waiting for them.”

“Oh, no, they haven’t!” answered Evelyn. “Just think how many college
students we have known who haven’t decided on a profession until their
senior year. They study the various branches and callings until they find
in which line they have the most ability.”

“Oh, dear! there it is again!” sighed Nan hopelessly “they always do
develop a taste for something, and then everything is all right. But I
don’t long to do _anything_ except to be miserable about it,” she again
sighed. “But, to return to the point at issue, my dear sister, will you
have the kindness to mention _what_ I do well?”

“You are capable in many ways and at many tasks; whatever you do
succeeds.”

“What?” wildly demanded Nan.

“Why, your hats are more Parisian than Paris; you draw well, paint well,
and you are certainly very ingenious. Look at this room!”

They both looked and saw a very quaint and dainty room, made pretty,
moreover, not by money, but by taste and skill. Even the owner’s troubled
countenance relaxed as she contemplated the effect of some yellow
cushions she had recently added to an old chair that she had reclaimed
from the shades of the attic, and had thus adorned.

“Yes,” she assented reluctantly, “my room is rather satisfactory; but who
is going to pay me for making oriental divans out of old piano-boxes, I’d
like to know?”

As Evelyn didn’t immediately order one, Nan went on, dejectedly dropping
her chin into her palm. “But I should like to be artistic—even for
money’s sake, you know. I want to have a studio, with queer bits of
drapery that you don’t have to mend or hem. I’d like to be a decorative
artist, and go into people’s houses and sweep out all the hideous
steamboat furniture one sees. And I wish to know artists, and to have
them come to my studio and eat sardines and crackers, and play Spanish
airs on a banjo while I paint things to astonish the world. No, on second
thought, I’d rather design, and if I could play the banjo myself while I
thought up new ideas—wouldn’t that be lovely!” she shouted gleefully.

She was quite cheerful now, with her little imaginary exploits.

“Then an artist is what you are fitted to be, Nan, dear,” announced her
sister with conviction; “for what any one wishes to be, that he _may_ be.”

Nan received this scrap of philosophy with a shrug.

“Yes, if he is a long-headed old fellow and wishes within his limits!”
she said.

“But I think some sort of artistic achievement is within your limits,”
urged Evelyn.

Nan bestowed a grateful look at her sister, but immediately voiced
another objection: “Where am I going to begin? People are always talking
about the ‘avenues now freely opened to our emancipated sisters,’ but no
one ever tells a poor girl exactly how to begin—what to do first. Men
have chances and opportunities.”

“Yes,” Evelyn quickly rejoined; “and do you know how they happen to fill
them? By being equal to their demands. If I were you, I should go to work
and perfect some incomplete accomplishment. But I hear Mother calling.
Come, cheer up, sister mine! ‘We miss the good we oft might win, by
fearing to attempt,’ you know.”

This saying was a truth that had often been urged by Nan upon Evelyn’s
own attention during seasons of self-abasement; so there was a touch of
sarcasm in the elder sister’s smile, as she glanced back from the door.

By that time, however, Nan’s nose was assuming its natural hue, and life
began to look more hopeful, for she had a strong spirit that liked to
conquer obstacles.

“Yes, Nan Ferris,” she thought, “it is about as that wise old Evelyn
says; you have as good a chance as anybody without respect to sex, and
you _shall_ be something worthy of existence! You shall do some one thing
so well that somebody will be frantic to pay you a fabulous price for it.
And what will you do with this wealth?” she went on, addressing herself.
“Are you so base that you yearn for filthy lucre for its own sake? No,
Nan Ferris, you are not. First you will pay your own little bills, and
lighten your father’s cares instead of his pocket; and then, may be, you
can go on lovely little sketching tours in the summer; and, perhaps—oh,
Nan!—perhaps, if you are a great success, you can go to Europe some time
and study art!”

This climax of prospective bliss was so top-heavy that the whole
delightful pile came crashing down, laying bare to this architect of her
own fortunes the uncertain foundation on which she had built.

(_To be continued._)




A DUEL WITH A STORK.

BY FREDERICK J. HIBBERT.


[Illustration: I.—THE INSULT.]

[Illustration: II.—THE CHALLENGE.]

[Illustration: III.—PREPARING.]

[Illustration: IV.—PRACTICING.]

[Illustration: V.—THE ENCOUNTER.]

[Illustration: VI.—OUTNUMBERED AND DISARMED.]

[Illustration: VII.—ALLOWED TO RECOVER ARMS.]

[Illustration: VIII.—IN FULL RETREAT.]

[Illustration: IX.—“YOU SHOULD HAVE SEEN HIM RUN! HA, HA!”]

[Illustration: X.—“YOU NOTICE THAT WE ARE NOT INSULTED ANY MORE.”]

[Illustration: XI.—“IT WAS TOO GOOD AN ADVENTURE TO BE LOST. I MUST WRITE
AN ACCOUNT OF IT.”]

[Illustration: XII.—“JUST IMAGINE HIS FEELINGS WHEN HE READS THIS IN
PRINT! THE PEN _is_ EVEN MIGHTIER THAN THE SWORD!”]




BOPEEP.

BY SYDNEY DAYRE.


    We have been playing bopeep to-day,
    Out on the sand-dunes along the bay.
    Who was our playmate, do you think?
    You couldn’t guess who gave us a wink
    And hid his face in the funniest place,—
    Behind a bit of a soft white cloud!
    And Polly and I we laughed aloud
    To see how the sun enjoyed the fun.
    And then he gave us another peep
    Before we could hide in the sedges deep.

    Many a little cloud went by,
    Floating up in the blue, blue sky—
    Oh, it was jolly for me and Polly
    To watch the sun look slyly out
    To see what we were laughing about!
    We kept as quiet as mice, we two,
    While he was sailing along the blue,
    Till he hid behind a patch of white,
    And then we hurried with all our might
    To hide again for a little while,
    Before he came with his beaming smile
    And seemed to try whether Polly and I
    Or he could beat, as he went to find
    Another white cloud to hide behind.

    At last he was tired, and hid his head
    In clouds of purple and gold and red;
    And we were tired, so in we came
    To tell what a merry, lively game
    We had in the meadow—just we three
    The good old sun with Polly and me.

[Illustration: “AT LAST HE WAS TIRED AND HID HIS HEAD.”]




AN ARMY.

BY A. C.


        An army of children encamped by the sea!
        What a muster of warriors ’tis getting to be!
    They are coming in clans, with their mothers and maids;
    They come in battalions, with buckets and spades;
    They are coming to make a descent on our coast,—
    They will alter the shape of it, sure!—such a host!
        Intrenching and digging from morning till night!
        What foe would dare scale such redoubts in a fight?

        Could any invader such parapets take
        As these forts that the sturdy young champions make?
    See them shoulder their shovels and march to the fray—
    See them merrily join the long battle array!
    Here’s a wave! On their works it begins its attacks!
    Oh! Alas!—Our brave soldiers are turning their backs!
        Ah, they rally,—they charge! No more flight, nor affright!
        They recapture the forts, and they’ll fight until night!




[Illustration: “HOW DOTH THE LITTLE BUSY BEE IMPROVE EACH SHINING HOUR”?

                                                —(_Ask this little girl._)]




GEORGE WASHINGTON.

[_An Historical Biography._]

BY HORACE E. SCUDDER.


CHAPTER XX.

THE LAST CAMPAIGN.

The battle of Monmouth was the last great battle before the final victory
at Yorktown. The three and a half years which intervened, however, were
busy years for Washington. He was obliged to settle disputes between the
French and American officers, to order the disposition of the forces, and
to give his attention to all the suggestions of plans for action. He was
greatly concerned that Congress should be growing weak and inefficient.
Here was a man, whom some had foolishly supposed to be aiming at supreme
power, only anxious that the civil government should be strengthened. He
saw very clearly that while the separate States were looking after their
several affairs, the Congress which represented the whole country was
losing its influence and power. “I think our political system,” he wrote,
“may be compared to the mechanism of a clock, and that we should derive a
lesson from it; for it answers no good purpose to keep the smaller wheels
in order, if the greater one, which is the support and prime mover of the
whole, is neglected.”

[Illustration: WASHINGTON’S CAMP-CHEST AND COOKING UTENSILS. [NOW IN THE
NATIONAL MUSEUM AT WASHINGTON, D. C.]]

He was indignant at the manner in which Congressmen, and others who
were concerned in the affairs of the country, spent their time in
Philadelphia. “An assembly,” he said, “a concert, a dinner, a supper,
that will cost three or four hundred pounds, will not only take off men
from acting in this business, but even from thinking of it; while a great
part of the officers of our army, from absolute necessity, are quitting
the service; and the more virtuous few, rather than do this, are sinking
by sure degrees into beggary and want.” How simply he himself lived may
be seen by the jocose letter which he wrote to a friend, inviting him to
dine with him at headquarters. The letter is addressed to Dr. Cochran,
Surgeon-General in the army:

    “DEAR DOCTOR: I have asked Mrs. Cochran and Mrs. Livingston
    to dine with me to-morrow; but am I not in honor bound to
    apprize them of their fare? As I hate deception, even where
    the imagination only is concerned, I will. It is needless to
    premise that my table is large enough to hold the ladies. Of
    this they had ocular proof yesterday. To say how it is usually
    covered, is rather more essential; and this shall be the
    purport of my letter.

    “Since our arrival at this happy spot, we have had a ham,
    sometimes a shoulder of bacon, to grace the head of the table;
    a piece of roast beef adorns the foot; and a dish of beans
    or greens, almost imperceptible, decorates the center. When
    the cook has a mind to cut a figure, which I presume will be
    the case to-morrow, we have two beefsteak pies, or dishes of
    crabs, dividing the space and reducing the distance between
    dish and dish, to about six feet, which, without them, would
    be near twelve feet apart. Of late he has had the surprising
    sagacity to discover that apples will make pies; and it is a
    question if, in the violence of his efforts, we do not get one
    of apples, instead of having both of beefsteaks. If the ladies
    can put up with such entertainment, and will submit to partake
    of it on plates once tin but now iron (not become so by the
    labor of scouring), I shall be happy to see them; and am, dear
    Doctor, yours.”

The main activity of the two armies in the last years of the war was
in the South, where General Gates, and after him General Greene, were
engaged in a contest with Lord Cornwallis. Washington, meanwhile,
kept his position on the Hudson, where he could watch the movements
of the enemy still in strong force in New York. The care of the whole
country was on his shoulders, for, except by his personal endeavors,
it was impossible for the armies to secure even what support they did
receive from Congress and the State governments. The letters written by
Washington during this period disclose the numberless difficulties which
he was obliged to meet and overcome. He was the one man to whom all
turned, and he gave freely of himself. How completely he ignored his own
personal interests may be seen by an incident which occurred at Mount
Vernon.

Several British vessels had sailed up the Chesapeake and Potomac, and had
pillaged the country roundabout. When these vessels lay off Mount Vernon,
the manager of Washington’s estate, anxious to save the property under
his charge, went out and bought off the marauders by a liberal gift.
Washington wrote at once, rebuking him for his conduct. In the letter, he
used these words:

    “I am very sorry to hear of your loss: I am a little sorry to
    hear of my own; but that which gives me most concern is, that
    you should go on board the enemy’s vessel and furnish them with
    refreshments. It would have been a less painful circumstance to
    me to have heard that, in consequence of your non-compliance
    with their request, they had burnt my house and laid the
    plantation in ruins. You ought to have considered yourself as
    my representative, and should have reflected on the bad example
    of communicating with the enemy, and making a voluntary offer
    of refreshments to them with a view to prevent a conflagration.
    It was not in your power, I acknowledge, to prevent them from
    sending a flag on shore, and you did right to meet it; but
    you should, in the same instant that the business of it was
    unfolded, have declared explicitly that it was improper for you
    to yield to their request; after which, if they had proceeded
    to help themselves by force, you could but have submitted; and
    being unprovided for defense, this was to be preferred to a
    feeble opposition, which only serves as a pretext to burn and
    destroy.”

In July, 1781, Washington’s army, which was watching Sir Henry Clinton
in New York, was re-enforced by the French troops, and at the same time
a French squadron cruised off the coast ready to co-operate. General
Greene was crowding Lord Cornwallis in the South and edging him up into
Virginia, and the design was to keep the two British armies apart, and
defeat each. But the siege of New York was likely to be a long one, and
the French admiral had orders to repair to the West Indies in the fall.
So time was precious.

Accordingly, Washington determined to mass his troops in Virginia, unite
the northern and southern armies, and, in conjunction with the French
fleet, completely crush Cornwallis. It was necessary, however, that
Clinton, in New York, should suspect nothing of this scheme, or else he,
too, would join Cornwallis. The change of plan was carried out with great
skill. Letters were written detailing imaginary movements, and these
letters fell into the hands of the British general, who supposed that
great preparations were making to attack him in New York. Meanwhile, a
few troops only were left in camp at White Plains, while the rest of the
army crossed the Hudson and moved rapidly to Virginia. It was not until
the two armies were within reach of each other that Clinton learned what
had really been going on.

[Illustration: KNIFE-AND-FORK-CASE USED BY WASHINGTON.]

Washington took this opportunity to make a flying visit to Mount Vernon.
It was the first time he had been there since he left it to attend
that meeting of the Continental Congress at which he had been chosen
Commander-in-Chief. He had never lost sight of his home, however. Thither
his thoughts often turned, and many a time, amid the anxieties and cares
of his burdensome life, he looked with longing toward the quiet haven of
Mount Vernon. He wrote weekly to the manager of his estate, and he gave
him one general rule of conduct in this wise: “Let the hospitality of the
house, with respect to the poor, be kept up. Let no one go away hungry.
If any of this kind of people should be in want of corn, supply their
necessities, provided it does not encourage them in idleness.”

[Illustration: “PRESENTLY A BALL DID STRIKE THE CANNON, AND, ROLLING OFF,
FELL AT WASHINGTON’S FEET.”]

He staid but a couple of days at Mount Vernon, where he was joined by
Count Rochambeau, and then he hastened to the headquarters of the army
at Williamsburg. It was now the middle of September. Cornwallis was at
Yorktown, and everything depended on the ability of the combined French
and American forces to capture his army before he could be re-enforced
by Clinton. The leading generals of the American army were there eagerly
directing operations, and Washington was at the front superintending the
works, for the men were fighting Cornwallis with the spade as well as
with cannon. Washington put the match to the first gun that was fired.
One who was in the army at the time relates an incident that came under
his notice:

“A considerable cannonading from the enemy; one shot killed three men,
and mortally wounded another. While the Rev. Mr. Evans, our chaplain, was
standing near the Commander-in-Chief, a shot struck the ground so near as
to cover his hat with sand. Being much agitated, he took off his hat, and
said, ‘See here, General!’ ‘Mr. Evans,’ replied his excellency, with his
usual composure, ‘you’d better carry that home and show it to your wife
and children.’”

Indeed it seemed to many that Washington bore a charmed life, and it
was often said that he was under the special protection of God. He was
fearless, and constantly exposed to danger, but his constant escapes
made him cool and self-possessed, and the admiration of his men. He was
excited by the events which were hurrying the war to the close, and he
watched with intense earnestness the several assaults which were made on
the works. Once he had dismounted and was standing by Generals Knox and
Lincoln at the grand battery. It was not a safe place, for, though they
were behind a fortification, it was quite possible for shot to enter
the opening through which they were looking. One of his aids, growing
nervous, begged him to leave, for the place was very much exposed.

“If you think so,” said Washington, “you are at liberty to step back.”
Presently a ball did strike the cannon, and, rolling off, fell at
Washington’s feet. General Knox seized him by the arm.

“My dear General,” said he, “we can’t spare you yet.”

“It’s a spent ball,” replied Washington, coolly. “No harm is done.” He
watched the action until the redoubts which his men had been assaulting
were taken; then he drew a long breath of relief and turned to Knox.

“The work is done,” he said emphatically; “and well done.”

The siege was short, the work was sharp, for it was full of enthusiasm
and hope, and when, on October 19, the army of Lord Cornwallis
surrendered to General Washington, there was a tumult of rejoicing in
camp which was long remembered. Washington issued orders that the army
should give thanks to God. “Divine service,” he said, “is to be performed
to-morrow in the several brigades and divisions. The Commander-in-Chief
earnestly recommends that the troops not on duty should universally
attend, with that seriousness of deportment and gratitude of heart which
the recognition of such reiterated and astonishing interpositions of
Providence demand of us.”

The officers of the combined armies spent some time in the neighborhood,
and there was a great ball given at Fredericksburg by the citizens of
the place. The most distinguished guest was the mother of Washington,
then seventy-four years old, who came into the room leaning on the arm
of her son. She was quiet and dignified, as one after another of the
French officers made his bow and his complimentary speech; but I think
there must have been a great deal of motherly pride in her heart, though
it is said that when her George came to see her alone after the victory
at Yorktown, she spoke to him of his health, marked the lines of care in
his face, spoke of his early days, and gave him a mother’s caution, but
said nothing of the glory he had won. To the last he was her boy, and not
America’s hero.


CHAPTER XXI.

WASHINGTON RESIGNS HIS COMMISSION.

After the surrender of Yorktown and the departure of the French,
Washington established his headquarters at Newburgh on the Hudson. There
he remained with the army until it was disbanded; and the house in which
he lived is carefully preserved and shown as an historical museum.

[Illustration: SURRENDER OF LORD CORNWALLIS.]

There is a pleasant story of La Fayette’s affectionate remembrance of
the life there. Just before his death, which occurred in 1834, he gave a
dinner party in Paris to the American Minister and some friends who had
been old associates. Later in the evening, when it came time for supper,
the guests were ushered into a room which was in strange contrast with
the elegance of the apartments they had been in. The ceiling was low,
with large beams crossing it; there was a single small, uncurtained
window, and several small doors. It looked more like an old-fashioned
Dutch kitchen than a room in a French house. A long, rough table was
meagerly set. A dish of meat stood on it, some uncouth-looking pastry,
and wine in decanters and bottles, ready to be poured out into glasses
and camp-mugs.

“Do you know where we are now?” asked La Fayette as his companions looked
about puzzled, and as if in a dream. “Ah! the seven doors and one window!
and the silver camp-goblets! We are at Washington’s headquarters on the
Hudson, fifty years ago!” He had reproduced the room as a surprise to his
friends.

       *       *       *       *       *

Peace did not come at once after Yorktown; there was still fighting in
a desultory way, but all knew that the end was not far off. Yet the
soldiers could not go back to their homes, and Congress was shamefully
remiss about paying them. Murmurs deep and loud arose, and Washington
suffered keenly from the neglect shown to the army. It required all his
patience and tact to keep the murmurs from breaking out into violent
action. With no military duty to perform, and with the impatience of men
who were suffering injustice, the officers and men began to form all
sorts of plans.

One of the officers—and how many agreed with him is not known, but the
sentiment easily took this form—one of the officers wrote to Washington
that it was clear that Congress was a failure. The army had won
independence, but no reliance could be placed on the Government. How much
more stable was the Government of England! Would not such a government
be after all the best for America? It might not be necessary to call the
head of the government a king, though even that title many would prefer,
but the head ought to have the power of a king. There was much more to
the same effect, and the letter was really a feeler to see how Washington
would look upon such a movement, which, of course, aimed to make him the
monarch of the new nation. Washington did not hesitate a moment, but
wrote a letter which must have made the officer’s ears tingle, however
honest he may have been in his opinion. Washington said:

    “With a mixture of great surprise and astonishment, I have read
    with attention the sentiments you have submitted to my perusal.
    Be assured, sir, no occurrence in the course of the war has
    given me more painful sensations than your information of there
    being such ideas existing in the army as you have expressed
    and I must view with abhorrence and reprehend with severity.
    For the present, the communication of them will rest in my own
    bosom, unless some further agitation of the matter shall make a
    disclosure necessary. I am much at a loss to conceive what part
    of my conduct could have given encouragement to an address,
    which, to me, seems big with the greatest mischief that can
    befall any country. If I am not deceived in the knowledge of
    myself, you could not have found a person to whom your schemes
    are more disagreeable. At the same time, in justice to my own
    feelings, I must add, that no man possesses a more sincere
    wish to see ample justice done to the army than I do; and as
    far as my powers and influence in a constitutional way extend,
    they shall be employed to the utmost of my abilities to effect
    it, should there be any occasion. Let me conjure you, then, if
    you have any regard for your country, concern for yourself or
    posterity, or respect for me, to banish these thoughts from
    your mind, and never communicate, as from yourself or any one
    else, a sentiment of the like nature.”

A graver peril arose, and Washington redeemed his promise to stand by
the army. In spite of the united effort of the army and its friends
in Congress, no satisfactory arrangement was made for paying the
long-delayed wages due to the soldiers. On March 10, 1783, a notice was
issued in the camp at Newburgh, calling a meeting of the officers. The
notice was not signed by any name, and with it was sent out an address
which rehearsed the wrongs suffered by the army and hinted that the time
had come when the soldiers must take matters into their own hands and
compel Congress to attend to their demands. It was an appeal to which
the officers were ready to listen, and every one was in so excited a
condition that it was impossible to say what might not be done.

Washington, at any rate, saw there was great danger, and he at once
seized the occasion. He issued an order calling attention to the address,
and asking that the meeting should be postponed four days and then should
convene at his invitation. This was to give the men time to cool off.
When the day came, Washington, as soon as the meeting was called to
order, made a long and powerful speech. He was not a ready speaker, and
so, feeling the importance of the occasion, he had written out what he
had to say, and he began to read it to the officers. He had read only a
sentence, when he stopped, took out his spectacles, and said, as he put
them on:

“Gentlemen, you will pardon me for putting on my glasses. I have grown
gray in your service, and I now find myself growing blind.”

It was a simple thing to say, and simply said, but it touched the
soldiers, and made them very tender to their commander, and more ready
even than before to listen to his counsel. Washington went on to say:

    “If my conduct heretofore has not evinced to you that I have
    been a faithful friend to the army, my declaration of it at
    this time would be equally unavailing and improper. But, as I
    was among the first who embarked in the cause of our common
    country; as I have never left your side one moment, save when
    called from you on public duty; as I have been the constant
    companion and witness of your distresses, and not among the
    last to feel and acknowledge your merits; as I have considered
    my own military reputation as inseparably connected with that
    of the army; as my heart has ever expanded with joy, when I
    have heard its praises, and my indignation has arisen, when
    the mouth of detraction has been opened against it; it can
    scarcely be supposed, at this late stage of the war, that I am
    indifferent to its interests.”

He used all his personal influence to heal the breach between the army
and Congress, and he brought the officers back to a more reasonable mind.
All the while he was writing to members of Congress and doing his utmost
to bring about a just treatment of the army.

[Illustration: WASHINGTON BIDDING FAREWELL TO HIS GENERALS.]

When the time came to disband the army, Washington, ready as he was to go
back to his home, could not forget that the work of the past seven years
would not be completed until the people which had become independent
was united under a strong government. He was the foremost man in the
country; he was also profoundly aware of the difficulties through which
they were yet to pass, and he addressed a long letter to the governors of
the several States. Congress was weak and unable to take the lead. The
States were each provided with governments, and were the real powers, but
Washington saw clearly that it would not do to have thirteen independent
governments in the country, each looking only after its own interests. So
in this letter he tried to show the States the importance of four things:

1. An indissoluble union of the States under one head.

2. The payment of all the debts contracted by the country in the war.

3. The establishment of a uniform militia system throughout the
country.—He did not advise having a standing army, but he thought all the
men should be drilled in their neighborhoods, formed into companies, and
be ready in any peril to take up arms again.

4. The cultivation of a spirit of confidence between different parts of
the country. He had seen so much jealousy and prejudice that he knew how
dangerous these were to the peace of the country.

       *       *       *       *       *

At last the time came when the army was disbanded. A few of the troops
only and their officers went with Washington to New York when the British
left the city. There was rejoicing everywhere; but it was a sorrowful
moment when Washington took leave in person of the officers who had
stood by him through the long, dreary years of the war. He was about to
leave the city to be ferried across the North River to the Jersey shore,
and his old friends gathered to say good-bye at Fraunces’ Tavern, in
Broad street. When he entered the room he could scarcely command his
voice. He said a word or two, and they all drank a farewell toast, as the
custom was in those days. Then Washington said: “I can not come to each
of you to take my leave, but shall be obliged if each of you will come
and take me by the hand.”

General Knox stood nearest, and he held out his hand. The tears were in
Washington’s eyes as he turned to his old comrade and grasped his hand.
He drew the strong man to him—Knox was nearly twenty years younger than
Washington, and very dear to him—and kissed him. Not a word could either
of them speak. Another general followed and another, each greeted with
the same affection; and then Washington left the room, passed through the
corps of infantry which stood on guard, and walked to Whitehall, followed
by the whole company, a silent procession. He entered the barge, turned
as the boat pushed off, and waved his hat in silent adieu. The officers
returned the salute in the same way, and then turned and in silence
marched back to Fraunces’.

Washington went to Philadelphia. Congress was in session at Annapolis,
but the Treasury was in Philadelphia. On receiving his commission as
Commander-in-Chief, Washington had announced that he would receive no
money for services, but would keep an exact account of all his expenses.
That account he had kept as carefully and scrupulously as any book-keeper
in a bank, and he now rendered it to the Comptroller of the Treasury. It
was in his own handwriting, every item set down and explained. I know of
few incidents in Washington’s career which show the character of the man
better than this. He held that a sacred trust had been reposed in him,
and he meant to be faithful in the least particular.

On December 23, 1783, Congress was assembled at Annapolis. The gallery
was filled with ladies. The Governor, Council, and Legislature of
Maryland, several officers, and the Consul-General of France were on the
floor. The Members of Congress were seated and wore their hats to signify
that they represented the Government. The spectators stood with bare
heads. General Washington entered and was conducted by the Secretary of
Congress to a seat. When all was quiet, General Mifflin, who was then
President of Congress, turned to Washington and said:

“The United States, in Congress assembled, is prepared to receive the
communications of the Commander-in-Chief.”

Washington rose and read a short address, in which he resigned his
commission. He delivered the paper into the hands of the President, who
replied with a little speech; and Washington was now a private citizen.
The next day he left Annapolis, and made all haste to return to his
beloved Mount Vernon.

(_To be continued._)




ON THE WILLEY-BROOK TRESTLE.

BY WILLIS BOYD ALLEN.


There had been rain among the mountains for almost a week. Every day the
newspapers brought reports of clear, warm weather in Boston and New York,
while the Crawford House guests gathered in shivering groups around their
open fires and applied themselves to indoor occupations, discontentedly
or cheerily, according to their various dispositions. Among the most
impatient in the hotel was a group of young people, who, as the season
drew to its close, were more eager than ever to improve each shining
hour. The hours, however, refusing to shine on any terms, that gloomy
September week, the bees were left “to hum,” as Lou Elwin plaintively
remarked.

When, therefore, the sun at last looked over the mountain-tops one cool,
delicious morning, and with his shining fingers gently drew aside the
misty draperies that had so long overhung the little valley of the Notch,
great was the delight of old and young at Crawford’s, and it was an eager
company of boys and girls that assembled about the big parlor fireplace
after breakfast. As soon as they were fairly together, half a dozen were
chattering at once.

“Isn’t it glorious?”

“What shall we do——?”

“Where shall——?”

“Fabyan’s!”

“Tennis!”

“Bugle Cliff!”

“A walk down the track.”

A shout of laughter greeted this last proposal, which was offered by a
delicate-looking youth of about eighteen.

“Fred is afraid that he’ll rub the shine off his boots!” cried one of his
companions, slapping him on the shoulder.

“Or tear that tennis suit on the rocks,” suggested Lou Elwin, with a toss
of her pretty head, as she leaned back in her chair and planted her own
stout little boots emphatically on the hearth. Lou was the acknowledged
leader among her set at Crawford’s, that season, in all the jaunts and
good times that were planned. She was a Boston girl, and she had her
full share of the independent spirit that characterized her ancestors.
Whenever the party set out on a scramble over the rough mountain-paths,
her joyous laugh was sure to be heard far in advance of the rest; it was
always her tennis-racket that met and returned the ball when the play was
apparently lost; it was Lou Elwin whose name zigzagged all over the cards
of the best partners an hour before dancing began.

Fred Seacomb did not quail, however, before her little broadside of
irony, but just looked straight into her eyes for a moment, and said
quietly, “You know better, Lou.” And then he proceeded to argue his
proposal, with such effect that in five minutes more the whole party of
young folks were racing down the plank walk toward the railroad.

At the little rustic shop beyond the station, the girls stopped for
caramels, packages of which the sterner element dutifully tucked into
their coat-pockets, ready for instant use. Thus provisioned, they all
struck off in the direction of the Notch, walking in twos and threes, on
the railroad ties, or balancing with little shrieks and a great deal of
laughter on the narrow rails. Lou, as usual, was ahead, but Fred soon
caught up and took his place at her side.

For several minutes, nothing was said by either. Then Lou exclaimed,
almost pettishly:

“Why do you try to be so quiet, and exact, and—and _different_?”

“You know, Lou, I can’t stand quite so much as some of the other fellows.
The doctor——”

“Oh, yes, I know. You’re up here for your health, and all that; but you
might ‘fly around’ a little more, get a little bit—just the least little
bit—rumpled, once in a while, like the rest of us!”

Fred laughed now, merrily enough, and perhaps would have defended
himself, had not another boy of about his own age joined them at that
moment, having caught the import of the girl’s words.

“If you think Seacomb _can’t_ ‘fly around,’ Miss Elwin, you ought to see
him in the gymnasium, at Harvard! He’s the best man on the bars in the
Freshman class, and he can——”

“There, there, Arthur!” interrupted Fred, “girls don’t care about such
affairs as that. My blackest sin, just now, is the shine on my boots,
isn’t it, Lou?”

Fred had known her long, and as an intimate friend, and so he used her
first name easily—a liberty rather envied by some of the later comers.

At the end of the Crawford plateau, they all turned away from the
track for a few moments, to visit “The House that Jack Built.” Of the
mysterious “Jack,” who was popularly believed to subsist on toads and
snakes, the girls stood rather in awe, and so they left the boys to do
the talking. Somewhat to Lou’s surprise, Fred Seacomb seemed to be on
excellent terms with the bluff Jack, who had been an English sailor. The
party soon chorused good-bye, and ran back down the path to the track, to
resume their excursion. They now entered the Notch itself, and for a few
minutes even their gay laughter was hushed in the presence of those gray
cliffs towering high, high above their heads. It seemed as if they were
leaving the land of sunshine behind them, and were entering the very home
of storm and avalanche. The iron track, clinging to the crumbling slope,
gave no sense of security or conquest over the terrible forces of nature;
rather, it was a frightened thing, like each one of themselves, at the
mercy of the stern, granite-browed hills overhanging it.

They emerged from the dark ravine, and gazed on the fair valley opening
before them, with a keen sense of relief which showed itself in a renewed
chorus of happy, thoughtless talk and laughter. Once they sprang aside,
and stood in a gay-colored group against the embankment, to let the nine
o’clock Portland train pass. Then they went on, more merrily than ever,
the girls gathering clusters of brilliant golden-rod and purple asters
for their hats and belts. It was Fred who discovered a single blue violet
blossoming serenely and cheerfully at that late day directly between the
iron rails, and with all the desolateness of Mount Willard stretching up
into the sky above it.

Lou took the offered flower without a word, and—wished it had been
golden-rod.

“Isn’t there _any_ manliness about him?” she thought fretfully. “That was
just like a girl. I believe I’m more a boy than he is, now!”

She saved the violet, however, and tucked it away carefully, where it
could not be injured or lost.

About a mile below the Notch, a small house stood beside the track,
occupied by a young married couple and their two children, who were held
up to the open window to look at the strangers. Fred handed in a spray
of asters to the baby, and the bashful little mother took them with a
nod and a pleased expression in her face. Lou had started to do the
same thing, but drew back sharply, vexed again, when she saw Fred step
forward with his flowers. The woman, however, had noticed her movement,
and after a moment’s hesitation beckoned to the girl. Lou was by this
time some distance down the track, and shook her head, pleasantly enough;
for, however much out of sorts, she rarely forgot herself so far as to
be really rude to any one. The woman seemed anxious, as Lou was about to
join her party, and leaned out of the window, pointing up the track and
making gestures which were quite incomprehensible. But Lou was in no mood
for trifling or lingering. She gave the baby a parting wave of her hand,
and ran off after the rest, who had not noticed this little episode. Fred
Seacomb was just in front, provokingly unconscious of her unfavorable
opinion, and—what? yes, actually racing with one of the girls! Well, the
morning was so bright, and Lou’s own nature so like it, that the clouds
soon blew away, and she was one of the merriest of the party as they drew
near the agreed limit of their excursion.

The sun was well up over the mountains when they reached the upper end of
the trestle-bridge which spans the deep chasm of Willey Brook. It was an
uncanny sort of place, and as the girls crept up to the edge and looked
down at the jagged bowlders eighty feet below, they shuddered and shrank
back, with their hands over their eyes. One or two proposed starting for
home at once, and the whole party probably would have begun the homeward
march, had not one of the boys in an unlucky moment remarked in a loud
whisper to his neighbor:

“’Twould be just like Lou Elwin to propose to go across.”

“I think she’s scared, though, this time,” replied his companion with a
laugh.

Lou stopped short, and the others with her. She had caught a part of the
foolish words, and guessed the rest. Turning squarely about, she surveyed
the yawning gulf, and the slender road across it, with shining eyes and
flushed cheeks. Her breath came quickly. She _was_ afraid, but should the
others know it—especially Fred Seacomb, whom she had been taunting with
weakness?

Without otherwise announcing her intention, she walked deliberately
toward the trestle, and stepped upon the narrow line of boards which
were placed across the ties for a foot-way. Fred sprang forward and laid
his hand on her arm.

“Lou! Surely you’ll not attempt——”

“Fred Seacomb, I’m going across this bridge. If you don’t wish to go,”
she added, in a tone which implied more contempt than she meant,—she was
so excited,—“you can sit down here and wait till we come back. Who’s
going to follow?” she cried, raising her voice and glancing over her
shoulder. She looked very pretty, standing there with a great cluster of
asters in her belt, her eyes sparkling, and little wisps of hair blowing
about her face. Two or three stout fellows came forward eagerly enough,
and one of the girls. Fred had not moved. Lou could feel his fingers
tremble on her arm. Now he tried to speak again, but she shook off his
hand impatiently, and turned away.

“But, Miss Elwin—Lou——” No, she would not listen. Already she was well
out upon the trestle, and the wind, drawing down through the ravine, had
begun to buffet her slender figure.

“Lou—you’ve forgotten—_the train_!”

She could not hear now, if she would. The wind caught the words and
hurled them away down the valley after the brook.

The boards were wet from the recent rains, and to her dismay she began to
find it difficult to keep a steady footing. One moment, the wind would
howl in her ears, and seize upon her fluttering dress with its powerful
grasp until she was obliged to lean against it with her whole force;
the next, the gust would die away, withdrawing its support so suddenly
that she nearly fell. She could not turn, but she knew that those who
had foolishly started after her must be some distance in the rear, for
she heard nothing from them. She did not know that they had given up the
perilous task and gone back at Fred’s first warning.

Once, and only once, she ventured to look down through the trestle work.
Far, oh! so far below, she could see the waters of the little stream
as it lay among the rocks with no sound, but moving on its white way
silently. At the same moment, a blast of wind grasped and shook her so
fiercely that she well-nigh lost her balance on the uneven boards. There
was no rail or support of any kind on either side or overhead; only
space, space, whirling in the wind, and below, the rocks and the white
brook.

Giddy, half fainting, she paused irresolutely, attempted, perhaps,
to turn back, and sank upon the bridge with a sob of genuine terror,
clinging to the smooth iron track and hiding her face in her hands.

As she did so, she heard a peculiar, vibrating hum in the rail that
sent the blood to her heart. Behind her, in their safe position on the
embankment, the rest heard it, too, and, looking up, saw what was
coming. The Boston express, with a long and heavily loaded train, was
at that very moment rounding a curve not a mile above the trestle, and
rushing upon them, a roaring, resistless avalanche of iron.

[Illustration: “THE TRAIN, TOO, WAS ON THE BRIDGE.”]

Lou felt as if she were in a nightmare. She tried to move, but was as
motionless as if she were lashed to the bridge. As if in a bewildering
dream, she faintly caught the sound of her companions’ cries of terror
and warning; in a bewildering dream, she heard two shrill notes echoing
and re-echoing from the mountains far and near, and knew it was the
agonized shriek of the great, laboring locomotive, powerless to prevent
what the rocks below were waiting for. She had read in books of people
who, in extreme peril, saw the details of their past life like a flash;
with the wet iron rails quivering and twanging more and more loudly under
her hands, she knew what it meant. But even while the last accents of
the whistle were sobbing themselves away in the distance, there came a
sound of footsteps, light and swift. Two strong arms seized the girl
about the waist, and, still, as if in a strange dream, she knew it was
the languid, delicate Fred who was running with her in his arms along
that fearful height.

A few moments later, a hollow roar and tremulous movement under his feet
told that the train, too, was on the bridge.

When Fred leaped from the track, upon the farther side, the locomotive
was not forty feet behind them. The engineer’s pale face stared at them
an instant from the cab; then the train, with groaning brakes, smoking
axles, and a shower of cinders, thundered past and was gone. Not one of
the passengers knew of the escape, or even of the danger.

It was afterward learned, however, that the appliances of the air-brake
on the engine would not work that day, and the train, with its tremendous
acquired momentum, ran to Bemis station, nine miles below, before it
could be brought to a standstill.

With half-closed eyes, Lou lay helplessly on the mossy plot where Fred
had placed her, and, in the slow waking from her dream, she watched him
as he went to and fro, at first beckoning and making motions for the rest
to join him by crossing the bed of the brook, and then confining his
attention entirely to her.

His face was almost as white as her own, as he approached, but she gave
him a smile and a grateful look that seemed to reassure him; and, after
seeing that her position was as comfortable as circumstances would
permit, he took off his thick jacket and laid it over her, in spite of a
feeble protest,—for the September morning was still cool, and the wind
whistled sharply through the ravine.

Next, Fred busied himself in gathering sticks, and, wet as they were,
he succeeded, with the aid of several matches, in coaxing a blaze out
of them, almost at her feet. By the time the rest of the company came
panting up the steep slope, she had so far recovered as to sit up and
hold out her cold hands to the cheery little fire which crackled and
snapped merrily against a big bowlder.

Many were the clumsy inquiries of the boys, and the caresses of the girls
as they came upon her sitting there, with Fred standing silently at one
side—no longer jacketless, for she had pleaded so hard that he had put it
on again.

There was some discussion as to what action should now be taken, some
favoring a slow return to Crawford’s by the road, some by the track, and
some, a short walk further down the valley to the Willey House, where
they could obtain rest and refreshment. After many sober arguments, quite
different from the eager propositions in the parlor that morning, they
decided to return at once to the hotel, and _not_ by the track.

It was a very silent and nervous little group of young people that made
its way down to the wagon road at the bottom of the valley. Fred had been
nearly exhausted, after all, by his efforts, and Lou was so prostrated
that they feared she could not get home at all. But the spirits and
strength of the young are elastic, and by the time they repassed the
Notch, one would hardly know, to look at them, that anything unusual had
happened. It was agreed that all should say as little about the affair
as possible. Accordingly, nearly all the party were in the parlor that
night, dancing, chatting, and laughing as usual.

For the next few days, it was observed that Fred Seacomb did not play
tennis, and that Lou Elwin never again chid him for his mild ways and
moderate excursions. Report says that she told him, in her own frank way,
that she was ashamed of her former treatment of him; at any rate, she
will not hear a word said against him, among her friends; and not once
since that day has she been known to accuse him of unmanliness.




THE GIRAFFE.


Many years ago, a young Italian lad named Gordian, who had been
proclaimed, when but fifteen years old, Emperor of Rome, gave the people
of his native city a splendid entertainment or “triumph.” And among the
many strange and terrible beasts that passed in procession around his
amphitheater, were ten curious animals—long-necked, long-legged, and
small-headed, with tufted tails and queer little horns. They were of a
tawny orange color, beautifully spotted and marked. They were driven
around the arena in gilded chariots by their Ethiopian drivers, and were
such an odd combination of the body of a camel and the spots of a leopard
that the people, who gazed upon them in wonder and surprise, gave to the
strange beasts the name of “Camelopardus,” or camel-leopard.

[Illustration: A HERD OF GIRAFFES.]

This singular animal, however, had long been known to the Arabians, under
the name of “Xirapha,” or “the long-necked.” And from this title comes
our word “giraffe,” the popular name now given to the odd-looking beast
that the boy-emperor exhibited in his circus sixteen centuries ago.

It is indeed a curious animal. Its chief characteristics are its length
of neck and its high fore-quarters. The head is sometimes seventeen feet
from the ground, and specimens have been found measuring over twenty
feet from hoof to nose. The apparent height of the fore-quarters is not
due, as is supposed, to a greater length of the fore-legs, but to the
extraordinary height of the withers or shoulder-bones. The tongue of
the giraffe is long and prehensile—that is, it is adapted to seize and
entwine; it can be tapered so small as to enter the ring of a small key.
This long neck and prehensile tongue, which are found in no other animal,
enable this giant browser to feed with ease upon the foliage and tender
branches of trees.

The eyes of the giraffe are very large, soft, and beautiful, and one
would suppose that their mild, imploring expression would restrain
the hunters from shooting down so attractive-looking and inoffensive
a creature. But the same willful and cruel desire for what is wrongly
called “sport,” that has exterminated the buffalo of our Western plains,
is killing off the giraffe of Africa. Its strong-tasting flesh is not
enjoyable eating, and its hide is of little use; its capture alive is of
no value to man, save as a gratification of curiosity; it can not, like
the camel, be used as a beast of burden; nor does it, like the ostrich or
the elephant, provide either feather or ivory for commerce. In fact, this
curious animal is of no practical use to man, and should be left free to
roam the plains and forests of its African home, unmolested and unharmed,
save for the occasional capture of such living specimens as may help boys
and girls to study and admire one of the most singular and graceful of
the creatures of the earth.




THE CHILDREN OF THE SUN.

BY ARTHUR WENTWORTH EATON.

[Illustration]


    A sunflower tall, by the garden wall,
    Scornfully nodded his head
    To a brilliant poppy, whose cheeks below
    Were all aflame with a crimson glow.

    “I am the child of the sun,” he smiled;
    “His color is mine, you see,
    While you are drinking his warm rays in,
    You never once try his tints to win.”

    But the poppy gay, still blushing away
    (And laughing a little too),
    Quietly answered, “The sun has told
    Me to be red and you to be gold.

    “The morning’s hush and the poppy’s blush
    Are dear to the heart of day
    As the noontide hour, with its triumphs won,
    And the flower that rivals the glowing sun.

    “Heaven is large, and its chiefest charge
    Is that life shall be broad and free,
    And it bids the children of sun and storm
    Ne’er to a single type conform.”

    The sunflower wise looked down in surprise
    At the bold little flower below,
    But he learned a lesson there and then
    That needs to be learned by many men.

[Illustration]




WONDERS OF THE ALPHABET.

BY HENRY ECKFORD.

SIXTH PAPER.


You must have noticed the difference in your own handwriting, when you
are using a pen that does not suit you, and when you have one to which
you are accustomed. Similarly, when you are writing on a slate—a sharp
slate-pencil makes a clear, thin mark, a blunt pencil makes a broad mark
with uneven edges. When the pencil is worn down on one side, if you turn
it over, it makes another sort of a mark. The writing done with a quill
differs from that made with a steel pen. And the differences between the
writings of certain nations of the Old World—which at one time puzzled
people very much—were often caused by their use of different writing
materials, such as: paper and pencils; paper and brushes; bricks and
metal pens; wax and metal nails; wood and knife-blades.

[Illustration: REED AND PEN-CASE OF ANCIENT EGYPT.]

The Egyptians, you remember, had two kinds of writing: one called
hieroglyphs, used mainly on monuments, for sentences of sacred history,
names of kings, and short prayers; the other called hieratic, used on
papyrus paper, chiefly for general and quicker writing. Both these
terms signify that writing was sacred and connected with the priests.
Religion entered very largely into the life of the people of Egypt, and
the priests, who formed the most powerful class, held all the learning,
and, before the Greeks flourished, were the wisest men in the world.
The differences between the rough little sketches that formed the
letters of the hieratic or swift hand and the laborious pictures called
hieroglyphs, arose originally, and kept growing greater and greater,
because of the different materials used in making them. It was natural to
work very slowly and carefully on the hieroglyphs which were carved on
royal monuments; while the scribes who wrote the hieratic characters on
smooth papyrus with a reed pen and thick ink were obliged to disregard
the smaller angles and finer outlines, and were satisfied if their
work conveyed the meaning they intended. There is a fantastic and not
inelegant writing used by the Burmese, a people to the north-east of
India, and south of China. This script is very rounded and is made up of
fine lines. The letters have been found to belong to an alphabet that
looks entirely different; and the difference arose from the custom of
writing on palm-leaves with a fine needle. It was difficult to make the
plain up-and-down strokes without splitting the leaf, so these strokes
were made in curves in circles and half circles.

[Illustration: PORTION OF THE BURMESE ALPHABET.]

The alphabet of the Goths, before and about the time they embraced
Christianity, was formed on a contrary system. All the strokes were
straight, either up and down, or crosswise, or slanting. Many persons
have thought this arose because the Goths lacked a feeling for grace
and beauty. But that was not the reason. When these forefathers of ours
invented or borrowed their runes, and later when they borrowed a true
alphabet from the Greeks, they cut their letters on sticks of wood or on
smooth lengths of bark. Most boys know by experience how difficult it is
to cut a round O on a smooth stick on account of the grain of the wood.
This led to peculiar shapes in the letters.

In the earliest known Runic alphabet, the letters do not stand in the
order of our letters; and they differ so greatly in other ways from the
ordinary Greek alphabet, that it is probable they were borrowed long
before the Christian era, and afterward became greatly changed. This
Runic alphabet was called the “Futhorc,” from the first six letters,
ᚠᚢᚦᚯᚱᚴ—F, U, TH, O, R, C. The third rune, ᚦ (TH), which came from the
Greek Δ, _delta_, or D, survived in English literature until the last
century, and is occasionally used to-day when people wish to write in
an old-fashioned style. And they are apt to make a curious mistake in
its pronunciation. The rune ᚦ remained in Irish and Anglo-Saxon for the
sound TH, and in English it was preserved longest in the word “THE,”
because that word occurs very often, and it was easier to write one
letter than two. But in the course of time it came to be mistaken for
Y; and although our ancestors knew better than to pronounce it like Y,
their descendants do not, but usually give this apparent Y the sound of
the real Y, making YE’s out of all the THE’s. They do not know that this
is a survival of a rune almost to the present generation. The fifth rune
of the “futhorc” is our R, and the sixth is our K without the tail. The
Goths, Angles, and Scandinavians used twenty-four such runes or closely
similar letters. You will notice that the Goth, like an unskillful
schoolboy who carves his initials on wood, and is bothered by the circle
of the O, has solved the difficulty by the bold move of cutting one
downward and two cross strokes. Sometimes, however, the O was made by
four strokes forming a lozenge ᛜ. They usually cut their down strokes
across the grain; and they gave all their cross lines a slant, in order
not to bury the point of the knife too deep, and splinter the wood, in
cutting with the grain. That is the reason that the cross lines of the
letters are rarely horizontal.

[Illustration: THE BUZEO TORQUE.[4]]

Some of our words that are in constant use can be traced back to this
period. The word book was originally the same as the word beech, and
reminds us of the time when our forefathers carved their records on
beech-wood or beech-bark. The similarity of the two words has remained
much closer in German; _Buch_ (book) being almost exactly the same as
_Buche_ (beech). To sing from a stave is the same as to sing from a
staff, because in runic writing the old chants were noted down with a
knife on sticks or pieces of bark, and read from these by the singers.
The Ojibway Indians, though they had not an alphabet like the runes,
until recently had similar staves which they brought out when they
chanted their songs; certain marks on the wood served to remind them of
what they were to sing.

You may remember my telling you how hard it is to distinguish some
of the letters of the Hebrew alphabet from one another, and how the
same difficulty is experienced in the case of the Arabic and Persian
alphabets. This is due to various reasons, among which was the employment
by those nations of pen, paper, and ink for perpetuating records.
This tended to make their writing less and less easy to read; and as
inscriptions on stone were not common, people did not have the ancient
models of letters before their eyes to refer to.

[Illustration: ROMAN WRITING MATERIALS.]

The capital letters of our own alphabet, however, are easily
distinguishable from one another. We owe this fact largely to the
Romans, a clear-headed, practical people, who used for every-day writing
slates or boards covered with a thin film of wax, on which the letters
were engraved, or furrowed, by a sharp-pointed instrument called a
_stylus_, from which we derive the term “style,” in literature. The
yielding quality of the wax encouraged the use of fine, open and legible
characters, and the Romans handed down to us an alphabet improved in many
ways.

But the most curious example of the modifying influence of the writing
materials upon the writing is seen in the cuneiform characters. If, on
a hot summer’s day, you should walk between the long lines of bricks
in one of the many brickyards that line certain sections of the Hudson
river, you would find the fresh-made bricks quite soft, and steaming
under the direct rays of the sun. If one of those soft bricks were given
into your hand and you were asked to draw a rebus on it, and given a
nail with which to do it, you would meet with this difficulty: If, in
drawing the outlines of your pictures, you should press equally along the
whole length of every line, you would raise small ridges on each side;
or, as you became more expert, one ridge on one side, as a plow does
when drawing a furrow. And when you should come to draw one line across
another, there would be two ugly interfering ridges.

But if you should stop your cross line just before you come to the other,
and skip it, beginning again on the other side, your picture would be
smoother and the surface of the brick less uneven. You would succeed
still better if you should not try to draw continuous lines, but should
indicate them with a series of dots made by dabbing the soft brick with
a corner of the iron nail. Now, imagine the Hudson to be the Euphrates,
and yourself a Babylonian of ten thousand years ago, and the nail a
little, smooth, square-pointed piece of copper, iron, tin, or silver,
and the pictures conventional signs representing the various sounds of
the language, and you would be writing cuneiform. The old Babylonians,
in writing, engraved soft bricks with regular and evenly placed dabs.
These hardened quickly under the hot sun of Mesopotamia, or were baked in
ovens, and so preserved the inscribed characters. Very often a coat of
soft clay was wrapped about the original brick, and the same inscription
made on the outside. This was done to prevent forgeries, and to make it
easier to restore the meaning, if part of the brick were destroyed or
lost. Whole libraries of these strange books have been found under the
ruins of the palaces of the old kings of Assyria. Still other libraries
are lying there waiting for their discoverer.

Did you ever try to make an alphabet of your own? I can distinctly
remember inventing one, with a favorite sister, when I was about seven
years old. Great was our diligence while at work on it, and great was our
secrecy! We used to hide it away so carefully that it was easy to forget
about it for weeks at a time. We never learned it well enough to write
the simplest sentences in it off-hand,—and for a very good reason: We
had too recently learned an alphabet infinitely better than any that a
child could think out—one which had been tested and changed and improved
by ages of use. I do not doubt that many other children have tried to
construct private systems of writing. It has never been uncommon for
men to attempt to use secret alphabets. In this respect, the ancient
people of Asia somewhat resembled children; and thousands of alphabets
and syllabaries were invented in those old days. It is rare, however,
that one has been handed down, and only when the people for whom it was
devised had a much poorer system or none at all.

[Illustration: A “TREE ALPHABET.”]

Sequoiah, an intelligent Cherokee Indian, contrived more recently
a syllabary of eighty-five signs, comprising all the sounds in his
language, using the English alphabet as a basis on which to form his
characters. This syllabary is in use to-day by the Cherokees, and
books and newspapers are printed in it. Botanists have given the name,
Sequoiah, to the gigantic trees of California, in perpetual memory of his
genius.

[Illustration: SPECIMENS OF OLD ASIATIC ALPHABETS. (SEE NEXT PAGE.)]

Long ago, when it was dangerous but very profitable to be thought a
wizard, it was customary for any wise man who wished to be feared, and
to keep his wisdom confined to himself and a few chosen disciples, to
write his books in an alphabet or cipher of his own invention. Generally
he took some existing alphabet as a foundation, and made variations on
it, somewhat as Sequoiah did. I have in my possession a queer little
treatise in Arabic, which claims to have been written after a labor of
twenty years, and solemnly deposited in the royal treasury, during the
reign of a certain Caliph who lived in Palestine more than one thousand
years ago. It professes to give a key to the hieroglyphs of Egypt, but
its greatest interest lies in the fact that the author has here brought
together, in an amusing medley, all the alphabets and ciphers that he has
ever heard of; perhaps some that he made up. Here in the upper wood-cut,
for example, is a curious tree alphabet. The letters follow the regular
order of the Arabic alphabet, each letter varying from the others by
the arrangement of the branches on one side or the other of the trunk.
Placing these in regular order with the corresponding Arabic letters
underneath, the Arab had a simple cipher which the ordinary Oriental who
only knows his own letters could scarcely read without the key. Another
alphabet, as shown in the second wood-cut on p. 773, is evidently based
upon a picture of the sun for _alif_, or A; while B, C, D, and the
following letters are made by varying the first character. Remember that
these, being Asiatic alphabets, are written so as to be read from right
to left; but the letters are here placed in reverse order to be read like
our own alphabet from left to right. This book contains also alphabets
founded on the signs for the moon, and on those for the planets, Jupiter,
Saturn, Mars, Mercury, and Venus. The one shown on this page is still
another, which the author calls the “oldest Chaldean Alphabet.” And one
can really trace a resemblance to Phœnician letters in some of these old
signs. In fact, it is easy to invent fancy alphabets, as soon as the idea
of an alphabet is familiar to the mind; but it is not so easy to induce
people to use them. The alphabets actually used by the various nations
of the world have been brought to their present state of perfection, as
you have seen, by a slow process of growth, one step at a time, and each
step the product of intense thought and ingenuity. The Cherokee is an
interesting exception to this rule. Of late centuries, there have been
few, almost no improvements in our alphabet. This is partly because it
is so well adapted to our use, but principally because the invention of
printing has tended to fix the style of printed type in one fashion. It
is true that when books were first printed in England, the characters
used were the indistinct so-called Gothic, or black-letter; but printers
soon saw the advantages of the later Italian, or Roman, styles, and
have kept to them ever since. The people of Germany are troubled to-day
with near-sightedness. It has been claimed, with a great show of truth,
that this is largely owing to the fact that the Germans still retain
the old black-letter of the early Irish and the Anglo-Saxons. But every
year the Germans are printing more and more books in Roman type, and
for generations Roman type and Roman script have been taught in their
schools, together with the angular Gothic.

[Illustration: THE OLDEST CHALDEAN ALPHABET.]

Among the half-civilized nations which are now being taught our wisdom,
many are learning to use our alphabet; and it seems almost certain that
in time the whole world, excepting perhaps the Mohammedan nations, will
express their thoughts in our version of the letters that came down
from the Phœnicians. What a glory for that strange old folk of the
Mediterranean Sea!

[4] This massive collar or bracelet, here reproduced from Mr. George
Stephens’s “Old Northern Runic Monuments,” was made of twisted gold, and
was found at Buzeo, in Wallachia, upon the site, probably, of a heathen
temple. The runic characters inscribed upon it mean “dedicated to the
temple of the Goths.” This torque was worth nearly twenty thousand
dollars.




A BALLAD OF BASE-BALL.

BY I. D.


I.

    Now that Summer has just reached its mark,
    And the schooling and fishing are done,
    Come! To-morrow get up with the lark
    (And you know she gets up with the sun)—
    Come along! who would shirk or would shun
    The game that is best of them all,
    For glory and frolic and fun?
    So hurrah for the Bat and the Ball!


II.

    Yes, hurrah! we’ll be first in the Park;
    Our Nine will go up there as one,
    _Not_ to see all the beasts of the Ark,
    Nor the birds, nor the beetles,—no fun!—
    But around the green Diamond to run,
    And the Red-stockings’ hearts to appall,
    And to show how a game may be won:
    So hurrah for the Bat and the Ball!


III.

    We’ve a Catcher as keen as a shark,
    For fouls—well he can’t be outdone;
    And our Batters could bat in the dark,
    And our Pitcher knows every one
    Of the “curves” and the “shoots”; not a run
    Did he give those Red-stockings last Fall
    In the champion match that we won.
    So hurrah for the Bat and the Ball!

    Jack, throw down your rod and your gun,
    Let kite and top go to the wall,
    Of _good_ games there’s not more than one,
    So hurrah for the Bat and the Ball!




MAN OVERBOARD!

BY H. A. JOHNSON.

[Illustration: OFF TO THE RESCUE.]


The cry of “Man overboard!” always has a startling sound on an ocean
vessel. In a naval ship, such accidents, or emergencies, are provided
against in advance. Two boats, one on each side of the ship, are kept
ready for instant use, and are equipped with everything necessary for
a speedy rescue, as well as an outfit, including provisions, for a
prolonged search in case immediate rescue is not possible. Picked seamen
in each “watch” are assigned to special duty as a life-boat crew, and
must be ready to jump into their boat at a moment’s notice.

Some ships are provided with “life-buoys”—queer-looking objects hanging
from the stern. In case of a man’s falling overboard at night, one of
these life-buoys can be dropped into the water, and lighted immediately,
so that the poor fellow can strike out for it at once and cling to it
until picked up.

Sometimes, however, the sea runs so high that no small boat could be
lowered without swamping and perhaps drowning the entire crew. To decide
the question whether to attempt the rescue of a poor fellow who has
fallen overboard, at the risk of losing others who might be sent to his
aid, is a fearful responsibility for a commanding officer, and requires
the coolest exercise of his judgment.




THE KELP-GATHERERS.

[_A Story of the Maine Coast._]

BY J. T. TROWBRIDGE.


CHAPTER IX.

LOADING THE KELP.

With the first flush of dawn kindling the sky, Perce Bucklin opened his
eyes in great bewilderment. But the sight of the sea, and the sand, and
his two companions still asleep under their blankets, brought him quickly
to his senses.

“‘Wake Nicodemus’!” he shouted, giving each a shake. “The tide is up!
the wind is all right, and the kelp is landing! ‘Hurrah for the great
jubilee’!”

Moke yawned a sleepy “hurrah!” while Poke, sitting up and rubbing his
eyes open, made some complimentary reference to “Uncle Moses.”

“Uncle Moses was right,” Perce admitted. “Now we must have breakfast and
be ready for work by the time the tide has gone down a little. Start up
the fire while I go and see to the oxen.”

Rubbish had already been gathered, and left to dry about their camp-fire
of the evening before. Moke produced some matches, while Poke prepared
a wisp of hay for lighting. And now, completely awake, both sang, while
Perce was starting off:

          “‘Run and tell Elijah to hurry up Pomp,
    And meet us at the gum-tree down in the swamp,
          To wake Nicodemus to-day!’”

The sun came up gloriously over the ocean. It was a superb morning.
The wind had gone down during the night, and only a gentle breeze was
blowing. The receding tide left long rows and scattered heaps of kelp,
rockweed, and other _algæ_ high on the beach.

The boys were in the gayest spirits. While the oxen were still feeding,
and the fire getting in condition to roast corn and potatoes, Perce
proposed that they should make the most of their time by gathering
driftwood.

Then a question of equity arose. The twins thought it fair that all they
both secured should be theirs; by which arrangement Perce could have
expected to get no more than half as much for his share.

“But why not divide the floodwood the same as we do the seaweed?” he
demanded—“Half and half.”

“Because your oxen——” began Moke.

“Don’t help,” added Poke.

“But they’re here on your account as much as they are on mine,” said
Perce. “They’re giving their valuable time all the same, whether they
help or not.”

“All right! what do you propose?” cried the twins.

“That we divide equally everything we find on the beach—driftwood,
seaweed, no matter what,” Perce replied. “Half for you two, and half for
me and the oxen.”

The twins agreed good-naturedly, and all set merrily to work. After
gathering driftwood for a while, they dug out a place in the hot coals,
into which they put their potatoes, wrapped in green sea-moss, and left
them to cook. Then the corn was made ready and roasted on the ends of the
sticks that had served the same purpose the night before, and at last
came breakfast—which they ate with such appetites as I fear some boys who
read this know nothing about.

“Won’t Olly be mad when he knows what he has missed?” cried Perce.

They all had to speak loud, to be heard above the sound of the surf.

“If he comes back by the coast——” said Moke.

“We shall see him,” said Poke. “I should think it was time.”

“It’s time to begin on the kelp!” Perce exclaimed, throwing away his last
corn-cob, and springing up from his seat on the sand.

The ox-cart was brought around, and halted alongside the heaps of still
dripping and glistening seaweed. The larger part of this was kelp, and
the most valuable part in the estimation of farmers who make use of these
products of the sea to enrich the land.

The kelp grows upon deep-sunken ledges, from which it is detached only
by the agitations of great storms,—a weird sort of plant, which in still
weather may sometimes be seen, far down, waving mysteriously, with
every fluctuation of the tide, in the silent ocean depths. It is often
of gigantic proportions, its slippery stems and great, glossy leaves
measuring many yards in length. It frequently comes up with clusters of
blue mussels and other shells clinging to its roots.

With the kelp, were mixed a tangled rockweed, eel-grass, and Irish moss;
all of which the boys pitched on the cart together; Perce starting up the
oxen now and then and stopping them again where the litter was thickest.

“How’s this for a devil’s apron?” cried Poke, struggling with an immense
leaf of kelp, to which he merely gave the picturesque, popular name; for
the twins were well-brought-up boys, who would not for anything have
uttered a profane word.

It flopped salt water in his face as he was getting it on the cart; and
then, as the oxen started forward, trailed its smooth, wet, snaky stem
along the ground.

[Illustration: PERCE FINDS THE WATCH. (SEE NEXT PAGE.)]

“It’s ugly stuff to pitch,” said Moke, twisting the root in the tines of
his fork to assist his brother.

“It’s strange that it always lands against the wind!” said Poke.

“I don’t see that it’s strange at all,” replied Perce. “The only things
that the wind from the sea blows ashore are things afloat on the surface,
like driftwood. It blows the surface water too, but that is all the time
running back; and it carries with it things below the surface.”

“Of course! I know all about that!” said Poke.

“The under-tow,” suggested Moke.

“Well! it’s the under-tow that lands the kelp,” returned Perce. “It works
both ways. When the wind blows off shore it blows the surface water back;
and that brings up the under-current with the seaweed. That’s the way it
is on our beaches.”

Moke and Poke knew the facts well enough; but Perce, who prided himself
on being a rather intelligent boy, liked to explain things. He went on:

“There’s another thing you’ve noticed: how much warmer the water is
sometimes when there’s a sea-breeze, than when it blows off the land;
just the contrary of what you would expect.”

“I guess every fellow who goes in swimming much——” Moke began.

“Has noticed that,” Poke ended.

“It’s because the sea-breeze is cooler than the land-breeze,” said Moke.

“And that makes the water seem warm to you,” said Poke.

“There’s something besides that,” Perce replied. “It’s the surface water
that is warmest; and the sea-breeze keeps that rolling on the beach. I’m
speaking of sunny days; in cloudy weather there isn’t much difference.
The sun warms the sand, and the sand warms the water. But a land-breeze
blows it off, and brings up the cold under-current. Think of that the
next time you go in swimming, and see if it isn’t so.”

The twins thought it strange he should know so much, as he had no Uncle
Moses; he didn’t tell them he had got his lore from his father, who was
one of the most intelligent farmers on the coast.

“I shouldn’t like to go in swimming here now!” said Poke, turning to look
at the waves, still dark with rolling seaweed and sand.

“It’s wonderful,” said Perce, “how pure the ocean keeps, with all the
dirt and things forever washing into it,—though it isn’t always so
pure as it looks. Don’t you know that fishermen have to take up their
gill-nets and dry ’em about every four days?”

“That’s to keep ’em from rotting,” said the twins.

“But what makes them rot?” returned Perce. “It isn’t the water; it’s
what’s _in_ the water.”

“The slime,” said Moke.

“They come up all covered with slime,” said Poke.

“That slime,” Perce replied, “is all a kind of life. Drying kills it.
But if the nets are left long in the water, it grows, and takes the life
out of ’em; that’s what you call rotting. In a few days you can see fine
green grass growing all over the twine. Then, how quick the bottom of a
boat, or a rope left in the water, or a sunken anchor, gets coated with
barnacles! The clearest sea water is swarming alive with things you can’t
see!”


CHAPTER X.

WHAT PERCE FOUND ON THE BEACH.

The boys worked well while they talked; and often the cart went with its
shaggy and dripping load to the two piles of seaweed they were depositing
high on the shore.

“Have you thought, boys,” said Perce, as he backed the cart around, after
one of these short trips; “it’s just along here somewhere that the body
of the old lobsterman came ashore, after the gale three years ago?”

All stopped to look at the tumbling breakers, still casting up their
burden of kelp.

“The storm caught him when he was out,” continued Perce; “but nobody
ever knew whether he got capsized pulling his lobster-pots, or trying to
land afterward. His boat was found stove to pieces on the rocks the next
morning, but he wasn’t found for several days. Then, wasn’t it dreadful?
Two men discovered him, when they were loading kelp!”

The boys worked for some time in silence, and then the conversation
turned upon wrecks and accidents at sea, until the cart-box was once more
filled with its heaping load.

This time the twins went with the oxen to dump it, while Perce stood
leaning on his fork, looking down at the last marks of the receding tide,
left in wavy lines along the sand.

Where some jags of seaweed had just been thrown up, these lines
disappeared, giving place to little straight channels cut by the water
dripping from them and running back to catch the retreating waves. He
was curiously watching these effects, and throwing up some straggling
stems of kelp with his fork, when he stopped suddenly with a start of
surprise. Something brighter than the glistening golden-green leaves and
stems had caught his eye. It was in the midst of a heap which had hardly
yet landed, and which seemed ready to slide back into the sea with the
next wave. He thrust in his fork to hold it; and, stooping, saw that the
object was a bit of shining metal.

“Gold!” he exclaimed gleefully.

He took hold of it, but found that it did not come so easily out of the
mingled mass of kelp and rockweed as he had anticipated. He pinched it
firmly, pushing back some clustering pods of rockweed, and gave it a
gentle pull.

“A gold chain!” he exclaimed in the greatest astonishment.

He had at first seen and touched only the end of the chain. But now he
drew and drew, removing the soft, slimy incumbrance with his other hand,
when up came, dangling before his eyes in the sun, a beautiful gold watch.

Perce Bucklin’s first impulse was to shout to his companions and hold up
the prize for them to see; but that natural movement was checked by a
more selfish consideration.

He was too honest a boy to wish to possess anything that did not truly
belong to him. But suppose the owner of the watch should never appear? It
might have been lost at sea, in the late storm; or possibly, before that,
it slipped from the pocket of some voyager on yacht or ship, who would
never pass that way again. Indeed, it might have been dropped overboard
miles from that spot, and have been brought ashore by the kelp in which
the chain was entangled.

If unclaimed, who would have a better right to it than the finder? But
then Perce remembered the unlucky agreement by which everything they
found that day on the beach was to be divided between him and the twins.
To be sure, that was meant to apply principally to seaweed and driftwood;
of course, it didn’t include watches! That seemed very plain to Percival
Bucklin. Yet, the twins might think different. It would be absurd, but
who could tell what self-interest might impel them to do?

It was this fear that prompted Perce to resolve upon a very foolish
thing. He glanced around, and seeing that the twins had just dumped their
load, and were lifting the cart-box back into its place, having quite too
much to attend to at the moment to be observing him, he slipped watch and
chain into his trousers-pocket. It had a hunter’s case, which, if it had
so far kept it from being broken, would probably preserve it still.

“I won’t tell them,” he said to himself, “till I’ve had a little time to
think.”

He was much excited; and if the twins had had keen eyes for anything that
wasn’t lying on the beach, they must have noticed, when they returned,
that something had happened to him in their absence.

He fell to pitching kelp again, but his talk was fitful and
absent-minded. He was all the while thinking of what he had found, and
instinctively looking for more watches and other valuables in the seaweed.

He also thought of something he wouldn’t have liked so well to find. The
loser of the watch might have lost himself with it; and perhaps he, too,
like the old lobsterman, had come ashore in a shroud of kelp.


CHAPTER XI.

ANOTHER DISCOVERY.

Perce’s eyes wandered up and down the beach, and finally, with thoughts
of shipwreck, he stood leaning on his fork and gazed abstractedly out to
sea.

“What’s the matter with you?” cried Moke.

“Why don’t you start up the team?” demanded Poke. “We’re waiting!”

Perce left his fork sticking in the sand, and starting suddenly, with his
face turned toward the sea, uttered an exclamation:

“My gracious, boys! Look!”

“Where? What?” cried the twins.

“On the ‘Old Cow!’ There’s somebody there!”

“That’s nothing strange,” Moke replied.

“Some fisherman,” Poke added.

They took the discovery coolly, not having Perce’s reason for attaching
to it a tragical importance.

“It’s no fisherman!” he exclaimed. “See! he is making some sort of
signal!” And he added, in great excitement, “It’s somebody cast away on
the rock! There’s been a wreck, boys! There’s been a wreck!”

He was so certain of this that he would have told them then and there
what he had found on the beach, but for the awkwardness of explaining
why he had previously concealed it. And, after all, he reflected, the
castaway—if such indeed he was—might not be the loser of the watch.

Without producing that evidence, he soon convinced his companions
that there had been some sort of disaster off the coast, and that the
movements they saw on the “Old Cow’s” back were signals of distress.

“He has a board or something in his hand, and he is beckoning with it!”
cried Perce. “He wouldn’t be waving it that way if he wasn’t in trouble!”

“I don’t see what _we_ can do,” said Moke.

“He can’t be in any great danger,” added Poke.

“But he may have been there all night; we don’t know what condition he
is in!” Perce replied. “We can give the alarm, and, may be, go for him
ourselves, if nobody else will.”

The twins didn’t see how they could afford to leave their work. There
was another cart already at the other end of the beach, and more
kelp-gatherers would probably be coming soon. They didn’t fancy the idea
of giving up the advantage gained by spending the night on the shore and
beginning work in the morning before anybody else arrived.

But, though Perce could do a rather underhand thing in keeping the watch
from them, he wasn’t a boy to let that or any other selfish consideration
prevent him from attempting the rescue of a person in distress.

“Besides,” he said, “it may be somebody we know. Don’t you remember when
that man was seen clinging to the rigging of the wreck off Rocky Shoals,
Tom Bowers was one of the men that volunteered to launch a boat and try
to take him off. Tom’s mother said all she could to prevent him, for
there was a tremendous sea running, but he went; and the man turned out
to be his own father—her own husband! and the only one saved from the
wreck.”

The twins remarked that it wasn’t any father of theirs on the “Old Cow’s”
back, at that time in the morning, very sure! And they were reluctant
to have their rich harvest of seaweed interrupted. Yet they thought
something ought to be done.

“Call out and tell old Homans,” they said.

“Old Homans” was the man who had come on at the other end of the beach
with his cart. But Perce didn’t see what he could do.

“He might do what we do; then he won’t be getting seaweed while we’re
off,” said the twins.

“Well, you can tell him while I run up to the boarding-house,” cried
Perce. “Here’s a boat; I’ll get oars, and, maybe, some men to help.”

Old Homans didn’t take much interest in the report the twins brought him
of a human being on the lonely outlying ledge.

“Big ninny! He’s no business to be there!” he exclaimed.

He spent but little time in trying to concentrate his imperfect eyesight
upon the figure they described.

“I can’t make out any human critter, nor any critter,” he said, and
turned again to forking seaweed. “If _you_ see anybody, better find a
boat and pull out, and see what simpleton it is, and what in the world
he’s there fur.”

[Illustration: LAUNCHING THE BOAT IN THE SURF.]

The twins returned to their own ox-cart; and soon Perce came running with
a pair of oars.

“Here are oars,” he said. “But there are no men at the house. They went
off in the yacht Susette yesterday, and haven’t been heard from. And Olly
hasn’t got back, though Mrs. Murcher says he ought to have come an hour
ago.”

“May be it’s the yacht that’s been wrecked,” suggested the twins.

“She’s afraid it is; and the ladies are all excited about it. I tried to
get a spy-glass to look through; one of the men owns one, they said, but
he must have taken it with him.”

The boys turned the oxen about, and left them eating the hay that had
served for a bed the night before. Then they dragged the dory down from
beside the bathing-houses, and got it ready to launch. Perce took the
precaution to put on board some provisions, and selected from the piles
of driftwood a strip of board that would do to steer with.

Then the boat was shoved into the surf. The twins scrambled aboard and
took the oars, ready to pull the moment Perce gave the word.

“Now!” he cried; and, pushing the dory over the next wave, at the same
time he leaped into the stern.

The oars dipped and bent; he assisted with his strip of board; and the
skiff reared and pitched on the breakers, cheered by the ladies from the
boarding-house, who had hastened down to the beach to see them off.

The twins, having embarked in the adventure, were now almost as
enthusiastic as Perce himself. The wind was light, the morning sun
sparkled on the waves, and the dory went dashing over them as if rowed
for a race.

The tide had not yet fallen much, and the ocean swells broke in a field
of white foam completely over the “Calf’s” back, while the tail wagged
up and down. But the “Old Cow” was clear above the line of surf about
her flanks; and there, on the highest hummock, stood the castaway, now
more distinctly discernible as the distance between him and his rescuers
diminished.

The boys made many conjectures as to who he could be and what had become
of the wreck, no vestige of which could be seen.

“He has on a white yachting-cap!” exclaimed Perce; and that confirmed
them in the opinion that the Susette had gone to pieces on the ledge.
The castaway had ceased to wave the object which had first attracted
Perce’s attention, but every now and then he threw up both arms, as he
stood facing them on the solitary rock, and made encouraging signals.

The “Cow” and the “Calf” are much farther from the coast than they look
to be in clear weather. Perce took his turn at the oars, and all worked
heroically; yet it seemed a long while before they came within hail of
the Crusoe of that small rocky island.


CHAPTER XII.

ON THE “CALF’S” BACK.

Let us take advantage of this lapse of time to go back a little and see
what had become of Olly Burdeen.

The salt water and the barnacles told but too true a tale: he had been
thrown upon the lesser rock, which the next tide would submerge.

If he had still any doubt of that terrible fact, it must have been
dispelled when the moon rose amid broken clouds and showed him the
“Calf’s tail” churning the waves at the end of his surf-fringed reef;
also the glimmering back of the “Old Cow,” with its encircling surge, a
furlong or more to the south.

An old, sad moon it was, with a distorted, melancholy face peering above
the illimitable desolation of waters; yet a welcome sight to the drenched
and shivering castaway, waiting on his lonely ledge for the tide to
return and cover it. No wonder it appeared to him not the cheerful orb
he knew, but some ancient, decayed satellite coming to look for the last
time on a lost world!

After his long labor with his rude paddle, and the effort it had cost to
swim to the rock and scramble out upon it, he was nearly exhausted; and
the discovery of barnacles in the pool had quenched what remained of his
courage. There was no shelter from the wind; and in his wet clothes he
felt a deadly chill striking to his bones.

Then followed another discovery, which did not tend to restore his
spirits.

He had from the first given up the boat as lost. It had disappeared in
the dark and turbulent water almost as soon as he left it; nor could he
see anything of it afterward.

It was an old dory that had been hired for the season by one of Mrs.
Murcher’s boarders. Olly had taken that, too, without leave; but it was
the custom on the coast for people to make rather free use of any boats
that came in their way. With it had gone his sole means of escape from
certain death; otherwise he would have cared little for the loss.

In his fearful anxiety about his own safety, he had thought little
even of the safety of the watch. He hated the recollection of it; for,
probably, if it had not been for that, it might never have occurred to
him to row out from shore in order to get a sight of the returning yacht,
around the point.

After the moon rose, he looked across the tumbling billows at the “Old
Cow” wallowing in their froth, and felt that his salvation lay in
reaching that before the rising tide should sweep him from the “Calf.”
Yet, how was that possible? The very thought of swimming so far, alone in
the night, in the wild ocean, was frightful to him. Yet as a last resort
he might be driven to make so desperate an attempt.

As for the water, it could hardly seem colder than the wind that pierced
his drenched clothes. He no longer thought of any injury to them—the
stylish suit that had been a delight to his soul a few hours before! He
wept with despair as he thought of the joy that had turned to such bitter
woe; and he wished he had never seen the giver or his gift.

Salt water might ruin the watch; but, if so, that was probably ruined
already. At all events, it was past being returned to its case in Mr.
Hatville’s room, without that gentleman’s knowledge of its having been
removed.

Past, indeed! Thinking of it, Olly put up his hand to his pocket. It gave
him a start of fresh terror, even in his utter misery and wretchedness,
to find it empty.

The watch was gone! That was his last disheartening discovery.

How long it had been gone he had not the slightest means of knowing.
His teeth chattered, and he trembled from head to foot, as he hurriedly
searched his clothing for the timepiece, but in vain.

He at first believed that he had lost it in his struggle between the boat
and the ledge; for he remembered having looked down and seen the golden
glitter of the seal, not long after he went adrift. But now the moonlight
disclosed the seal still hanging by the hook in his button-hole. The
guard had been broken, and everything, excepting the seal and a few
dangling links, had gone with the watch.

He concluded that he must have lost it when he had his first tumble in
the boat. The oar, when it struck his breast, and flew from his hand, had
doubtless caught in the chain, and snatched the watch from his pocket.
Of course he couldn’t know that this was so; but if he had foreseen what
Perce Bucklin was to find on the beach a few hours later, he would have
argued that no watch could have been conveyed so far, in so short a time,
by waves or tide.

However it might have happened, it was hopelessly gone; and now, in his
enfeebled, frightened state, he began to consider how he should escape
the suspicion of having stolen it, if ever his body reached the shore
alive or dead.

“Nobody knows I had it,” he said miserably to himself. “And why should
anybody ever know?”

He unhooked what was left of the guard, and held it, with the seal, for a
moment in his shaking fingers, considering whether he should destroy that
evidence against him by flinging it into the sea.

But he could hardly make up his mind to cast away irrevocably what might
prove of value, should the watch and the rest of the guard be found.
That might still be possible, he reasoned; and, after a few minutes of
sickening doubt and hesitation, he put the shining trinkets into his
pocket. Even as he did so, he went about mechanically searching for what
he had hardly the faintest expectation of finding. Who that has ever lost
a prized object has not done the same?—looking again and again in places
where a superstitious hope whispers that it may be mysteriously lurking.

He felt sure that it could not, without his knowledge, have dropped from
his pocket when he had stooped over the pool to grope for barnacles; and
even if it had, the moonlight must show so bright an object shining in
the shallow bottom. Yet he explored it carefully with his hands, and went
back and explored it again, after examining other parts of the ledge.

But why be so anxious about the watch, when he was in despair of saving
his own life? He said that to himself, as he searched every crevice and
hollow of the slope where he had crawled out of the sea.

It was fortunate that he had something thus to engage his wretched
thoughts and benumbed hands. And a still better employment awaited him.

He had some time before he heard a strange thumping and grinding sound,
which he supposed must be caused by the motion of the “Calf’s tail.”

The hunt for the watch had kept him from investigating it. But now that
very search led him to make a different, but even more welcome discovery.

The side where he had landed was in shadow. As he followed it around,
just out of reach of the waves, he saw to his great joy something rising
and falling in the black seaweed that grew below the gray girdle of
barnacles, and bumping on the reef. It was his boat, which the wind had
blown against the little island, and lodged not far from the “Calf’s
tail.”

It was lying on its side, and a heave of the sea threw up the dark
gunwale into the moonlight that slanted across the surf-vexed end of
the island. As the wave drew back, sucking heavily along with it the
somber fringe of rockweed, Olly stepped cautiously down on this slippery
footing, and, seizing the rail of the dory, held it fast. Then with the
next swell he lifted the end upon the barnacled rocks and held it again,
while its heavy freight of water spilled out over the side into the sea.

Getting hold of the painter, he now had the boat safe, and, by a little
management, he was able to haul it higher up the slope and tip the rest
of the water out. The exertion warmed him, and success gave him new
courage.

True, he had no oars, and the thwart he had used for a paddle was lost.
But there was a second thwart which he could detach. The dory appeared
little the worse for the rough usage it had received, and he did not
doubt but it would prove seaworthy when it should become necessary for
him to intrust his life to it, in escaping from the rock.

That might be some time yet, for it was now low water. With the turning
of the tide, the wind might change or go down; and it would probably be
near daylight before the “Calf” would be submerged.

“The trouble will be,” he reflected, “to get the dory upon that highest
part.”

That was something more for him to do. He worked it along inch by inch,
pulling seaweed from the rocks to put under it in order to make it slide
easily over the barnacles.

But this device came near causing him a sad accident. Once, when he
released his hold of the boat to take breath after violently lifting, it
broke away from him and started back down the descent, which the seaweed
he had placed there made slippery. He sprang to seize the painter, which
was dragging on the rocks, but it pulled him after, and boy and boat
barely escaped plunging together into the brine.

As it was, though, he arrested its progress just as it struck a billow.
He was compelled once more to tip it over—for he had no other means of
getting the water out—and then to perform over again the labor of lifting
it up the ledge.

But this was, perhaps, a fortunate accident, since it kept him in
exercise until he felt that his clothes were getting dry. And it showed
him, besides, the danger that would attend the final launching of the
dory.

(_To be continued._)




REGATTA.

A GAME FOR THE LAWN OR PARLOR.

BY FRANK BELLEW.


Perhaps you have never heard of a yacht-race ashore, yet that term might
almost be applied to this picturesque game, which will be found not only
exciting, but a source of great fun. It can be played out-of-doors on the
lawn or in a large room.

Two players are required for each “yacht”—the “captain,” who directs the
course of the vessel, and the “crew,” who carries the boat in his cap or
“helmet,” and obeys the orders of the captain.

To play the game, it is first necessary to lay out the “course” on the
lawn or the floor, which represents the sheet of water that is to be
the scene of the regatta. Any convenient objects can be taken for the
“stake-boats” and “turning-buoy,” and the course can be made as difficult
as desired by placing obstacles, such as chairs, boxes, or cushions, in
the way, to represent “rocks,” “reefs,” “shoals,” and “islands.” The
crews that are to compete are first allowed to sail over the course
to inspect it, and are then drawn up in line at the start, where each
puts on his “yacht-rig,” and is carefully blindfolded by the captain of
a rival yacht. At the “first gun,” or signal to make ready, each crew
turns around three times. At the “second gun,” or signal to start, they
all proceed, under command of their respective captains, to go over the
course, keeping always in “deep water” and avoiding the reefs and other
obstacles, around the turning-buoy, and back to the starting-point. The
yacht which is the first to come in wins the race.

A captain must always address his crew by the name of his yacht, and must
give his orders in nautical terms. If he fail to do so, his yacht must
stop, and turn once around before going on. The same penalty is exacted
if the crew does not understand an order and asks for an explanation; and
also whenever, through the unskillful management of the captain or the
poor sailing of the crew, the yacht runs into any of the obstacles or
into one of the other yachts.

Of course, unless the players know how to sail real boats, the orders
will often be very ridiculous; but as long as they are given in nautical
language, and the crew understands what they mean, it makes no
difference, except to add to the fun.

For instance, let us imagine the Genesta to be racing the Puritan. The
orders might sound something like this:

“Steady, Genesta, steady!” from the captain of the English cutter.

“Keep her off about two points to starboard, Puritan—steady!” from the
American skipper.

But such a command as “Hard a-port, Genesta—no, no, the other way, you
goose!” would compel the captain of that craft to stop his yacht and make
it turn once around; while, if on receiving the order, “Shake out a reef,
Puritan, and head her nor’-nor’east!” the crew should ask, “Oh, I say,
Billy, what do you mean by ‘shake out a reef’?” or “‘Which direction is
nor’-nor’east’?” then the Puritan would have to stop and turn around. And
if the captain of the Genesta, wishing to take advantage of his rival’s
set-back, should exclaim, “Now, Sam, let her go!” the English boat would
have to pay the same penalty.

Many modifications of this game will naturally suggest themselves to
those who understand sailing. The sport can be made much more difficult
and interesting by supposing the wind to blow directly up the course, so
that the yachts will have to beat down to the turning-buoy and then come
home before the wind. When the game is played out-of-doors and there is a
breeze blowing, a great deal of skill and ingenuity can be exercised in
keeping the yachts in the courses they would have to take if they were
actually propelled by the wind.

The nattiest yacht-rig is made of a square piece of cardboard that will
go just around the head of the crew. The two edges are then stitched
together to form a “helmet,” like a high hat without crown or brim. Two
notches should be cut in the top of the helmet, as shown in Fig. 1, to
receive the hull of a small toy yacht, such as can be bought cheaply at
any toy shop. The yacht is held in place by lashings passing through
holes made in the helmet. Strings should be fastened to the sides of the
helmet to tie under the chin, and a curtain of some thick, close material
may be sewed on in front, as a blindfold. The cardboard should be colored
blue to represent waves; but the curtain, flags, and strings should be of
some distinctive tint, so that each vessel can sail under its own colors.

A simpler form of yacht-rig (Fig. 2) consists of a roll of cloth about
twenty inches long, the ends of which are sewed together, forming a
ring-shaped pad to rest upon the head. The yacht, a home-made affair,
cut out of a shingle or a piece of board, is fastened upon the pad. This
helmet also has the blindfold, and strings to tie under the chin. A third
style of helmet (Fig. 3) was once formed by scooping out the end of a
watermelon to fit the crew’s head, and rigging it up with a twig mast
and a brown-paper sail. It was cheap, ingenious, and uncomfortable, and
is not recommended. There is a fourth and entirely different rig, which
consists in fastening the sails directly to the crew’s body. (See Fig.
4.) The spars—boom, sprit, and bowsprit—are of wood, shaped as in A,
and are fastened to the body by strings run through holes in the broad
ends. The sails should be attached to the spars as in real boats. A small
flagstaff in the front of the cap bears the pennant, and completes the
rig.

[Illustration]

For the benefit of those who are not familiar with sea terms, a few of
the more common directions used in this game of Regatta are here given
with their explanations:

“Port” means the left side of the yacht. “Starboard” means the right
side. To “luff” means to bring the yacht so that it will point more
toward the direction from which the wind is blowing. To “luff a-lee” is
to point the yacht directly at the wind, in the “wind’s eye.” To “tack”
is to change the course of the yacht so that it receives the wind on the
other side. The maneuver is accomplished by “luffing a-lee,” and keeping
on until the yacht presents its other side to the wind. To “fall off” is
the opposite of to “luff.” Experienced yachtsmen will know and use many
other terms, but these are sufficient for conducting a game. Stories and
books about the sea will suggest other useful words, and any one who
plays the game often will soon gain an ample vocabulary.




[Illustration: THE SEA-URCHIN]

      There once was an Untaught Sea-Urchin,
    Who said that for years he’d been searchin’
          For a place in the sea
          Where he quiet could be,
    For the waves kept him pitchin’ and lurchin’.




A NEW THEORY.

BY BESSIE CHANDLER.


    At the telegraph poles Grace was looking,
      When she solemnly said: “I think
    Those little glass things are the bottles
      That hold all the telegraph ink.”




WORK AND PLAY FOR YOUNG FOLK.—XV.

A ROPE YARN SPUN BY AN OLD SAILOR.

BY C. W. MILLER.


There are many things you boys can do with a rope, if you only know how.
Let an old sailor spin you a “yarn” or two.


I. SPLICES.

If you wish to put up a swing, to make a lasso, to fasten a rope to your
sled, or if you live on a farm and desire to make a halter or a hay-rope,
you should know how to make an “eye-splice.”

The tools you will need are a hammer and a marline-spike. A sailor’s
marline-spike is made of iron, and is about six inches long, like that in
Fig. 1; but you can easily whittle from a bit of any hard wood a peg that
will answer the purpose of a marline-spike.

To begin the splice, take a small rope, like a clothes-line (if possible,
a new one in which the strands are unworn), and first untwist, or, as we
sailors say, unlay, about four inches of it. Then wind thread tightly
around the end of each strand to keep it in shape. Next bend the rope
around into a loop of any size desired, letting the loose strands or
cords cross on the upper side and project beyond the rope. Be sure that,
as you hold the loop toward you, the rope bends toward the right.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.—MARLINE-SPIKE AND EYE-SPLICE.]

At the point of crossing, twist the solid or “standing” part of the
rope the wrong way, so as to open it a little, and thrust the spike in
between the strands, pushing it in until the strands are well apart. Now
draw the spike out and put the end of the first loose strand into the
enlarged opening. To do this easily you should insert the spike with its
point toward the loose ends, so that, as you draw it out, you can follow
it closely with the first end before the separated strands close. Draw
the end up tight, as shown in the cut. Then take the spike and separate
the next strand in the rope from the others, and insert the second loose
end in the same way, and similarly place the third end under the third
strand of the rope. At this stage, your splice will look like Fig. 1, and
a little study of that diagram will show you, better than I can tell you,
just how to insert the strands.

Continue the work, by passing the first end over one strand and under the
next, and do the same with the second and third ends.

When each end has been woven in twice, take off the thread from the ends
and cut about a third from the under side of each one, making it that
much thinner than before. Bind the ends again with the thread, and weave
each one under another strand of the rope. Again take off the thread and
cut off half of what remains from the under side of each of the loose
ends; replace the thread, weave under again, draw each end up tightly,
and cut it off close to the rope. If you have carefully followed the
directions, each end will pass over and under the strands alternately,
and no two ends next each other will pass under the same strand.

You must always remember, in working with a rope, to twist every strand
hard and tight, and to draw it snugly to place. And in making a splice,
the rope should be pounded frequently with the hammer or a piece of wood,
and rolled back and forth under your foot. This operation makes the
strands sink into one another and look smooth and even.

Another splice, quite as useful as the one just described, is that
by which the ends of two ropes are joined so firmly that they form
one continuous rope. There are two forms of it, one called the “short
splice,” and the other the “long splice.”

The short splice, is more often used, because it is quickly made, it
does not waste much of the rope, and it is nearly as strong as the
long splice. There is one objection to it: It makes part of the rope
somewhat larger than the rest, so that it can not be run through a narrow
pulley-block. The long splice, on the other hand, though using much more
material, may be made without increasing the size of the rope at any
point, and is, in fact, somewhat stronger.

To make the short splice, first untwist about eight inches of each of the
two ends you wish to join, and bring them together in such a way that the
ends of the untwisted parts are squarely and closely against each other
as though they were one rope, while the six loose strands stand out all
around, each one of the right-hand strands being between two of those on
the left hand, or interlocked.

Now what you are to do is to weave the loosened strands of the right-hand
rope into the untwisted rope of the left side, and the loosened strands
of that rope into the solid part of the right-hand rope. To hold the two
ends in place while you work, begin by drawing all three of the left-hand
strands down over the right-hand rope, and tie them there with a piece of
cord.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.—A SHORT SPLICE.]

Now weave the three loose strands into the solid rope by the help of the
spike, just as you did in making the eye-splice. When you have finished
this side, untie the twine and weave the loose strands into the left-hand
rope in the same manner. The directions given for making the eye-splice
apply also to this splice. It must be well pounded and twisted back and
forth until the ends work into the strands and it is smooth and firm; and
this splice, too, will look better if part of the rope-yarns are cut off
before weaving in the last time, but if you are not particular you may
cut the ends off just as they are left in Fig. 2. To help you to see how
the ends go under and over the strands of the rope, each one is marked in
Fig. 2 with a different line of dots and dashes, and, by following any
one line, you will learn exactly where that one strand passes in and out.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.—A LONG SPLICE, FIRST STAGE.]

The long splice, though a little more trouble than the short splice,
makes a much neater joining. For this splice, you must untwist three feet
of one end of each rope and bring the two closely together as in making
a short splice, with the loose ends interlocked. Next take one of the
strands of the right-hand side and untwist it, or separate it from the
rope an inch or two, and into the space it leaves vacant “lay” one of the
loose ends from the other side. (By “laying” I mean twisting the strand
tightly and pressing it into place.) Go on in this way, untwisting the
strand from one side and laying in its place the strand from the other
side, until the latter has only about eight inches free, while the one
you have been untwisting has nearly six feet free. What you have now
done is merely replacing a strand belonging to one rope by a strand from
the other. Do the same thing on the other side; that is, untwist one of
the strands of the left-hand rope and twist into its place a loose strand
from the right-hand rope. When you have done this, your splice will look
like Fig. 3, the six untwisted strands ending in pairs in three places.
The pair in the middle will be three feet long each; while at the ends
there will be one long and one short strand, although, as seen in Fig. 3,
they all must be cut off short for the next operation.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.—A LONG SPLICE FINISHED.]

This consists in weaving the ends in, and it is done by forcing the spike
under the strand next to the end you wish to weave in, passing the end
through the opening, then over the next strand, and under the third,
which you have opened in the same way. Now cut off a portion from the
under side of the strand, pass it over and under once more, and cut off
closely. Repeat this with the second strand of the pair, and your joining
will look like Fig. 4, which represents a long splice finished. This
figure, of course, shows only one woven-in end, the other being on the
opposite side.

Having thus disposed of one pair of the loose ends, treat the other two
pairs in the same way. Notice that the strands are nowhere turned back on
themselves, but that they always work on in the same way they started;
that is, those which turned out from the middle turn out to the end,
while those that turned toward the middle (or those you untwisted to make
place for the others) still turn toward the center, as they began.


II. SENNIT, OR BRAID.

The first thing a boy learns when he goes to sea is to make braid, or,
in sailors’ talk, “sennit,” and I think land boys will find it very
convenient to know a few of the different kinds in use. All boys wish
to make whip-lashes or to swing hammocks; and for those of you who own
sail-boats, or even row-boats, there are endless uses for these braids.
Fenders to protect the sides of boats from injury are best made from a
short, thick piece of sennit; and many boats have a guard, made of about
seven large strands, like Fig. 5, running all around just under the
gunwale.

[Illustration: FIG 5.—THE SIMPLEST KIND OF SENNIT.]

On a ship these braids are used to wrap around parts of the rigging,
to keep them from chafing, so they are called “chafing-gear.” And the
sailors make it by the barrelful, so that it will be on hand when needed.

In beginning a braid, tie a string around one end of the strands and
fasten it to any convenient object, such as a hook in the wall or a
door-knob, in order to keep the braid taut, as it is very important to
draw the strands up snug and even every time. The simplest kind of sennit
may be made of any uneven number of strands. It is shown in Fig. 5.

To begin, take five strands and separate them, holding three in the right
hand and two in the left. First take the outside strand of the three in
the right hand, pass it over the two next it, and lay it inside the two
in the left hand. Now you have three in the left hand. Then take the
outside strand of the three in the left hand, pass it over the two next
it, and lay it inside of the two in the right hand. So you go on, always
taking the outside strand from the side which has three together, passing
it over its two neighbors, and laying it inside the two in the other
hand. It is very easy, you see, and you will soon have a piece like that
in the figure, in which the outside strand from the left side has just
been laid over inside of the right. You can make this kind of braid of
any uneven number of strands, and the only rule is always to bring the
one from the outside of the greater number over all its neighbors to the
inside of the smaller number.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.—A ROUND SENNIT.]

To make a whip-lash, you should try a braid like that shown in Fig. 6,
which is a round sennit. The one in the drawing is made of large round
strands to show the braid better; but for a lash you should take flat
strips of leather, and taper them to make your lash the proper shape.

This braid is made of four strands. Take two in each hand, pass the
outside strand in the right hand under its neighbor and also under the
inside strand in the left hand. Bring it up between the two in the left,
and lay it over the inside strand next to it, placing it at last beside
the one strand in the right hand, only inside of it instead of outside,
where it was first. Do the same with the outside strand of the left hand;
that is, pass it under the one next to it and the inside one of the
right hand, bringing it up between the two in the right, turning it over
the inside one, and laying it next to the one remaining in the left hand,
on the inside. Keep on doing this and you will notice that the same two
strands always stay in the same hand, but each turn of one interlocks it
through the two in the other hand.

In Fig. 6 the outside strand on the right side has just been passed under
and up between the two on the left side, over the inside one of the left
and beside the strand on the right.

This method of braiding is pretty to use in covering many things, round,
square, or tapering. Even a turned vase and many articles of varying
shape may be covered by it. Where the object is wide the strands cross
each other at a wide angle, and where narrow, run more nearly parallel to
the object, but in every case it is covered. Some very pretty things are
made with this braid.

For a flat braid, which, when made of rope-yarns or cord, is very nice
for a dog or goat harness, you will need the “French” sennit shown in
Fig. 7. At sea, it is sometimes made eight or ten inches wide, and half
an inch thick; but you will not need it so heavy. To begin, take nine
strands as in the figure, though it may be made of any other number.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.—THE FRENCH SENNIT.]

First spread the strands out flat, take the middle one (in this case,
No. 5), bend it to the right and over No. 4, which is bent to the left.
Take No. 6, bend it to the right, and under No. 4. Take No. 3, bend it to
the left, over No. 5, and under No. 6. Take No. 7, bend it to the right,
over No. 4, and under No. 3. Take No. 2, bend to the left, under No. 5,
over No. 6, and under No. 7. Continue in this way until all the strands
are in. Then take No. 5, which, you remember, was bent to the right, and
now occupies the outside place on that side, bend it up and over No. 6,
which is next it, and then braid it in alternately over and under just
as before. Braid in the outside strand from the left side in the same
manner. Go on in this way, and the braid will look like Fig. 7. So many
directions make it seem hard; but when you try it with the figure before
you, you will find it very easy. If the braid is made from an even number
of strands, as in Fig. 8, the strands will begin on both sides by turning
over; but if the number is uneven, as in Fig. 7, the strands on one side
will begin by turning under.

Be careful to draw the strands even and snug. This braid has one great
advantage over others. It may be split into two or more narrower braids,
as you see in Fig. 8, and afterward braided together again, leaving an
open loop, or a sort of button-hole. A glance at Fig. 8 will show you
just how this is accomplished, and that it is an easy task.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

In a navy hammock, the cords which support the body are woven into a flat
braid which starts with two or three strands and has the others gradually
woven in, two at a time, one on each side. This finishes it off very
neatly, and keeps the cords from tangling, and is a great improvement
on simply putting the cords through the ring, which has a bungling
appearance, as they are generally in a snarl. This braid may be more
easily made by “putting the cart before the horse”; that is, by beginning
at what is apparently the wrong end. Take the cords double length, and
draw them all through the ring, until half the length is on each side.
There will be twice as many strands as you had cords. Begin a flat braid,
as in Fig. 8, until all the strands are woven in. If there are twelve,
you then leave out the outside strand on each side and continue the braid
with ten; leave out two again, and continue with the middle eight; and so
on until you have but two left. Tie these firmly together, and the braid
will not work loose.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

The queer-looking flat open-work braid shown in Fig. 9 is much used at
sea, but it is hard to make of anything but tarred hemp rope-yarns,
because it always inclines to loosen. The tarred rope does not slip like
ordinary cord. In this braid, the strands do not cross the braid, but
each one simply locks into its neighbor. To make it, you twist the first
strand around the second, the second around the third, the third around
the fourth, and so on across the braid. In the figure, the first has been
twisted around the second, and the second is ready to twist around the
third.

These braids can be easily learned by following the descriptions, and by
referring to the cuts. Girls may use them in many ways; that shown in
Fig. 5 is pretty for the hair. But I need not point out the various uses
to which they may be put, for I am sure you all will discover them for
yourselves.


III. THE “MADERWOCKER.”

This object bears no relation to the famous Jabberwock; in fact, it is
simply a knot in common use among sailors; and the mysterious-sounding
name is merely a very bad way of pronouncing “Matthew Walker.” Matthew
Walker was an inventor, and, though his name has become gibberish, his
knot is as good as ever, and is a very useful one. Whenever a rope is put
through a hole and held by a knot, there is the place for a maderwocker,
one that is not clumsy, will hold fast, and never loosen. The boys can
use it on sled-ropes, swings, rope handles to boxes, and in many other
places.

[Illustration: FIG 10.—A SINGLE MADERWOCKER.]

To make it you must first untwist, or unlay, about six inches of one end
of the rope, and tie a string firmly around it where the knot is to be.
Now, hold the rope in your left hand with the untwisted ends standing up,
take one strand and bend it downward and around the second. Do not draw
it tight, but leave a loop. Next bend the second strand around the third,
and the third around the first, bringing the third one up through the
loop left in the first. Draw all the ends tight and snug, and the knot
will look like Fig. 10, which is a “single maderwocker,” or “single wall.”

[Illustration: FIG. 11.—A CROWN.]

If this knot is not enough you may put a “crown” on it. Bend down the
first end and leave a loop; bend the second over the first, the third
over the second, and put the end through the loop left in the first. Draw
all the ends down snug and cut them off, and you will have a neat and
strong knot like Fig. 11. Perhaps you will understand this crown better
by looking at the end of the braid, Fig. 13.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.—A DOUBLE MADERWOCKER.]

A “double maderwocker,” or “double wall,” is a variety of this knot, made
in the same way, excepting that each strand passes around two others,
instead of one, as in the single maderwocker. Thus, the first strand is
bent down and around the second and third, the second around the third
and first, and up through the loop of the first; the third around the
first and second, and up through the loop of the second, which also has
been left a little loose. Draw all snug and you have a larger knot than
the single one. (See Fig. 12.) You can finish it either by putting a
“crown” on it, as described before, or by binding the strands close to
the knot and cutting off the ends.

[Illustration: FIG. 13]

A series of crowns makes a very pretty and useful round braid like Fig.
13. The one represented has but four strands, though you will notice
that it looks as if it had eight. Any number of strands may be used for
this, and it will always appear to have double the number it really has.
To make it look even and smooth, you must always bend the strands down
in the same way; that is, always bend them to the right or always to the
left. Girls will find this pretty cord convenient for many things; made
of fine silk braid, it is nice to hang a fan from the belt, or for other
purposes. Made of heavier materials, boys, I am sure, will find use for
it.




THE SAILOR BOY.

BY WALLACE E. MATHER.

[Illustration]


    I knew a little youngster
    Who would a sailor be;
    He did not care for top or ball,
    For marbles, kites, or trinkets small,—
    He did not care for these at all,
    For he would go to sea.

    The things he really cared for
    Were queer things such as these:
    Odd knots of rope, and bits of string,
    A marline-spike, a hammock ring,
    India ink, or anything
    That might a sailor please.

    He liked to read of voyages,
    And navigators’ lore.
    “And I can tell you how,” he said,
    “To make a splice or a ‘Turk’s head,’
    To hold the reel, or heave the lead,
    And—oh! a great deal more.”

    And if perchance you missed him,
    When others were at play,
    You’d find him stowed in some odd nook,
    Off cruising in his sailor book
    With Frobisher or Captain Cook,
    In regions far away.

    He has not gone from home as yet,
    To ship before the mast;
    But only wait and you shall see—
    Sailors are made from such as he;
    I’m very sure that he will be
    An Admiral at last.




[Illustration]

        “Hi! Yi! What’s the matter with you?”
        “My! My! There’s a frog in my shoe!
        I just took ’em off to paddle, you know,
        In the beautiful lake where the pond lilies grow,
        And when I turned ’round, that frog, don’t you see?
    Sat up in my shoe and made faces at me.
      My! My! Oh, what shall I do?”
        “BLUP!” said the frog—and jumped out of the shoe.




[Illustration: “DO _YOU_ LIKE BUTTER, BOSSY?”]




JACK-IN-THE-PULPIT.

[Illustration]


Try not to mind it, dearly beloveds. It is merely “the sensation caused
by caloric, or the principle of heat, in excess; the bodily feeling
experienced on exposure to the sun’s rays; the reverse of _cold_.” What
is there to grumble about in so simple a thing as that? And yet that is
all that makes these sunny days uncomfortable. Just fan yourselves with
that fact, my dears. I’m assured you have the highest authority for it—a
big, wise book named Webster.

And now that your thoughts are cooled and refreshed, you’re ready for
this communication which the Little School-ma’am wishes to lay before you.


LONGFELLOW’S FIRST LETTER.

MY DEAR LITTLE SCHOOL-MA’AM: My mamma has found in a new book (the “Life
of Henry W. Longfellow,” edited by his brother Samuel), a copy of the
very first letter ever written by the poet. We reckoned his age, and
found that he was six years and eleven months old when he wrote it. It
interested my brother Kit and me so much that Mother said we could copy
it for you to show the ST. NICHOLAS boys and girls. I think it was very
nice in him to put his sister Ann in first, and Kit says I ought to
explain that a billet was sometimes good to get.

This is the letter:

                                                    “PORTLAND, 1814.

    “DEAR PAPA,—Ann wants a little Bible like little Betsey’s. Will
    you please buy her one, if you can find any in Boston. I have
    been to school all the week, and got only seven marks. I shall
    have a billet on Monday. I wish you to buy me a drum.

                                              “HENRY W. LONGFELLOW.”

As some one may wish you to tell whether Henry got the drum or not, I
think I’ll copy next a part of the father’s answer to the letter. He was
in Boston at the time, and he wrote:

    ... “I have found a very pretty drum, with an eagle painted
    on it, but the man asks two dollars for it; and they do not
    let any vessels go from Boston to Portland now. But if I can
    find any opportunity to send it down, I shall buy it. And if
    I cannot, I shall buy something else which will please you
    as well. I am glad to hear that you have been a good boy at
    school, and are likely to get a billet. You must save all your
    billets till I get home.” ...

P. S.—What do you think my father says? He says Henry’s letter was pretty
hard on Boston.

                     Your little friend and admirer,

                                                              DOROTHY G——.


THE WATER-SNAKE AS A FISHERMAN.

DEAR JACK: I once had some tame fish in a lake at the foot of my
garden,—or, rather, some fish that came every afternoon about five
o’clock to be fed. My children were in the habit of taking bread daily
and throwing it into the lake for them to eat. The fish became so tame
that they would eat out of our hands, and when a foot-fall was heard
coming down the terrace that leads into the small flower-garden by the
lakeside, the fish would rush through the water by hundreds, expecting
their food. They were of many kinds,—from the large catfish, or bullpout,
weighing three or four pounds, to the small minnow.

Once, while I was feeding them from my hand, a water-snake suddenly
caught one of the fish by the head, and, as a snake always must do after
catching his prey under water, he held the fish up out of the water for a
moment while he took breath. I instantly caught the fish, and attempted
to pull it out of the snake’s mouth, but the snake as quickly twisted his
tail around a root under the water and resisted my attempt to deprive
him of his expected dinner. With all the strength I could exert, I could
neither pull the fish out of the snake’s mouth nor tear loose his hold
upon the root.

While I continued to pull, I very soon found that the snake was beginning
to swallow the fish, and was visibly sucking it in. Notwithstanding all
my efforts to wrench it from his grasp, the fish gradually disappeared
into the snake’s mouth until I felt my thumb and finger touch against the
jaws of the reptile, and even then they were irresistibly pushed back
until my grasp was only upon the tip end of the fish’s tail. Then the
snake, with a sudden jerk, pulled it quite out of my hand and swam away.
I was defeated, and the snake had gained the victory.

                              Yours truly,

                                                                 H. E. S.


MORE ANIMAL WEATHER-PROPHETS.

It never rains but it pours! as I’ve often heard the Deacon say. We
have lately been discussing the habits of some animal weather-prophets,
but we have considered them one at a time. Now, lo and behold!—my young
friend Ida G. Egerton sends me this letter and a newspaper extract, which
describes a long list of such weather-prophets.

                                                    BOONVILLE, N. Y.

    DEAR JACK: Seeing your readers are interested in living
    barometers, I thought I would send you this paper. From

                                                     IDA G. EGERTON.

    “I do not know of any surer way of predicting the changes in
    the weather, says a correspondent, than by observing the habits
    of the snail. They do not drink, but they imbibe moisture
    during a rain, and exude it afterward. The snail is never seen
    abroad except before a rain, when you will see it climbing the
    bark of trees and getting on the leaves. The tree-snail, as it
    is called, two days before rain, will climb up the stems of
    plants, and if the rain is going to be a hard and long one, it
    gets on the sheltered side of a leaf, but if a short rain, on
    the outside. Then there are other species that before a rain
    are yellow in color, and after rain blue.

    “Take the ants, too; have you ever noticed the activity they
    display before a storm—hurry, scurry, rushing hither and yon,
    as if they were letter-carriers making six trips a day, or
    expressmen behind time? Dogs grow sleepy and dull, and like
    to lie before a fire, as rain approaches; chickens pick up
    pebbles, fowls roll in the dust, flies sting and bite more
    viciously, frogs croak more clamorously, gnats assemble under
    trees, and horses display restlessness.

    “When you see a swan flying before the wind, spiders crowding
    on a wall, toads coming out of their holes in unusual
    numbers in the evening, worms, slugs, and snails appearing,
    robin-redbreasts pecking at the windows, pigeons coming to
    the dovecotes earlier than usual, peacocks squalling at
    night, mice squeaking, or geese washing, you can put them
    down as rain-signs. Nearly all the animals have some way of
    telling the weather in advance. It may be that the altered
    condition of the atmosphere with regard to electricity, which
    generally accompanies changes of the weather, makes them feel
    disagreeable or pleasant. The fact that a cat licks herself
    before a storm is urged by some naturalists as proof of the
    special influences of electricity. Man is not so sensitive. Yet
    many persons feel listless before a storm, to say nothing of
    aggravated headaches, toothaches, and rheumatic pains.”

It appears, from this, that even boys and girls may sometimes be classed
among the animal weather-prophets. But, as they seem to have a rather
painful way of indicating storms, I hope none of you excel in prophesying.


A USEFUL BIRD WITH AN ARISTOCRATIC NAME.

                                                        WARWARSING, N. Y.

DEAR JACK: We were lately much interested in watching a family of
Baltimore orioles that lived in a nest in a tree near our house. There
were several young birds in the nest, that kept their father and mother
busy all day long feeding them. The nest was rather small for its
inmates, and some time ago a little bird fell out. Though the nest is
about fifteen feet above the ground, it did not hurt itself. We saw it
fall, and put it on a small tree near by, where its mother could see it.
Afterward I climbed a ladder and put it in the nest. Then the mother bird
arrived and hunted all over the small tree, trying to find it and give it
something to eat, and seemed very anxious about it. It was a very pretty
sight to watch her.

This oriole’s nest has been in the tree for some years. It hangs from
one of the highest limbs, to which it is fastened by strong cords made
from the material of which the nest is built. We are glad to have orioles
about, for they feed the young birds with insects injurious to the garden
and orchard. Insects seem to be their principal food; and I have seen
them eat hornet’s eggs.

The name “oriole” is from the old French “oriol,” which is derived from
the Latin “aureolus,” meaning golden. They are sometimes called “golden
robins.” The orchard oriole, which we occasionally see, is of a pure
yellow color, with stripes of black on its back, and is about the size
of a canary-bird. The colors of the Baltimore oriole are orange and
black. They are so called because orange and black were the colors of the
coat of arms of Lord Baltimore, who was Governor of Maryland under King
Charles I.

                              Respectfully,

                                                      NORMAN T. SAUNDERS.


A WISE HUMMING-BIRD.

Wisdom does not depend on size, as you all know, my dears. The ant and
the bee, in fact, often seem to know more than some of the largest
animals. The humming-bird, too, though the smallest of birds, is not
lacking in intelligence. A friend of the Deacon tells a pleasant little
story of one that was trying to secure the honey from a flower with a
deep cup, and at the same time was plainly very tired. The flower grew
near a porch where a family was sitting, and seeing the trouble of the
bird, a young girl walked slowly toward him, holding out her finger. The
tired bird looked sharply at her and then accepted the offered perch,
alighted on the finger, and, when it was held close to the flower,
returned to his work of honey-gathering. The girl stood quietly, and he
used her finger as a resting-place till he had finished his meal, when he
flew away home. A wise humming-bird that, say I,—and a wise girl, too.


THE PITCHER PLANT.

You were lately told in ST. NICHOLAS, I hear, about a curious lace-leaf
that grows in a far-off corner of the world called Madagascar. Well, the
Little School-ma’am asks me to show you now this picture of another queer
plant, which, she says, is a near neighbor to the lace-leaf, for it is
found in the marshes along the coast of Madagascar, and it is known as
the pitcher plant.

[Illustration]

At the end of each leaf, which narrows to a mere stalk at the tip,
it carries a little vegetable vase very like a pitcher with lid and
all complete. And this curious cup is indeed a pitcher, given to the
plant for the express purpose of keeping its leaves well supplied with
moisture; for travelers report that they have frequently found quite a
quantity of water in those queer little natural cups. Besides, they have
big ears, so of course they’re little pitchers.

The Deacon says that, according to all accounts, Madagascar must be a
sort of palace of the vegetable kingdom.




[Illustration: The Agassiz Association

SIXTY-FOURTH REPORT.]


A FINAL WORD ABOUT THE BADGE.

Since Mr. Hayward went out of business, Mr. N. M. Shepard, 85 Nassau
street, N. Y., has consented to succeed him as our badge-manufacturer.

He is quite enthusiastic in the matter, and has designed some very pretty
badges, which seem to us a decided improvement upon the styles shown in
the hand-book. The scarf-pin and lace-pin are most attractive, because
least noticeable,—which is a paradox.

For further information communicate with Mr. Shepard, whose address is
given above.


A FRIENDLY WORD FROM PRINCE KRAPOTKINE.

It is a pleasant thought that even those men whose personal experience of
sorrow has led them to take dark views of life in general can find in our
Association something worthy their commendation—something to be built up,
rather than destroyed. Would that we could extend our brotherly influence
as widely as Prince Krapotkine suggests in the following extract from
his article, “What Geography Ought To Be,” published in “The Nineteenth
Century” for December, 1885:

    “Another feature to be introduced in our schools ought to
    be mentioned here. I mean the exchange, between schools,
    of correspondence on geographical subjects and of their
    natural science collections. This feature, already introduced
    in several schools of the United States by the ‘Agassiz
    Association,’ can not be too warmly advocated. It is not
    enough to collect specimens of rocks, plants, and animals from
    its own limited regions. Each village school ought to have
    collections from everywhere; not only from all parts of its own
    country, but from Australia and Java, Siberia and the Argentine
    Republic. It can not purchase them, but it may have them—it can
    have them in exchange for its own collections, from schools
    scattered everywhere on the surface of the globe.

    “Such is the great idea which presided at the creation of the
    ‘Agassiz Association’—an organization which has already seven
    thousand members and six hundred ‘Chapters,’ or sections.[5]
    The members of this Association are accustomed to study
    natural sciences in the field, amid nature itself; but they
    do not keep their treasures to themselves. They write to
    other branches of the Association; they exchange with them
    their observations, their ideas, their specimens of minerals,
    plants, and animals. They write about the scenery of Canada to
    friends in Texas. Their Swiss friends (for something similar
    exists also in Switzerland) send them the _Edelweiss_ of the
    Alps, and their English friends instruct them in the geology
    of England. Shall I add that in proportion as the existence of
    the Association becomes known, specialists, professors, and
    _amateur_-naturalists hasten to offer their services to their
    young friends for lecturing before them, for determining their
    specimens, or for climbing with them on the hills in geological
    and botanical excursions?... Is it necessary to insist on the
    benefits of the ‘Agassiz Association,’ or to show how it ought
    to be extended? The greatness of the idea of establishing a
    lively connection between all schools of the Earth is too
    clear. Everybody knows that it is sufficient to have a friend
    in a foreign country—be it Moscow or Java—to begin to take
    some interest in that country. A newspaper paragraph entitled
    ‘Moscow’ or ‘Java’ will thereafter attract his attention,—the
    more so if he is in a lively intercourse with his friend, if
    both pursue the same work and communicate to one another the
    results of their studies and explorations. More than that: Let
    English children be in a continuous exchange of correspondence,
    collections, and thoughts with Russian children, and you may be
    sure that after some time neither English nor Russians will so
    readily grasp at guns for settling their misunderstandings. The
    ‘Agassiz Association’ has a brilliant future; similar ones will
    surely extend all over the world.”

[5] “Hand-book of the Agassiz Association,” by Harlan H. Ballard. Lenox,
Mass., 1884.


DELAYED REPORTS.

455, _Bedford, Pa._ Each member has his own cabinet. Our time has not
been wasted by any means. It will not be long before we recommence our
collecting expeditions and picnics.—W. C. Langdon, Jr., Sec.

447, _Chittenango, N.Y._ We have a very good collection, including rare
insects. We intend soon to visit the Indian mound near Manlius, where we
hope to make various additions to our collection. We shall raise 1000
silk-worms for study this summer.—C. A. Jenkins, Sec.

490, _New York_ (_N_). The year has been the most successful of our
existence. We stand to-day strong in numbers, interest, and enthusiasm.
We have held meetings steadily twice a month, and these have been
enthusiastic and well attended. Our good friend, Professor J. D. Hyatt,
has lectured for us, illustrating each lecture by blackboard diagrams
and also by his powerful microscope. We have started a library, and a
number of interesting and valuable books have been presented to us. We
have issued a little paper called the “Naturalist’s Journal.” Our cabinet
is assuming gigantic proportions, and embraces specimens in all lines of
natural history, properly arranged and classified. We have a tabulated
list of subjects and speakers for our meetings arranged for the next
three months. These are nicely printed, together with names of officers,
time of meeting, rules, and constitution, so that each member can have
a copy for his own reference, and also to distribute to his friends.
We have also made arrangements for excursions and field-meetings. We
are encouraged and inspired by the past, and enter upon the future with
bright anticipations for still greater success. May that success crown
the efforts of all our Chapters!—Cephas B. Fox, Secretary.


REPORTS FROM THE SIXTH CENTURY.

527, _San Francisco_ (_G_). One of our young men has made an excellent
induction-coil and other apparatus which we find useful in experimenting.
Our work, as members of the A. A., has been very satisfactory and
instructive.—Henry Rhine, Secretary.

539, _Philadelphia_ (_P_). We started in October, ’83, with ten members,
and we now have thirty-two. We have held 100 regular and two special
meetings. Six lectures have been delivered to the Chapter by as many
lecturers. Our present plan of working is this: The Chapter is divided
into three classes, zoölogy, botany, and mineralogy and geology. A member
may join all the classes if he chooses, but must join at least one. Each
class elects its own chairman. At four successive meetings, zoölogy is
studied. The next four meetings are botanical. We conduct a journal, not
printed, but written in a book, and read by the editor. Each member, in
turn, is appointed to contribute an article to this journal. Our finances
are in good condition, and in our next report I hope you will find an
account of a permanent meeting-place (with an engraved charter, and
picture of Professor Agassiz on the wall), containing a large library, a
new cabinet, and a splendid microscope.—Louis L. Calvert, Sec.

549, _Linlithgow, Scotland._ The work of our Chapter has gone on very
successfully. The members of the A. A. are also members of a local
association, and the work of the latter is generally considered to be
also that for the former. All the members have to acknowledge with
pleasure the numerous offers to exchange made to them by American
friends, advantage of which has been greatly taken. The Secretary has
greatly enriched his herbarium by the additions to it of American plants.
The out-of-door work—always the most pleasant—proved all last year to
be most pleasurable and profitable, and it may be interesting to other
members to know that all the members here are ’cyclists and find their
wheels of the greatest service.

The subjects taken up have been botany, geology, entomology, ornithology,
conchology, oölogy, and to a certain extent also zoölogy. Meetings have
been held and papers read, and many excursions taken, and the members
hope that, in spite of the claims made on them by their daily avocations,
they will still be able to continue the study of nature.—Wm. Wardrop,
Secretary.

544, _Philadelphia_ (_Q_). Our meetings are well attended and very
interesting. Our debates are excellent, and show preparation on the part
of the participants. During the coming year we promise to push things to
a higher point than ever.—Joseph L. Hammer, Sec.

555, _Olympia, W. T._ We have held weekly meetings continuously, and have
made constant additions to our cabinets. In botany we have a pretty good
collection of phanerogams; about five hundred species determined; and in
microscopy we have a good collection of diatoms. We have a good series of
Puget Sound clamshells.—For the Secretary, Robt. Blankenship.

556, _Phila._, (_R_). Many specimens have been gained, but our cabinet
does not fairly represent the Chapter, because each member is an
enthusiastic collector in his own department, and, with a selfishness
that perhaps can not be blamed, reserves his “finds” to increase his
“working capital.” Our library has been more fortunate.

Our correspondence is a very pleasant feature. Mr. H. G. White writes us
valuable letters on the bird life of Eastern Massachusetts, and W. H.
Steckel keeps us informed on the plant life of Bucks County, Pennsylvania.

Another department of our Chapter is the biological section. Objects
are exhibited under the microscope, and specimens, dissections, and
preparations are handed around and freely discussed. Sometimes we meet
informally, and spend an evening in dissections and general study. One
will take a cicada pupa, one a locust or an earth-worm, and so on; before
adjourning, each reports on his evening’s work.

Our MS. paper, “Monthly Notes,” has fallen into the hands of a most able
and vigorous editor, and is flourishing vigorously. To conclude, we all
feel that we are engaged in a good work, and each one, inspiring and
being inspired by the example of the others, agrees that the Agassiz
Association is the most worthy object of his loyalty and love. A question
frequently asked by outsiders is, “Does it pay?” We promptly and heartily
answer, “Yes!”—Wm. E. McHenry, sec.

564, _Santa Rosa, Cal._ The interest and attendance for the past six
months have been larger than ever before. We gave a reception one
Saturday evening, for the purpose of awaking an interest, and introducing
our society to the public. The programme was:

1. Address, “History of the S. R. Chapter of the A. A.,” _Pres. G.
Lowell_, 2. Select Reading, “The Cat,” _Louis King_. 3. Essay, “Nature,”
_Wilber M. Swett_. 4. Select Reading, “Poem of Agassiz,” _Geo. Butt_.
5. “Biographical Sketch of Agassiz,” _Geo. Shaffer_. 6. “Microscopical
Exhibition.”

The members loaned their private collections. There were four microscopes
at hand, and numerous slides, all of which had been prepared by members.
We hope by our perseverance to raise the S. R. A. A. to rank “one,” as a
working Chapter.—Wilber M. Swett, Sec.

565, _Waseca, Minn._, is in the field to stay. Since our last report we
have accomplished a great deal in the way of adding to our collections.
We consider one good working member worth a hundred drones. The
Secretary and Vice-President hope to be at Davenport in August. We
report forty-six mounted birds, and seventeen skins of birds, all of our
country; three mammals, forty-five osteological specimens, etc.; three
skeletons, fifteen alcoholic specimens, and 200 eggs in sets, all named
and numbered. Also some 1200 mineral specimens. We also devote some
time to the study of ethnology, as up to as late as 1863, the ground on
which Waseca now stands was frequented by tribes of Indians; and as a
consequence of that study we have a box of bones, dug up from a mound,
about two hundred arrow points, stone axes, and a curiously carved stone
head. Please consider Chapter 565 as one of the Chapters that will be
heard and felt in the years to come.—J. F. Murphy, Sec.

569, _Ludington, Mich._ We have a faithful club. Have not lost a member
since we started two years ago last November. Have not failed of a
meeting each week since last September. Have fourteen boys between ages
of thirteen and fifteen.

Have been studying Winchell’s geological excursions, and one of the
members said he thought that Prof. Winchell had written the book
purposely for him. It has explained to us the higher geologies, and by
it we have been enabled to name nearly all the rock specimens found in
Michigan.

We gave a public meeting to our parents and friends, and entertained
them with music, and essays, etc., prepared on the subjects previously
studied. We also had a blackboard illustration, showing the causes of
wells and springs, drawn and explained by one of our boys.

Again we invited the young ladies’ club to hold a meeting at our rooms,
and after listening to their programme of essays, music, etc., we invited
them to a banquet, cooked, arranged, and served _wholly_ by our _boys_.
All pronounced it a fine success. We have had various excursions,
examining gravel banks, gullies, cañons (small ones), etc. We have had
experiments in chemistry, and have used the various acids, to the full
satisfaction of the owner of the club-room. In order to fix in the minds
the description of the different rocks, two of our young members have
invented games of mineralogy,—one to be played like “Authors,” and the
other like the geography game. The members like to try the latter on
their adult friends, to see how much they know of the hardness, streak,
chemical composition, forms of crystals, and uses of the common rocks.—L.
B. Elsworth, Cor. Sec.

571, _Grand Rapids, Mich._ We organized our club in the first part of
January, 1883, with about fifteen members; but we have grown, and now we
have twenty-five members. We meet for one hour every Monday evening. One
plan has been to call for items of interest from each of the members,
and of these items we are forming a scrap-book. We have often had short
talks from gentlemen upon various subjects, such as gunpowder and the
care taken of it; light, and sound, and electricity with experiments.
Our meetings are well attended, and the interest rather increases than
otherwise.—Ed. Avery, Sec.

578, _Osceola, Iowa._ Our Chapter has a membership of twenty. We meet
every Wednesday evening in a room fitted for that purpose. We have a
cabinet containing a fine collection of ores, fossils, etc. Our Chapter
was organized over two years ago. Since then our membership has gradually
increased, and with it the interest of the members. The condition of the
society is in every way promising.—Lee Burns, Sec., Box 744.

587, _Concord, N. H._ We think we have made more progress during the
past year than in any other since our Chapter was formed. We have
received many good specimens in exchange, among them some coal-fossils,
in which we were greatly interested; a piece of iron ore from the Isle
of Elba, and a quantity of shells from all points of the compass. So now
our cabinet contains some 500 minerals, besides the shells and other
curiosities. We have not read scientific books as much this winter as
we did last year, but have given our time to practical work in botany
and mineralogy. Five young ladies come in every Monday for the study
of botany, taking up house-plants as a preparation for other work next
summer. Also, we took advantage of Professor Crosby’s offer, and have
much enjoyed the work in mineralogy under his direction. We found
blow-pipe analysis very fascinating.—Lunette E. Lamprey, Sec.

590, _Pomfret Centre, Conn._ An average of four members of our Chapter
have met once a week through the winter. We have carefully examined two
herbariums collected by members, besides looking over nearly one hundred
species of flowers and ferns sent to me from California. During the
year we have examined 300 species of flowers and ferns growing in this
vicinity. We have made one excursion this month, and we have upon our
list since April 7, 1886, twenty-five plants. The first, Houstonia, was
found on April 13. Our members are more enthusiastic than ever before,
and we are looking forward to a very profitable season.—S. P. Oakes
Marsh, Sec.

595, _Oneonta, N. Y._ One of our members is taking the course of lessons
in mineralogy, and enjoys it very much. Another is making a collection
of the violets, and writing out descriptions of all the plants she
finds. When we go to the woods we always take a basket and stout knife;
then when we find a plant which we do not know, and is not in bloom,
we transplant it to our little wild garden; then when it blossoms, we
analyze it: if it is pretty and desirable, we let it grow; if not, we
pull it up; but when we meet it again, we know it.—Jessie E. Jenks, Sec.

600, _Galveston_ (_A_). Since date of last report (September 16, 1885),
we have held fifteen meetings, at which were read six essays and eleven
selected readings. There were reported seventy-six notes on natural
objects, and specimens found, to the number of one hundred and fifty-one.

Among the many curious notes reported was one on the nest of a mud-wasp,
found within the rind of a ripe orange, the skin of which had burst from
rapid growth.


EXCHANGES.

Galena, gold ore, silver ore, fluorspar, etc. I will hereafter give all
inquirers for exchange my closest attention.—Ernest L. Roberts, Sec. 262,
Denver, Col.

Infusorial earth from Virginia for specimens from other States.—Chapter
248, 109 East Grace street, Richmond, Va.

Minerals for same. Lists exchanged. Silicified wood a specialty.—Miss
Allie Cole, Sec. Ch. 700, Mt. Pleasant, Iowa.

Cactus and petrified wood.—Emma E. Pirie, San Antonio, Texas.

Collections of twenty-five native California plants each, for books and
pamphlets relating to botany and ornithology.—P. M. Hoit, Santa Barbara,
California.

Holly, mistletoe, balls of sweet gum-tree, and “cross-vine,” for mounted
sea-weed, star-fish, and other marine specimens.—Frank J. Engel, Montvale
Springs, Tennessee.

Well identified bird-skins for same. Send for lists.—L. M. Davies, 203
Newell street, Cleveland, Ohio.

Petrified wood.—Wilber M. Swett, Santa Rosa, Cal.

                      NEW AND REORGANIZED CHAPTERS.

                                _No.
  _No._     _Name._              of       _Address._
                              Members._
   967  Menominee, Mich. (A)      2     Guy Milbury.
   779  Chicago, Ill. (Y)         4     Miss Alice I. Halsey, 3027½ S.
                                          Park Ave.
    45  Shelbyville, Ky. (A)      6     Ross Neel.
   791  St. Louis, Mo. (F)        5     Mrs. E. K. Jones, 713 Channing
                                          Ave.
   347  Baltimore, Md. (C)        6     Miss Affa Gray, 428 N. Mount St.
   719  Phila., Pa. (A’)          7     Herbert L. Evans, 4414 Sansom St.
   557  Phila., Pa. (S)           7     Chas. Nason, 2116 Percy St.
   968  Montvale Sp’gs, Tenn (A)  9     Frank J. Engel, Blount Co.
   969  Cromwell, Ct. (A)         9     H. H. Barrows.
   970  Stanbridge Quebec (A)     8     A. F. Sargent.
   971  Mendham, N. J. (A)       11     Alvah Quimby.
   110  Marshalltown, Iowa (A)    4     C. C. Trine.
    13  Madison, N. J. (A)        9     Lillian H. Springer.
   107  Newburyport, Mass. (A)    6     Geo. A. Noyes.
   168  Buffalo, N. Y. (C)        5     Henry S. Gatley, 205 Swan St.

                               DISBANDED.

   841  Fairview, N. J.                 Mrs. C. W. Asbury.
   506  Port Henry, N. J.               John M. Thomas.
   462  New Haven, Conn. (A)            J. H. Haydon.

Secretaries of Chapters 601-700 will kindly send in their annual reports
by August 25, if possible.

All are invited to join the AGASSIZ ASSOCIATION, old and young.

Address all communications for this department to

                                                    MR. HARLAN H. BALLARD,
                                                    Lenox, Mass.




THE LETTER-BOX.


Contributors are respectfully informed that, between the 1st of June and
the 15th of September, manuscripts can not conveniently be examined at
the office of ST. NICHOLAS. Consequently, those who desire to favor the
magazine with contributions will please postpone sending their MSS. until
after the last-named date.

The explanation of “curving” in base-ball pitching has been discussed at
length in this volume of ST. NICHOLAS, and we now present to our older
boy-readers, as a final contribution on the subject, these three letters
from three widely separated localities. The first comes from the far West:

                                                 PINOLE, CAL., 1886.

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: The explanation of “curving” suggested in
    your April number is ingenious, but unfortunately it makes the
    ball curve the wrong way. The anonymous explanation in February
    has the same defect, though it narrowly misses being correct.
    I ask your readers to look over that explanation again, and
    they will see that the ball, under the extraordinary conditions
    imposed upon it, instead of “curving,” as the writer says, to
    the right, will not advance at all, but will revolve around the
    point D to the left.

    There can be no doubt about the possibility of “curving” a
    base-ball. The subject is an old one in gunnery, and has
    been thoroughly investigated by various experimenters. When
    spherical projectiles were the only ones in vogue, the matter
    was one of vital interest to artillerists. When such a ball
    is thrown, it is acted upon by two forces—the resistance of
    the air and the force of gravity. The normal path for a given
    velocity and angle of projection is a plane curve, because both
    these forces act in the vertical plane of fire—the force of
    gravity vertically and the resistance of the air tangentially
    to the curve. When, in addition to the motion of translation,
    the ball is given a motion of rotation about its center of
    inertia, the latter will no longer describe the normal path,
    but will deviate from it by “curving” to the right or left, up
    or down, depending upon the direction of the rotation. This is
    because the resultant of the air-resistances will no longer act
    in the line of the tangent in the general case, but at an angle
    with it. The general effect will be an increase or diminution
    of the normal range or deviation to the right or left of the
    plane of fire.

    Now, it is almost impossible to project a spherical ball from
    a smooth-bore gun without giving it a rotation the direction
    of which it is difficult to predict; hence the inaccuracy of
    that kind of fire. Spherical balls are not homogeneous, as a
    rule. If the center of figure and center of inertia do not
    coincide, the ball will rotate when fired—unless so placed in
    the gun that these points are both in the axis of the piece.
    Taking advantage of these principles, Major Wade, of our army,
    years ago managed to make an eccentric shell curve so as to
    fall fifty yards to the right or left of the plane of fire.
    The “curving” due to rotation is in the direction in which the
    _front of the ball rotates_. Perhaps the explanation accepted
    by artillerists can be best understood by the aid of a figure.
    Let the ball be moving in the direction AE and be rotating at
    the same time in the direction BCD about an axis vertical to
    the plane of the paper. AE will be the projection of the plane
    of fire—which plane will divide the ball into two hemispheres.
    Now, the half of the ball on the side B will be moving forward
    by the rotation, or in the same direction as the center, while
    the other half D will be moving backward, or in opposition
    to the motion of the center. The side B will have a greater
    velocity than the side D. The resistance of the air upon any
    surface moving through it varies with the amount and form of
    the surface. In these regards, the two sides are alike, but
    the resistance also varies with the velocity of the moving
    surface, increasing with some power greater than the square,
    and in this regard the two sides are different. The side B
    will experience a greater resistance than the side D, or, what
    is the same thing, the resultant of all the pressures on all
    points of the hemisphere. B is greater than the corresponding
    resultant on D, and the ball will yield toward the side D,
    describing a curve C F.

    [Illustration]

    The deviation of oblong rifle projectiles which rotate about
    their axes of figure is called “drift.” This is a very
    interesting phenomenon, but it should not be confounded
    with the “curving” or deviation by rotation of spherical
    projectiles, as it is to be explained very differently. Yours
    truly,

                                                       W. R. QUINAN.

The next letter is sent from Chicago, and the writer’s theory is
comparatively a simple one:

                                                      CHICAGO, 1886.

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: I have been much interested in the letters
    on the subject of curve-pitching, and since I have taken you
    for eleven years, I hope you will publish my theory, that it
    may be picked to pieces, and I may be set right on the subject.
    My theory is as follows:

    [Illustration]

    Let _A B_ be a ball moving toward _D_, and rotating in the
    direction shown by the arrows.

    As the ball flies along, it pushes the air aside, as shown by
    the lines _F E_; the air thus rubs against the sides of the
    ball. But as the half of the ball called _B_ is revolving with
    the air as shown by the arrow, there is much less friction
    on that side than on the half called _A_, which is revolving
    against the air.

    Therefore, as motion is always in the direction of least
    resistance, the ball must curve in the direction _C_.

    If any of the readers of the ST. NICHOLAS can not understand
    my explanation, let them imagine, for example (instead of a
    regular ball), a ball covered with paddles, and they will then
    readily understand it. If they think it not a good simile, let
    them look at the surface of a ball through a microscope and
    their doubts will not last long.

                              Your friend,

                                                               W. H.

Finally, from Boston, comes this rather formidable-looking explanation,
which will interest those of our boy-readers who are accustomed to take
their recreation and fun in the form of mathematical problems. [But
doesn’t it make the ball curve in the wrong direction?]

                                                       BOSTON, MASS.

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: Let the line _A B_, Fig. 1, represent in
    length and direction a given force acting on the point _B_.
    Draw any parallelogram, as _A C B D_, having _A B_ for a
    diagonal; then the lines _C B_ and _D B_ represent in length
    and direction two forces acting on _B_, which, together, are
    equivalent to _A B_, _A B_ is the resultant of _C B_ and _D B_,
    _C B_ and _D B_ are components of _A B_.

    [Illustration: Fig. 1]

    [Illustration: Fig. 2]

    If the parallelogram, _A C B D_, Fig. 2, is a rectangle, the
    components _C B_ and _D B_ are known as right components. The
    force represented by _D B_ has no effect in the direction _C
    B_, and the force represented by _C B_ has no effect in the
    direction _D B_.

    Let Fig. 3 represent a ball revolving about its center _O_,
    in the direction indicated by the arrows, but the ball, as a
    whole, not moving in any direction. Let _BB_, _BB_, be lines
    at right angles to each other. Let the resistance of the
    atmosphere be represented by lines _AB_, _AB_, _AB_, _AB_, and
    _AB′_, _AB′_, _AB′_, _AB′_, running in a direction opposite
    to the revolution of the ball. The lines _AB_, _AB_, _AB_,
    _AB_ are already perpendicular to _BB_, _BB_, and need not
    be changed. But the lines _AB′_, _AB′_, _AB′_, _AB′_ must be
    resolved into components perpendicular to _BB_, _BB_. This has
    been done in one case, the components being _CB′_ and _DB′_.
    But the force _CB′_ acting on the point _B_ is equivalent to
    the force _EF_ acting on _BB_, and the force _DB_ is equivalent
    to the force _GH_ acting on the other _BB_.

    [Illustration: Fig. 3]

    In a similar manner all the other forces, _A′B′_ may be
    resolved into forces perpendicular to the lines _BB_, _BB_.

    [Illustration: Fig. 4]

    If, in Fig. 3, all the forces acting on each of the lines _OB_,
    be represented by a single line, we have as the result the four
    equal lines _AB_, _CD_, _EF_, _GH_, Fig. 4 representing the
    total force acting on the ball.

    Now, suppose the ball to move in the direction indicated by the
    large arrow, Fig. 5, then the resistance on the side _B_ would
    increase, that on the side _F_ would decrease, hence _AB_ would
    increase, while _EF_ decreased proportionately. Again, the air
    in front of the ball at _H_ is condensed, that in the rear at
    _D_ is rarefied, hence the resistance at _H_ is increased, that
    at _D_ being lessened, and _GH_ is increased, while _CD_ is
    lessened.

    [Illustration: Fig. 5]

    Set off on _AB_, _AK_ equal to _EF_; _AK_ will balance _EF_,
    and we have only the force _KB_ acting on the line _BF_. Making
    _GL_ equal, _CD_, in the same manner, we have only the force
    _LH_ acting the line _HD_.

    Now, the force represented by the line _BK_ can not do any work
    in the directions _BF_ or _FB_, and therefore merely slows the
    ball. But the force _LH_, although it can not do any work in
    the directions _HD_ or _DH_, can do work in the direction _LH_,
    and causes the ball to follow the curve _HM_.

    Of course, all the forces, _AB_, _CD_, _EF_, _GH_, tend to stop
    the rotation of the ball, but the forces _KB_ and _LH_ are the
    only ones which change the motion of the ball as a whole.

                                                            F. H. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

The following verses were written by a young poet of eleven, who began
making rhymes at the rather early age of three.

CONSOLATION.

BY ETHEL S. K. PACKARD.

    The waves of the coming tide
      Crept gently along the beach,
    With musical, silv’ry plash,
      As if they broke into speech.

    And when my sweet joy was dead,
      The sound of the heaving sea,
    Like gentle breath of sleepers,
      Was a soothing balm to me.

       *       *       *       *       *

    DEAR ST. NICHOLAS: I suppose you know that many girls have a
    poor opinion of boys. Well, my sister and her girl-friends were
    going to have a fair in my mother’s parlors. I wanted to be in
    it, but they laughed, and asked me “if I could dress a doll, or
    make a needle-book?” While they were joking, Mamma whispered
    something in my ear, and we had a secret together, and we kept
    it till the night of the fair, and then we astonished my sister
    in this way. There is a long hall opening out of our back
    parlor. Mamma had it brightly lighted, that night, and about
    the middle of the evening Papa opened the door which led into
    the hall, and hung a large card over the door, on which was
    written: “Target-Shooting.”

    I was in there with my new air-pistol, and the target was at
    the other end of the hall. I loaded the pistol, and another
    boy took the money. We charged two cents for a shot, and we
    had all we could do to load fast enough, so many people wanted
    to shoot. Some took ten shots. When I handed the money to my
    sister, she said I was “a daisy,”—I think I had the best of the
    joke that time,—don’t you?

                                 Yours,

                                                            JAMIE H.

Yes, Jamie,—but we think also that some of the credit belongs to Mamma.
Don’t you?

       *       *       *       *       *

A FRIEND of ST. NICHOLAS sends to the “Letter-box” this illustrated
jingle:

[Illustration]

    A rising young Man at the CAPE,
    Climbed a tree with the speed of an ape.
    “Why I’ve climbed up you’ll know
    If you look down below.”—
    Said this rising young Man at the CAPE.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHILDREN’S RIDE.

Once there were two little girls. Their names were Rosy and Alice. They
had a little brother whose name was Robbie. Once when they were in the
woods they saw a creature with eyes of flame, whistling as it went
through the air, and it said in a gruff voice, “I am a Jabberwock.”

“What kind of a creature under the sun are you?” said Robbie; “what
flashing eyes you have! You look rather kind, though very frightful.
Please take me up to the moon on your back and give me some cheese when
you get there.”

Robbie had heard that there was cheese in the moon, but he did not really
think so; only for a joke he said that.

“Oh! you soft little pussy thing!” said Rosy, as they rode away up to
the moon. Pretty soon they went bump against something which was shiny
and yellow. It was the moon. Then Jabberwock let the children get off
her back, and asked the Man in the Moon if he would please get from his
closet some cheese. “Why!” said Robbie, “I didn’t know there was really
any cheese up in the moon!”

“Then,” said the Jabberwock, “why did you ask for it?”

“For a joke,” said Robbie.

“Well, here now,” said the Man in the Moon, “eat your cheese.”

“Why, how nice!” said Alice, as she took a large bite out of the cheese.
“I think it would be nice to live up in the moon altogether, though I am
afraid Mamma would not let us.”

“Well, I suppose she wouldn’t,” said the Jabberwock. After they had had
some cheese they went down again.

“Oh, thank you,” said Rosy, as they got down to the earth. “Jabberwock, I
think you are the loveliest creature in the world—except Mamma!”

“Oh,” said Alice, “I wish you would stay with us a few days—I suppose you
will if we ask you to.”

“Yes,” said Jabberwock, “I would love to. Should you like to see my baby?
It is a sweet little thing.”

She led them to a hole in a tree, where they saw the tiniest little baby
Jabberwock you ever saw.

“What a cunning little thing!” said Rosy; “but has it not got any fur on?”

“No,” said Jabberwock; “but still it is pretty, is it not?”

“Of course it is,” said Rosy.

“But come,” said Alice, “this is the time Mamma wanted us to be home.”

“Is it?” said the Jabberwock. “Well, I will come.” So away they went.

                                    Written by MARY CONSTANCE DU BOIS
                                    (at the age of 5 years and 10 months).

       *       *       *       *       *

We acknowledge with thanks the receipt of pleasant letters from the
following young friends: Frank Taylor, Harry Armstrong, Katie P. Peabody,
Alice Conway, Robert A. Provan, Fay Taylor, Pussy and Leuce, Josie Irwin,
Agnes F. Conwell, W. H., Allmond McKay Griggs, Hugh P. Yiemann, Katie,
Dorothea Nimzer, Anna Wetmore, Edith M., H. L. M., “Venus,” Celia Loeb,
Francis E. L., Florence E. Gaffield, Marion S. Dumont, Lee A. Miller, M.
C. H., Evelyn Knight, Pansy, Luckett & Miriam I., F. W. Horninghouse,
Hattie Frost, Emily E. Warner, “Alice, Annie, Gracie, Florence, Jessie,
Marion,” “Three Rebels,” K., H. S. M., Bessie Maud Bowsher, Jerry
Richter, Walter S. H., Nettie Rychen, Allan C. Rowe, May Singleton,
Philip A. M., William B. Judson, Minnie W., C. E. Lankford, Ida E., Annie
B. Sargent, Nellie P. Clark, Alex. D., Helen W., J. Henry Warren, F. W.
Lodge, Grace Coburn, Harriet F. Lightfoot, Edith S. Clark, Fred B. W.,
Sadie Furman, Ellen S. Congdon, Gertrude, Emily Belton, Grace Vandever,
Helen Crane, Alex. Evans, Kate Morris, Belle B. Anderson, Mabel B., M. B.
P., Mabel Carrington, Cora L. Witherspoon, Gertrude M., Eugene Kell, C.
G. Elmore, Willie Pettigrew, Willie J. Spear, Jeannette G., Jessamine C.,
Albert L. Scoullar, Albertie Russell, George Emerson, Helen A. Polsley,
Ed. H. B., Elizabeth Butler and Elizabeth Wright, P. N. S., Ethel Grey,
Rebecca K. Allison, Burton P. Thoms, Amy H., Florence Rawson Greer,
Stella A. Goodell, S. W. Bridgham, Jenny Wren, Anna L. L., R. E. B.,
Maude F. Helen, W. M., Mary Weller, Buddie Holt, Daisey Higham, Sadie,
Lyra and Silvia, M. G. Waring, E. H. Smalley, Annetta Reese, Anna May
Peaslee, Florence Langton, Bessie P., Howard Butcher, Jr.

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. CULMER BARNES contributes to the “Letter-box” this month a timely
picture:

[Illustration: “JUST MY LUCK! LAST WINTER ’TWAS STRAW HATS ALL THE TIME,
AND NOW I GET NOTHIN’ BUT FUR GOODS!”]




THE RIDDLE-BOX.


ANSWERS TO PUZZLES IN THE JULY NUMBER.

NUMERICAL ENIGMA. “Our country! In her intercourse with foreign nations,
may she always be in the right; but our country, right or wrong.”

                                                        _Stephen Decatur._

CUBE. 1 to 2, mother; 2 to 6, repose; 5 to 6, needle; 1 to 5, Marion; 3
to 4, eating; 4 to 8, greedy; 7 to 8, nimbly; 3 to 7, ensign; 1 to 3,
mite; 2 to 4, rung; 6 to 8, easy; 5 to 7, noon.

ANAGRAMS. 1. Don Quixote. 2. Oliver Twist. 3. The Virginians. 4. Guy
Mannering. 5. Old Curiosity Shop. 6. Uncle Tom’s Cabin. 7. The Woman
in White. 8. The Last Days of Pompeii. 9. The Vicar of Wakefield. 10.
Quentin Durward.

PI. “Angling may be said to be so like the mathematics that it can never
be fully learnt.”

                                                           _Izaak Walton._

METAMORPHOSES. 1. Cow; row, rot, rat. 2. Hard; harm, farm, form, fort,
sort, soft. 3. Left; lest, vest, vast, east. 4. Hit; nit, not, now, low.
5. Long; lone, lose, lost, lest, west.

RHOMBOIDS. I. Across: 1. Venom. 2. Damon. 3. Bales. 4. Resin. 5. Strop.
II. Across. 1. Nabob. 2. Mason. 3. Danes. 4. Remit. 5. Donor.—CHARADE.
Par-son-age.

ZIGZAG. Independence Day. Cross-words: 1. Ivy. 2. aNt. 3. liD. 4. fEd. 5.
Put. 6. nEd. 7. paN. 8. aDd. 9. End. 10. aNd. 11. roC. 12. lEd. 13. Dig.
14. mAy. 15. laY.

HOUR-GLASS. Centrals, straw-hats; from 1 to 2, saltwater; from 3 to 4,
stopwatch. Cross-words: 1. Spinsters. 2. Apitpat. 3 Largo. 4. Tap. 5. W.
6. Aha. 7. Trait. 8. Centime. 9. Handsomer.

TO OUR PUZZLERS: In sending answers to puzzles, sign only your initials
or use a short assumed name; but if you send a complete list of answers
you may sign your full name. Answers should be addressed to ST. NICHOLAS
“Riddle-box,” care of THE CENTURY CO., 33 East Seventeenth street, New
York City.

ANSWERS TO ALL THE PUZZLES IN THE MAY NUMBER were received, before May
20, from Maud E. Palmer—Annette Fiske—Philip S. Fiske—“B. L. Z. Bub, No.
1”—Maggie T. Turrill—Paul Reese—San Anselmo Valley—Arthur and Bertie
Knox—“Betsy Trotwood”—B. L. Z. Bub, No. 2—“May and 79”—Sallie Viles—The
Melvilles—Blithedale—Mamie R.—Madge and the Dominie—Carrie S. Seaver and
Alice M. Young—The Spencers—“Francesca”—“Clifford and Coco”—Bertha Z.
Gerhard—“Sisters Twain”—“R. U. Pert”—“Hazel, Laurel, and Olive”—“Theo.
Ther.”

ANSWERS TO PUZZLES TO THE MAY NUMBER were received, before May 20, from
M. L. B., 1—M. S. Dumont, 1—W. B. R.—M. L. D. and others, 2—Pelham, 1—Two
Fs., 5—The Peraults—C. D. Mason, 1—“Miss Ouri,” 5—“Tigers,” 2—Stella
Mendel, 1—Johnny, 1—Dixie, 1—“Tigers,” 1—Maud F., 1—Lucy Jones, 1—J.
Schlussel, 1—Laura G. Levy, 9—Buttercup and Daisy, 1—Helena Hellwig,
2—Madge Fursman, 1—Florence Althaus, 7—Thyrza Thornton, 5—C. S. H.,
2—Mrs. Sippi, 5—Mary, Jennie and Mother, 6—Grace Cameron, 2—Effie K.
Talboys, 8—“Yum Yum,” 1—Pepper and Maria, 12—Papa and Daisy, 1—Ned
Mitchell, 5—Emma W. and Katie B. Knight, 2—T. L. and L. Cozzens, 1—Lucy
M. Bradley, 12—Lizzie Wainman, 1—Geo. H. English, 1—“Chrysanthemum,”
1—Mary P. Fan, 1—“Jack Sprat and Pa,” 6—H. and L., 9—Clarence Brothers,
1—L. Reeves, 9—Eugene Kell, 1—No Name, N. Y., 9—W. R. M., 11—Bertha H.,
12—“Rags and Tags,” 1—Nellie and Reggie, n—S. B. Bissell, 8—“Avis” and
Grace Davenport, 10—“Mohawk Valley”—“Rasco,” 2—S. L. Meeks, 9—Belle
Murdock, 12—No Name, Chicago, 10—B. B. Y., 11—“The Girls, Mabel, John,
and Chickadee,” 11—R. B. C., 2—Original Puzzle Club, 10—“Geo. M. Ebry,”
2—Harrison Allen, Jr., 1—R. Lloyd, 1—“Blank” and Ulysees, 12—Dash,
12—Francis W. Islip, 12—Eleanor, Maude, Louise, Bertie and Nanno Peart,
7—Ida and Edith Swanwick, 8—Geo. S. Seymour, 8—Lulu May, 11—Frank M.
Crispen, 1—Puzzled Family in Paris, 8—Esther Reid, Merton House, 1.


CHARADE.

    My dear, this _whole_ I send to you,
      A token of my friendship true;
    I trust you’ll _first_ it,—hold it fast,
      And prize it if but for my _last_.

                                                          “MYRTLE GREEN.”


OCTAGON.

1. A gentle blow. 2. The Christian name of the heroine of a novel by
Theodore Winthrop. 3. To bleach. 4. The herb wolf’s-bane. 5. Pertaining
to the bile. 6. A fruit which was said to make strangers who ate of it
forget their native land. 7. Musical syllables.

                                                          EDWARD ROBERT B.


GREEK CROSS.

        . . . .
        . . . .
        . . . .
  . . . * * * * . . .
  . . . * * * * . . .
  . . . * * * * . . .
        . . . .
        . . . .
        . . . .

I. UPPER SQUARE: 1. Proportion. 2. To affirm. 3. Familiar beverages. 4.
Formerly.

II. LEFT-HAND SQUARE: 1. Rent. 2. A Hebrew measure. 3. Fabrics of a
certain kind. 4. Formerly.

III. CENTRAL SQUARE: 1. Formerly. 2. A large bird of South America. 3.
Bodies of water. 4. Labor.

IV. RIGHT-HAND SQUARE: 1. Labor. 2. Surface. 3. Abode. 4. A feminine name.

V. LOWER SQUARE: 1. Labor. 2. A feminine name. 3. To break suddenly. 4.
Retained.

                                                         MURRAY AND PERCY.


INVERTED PYRAMIDS.

I. Across: 1. Eloquence. 2. To eat into. 3. Part of a cat’s foot. 4. In
eloquence.

Downward: 1. In Troy. 2. A musical note. 3. Skill. 4. An implement. 5. A
lyric poem. 6. A musical note. 7. In Troy.

II. Across: 1. Pertaining to the craft of Freemasons. 2. A wooden shoe.
3. To cut the grass from. 4. In ceramic.

Downward: 1. In ceramic. 2. Similar to. 3. A boy’s nickname. 4. A
hautboy. 5. At this moment. 6. A pronoun. 7. In ceramic.

                                                             “LOU C. LEE.”


ILLUSTRATED CENTRAL ACROSTICS.

[Illustration]

All of the cross-words of the above central acrostic are grouped around
the central picture, and answer to the following definitions.

1 (nine letters). A contrivance useful in winter. 2 (nine letters). A
swift-flying insect. 3 (seven letters). A young fowl. 4 (five letters).
Familiar objects in rural districts. 5 (three letters). A winged animal.
6 (three letters). Consumed. 7 (five letters). Useful to fishermen. 8
(seven letters). An animal.

The central letters of the words described will spell the name of a
great Athenian philosopher, and the central picture will suggest what is
usually associated with his last moments.


AN EGYPTIAN PUZZLE.

[Illustration]

            x
          . x .
        . . x . .
      . . . x . . .
    . . . . x . . . .
  . . . . . x . . . . .

The above Egyptian puzzle is an illustrated pyramid, as the diagram in
the lower left-hand corner indicates. When rightly guessed, the central
letters (indicated by crosses) will spell the name of a famous statue
that is said to emit sounds like those of a harp as the sun rises. The
illustrations answer to the following definitions.

1. A letter. 2. A precious stone. 3. An animal. 4. Tropical fruit. 5. An
animal. 6. A native of a certain Egyptian city.


RIMLESS WHEELS.

  8     1     2
    .   .   .
      . . .
  7 . . 9 . . 3
      . . .
    .   .   .
  6     5     4

I. From 1 to 9, the Christian name of an English queen; from 2 to 9, a
famous river; from 3 to 9, a cupola; from 4 to 9, the name of a large
lake; from 5 to 9, to scale; from 6 to 9, magnitude; from 7 to 9, the
margin; from 8 to 9, a number.

The letters represented by the figures from 1 to 8 spell the name of a
Danish author who died August 4, 1875.

II. From 1 to 9, part of a watch; from 2 to 9, qualified; from 3 to 9,
matured; from 4 to 9, uncommon; from 5 to 9, 43,560 square feet; from 6
to 9, to stare; from 7 to 9, to incite; from 8 to 9, a specimen.

The letters represented by the figures from 1 to 8 spell the name of a
famous American who died August 14, 1870.

                                                                 HONORA N.


DIAMOND.

1. In telephone. 2. One of the smaller sails on a ship. 3. A small but
famous country. 4. A Spanish nobleman. 5. A favorite. 6. Era. 7. In
telephone.

                                                                 “ŒDIPUS.”


DOUBLE ACROSTIC.

In each of the following sentences a word is concealed, the definition
to which is given in the same sentence. When rightly selected and placed
one below the other in the order here given, the primals and finals will
each form the name of a distinguished poet who was born in August. The
cross-words are all of the same length.

1. It is hard, in essays, to avoid assurance.

2. Mary has gone to Salem; Bell is home, and the latter will adorn the
book she is composing.

3. In an oration, a legate gave the detail of reasons for making it.

4. Clare hears a little rumor that there will be a recital this evening.

5. This incident I call the same as that in the other story.

6. On Mount Carmel I temporized with one of the friars.

7. When I look now in glyphs, I feel their beauty understandingly.

                                                              CYRIL DEANE.


CUBE.

        1 . . . . . . 2
      . .           . .
    .   .         .   .
  5 . . . . . . 6     .
  .     .       .     .
  .     .       .     .
  .     .       .     .
  .     3 . . . . . . 4
  .   .         .   .
  . .           . .
  7 . . . . . . 8

From 1 to 2, royal; from 2 to 4, a long-tailed species of hawk, found in
Europe; from 3 to 4, a dealer in precious stones; from 1 to 3, eternal;
from 5 to 6, a two-masted vessel; from 6 to 8, becoming circular; from
7 to 8, a method of securing a good draught in chimneys; from 5 to 7,
the name of one of the three persons thrown into the fiery furnace of
Nebuchadnezzar; from 1 to 5, the flower-deluce; from 2 to 6, an affected
cast of countenance; from 4 to 8, a kind of seaweed; from 3 to 7, to
scourge.

                                                            “ROSE MADDER.”


BEHEADINGS.

1. Behead withered and leave part of the head. 2. Behead dry and leave
to free from. 3. Behead flexible and leave a demon. 4. Behead to sulk
and leave to unfold. 5. Behead surrounded by and leave in the center of.
6. Behead joyful and leave a young boy. 7. Behead an ornament worn by
Jewish priests and leave an edge. 8. Behead a short piece of iron and
leave to be ill. 9. Behead the fraction of an ounce and leave an ancient
instrument of war. 10. Behead a character in the play of “Othello” and
leave gone.

The words described are of equal length. The beheaded letters, read in
the order here given, will spell the name of one of Washington Irving’s
earliest works.

                                                       “FRANCESCO AND CO.”


ZIGZAG.

Each of the words described contains the same number of letters, and the
zigzag, beginning at the upper left-hand letter, will spell an important
event that occurred on August 5, 1856.

CROSS-WORDS: 1. Certain. 2. An exhibition. 3. Merriment. 4. Festivity.
5. To satisfy. 6. To strike. 7. A minute particle. 8. Formerly. 9.
Recent. 10. Half. 11. Nationality. 12. Pain. 13. Dry. 14. Capable. 15.
An elevation. 16. To engage. 17. Hearty. 18. To salute. 19. Want. 20.
Notion. 21. To cook slowly. 22. To twist.

                                                               “KATASHAW.”





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ST. NICHOLAS, VOL. 13, NO. 10, AUGUST 1886 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


