The Project Gutenberg eBook of Elfin songs of sunland
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Elfin songs of sunland

Author: Charles Keeler

Artist: Louise Mapes Bunnell Keeler

Release date: April 18, 2025 [eBook #75901]

Language: English

Original publication: Berkeley: Live Oak Publishing Company, 1904

Credits: Charlene Taylor, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELFIN SONGS OF SUNLAND ***


                          Transcriber’s Notes

  1. Certain typographic errors were silently corrected.

  2. Illustrations moved next to Song-titles, were contextually
     captioned.

  3. The text version is coded for italics and the like mark-ups i.e.,

      (a) italics are indicated thus _italic_;

      (b) small-caps are indicated thus +CAPS+;

      (c) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)].




                        Elfin Songs of Sunland




                              ELFIN SONGS
                              OF SUNLAND

                           BY CHARLES KEELER

                            [Illustration]

                    DECORATIONS +BY+ LOUISE KEELER

                            FOURTH EDITION

                            [Illustration]

                          LIVE OAK PUBLISHING
                                COMPANY

                          Berkeley California




                          +COPYRIGHT 1904 BY+
                            CHARLES KEELER

                          +COPYRIGHT 1904 BY+
                            CHARLES KEELER
                         (For Second Edition)

                          +COPYRIGHT 1914 BY+
                            CHARLES KEELER
                          (For Third Edition)

                          +COPYRIGHT 1920 BY+
                            CHARLES KEELER
                         (For Fourth Edition)


                            Decorations by
                             LOUISE KEELER




                              DEDICATION


 Elfin songs of sunland,
 Frolicland and funland;
 Little rhymes of child hours,
 Wood elves and wild flowers;
 Jingles of the forest green,
 Songs for little Merodine!

 [Illustration: Merodine]

 [Illustration: Boy with owl]




                          NAMES OF THE SONGS


                                                                    PAGE

_I. A RING AROUND OF PLAYTIME_

 +COME AWAY CHILDREN+                                                  1

 +HAND-ORGAN MAN+                                                      3

 +POPPING CORN+                                                        5

 +THE BAKER MAN+                                                       7

 +TOPS+                                                                9

 +THE KITE+                                                           11

 +THE SEE-SAW+                                                        13

 +SOAP BUBBLES+                                                       14

 +THE BRASS BAND+                                                     15

 +THE MERRY-GO-ROUND+                                                 17

 +THE OVERLAND FLYER+                                                 19

 +SPORTS+                                                             21

 +THE SWIMMING POOL+                                                  22

 +A SONG OF LEONARDE+                                                 24


_II. SONGS OF THE WILDWOOD_

 +A CHILD’S BOOK+                                                     27

 +A LESSON+                                                           28

 +A WINTER WALK+                                                      29

 +WINTER RAIN IN CALIFORNIA+                                          30

 +MR. WIND+                                                           32

 +WILD-WOOD BOGIES+                                                   34

 +THE COYOTE+                                                         36

 +THE HUMMINGBIRD+                                                    38

 +THE ROADRUNNER+                                                     40

 +THE BURROWING OWL+                                                  42

 +THE CRESTED JAY+                                                    44

 +TROUBLE IN THE TREES+                                               46

 +THE SQUIRREL+                                                       48

 +THE POLLIWOG THAT LOST ITS TAIL+                                    50

 +THE HORNED TOAD+                                                    52

 +A FAIRY IN A FLOWER+                                                53

 +BUTTERCUP+                                                          55

 +THE COLUMBINE+                                                      56

 +THE LEOPARD LILY+                                                   57

 +JOHNNY JUMP-UP+                                                     58

 +SONG OF THE BROWN LILY+                                             59

 +SHOOTING STAR FLOWERS+                                              60

 +THE SCARLET LARKSPUR+                                               61

 +THE TRILLIUM+                                                       62

 +BABY BLUE-EYES+                                                     63

 +WHO KNOWS ROSALIE+                                                  64

 +TO A WILD ROSE+                                                     65

 +THE QUEEN OF THE FAIRIES+                                           66


_III. QUIPS AND CRANKS_

 +MY AUNTIE+                                                          71

 +THE BEAR HUNTER+                                                    73

 +TRYING TO PLAY+                                                     74

 +MAGGIE MULDOON+                                                     75

 +THE BOOBITY BUMPKIN+                                                76

 +FARMER JONES’ GOAT+                                                 77

 +POOR MR. MIDAS+                                                     78

 +THREE WISE MEN+                                                     79

 +A GOBBLER IN TROUBLE+                                               80

 +THE TALE OF A POOR LITTLE WORM+                                     82


_IV. RHYMES FOR TODDLERS_

 +PUSSY WHITE+                                                        87

 +CHINA DOLLS+                                                        88

 +DOLLIE’S LULLABY+                                                   90

 +BABY LIFE+                                                          92

 +LITTLE BROTHER+                                                     93

 +PLAYING HORSE+                                                      94

 +MY DONKEY+                                                          95

 +BABY IN THE BARNYARD+                                               96

 +BABY’S GOOD-NIGHT+                                                  98

 +DOGS+                                                              100

 +MY ANIMALS+                                                        101


_V. BROWN BABY BALLADS_

 +SIX LITTLE ESKIMO+                                                 105

 +PICCANINNY LULLABY+                                                107

 +THE MEXICAN BABIES+                                                109

 +THE LITTLE PIUTE+                                                  111

 +THE HONOLULU BOY+                                                  113

 +A SAMOA SLEEPY-SONG+                                               114




                       A RING AROUND OF PLAYTIME

                [Illustration: Elfin Songs of Sunland]




                          COME AWAY CHILDREN


 COME away children, frisk along with me,
 For I’ll be the piper and merry will we be;
 With laughter and dancing and sports to make us gay,
 O there’s sunshine and there’s singing--come away, come away!

 Come away children, leave the town behind;
 Follow me to Happy-land and see what we shall find,
 Where the flowers smile to see you and the birdies trill and play
 Just because the sun is shining--come away, come away!

 Come away children, I’ll pipe an elfin tune
 And we’ll play that we are fairies dancing in the summer moon;
 We’ll pretend that we are flowers in the carnival of May
 If you’ll join the merry crew and come away, come away!




                            HAND-ORGAN MAN


 HAND-ORGAN MAN, O hand-organ man,
 Grind out the music as fast as you can,
 With a tum-turi tum-turi hippity hay,
 And a red-coated monkey to frolic and play.

 The organ rings merrily on down the street,
 And the very policeman steps out to your beat,
 When, sucking her stick of molasses, comes Jennie
 To give that impertinent monkey a penny.

 O toodle de toodle de, hand-organ grinder,
 No man in the city to children is kinder,
 And my little kid brother just played not to care
 When the monkey jumped on him and grabbed at his hair.




                             POPPING CORN


 COME, you merry little fellows,
 Poke the coals and blow the bellows;
 Here’s the popper, shell the corn,
 And let it pop this winter morn.

 Pop-a-tee-pop-pop-pop!
 See the kernels skip and hop,
 See them puff out full and white,
 Hear them crackle in affright.

 Now shake, shake, shake,
 Till your hands and faces bake;
 Tip it, turn it,
 Or you’ll burn it,
 And a dreadful muss you’ll make.

 Now it’s done we’ll have a feast;
 Smallest hands must take the least!
 Hot and crisp and white and sweet,--
 Isn’t this a jolly treat!

 [Illustration: Around the fire popping corn]




                             THE BAKER MAN


 O WHO do you think is the baker man,
 And how do you think he makes his cake?
 He mixes his dough in an old tin can
 And puts it out in the sun to bake.
 He pats pats pats at his little mud pies;
 He rounds them and rolls them and looks so wise.

 The baker man is my brother Ned,
 And out in the garden he’s working away,
 Right by the scarlet geranium bed,
 And his hands and his face are just covered with clay,
 As he pats pats pats at his little mud pies;
 As he rounds them and rolls them and looks so wise.

 [Illustration: Ned making mud pies in the garden]




                                 TOPS


 HOW would you like to be a top,
 To be made to spin till you couldn’t stop;--
 To be pitched head first from a coil of string,
 To be made to dance till you sigh and swing?

 There’s the top that is whipped and the top with a peg
 That gouges its brother and leaves him to beg;
 There’s the musical top with holes in its side,
 That is said to have played till it fell down and died.

 But of all the tops that ever were spun,
 The biggest are those of the old daddy Sun;
 And I’ll wager he has just the jolliest sport
 With the Earth and with Saturn and tops of that sort.

 [Illustration: Top spins from a coil of string]




                               THE KITE


 BLOW, wind, blow, wind,
   Fly, kite, fly!
 On and on you go, wind,
   Up, kite, high!

 Out sweeps your tail, kite,
   Tug on the string;
 Far away you sail, kite,
   Proudly you swing.

 If I were like you, kite,
   One white wing,
 With nothing else to do, kite,
   But tug upon the string.

 I’d sail up from town, kite,
   To see the moon’s back,
 And then slide down, kite,
   The Milky-Way’s track.

 [Illustration: Flying a kite]




                              THE SEE-SAW


 O BALANCE the ladder atop of the rail,
 And up we go, down we go, all in a gale,
 Singing like birds as we teeter away,
 Bouncing and jouncing each other in play.

 You are Queen Sally and I am King Peter,
 And where are we going astride of our teeter?
 Riding to fairyland, over the moon.
 Up we go,--down!--and we’ll be there soon.




                             SOAP BUBBLES


 FLUBBLETY, flopplety, bubble and spatter,
 Soap-suds and water and clay-pipes and chatter!
 Puff little cheeklets and blow, blow, blow!
 Look at the bubbles beginning to grow!

 O what a beauty, all purple and pink!
 Whiff! it has vanished before you can think!
 Now look at this one with clouds and a tree
 Swimming about in a gold-lighted sea!

 Hurrah, it is floating away through the air!
 Car of the fairies was never more fair.
 Zip comes a goblin and clips it away!
 What will the fairy who rode in it say?




                            THE BRASS BAND


 IT makes me feel so fine and gay
 When drums are beat and bugles play;
 I think I’d like to be a king
 And rule the earth and everything.

 The big bass-drum
 Goes dum, dum, dum,
 The horns play tweedle dee,
 And every toot and every beat
 Just catches hold of my two feet
 And makes them run away from me.
 And this is what I hear them say
 As down the street they march away:
 Te dum ratta dum, ratta dum, dum dee,
 Te dum, ratta dum, shout hurrah boys with me!
 Tweedle twee twee twee, tweedle anything you can,
 For I’m going to be a soldier when I get to be a man!

 [Illustration: I’m going to be a soldier when I get to be a man]




                          THE MERRY-GO-ROUND


 STAND still, Mr. Horse, while I jump on your back
 To ride in the ring of the whirligig’s track.
 The boys and girls shout as the man cries, “Hold fast.”
 The music is playing--we’re started at last!

 O faster and faster we rock and we spin
 Around, keeping time to the musical din,
 Then I pull on my reins and cry “Whoa!” to the horse,
 For that is the right way to stop him, of course.

 But we go and we go and we don’t mind a pin
 If we end where we started and have to begin
 On the merry-go-round, the merry-go-round--
 ’Tis the best kind of travel I ever have found!




                          THE OVERLAND FLYER


 TO-TOO! to-too! Ka-ding, ka-dong!
 Down the mole comes the flyer a-zipping along,--
 Smoke clouds panting and hissing of steam,
 Rattling of rails and a sudden scream!

 The iron dragon snorts up to the station,
 The proudest beast in the wide creation;
 Fed on fire it puffs and blows,
 Cyclops-eyed like a fiend it glows.

 We kiss our hands to the friends by the Bay,
 On the dragon’s tail we are whisked away,
 And faster we whiz by the glistening shore,--
 Towns spin past as we ride with a roar.

 Now the iron throat is gasping astrain
 As the beast up the mountains is dragging his train.
 O where are you taking us, monster of steel?
 Out in the darkness the pine-trees reel!

 Over the desert we swing and fly,
 Towns and prairies are flashing by;
 When, lo! to your castle you plunge in the night,--
 The great walls tower in ghostly light.

 Does a princess live in that tall black tower?
 Are all of the people here under your power?
 I never was certain that dragons were true
 Till I got on your tail and rode with you!




                                SPORTS


 SNAP-the-whip and tug-of-war--
 What is all this tussle for?
 Hare-and-hounds and prisoners-base,
 Just to make you puff and race!

 Balls to bat and balls to kick
 Make you nimble, make you quick;
 And anyhow I like to play,
 So come on boys,--hurray, hurray!




                           THE SWIMMING POOL


 WE boys love to swim on a hot summer day
   In the pool where the pond-lilies float;
 There’s Willie and Frankie and Bennie and Jay
   Adrift in a leaky old boat.

 As Ben splashes under, a kingfisher cries:
   “You’ll frighten my fish with your noise,”
 While the frog on the lily-pad croaks in surprise:
   “What awkward great creatures are boys!”

 The poor little catfish way down in the mud
   Can’t imagine what’s coming its way
 As Frank dives head-first with a splash and a thud,
   Close followed by Willie and Jay.

 Then to lie in the sand when the swimming is done,
   While the skater-bugs dance on the stream!
 Just a tickle of wind and a shower of sun
   And a sigh of content as we dream!




                          A SONG OF LEONARDE


 SUNSHINE boy of the world of play,
 Laughing out in the wind away,
 Singing free as a song-bird wild,--
 O that is the way of my elfin child!

 Love in the heart thro’ the day-bright hours,
 Joy on the lips like the smiling flowers,
 Peace on the face when the night is starred
 And sleep steals over my Leonarde.




                         SONGS OF THE WILDWOOD




                            A CHILD’S BOOK


 THERE are many good books, my child,
   But the best of them all for you
 Is the book that is hid in the greenwood wild,
   All bound in a cover of blue.

 ’Tis the book of the birds and the bees,
   Of the flowers and the fish in the brook;
 You may learn how to read if you go to the trees
   And open your eyes and look.

 [Illustration: A child holds a book]




                               A LESSON


 TELL me little spider,
   Who taught you how to spin?
 Tell me little minnow,
   How you learned to use your fin?

 Tell me little swallow,
   Who taught you how to fly?
 And they each said, “It is easy
   If you only try and try.”

 [Illustration: How? It is easy if you try]




                             A WINTER WALK


 IN the Berkeley Hills for miles away
 I went a-roaming one winter’s day,
 And what do you think I saw, my dear?
 A place where the sky came down to the hill,
 And a big white cloud on the fresh green grass,
 And bright red berries my basket to fill,
 And mustard that grew in a golden mass,--
 All on a winter’s day, my dear!




                       WINTER RAIN IN CALIFORNIA


 SEE the little drops of rain,
   Falling, falling,
   Softly calling
 Flowers back to life again.

 First the blades of grass appear,
   Upward creeping,
   Shyly peeping
 O’er the meadow far and near.

 Then the mustard spreads its gold,--
   Opes its flowers
   To the showers,
 Little heeding winter’s cold.

 Poppies’ velvet petals glow;
   Each new-comer
   Thinks ’tis summer,
 Though the winter breezes blow.

 And the little drops of rain,
   Softly falling
   Still are calling
 Flowers forth on hill and plain.




                               MR. WIND


 O APRIL fields are fair to see--
 Tum tiddle tum, tiddle tum tum tee!
 The grass and the snow play at hide and seek,
 And the sun ’round the rim of a cloud will peek;
 O fie and fiddle and ha ha he!

 Up came an old man as I sang my song,
 With a “Hi, Johnnie, hi; skip along, skip along!”
 “And who are you, sir?” said I; and quoth he:
 “Mr. Wind is my name, hop along with me”;
 So we skipped and we hopped along long long.

 O his beard was towsled, his hair blew free--
 Tum tiddle tum; little matter to me!
 For he whistled and piped as we danced away,
 And the best of companions I found him in play--
 O fie and fiddle and ha ha he!




                            WILD WOOD BOGIES


 HIST little toddlekins, whisk and away!
 Now is the time for the bogies to play;
 Patter of foot-pads and eyes brightly glowing,
 Noses that sniffle the night breezes blowing,
 Bogies are romping the wildwood in glee,
 Frisking and scampering, nimble and free.

 Who are the velvet-foot, fire-eyed bogies?
 Coons and coyotes and wild woodland roguies!
 Playing at night-time when baby’s asleep;
 Whisk! did you see that ghost jack-rabbit leap?
 “Boo!” and “Boo-hoo!” cries the fluffy horned-owl,
 And the wolf in the pine-woods calls back with a howl.

 The panther slinks on in the trail of the deer,
 The wood-rats have run to their tunnels in fear,
 And down the steep mountain with snuffling and shuffling
 A clumsy she-bear with her cubbies is scuffling;
 For night is the time for the bogies to roam,--
 Hist, little toddlekins, fly to your home!




                              THE COYOTE


 CROUCHING in his monkish gray,
 Crunching at his dying prey,
 Furtive eyes and pricking ears,
 Haunted by a hundred fears!--
 Yet the cotton-tail trembles to see him pass
 With his pat pat patter on the parching grass!

 Lolling tongue and panting sides,--
 ’Mid the tawny grass he hides.
 Lowered is his bushy tail,
 Keen of snout he sniffs the trail;
 But he yelps and howls like a mad thing at night,
 With his kai yi yi in the moon’s dim light.

 Friendless prowler, sage-brush thief,
 Hunted rover, desert chief!
 Even you who friendless roam
 Have a loving mate at home,--
 And her little ones yelp in their lair with delight
 As she pat pat patters anear through the night.

 [Illustration: A coyote]




                            THE HUMMINGBIRD


 BUZ-Z! whir-r!--a flash and away!
 A midget bejeweled ’mid flowers at play!
 A snip of a birdling, the blossom-bells’ king,
 A waif of the sun-beams on quivering wing!

 O prince of the fairies, O pigmy of fire,
 Will nothing those brave little wings of yours tire?
 You follow the flowers from southern lands sunny,
 You pry amid petals all summer for honey.

 Now rest on a twig, tiny flowerland sprite,
 Your dear little lady sits near in delight;
 In a wee felted basket she lovingly huddles,--
 Two dots of white eggs to her warm breast she cuddles!

 Whiz-z! whiff! off to your flowers!
 Buzz ’mid the perfume of jasmine bowers!
 Chatter and chirrup, my king of the fays,
 And laugh at the song that I sing in your praise.

 [Illustration: A hummingbird]




                            THE ROAD-RUNNER


 A GRAY-STREAKED road-runner scurrying by
 In a sage-brush valley, I happened to spy,--
 Long-legged and thin-billed, with a stretched-out tail,
 And a comical body as thin as a rail!

 Oh surely, I thought, what a sad slim fowl
 Compared with his neighbor the well-fed owl!
 Till he pounced on a snake with a rapturous squeak,
 And rapped the poor reptile a clip with his beak.

 Then why is he nothing but feathers and skin?
 Is it running so fast that has worn him so thin?
 Just think what would happen, my lad, to you,
 If you ran all day like a ground cuckoo.

 [Illustration: A road-runner]




                           THE BURROWING OWL


 MY blinkety owlet atop of your mound,
 Is your mate tucked away in a hole in the ground?
 You bare-footed gnome in your striped suit of dun,
 With your fluffy white babies that bask in the sun!

 See her bobbing and blinking
 As if she were thinking
 Of the poor lady cricket
 That chirps in the thicket!

 With a snap and a chatter
 Mrs. Owlet is at her,
 And whisk! she is beaten
 And crunched up and eaten!--
 That poor lady cricket
 That chirped in the thicket!

 My blinkety owlet, go down in your hole,
 And sleep in your nest like a squirrel or mole!
 Who’d think that a bird could have toes for a trowel
 To grub in the ground like a burrowing owl!




                            THE CRESTED JAY


 THE jay is a jovial bird,--heigh-ho!
   He chatters all day
   In a frolicsome way
 With the murmuring breezes that blow,--heigh-ho!

   Hear him noisily call
   From a red-wood tree tall
 To his mate in the opposite tree, heigh-ho!
   Saying: “How do you do?”
   As his top-knot of blue
 Is raised as polite as can be,--heigh-ho!

   Oh impudent jay
   With your plumage so gay
 And your manners so jaunty and free,--heigh-ho!
   How little you guessed
   When you robbed the wren’s nest,
 That any stray fellow would see,--heigh-ho!

 [Illustration: Any stray fellow would see]




                         TROUBLE IN THE TREES


 THE birds had a meeting,--
   The owl was judge;
 But a jay came along
   And said ’twas all fudge.

 With a quill in his ear
   The shore-lark was clerk;
 The wren was a witness,
   And how she did perk!

 The king-bird was sheriff
   And brought in the shrike,
 When a goldfinch could scarcely
   Conceal her dislike.

 What talking and squawking,
   What whetting of bills!
 What ruffling of feathers,
   What bristling of quills!

 Till a fox heard the chatter
   And pounced on the jay,
 When swallows and sparrows
   And all flew away!

 [Illustration: An owl]




                             THE SQUIRREL


 IT must be risky
 To frolic so frisky
 Up in a swaying tree;
 To scamper and skip
 On a pine tree’s tip
 As you chatter away at me!

 Now what’s your hurry,
 You wood-imp furry,
 In your snug little suit of gray?
 You romp and rolic
 With fun and frolic
 Like wind with the leaves at play.

 O nervous nixie
 With ways so trixie,
 Fidgety sprite so frail!
 Sit up and munch
 At your pine-nut lunch
 In the shade of your bushy tail!

 [Illustration: A squirrel munching a pine-nut]




                    THE POLLIWOG THAT LOST ITS TAIL


 A WIGGLY little polliwog lived in a pool
 On the edge of a stream where the water was cool,
 Till one day he turned very green and pale
 For he found that he surely was losing his tail,
 And legs were sprouting and he caught the croup
 As he crawled up the bank with a hoarse, “Ge-loup!
 Ca-thump, ca-lump, ca-chug, ca-chook!

 Oh what can have happened?” he asked with a croak;
 “This seems like a regular bull-frog joke.”
 Then he stretched his legs for a mighty jump,
 And right in the water he landed ka-plump;
 Which made him smile from ear to ear,
 For he felt so very delightfully queer
 As he called to his mate, “I’m a frog, my dear!”

 [Illustration: Frog stretches his legs for a mighty jump]




                            THE HORNED TOAD


 HORNYKINS, Hornykins, open your eye,
 For close to your nose is a blue-bottle fly!
 Toadykins ruffle your spines and your frills
 And scurry away on the rocks to the hills!

 Little squat goblin, all bristling with spikes,
 Flattened-out lizard that nobody likes,
 Stone-colored hermit of sage-brush and sand,
 You’re the drollest hobgoblin of no-baby’s land!

 [Illustration: Horned toad]




                          A FAIRY IN A FLOWER


 A TINY gold fairy flew into a flower
 One morning at cock-crow, to hide from a shower;
 The drops fell a patter upon his tent roof,
 But what did it matter while leaves were rain proof?

 He found in the flower fine honey to eat;
 “So-so,” sang the fairy, “the food here is sweet!
 No prince in his palace fares better than I,
 Alone in my chalice with storms blowing by!”

 Now what do you think is the name of this fairy
 Who hid from the shower in lily-bell airy?
 His coat is bright yellow, black banded with fuzz;--
 This bumble-bee gay with his musical buzz!




                               BUTTERCUP


 BUTTERCUP, buttercup,
 Why don’t you hurry up
   Out of the ground so cold!
 With your little coat yellow,
 You dear little fellow,
   Why doesn’t your blossom unfold?

 [Illustration: Waiting for the buttercup blossom to unfold]




                             THE COLUMBINE


 FIVE doves the fairies took away
 To the deep dark wood one summer day,
 And they hung them up on a slender spray,--
   Heigh-ho for the columbine!

 Red and gold were the doves they took;
 With heads outstretched the birdlings shook,
 Till the fairies sang them to sleep by the brook,--
   Heigh-ho for the columbine!




                           THE LEOPARD LILY


 IN the forest stilly
 The leopard lily
 Sways on her stem so stately;
 Tall as a child
 In the mountains wild,
 She stands and nods sedately.

 Orange and red
 Is her dappled head
 And her anthers brown are a-quiver;
 O fie on you, lily,
 So vain and silly
 To look at yourself in the river!




                            JOHNNY JUMP-UP


 AS I walked under a black-oak tree
 A little Johnny Jump-up laughed at me.
   Here you yellow elf,
   Go and laugh to yourself,
 Or wink at the cricket that chirps on your knee.
 Ha ha ha! he he he!
 Merry Johnny Jump-up, wild and free!




                        SONG OF THE BROWN LILY


 FAIRY bells of green and brown
 Hanging high in a fairy town,
 With cloth of gold beneath them spread
 And mossy nooks for the fairies’ bed!

 Who is it rings the fairy bells,
 Ding dong! ding dong! down in the dells!
 Who is it flits to the fairies’ ball?
 The bee and the beetle have heard their call,
 Ding dong! ding dong! down in the dells!




                         SHOOTING STAR FLOWERS


 STARS of childhood,
 Stars of the wildwood,
   Shooting stars of purple and pink,
 Stars that hang in trembling showers,
 Stars of spring that are more than flowers,
   Swinging blithe at the cañon’s brink!

 Birds are playing
 Above you, swaying,
   Beloved stars of the woodland spring!
 Children shout and sing when they see you,
 And where is the fairy who dares to free you,
   Joyous spirits that sway and swing!




                         THE SCARLET LARKSPUR


 MERRY wee red-coats were frisking and dancing
   Down in the rocky glen,
 And the jolly old sun o’er the mountains was glancing
   At the merry wee red-coated men.

 Each little man had a horn on his head,
 And the old sun laughed as he got out of bed!
   The wind played a tune
   And they danced until noon,
 And, “A jolly good time we’ve had,” they said.




                             THE TRILLIUM


 O TRILLIUM dear
 I am glad you are here,
 While March rains are pattering,
 Brooklets are clattering,
 Kinglets are chattering,
 And you, pretty thing,
 Are just smiling and dreaming of spring.

 O shade-loving sprite,
 The cañon’s delight,--
 Three petals wine-red,
 Three leaves broadly spread,
 You leap from your bed
 In joy, pretty thing,
 To sway in the breezes of spring.




                            BABY BLUE-EYES


 BONNY baby blue-eyes
   Twinkling in the grass,
 Smiling on the sunny hill
   To see the children pass!

 Of all the flowers of spring-time
   The fairest and the frailest!
 There’s gladness in your baby eyes,--
   The purest and the palest!




                          WHO KNOWS ROSALIE?


 WHO knows Rosalie?
 There goes Rosalie
 Out where her roses are growing!
 The dear little tot
 With her watering pot
 Where the daisies are nodding and blowing.

 It’s six o’ the clock
 And the lily bells rock
 In the merry warm month of July;
 And Rosalie tells
 All the whispering bells
 Of the tear in the violet’s eye.




                            TO A WILD ROSE


 DEAR little rose, so sweet and fair,
 You give your perfume to the air,
 You give your honey to the bee,
 And all the day long you smile at me.

 O teach me, little rose, the way
 To smile at people all the day,
 To give from my heart-store the sweet
 To every one I chance to meet.




                       THE QUEEN OF THE FAIRIES


 I WANT to go out in the woods and play
 That I am the queen of the fairies to-day;
 So I’ll gather some stars from the midnight sky
 (There are plenty to spare in the jewels on high)
 And I’ll have them set in a crown of gold;
 For a sceptre a tiger lily I’ll hold;
 A violet bed will be my throne
 And the beautiful world will be mine alone.

 I’ll make one law my realm to bind,
 That everybody must just be kind
 And love all children and flowers and birds
 And always speak in gentle words.
 What a happy land will my kingdom be
 Where hopes are high and hearts are free!




                           QUIPS AND CRANKS




                               MY AUNTIE


 HOW would you like to have for an auntie
 Kittie ka dink ka dee ka dantie?
 Kittie ka dink
 With frolicsome wink,
 Kittie ka dink
 With ruffles of pink,
 Kittie ka dink,--
 Now what do you think
 Of Kittie ka dink for an auntie?

 Kittie ka dink ka dee
 Is as bright as a bumble bee,
 Kittie ka dink ka dee,
 She dresses my dolls for me!
 Kittie ka dink ka dee,--

 If you knew her I’m sure you’d agree
 That Kittie ka dink
 With frolicsome wink
 In ruffles of pink,
 Is the jolliest kind of an auntie!

 [Illustration: Kittie ka dink]




                            THE BEAR HUNTER


 IF I should meet a grizzly bear
 A-roaming from his mountain lair,
 I’d just get down on hands and knees
 And growl around among the trees.

 Then if my growling didn’t scare
 That great ferocious grizzly bear,
 I’d sing a song and at my ease
 Just try my best the bear to please.




                            TRYING TO PLAY


 O A gentleman dressed in a high top hat
 Rode on a hobby-horse just like that.
 “Mr. Man, Mr. Man, O what is the matter?”
 “Little boy, let me hear no more of your chatter.”

 So he pranced and he kicked till his glasses fell off,
 And he puffed and he choked till it made him cough;
 Then he stopped and said in his solemn way,
 “My child, I was merely attempting to play.”




                            MAGGIE MULDOON


 O DOWN at Milpitas there was an old hag
 Who drove to town with a bobtail nag.
 She rattled along in a rickety rig,
 With a red bandana to cover her wig.

 When a wheel came off and she tumbled ka-flop,
 She hobbled away to the blacksmith shop;
 And the blacksmith said: “O Maggie Muldoon,
 If you’ll dance me a breakdown I’ll sing you a tune!”




                          THE BOOBITY BUMPKIN


 A BOOBITY bumpity bumpkin
 Was sent to town with a pumpkin,
 But he stumbled and tripped
 As he hippity skipped,
 And smackety smash went the pumpkin!




                          FARMER JONES’S GOAT


 OLD Farmer Jones had a frisky old goat
 That wore a long beard and a hairy black coat,
 With hoofs on its feet and horns on its head,
 And a sad hungry look on its face while it fed.

 Now what do you think was its favorite caper?
 It would eat Farmer Jones’s weekly Saturday paper;
 But the diet was more than the goat could endure,
 So it fed upon sawdust and rags for a cure.




                            POOR MR. MIDAS


 O POOR Mr. Midas did nothing but think
 Of the sound that his money made,--chink, chink, chink!
 He filled his pockets, he filled his shoes,
 But the more he gathered the less he could use.

 It weighed on his mind till he scarce slept a wink,
 And then he would dream of the chink, chink, chink.
 He filled his boxes, he filled his bed,
 And so there was nothing to fill but his head.




                            THREE WISE MEN


 THREE wise men sailed away on a bat,
 But the one who was bald forgot his hat;
 The one who made music forgot his fife,
 And the one who was married forgot his wife.

 The bat flew straight to the Man in the Moon,
 And they said, “Kind sir, is it night or noon?”
 So the Man in the Moon his brain he racked
 And decided the three wise men were cracked.




                         A GOBBLER IN TROUBLE


 O WHAT would the turkey gobbler do
 If he got the hiccoughs before he was through
 With his gobble-gobble-gobble-gobble-gobble?

 I’m sure that he could never see through the joke
 If he started to gobble and stopped to choke
 In his gobble-gobble-gobble-gobble-gobble.

 The puffed-out fool would grow red in the face,
 And the hens would laugh at their lord’s disgrace,
 At his gobble, hic! gobble, hic! gobble-gobble-gobble!




                    THE TALE OF A POOR LITTLE WORM


 JUST listen to that,
 Rat-atat-tat!
 “’Tis a woodpecker,” whispered a worm.
 As he crouched in a cranny
 He called to his granny,
 “Hark hark, hark hark,
 Rap-a-tap on the bark,
 That noise makes me shiver and squirm!”

 Then a long barbed tongue
 Right through him was flung,
 And down in the gizzard he wallowed;
 It made him grow pale
 Till he thought of the whale
 With Jonah inside,
 Then he shivered and cried:
 “’Tis a fatal mistake to be swallowed.”




                          RHYMES FOR TODDLERS




                            TO PUSSY WHITE


 LITTLE white furrykins,
 Sly pussie purrykins,
   Snoozing all day by the grate
 Pinky-nosed kittie cat,
 Who wouldn’t pity that
   Snip of a mouse that you ate!

 Hittlety skittlety,
 Mousie squeaked, “Mercy me!”--
   Off went his head with a snap;
 Ere he knew what had jolted him,
 Kittie had bolted him
   And stretched herself out for a nap.




                              CHINA DOLLS


 THERE are china cups and china dolls
   And Chinamen galore,
 All huddled in together
   In a little China store.

 The china cups are pretty
   And the china dolls, O dear,
 I wish I had a hundred
   Sitting round me now, right here.

 But the Chinaman that sells them,
   With his slits of eyes askew,
 And hair all braided down his back
   In such a funny queue!--

 If all his dolls should grow and grow
   Until like him they grew,
 And I should have the care of them,
   O dear, what would I do?




                           DOLLIE’S LULLABY


 DOLLIE’S in the cradle
   Falling fast asleep;
 Hush, little mamma,
   Run and take a peep.

 Whisper low to dollie:
   “Dream of pleasant things,
 Fairies in the doll house
   A-dance in fairy rings;

 “Fairies round the cradle
   Flying to and fro,
 Singing in the moonlight
   Fairy music low.”

 Shut are dollie’s eyelids,
   Cover up her arm;
 Keep the little dollie dear
   Safe from every harm.

 [Illustration: Covering Dollie in the cradle]




                               BABY LIFE


 WHAT can little baby do?
 Clap his hands and coo and coo;
 Kick and roll and smile and grow,--
 That is why we love him so!

 [Illustration: Baby]




                            LITTLE BROTHER


 LITTLE brother full of glee,
 With dainty hand and dimpled knee,
 Chubby little laughing boy,
 Father’s pride and Mother’s joy!

 Ringlets gold on shapely head,
 Smiles that break ere tears have fled,
 Eyes of blue that open wide,
 Wondering at the world outside!

 Merry spirit, sweetly wild,
 Why are you, my precious child,
 Dearer far than any other
 Loving sister’s little brother?




                             PLAYING HORSE


 HORSE and cart and tinkling lines,
 Rattling under the passion vines;
 Up the road and down the lane
 And round the yard to the door again!

 Babe is driver, snap the whip!
 Watch the turn and don’t you tip.
 Nero barks as the chickens scatter,
 Dust is flying and cart-wheels clatter.

 Nell, the cook at the kitchen door,
 Wonders what the noise is for.
 Round the house on the run they go
 Till baby calls to the horsie,--“whoa!”




                               MY DONKEY


 MY little Donkey is a dear,
 We call her Mistress Bunny,
 Her ears are very long and queer
 And her voice is O so funny,--
 Haw-he, haw-he, haw-he!

 I saddle her and bridle her
 And on her back I climb
 To ride around the Berkeley streets
 And have a happy time,--
 Haw-he, haw-he, haw-he!

 I tied her with a long, long rope
 Where she could eat the grass,
 But O my burro broke her rope
 And ran away, alas!
 Haw-he, haw-he, haw-he!




                         BABY IN THE BARNYARD


 BABY with the big blue eyes,
 Tell me why you look so wise
 When you watch the kitties play,
 Or old Billy eating hay.

 Do the horses talk to you,
 Baby with the eyes of blue?
 Can you tell me what they say
 When they look at you and neigh?

 And the romping kitties, too,
 When they cry out, mew, mew, mew,
 Have they secrets, baby dear,
 Only meant for you to hear?

 When the doggie says, bow-wow
 To the lazy muley-cow,
 And the cow replies, moo, moo,
 Are they talking still to you?

 And the piggie in her pen,
 Grunting to the setting hen,
 Ugh, ugh, ugh, can baby tell
 What the piggie means to spell?

 Lying in her bed at morn,
 Baby hears a lusty horn
 Sounding, rook-a-dook-a-doo!
 And baby laughs as if she knew.

 Baby loves them, one and all,
 And she answers when they call;
 And they tell her wondrous tales
 Of the barnyard, hills and dales.




                           BABY’S GOOD-NIGHT


 LITTLE eyes droop in the dim evening light;
 Wave your hand, little maiden, good-bye, good-night;

 Throw a kiss to the doggie--he’s wagging his tail--
 And wave to the muley-cow down in the dale.

 Hark! hark! she is ringing good-night with her bell;--
 Now toss to the kitties a sweet farewell.

 Good-night to the birds, in the branches asleep,
 Good-night to the stars that twinkle and peep;

 Good-night to the horn of the moon in the west,
 And toddle away to your warm little nest.

 [Illustration: Wave your hand, little maiden, good-bye, good-night]




                                 DOGS


 I HAVE many little doggie friends;
 There’s Jip who wags at both his ends,
 And Buddie like a ball of silk,
 Who laps the cream and sniffs at milk,
 And Judie with her rubber ball
 Who never minds me when I call,
 And Rab who runs before the horse,--
 I love to hear him bark, of course,
 ’Cept sometimes he most barks in two,
 And then I wish he’d stop, don’t you?




                              MY ANIMALS


 HAVE you seen my little animals
   Shut in a paper house?--
 There’s a donkey and a camel
   With a kittie and a mouse;

 There’s a doggie and an elephant,
   A lion and a bear,
 All huddled in together,
   And they never seem to care!

 O I’m very, very hungry
   And I think I’d like to eat
 The donkey and the lion
   And the elephant for meat;

 They are all made out of crackers,
   And if Mamma says I may,
 I’ll eat a half a bag of them
   And give the rest away.

 [Illustration: Boy with bag of acrackers]




                          BROWN BABY BALLADS




                           SIX LITTLE ESKIMO


 SIX jolly little Eskimo
 Lived in the land of ice and snow.
 They played with their ivory dolls all night
 In a stuffy igloo with a smoky oil light.
 I wouldn’t live in a smoky igloo,
 Would you?

 They dressed in seal-skin from hood to heel;
 I wonder how such a suit would feel!
 They chewed their blubber and smacked their lips
 And wiggled their toes and finger tips,
 But I wouldn’t like such food to chew,
 Would you?

 And when they were tired of eating and play
 Their mammas stowed them safely away
 In the big white skin of a polar bear.
 Six little black heads in a row were there,
 But I wouldn’t like to be one of that crew,
 Would you?

 [Illustration: Little Eskimo dressed in seal-skin]




                          PICCANINNY LULLABY


 BAH low mah littl’ honey,
   Bah low, littl’ piccaninny boy,
 Shoo, shoo, littl’ coon, mah sonny,
   Stop yoh winkin’ at yoh mammy, littl’ joy.

 Sh! Sh! de wind comes creepin’,
   Now cuddle close to mammy--so--so.
 Quit yoh fussin’, don’ yoh know it’s time foh sleepin’
   When de moon peeks in an’ tells yoh, littl’ Joe?

 Go to sleep, shut yoh eyes, littl’ coon
   Or de Voodoo come an’ fetch yoh right away;
 Carry yoh cleah up into de moon,
   An’ den what would yoh poh old mammy say?




                          THE MEXICAN BABIES


 THE Mexican babies are chubby and gay;
   Each family has ten or a dozen,
 And all in the town are related, they say,
   From a first to a twentieth cousin.

 The house is adobe, the floor is of dirt;
   In the patio sheltered and sunny
 The babies can toddle with never a shirt
   While their mammas can sing without money.

 If the little black-headed brown baby should cry,
   Or madre grow sick of his prattle,
 His tears in an instant his sister can dry
   With the end of a snake for a rattle.

 Their little black dogs are a sight to behold,
   All hairless and wrinkled as mummies;
 With blankets about them to keep out the cold,
   And the babies about them for chummies.

 How happy these imps from the day they are born,--
   They toddle and tumble in tatters;
 Their faces are dirty, their clothes are all torn,
   But nobody thinks that it matters.




                           THE LITTLE PIUTE


 UP in Winnemucca in Piute land,
 Where the hot sun falls on the sage-brush sand,
 A little papoose in a basket lay,
 Fat as a badger and ready for play.

 Mahali was proud of the way he grew
 Upon acorn soup and on pine-nut stew;
 She caught him a lizard and let it wiggle,
 Which set him off in a Piute giggle.

 But the brush hut is lonely, for father’s not there;
 In ghost-land he’s hunting the bison and bear.
 Soon you will follow; alas--too soon,
 As your clan moves on toward the setting moon!




                           THE HONOLULU BOY


 COCOANUT milk and poi,
   Cocoanut curds and fish,
 For the Honolulu boy,--
   What more could a baby wish?

 Taro and yams and chicken,--
   Baby shall have a feast,--
 Bones of the pig for pickin’,
   Fat little face well greased!

 A sleep in the house of grasses,
   A swim in the cool lagoon,
 A kiss as the trade wind passes,
   And a low Kanaka tune!




                          A SAMOA SLEEPY-SONG


 LIE on your mat, little tama, and sleep;
   The pigeon has gone to its rest in the palm;
 I see the bright moon through the ifi trees peep,
   And the sleepy waves sing on the coral reef calm.

 Sing to my tama, soft waves of the sea;
   Some day he’ll ride in his rocking canoe,--
 Ride on your laughing crests, happy and free,
   Joyous to roll on your rollicking blue.

 Sleep, little tama, the bats flutter low,
   The breeze through the breadfruit-tree sighs to the star;
 And out on the water, with torches aglow,
   Your father and brother are fishing afar.

 Tina will tuck the siapo around;
   Sleep, little chief, for the spirits are nigh!
 Fish-gods and wind-gods, and gods of the ground
   Watch my brown baby as round him they fly!

 [Illustration: Lie on your mat, little tama, and sleep]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELFIN SONGS OF SUNLAND ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


