The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Life and Adventures of Peter Wilkins, Volume 2 (of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Life and Adventures of Peter Wilkins, Volume 2 (of 2)

Author: Robert Paltock

Commentator: A. H. Bullen

Release date: May 2, 2016 [eBook #51968]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by David Widger from page images generously
        provided by the Internet Archive


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF PETER WILKINS, VOLUME 2 (OF 2) ***

THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF PETER WILKINS.

By Robert Paltock

With A Preface By A. H. Bullen

Vol. II (of II)

London: Reeves & Turner, 196 Strand.

1884.

[Illustration: 0001]

[Illustration: 0007]




LIFE and ADVENTURES OF PETER WILKINS

A Cornish Man

Relating particularly,

His Shipwreck near the South Pole; his wonderful Passage thro' a
subterraneous Cavern into a kind of new World; his there meeting with a
Gawry or flying woman, whose Life he preserv'd, and afterwards married
her; his extraordinary Conveyance to the Country of Glums and Gawrys, or
Men and Women that fly. Likewise a Description of this strange Country,
with the Laws, Customs, and Manners of its Inhabitants, and the Author's
remarkable Transactions among them.

Taken from his own Mouth, in his Passage to England from off Cape Horn
in America, in the ship Hector.

With an INTRODUCTION, giving an Account of the surprizing Manner of his
coming on board that Vessel, and his Death on his landing at Plymouth in
the Year 1739.

Illustrated with several Cuts, clearly and distinctly representing the
Structure and Mechanism of the Wings of the Glums and Gawrys, and the
Manner in which they use them either to swim or fly.

By R. S. a Passenger in the Hector.

In Two Volumes.

[Illustration: 0011]




CONTENTS OF VOL. II.

CHAPT I.

A discourse on light--Quangrollart explains the word crashee--Believes a
fowl is a fruit--Gives a further account of Youwarkee's reception by
her father, and by the king--Tommy and Hallycarnie provided for at
court--Youwarkee and her father visit the colambs, and are visited--Her
return put off till next winter, when her father is to come with her

CHAPT II.

The author shows Quangrollart and Rosig his poultry--They are surprised
at them--He takes them a-fishing--They wonder at his cart, and at his
shooting a fowl--They are terribly frightened at the firing of the
gun--He pacifies them

CHAPT III.

Peter prepares for his father's reception--Arguments about his
beard--Expects his wife--Reflections on her not coming--Sees a messenger
on the rock--Has notice of Pendlehamby's arrival and prepares a treat

CHAPT IV.

Peter settles the formality, of his father's reception--Description
of their march and alighting--Receives his father--Conducts him to
the grotto--Offers to beg pardon for his marriage--Is prevented by
Pendlehamby--Youwarkee not known in her English habit--Quarters the
officers in the tent

CHAPT V.

The manner of their dinner--Believe the fish and fowl to be
fruits--Hears his brother and the colambs are coming--Account of their
lying--Peter's reflections on the want of the graundee--They view
the arkoe--Servants harder to please than their masters--Reasons for
different dresses the same day

CHAPT VI.

Quangrollart arrives with the colambs--Straitened for
accommodation--Remove to the tent--Youwarkee not known--Peter relates
part of his travels--Dispute about the beast-fish skins

CHAPT VII.

Go a-fishing--Catch a beast-fish--Afraid of the gun--How Peter altered
his net--A fish-dinner for the guards--Method of dressing and eating it

CHAPT VIII.

A shooting proposed--All afraid of the gun but one private guard--His
behaviour--Pendlehamby at Peter's request makes him a general--Peter's
discourse thereon--Remainder of his story--The colambs return

CHAPT IX.

Peter finds his stores low--Sends Youwarkee to the ship--Receives an
invitation to Georigetti's court

CHAPT X.

Nasgig comes with a guard to fetch Peter--Long debate about his
going--Nasgig's uneasiness at Peter's refusal--Relates a prediction to
him, and proceedings thereon at Georigetti's court--Peter consents to
go--Prepares a machine for that purpose

CHAPT XI.

Peter's speech to the soldiery--Offers them freedom--His journey--Is met
by the king--The king sent back, and why--Peter alights in the king's
garden--His audience--Description of his supper and bed

CHAPT XII.

The king's apartments described--Peter is introduced to the king--A
moucheratt called--His discourse with the king about religion

CHAPT XIII.

Peter's reflections on what he was to perform--Settles the method
of it--His advice to his son and daughter--Globe-lights living
creatures--Takes Maleck into his service--Nasgig discovers to Peter a
plot in court--Revolt of Gauingrunt

CHAPT XIV.

Hold a moucheratt--Speeches of ragans and colambs--Peter settles
religion--Informs the king of a plot--Sends Nasgig to the ship for
cannon

CHAPT XV.

The king hears Barbarsa and Yaccombourse discourse on the plot--They
are impeached by Peter at a moucheratt--Condemned and executed--Nicor
submits, and is released

CHAPT XVI.

Nasgig returns with the cannon--Peter informs him of the
execution--Appoints him a guard--Settles the order of his march against
Harlokin--Combat between Nasgig and the rebel general--The battle--Peter
returning with Harlokin's head is met by a sweecoan--A public
festival--Slavery abolished

CHAPT XVII.

A visitation of the revolted provinces proposed by Peter--His new name
of the country received--Religion settled in the west--Slavery abolished
there--Lasmeel returns with Peter--Peter teaches him letters--The king
surprised at written correspondence--Peter describes the make of a beast
to the king

CHAPT XVIII.

Peter sends for his family--A rising of former slaves on that
account--Takes a view of the city--A description of it, and of the
country--Hot and cold springs

CHAPT XIX.

Peter sends for his family--Pendlehamby gives a fabulous account of the
peopling of that country--Their policy and government--Peter's
discourse on trade--You-warkee arrives--Invites the king and nobles to a
treat--Sends to Graundevolet for fowls

CHAPT XX.

Peter goes to his father's--Traverses the Black Mountain--Takes a
flight to Mount Alkoe--Gains the miners--Overcomes the governor's
troops--Proclaims Georigetti king--Seizes the governor--Returns him the
government--Peter makes laws with the consent of the people, and returns
to Brandleguarp with deputies

CHAPT XXI.

Peter arrives with the deputies--Presents them to the king--They
return--A colony agreed to be sent thither--Nasgig made governor--Manner
of choosing the colony--A flight-race, and the intent of it--Walsi wins
the prize and is found to be a gawry

CHAPT XXII.

The race reconciles the two kingdoms--The colony proceeds--Builds a
city--Peter views the country at a distance--Hears of a prophecy of
the king of Norbon's daughter Stygee--Goes thither--Kills the king's
nephew--Fulfils the prophecy by engaging Stygee to Georigetii--Returns

CHAPT XXIII.

A discourse on marriage between Peter and Georigetii--Peter proposes
Stygee--The king accepts it--Relates his transactions at Norbon--The
marriage is consummated--Account of the marriage ceremony--Peter goes
to Norbon--Opens a free trade to Mount Alkoe--Gets traders to settle at
Norbon--Convoys cattle to Mount Alkoe

CHAPT XXIV.

Peter looking over his books finds he has got a Latin Bible--

Sets about a translation--Teaches some of the ragans letters--Sets up
a paper manufacture--Makes the ragans read the Bible--The ragans teach
others to read and write--A fair kept at the Black Mountain--Peter's
reflections on the Swangeantines

CHAPT XXV.

Peter's children provided for--Youwarkee's death--How the king and
queen spent their time--Peter grows melancholy--Wants to get to
England--Contrives means--Is taken up at sea

[Illustration: 5016]

[Illustration: 0017]




A GENUINE ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE OF PETER WILKINS.



CHAPTER I.

_A discourse on light--Quangrollart explains the word crashee--Believes
a fowl is a fruit--Gives a further account of Youwarkeds reception by
her father, and by the king--Tommy and Hallycarnie provided for at
court--Youwarkee and her father visit the colambs, and are visited--Her
return put off till next winter, when her father is to come with her._

THE next day I prepared again of the best of everything for my new
guests. I killed three fowls, and ordered Pedro (who was as good a cook
almost as myself) to get them ready for boiling, whilst we took a walk
to the lake. Though we went out in the clearest part of the morning, I
heard no complaint of the light. I took the liberty to ask my brother if
the light did not offend him; for I told him my wife could not bear so
much without spectacles.--"What is that spectacle?" says he.--"Something
I made your sister," says I, "to prevent the inconvenience of too much
light upon her eyes."--He said the light was scarce at all troublesome
to him, for he had been in much greater, and was used to it; and that
the glumms, who travelled much abroad, could bear more light than the
gawrys, who stayed much at home: these stirring but little out unless
in large companies, and that of one another, and very rarely admitted
glumms amongst them before marriage. For his own part, he said, he
had an office at Crashdoorpt, * which, though he executed chiefly by
a deputy, obliged him to reside there sometimes for a long season
together; that being a more luminous country than Arndrumnstake, light
was become familiar to him; for it was very observable that some who
had been used to it young, though they might in time overcome it, yet at
first it was very uneasy.

     * The country of the Slits.

I was upon the tenter whilst he spoke, lest, before he had done, a
question I had a thousand times thought to have asked my wife, should
slip out of my head, as it had so often done before, and was what I had
for years desired to be resolved in; viz., what the meaning of the word
slit was, when applied to a man. So, on his pausing, I said that his
mention of Crashdoorpt reminded me of inquiring what crashee meant, when
applied to a glumm or gawry. "It would be no hard task," he said, "to
satisfy me in respect of that, as I already understood the nature of the
graundee;" whereupon he went on thus: "Slitting is the only punishment
we use to incorrigible criminals: our method is, where any one has
committed a very heinous offence, or, which is the same thing, has
multiplied the acts of offence, he has a long string tied round his
neck, in the manner of a cravat; and then two glumms, one at each
end, take it in their hands, standing side by side with him; two more
standing before him, and two behind him; all which in that manner take
flight, so that the string keeps the criminal in the middle of them:
thus they conduct him to Crashdoorpt, which lies farther on the other
side of Arndrumnstake than this arkoe does on this side of it, and is
just such an arkoe as ours, but much bigger within the rocks. When they
come to the covett they alight, where my deputy immediately orders
the malefactor to be slit, so that he can never more return to
Normnbdsgrsutt, or indeed by any means get out of that arkoe, but must
end his days there. The method of slitting is thus: The criminal is laid
on his back with his graundee open, and after a recapitulation of his
crimes, and his condemnation, the officer with a sharp stone slits the
gume * between each of the filuses ** of the graundee, so that he can
never fly more. But what is still worse to new-comers, if they are not
very young, is the light of the place, which is so strong that it is
some years before they can overcome it, if ever they do."

This discourse gave me a great pleasure; thereupon I repeated the
dialogue that had passed between me and Youwarkee about my being slit,
and how we had held an argument a long time, without being able to come
at one another's meaning. "But pray, brother," says I, "how comes that
light country to agree so well with you?"--"Why," says he, "the colambat
*** of Crashdoorpt is reckoned one of the most honourable employments
in the state, by reason of the hazard of it, and the person accepting it
must be young: it was, by my father's interest at court, given to me at
nine years of age; my friend Rosig has followed my fortune in it ever
since, being much about my age, and has a post under me there: in short,
by being obliged to be so much there, and from so tender an age too, I
have pretty well inured myself to any light."

     * The membrane.

     ** Ribs.

     *** Government.

By this time we had got home again to dinner, which Pedro had set out
as elegantly as my country could afford, consisting of pickles and
preserves, as usual, a dish of hard eggs, and boiled fowls with spinage.

My guests, as I expected, stared at the fowls, but never offered to
touch them, or seemed in the least inclined to do so. I was afraid they
would be cold, and begged them to let me help them. I put a wing on each
of their plates, and a leg on my own; but perceiving they waited to see
how I managed it, I stuck in my fork, cut off a slice, dipped it in the
salt, and put it in my mouth. Just as I did they did, and appeared very
well pleased with the taste. "I never in my life," says Rosig, "saw a
crullmott*of this shape before;" and laid hold of a leg (taking it for
a stick I had thrust in, as he told me afterwards), intending to pull
it out; but finding it grew there, "Mr. Peter," says he, "you have the
oddest-shaped crullmotts that ever I saw; pray what part of the woods do
they grow in?"--"Grow in?" says I.--"Aye," says he, "I mean whether your
crullmott-trees are like ours or not?"--"Why," says I, "these fowls
are about my yard and the wood too."--"What!" says he, "is it a running
plant like a bott?" **--"No, no," says I, "a bird that I keep tame about
my house; and these (showing him the eggs) are the eggs of these birds,
and the birds grow from them."--"Pr'ythee," says Quangrollart, "never
let's inquire what they are till we have dined; for my brother Peter
will give us nothing we need be afraid of."

     * A fruit like a melon.

     ** A gourd.

It growing into the night by that time we rose from table, I set a bowl
of punch before them, made with my treacle and sour ram's-horn juice,
which they pulled off plentifully. After some bumpers had gone round,
I desired my brother to proceed where he left off, in the account of my
wife's reception with her father.

"When my father," says he, "had recovered himself by some hours' repose,
the first thing he did was to order my sister Youwarkee to be called;
who, coming into his presence, he took her from her knees, kissed her,
and ordered all to depart but myself and Hallycarnie. Then bidding us
sit down, says he to your wife, 'Daughter, your appearance, whom I have
so long lamented as dead, has given me the truest cordial I could have
received, and I hope will add both to my health and years. I have heard
you suspect my anger for some part of your past conduct (for he had
hinted so to her sister and me), which you justly enough imagined may
be censured; but, my dear life, I am this day, what I did not expect any
more to be, a father of a new-born child; and not of one only, but of
many; and this day, I say, daughter, shall not be spent in sorrow and
excuses, or anything to interrupt our mutual felicity; neither will
I ever hereafter permit you to forget my forgiveness, or attempt to
palliate any of your proceedings; for know, child, that a benevolence
freely bestowed is better than twice its value obtained by petition: I,
therefore, as in presence of the Great Image, your brother and sister,
at this instant erase from my mind for ever what thoughts I may have had
prejudicial to the love I ever bore you, as I will have you to do all
such as may cloud the unreserved complacency you used to appear with
before me. And now, Quangrollart,' says he, 'let the guard be drawn out
before my covett, and let the whole country be entertained for seven
days; proclaim liberty to all persons confined; and let not the least
sorrow appear in any face throughout my colambat.'

"I retired immediately, and gave the necessary orders for the speedy
despatch of my father's commands, which indeed were performed to the
utmost; and nothing for seven days was to be heard through the whole
district of Arndrumnstake but joy and the name of Youwarkee.

"My father, so soon as he had despatched the above orders, sent for the
children before him, whom he kissed and blessed, frequently lifting up
his eyes in gratitude to the Great Image for the unexpected happiness he
enjoyed on that occasion; and then he ordered Youwarkee to let him know
what had befallen her in her absence, and where she lived, and with
whom.

"Youwarkee was setting out with some indirect excuses; but my father
absolutely forbid her, and charged her only to mention plain facts,
without flourishes. So she began with her swangean, and the accidental
fall she had, your taking her in after it, and saving her life. She told
him your continued kindness so wrought upon her, that she found herself
incapable of disesteeming you, but never showed her affection, till,
having examined every particular of your life, and finding you a worthy
man, she could not avoid becoming your wife; and she said the reasons
why she always declined being seen by her friends in their swangeans,
was for fear she should be forced from you, though she longed to see
us; and that at last she was to come by your consent, and that, had it
rested there only, she might have come much sooner, for that you would
often have had her show herself to her friends, when you heard them,
having strong desires yourself to be known to them.

"My father, upon hearing this, was so charmed with your tenderness and
affection to his daughter, that you already rival his own issue in
his esteem, and he is persuaded he can never do enough for you or your
children.

"The noise of Youwarkee's return, and my father's rejoicing, soon spread
over all Normnbdsgrsutt; and King Georigetti sent express to my father,
to command him to attend with your wife and children at Brandleguarp,
his capital. Thither accordingly we all went with a grand retinue, and
stayed twenty days. The king took great delight, as well as the ladies
of the court, to hear Youwarkee and her children talk English, and in
being informed of you and your way of life; and so fond was Yaccombourse
(who, though not the king's wife, is instead of one) of my nephew Tommy,
that, upon my father's return, she took him to herself, and assured
my sister he should continue near her person till he was qualified for
better preferment. The king's sister Jahamel would also have taken Patty
into her service; but she begged to be permitted to attend her mother
to Arndrumnstake; so Hallycarnie, her sister, who chose to continue with
Jahamel, was received in her room.

"Upon my father's return to Arndrumnstake, he found no less than fifteen
expresses from several colambs, desiring to rejoice with him on the
return of his daughter, with particular invitations to him and her to
spend some time with them. My father, though he hates more pomp than
is necessary to support dignity, could do no less than severally visit
them, with Youwarkee, attended by a grand retinue, spending more or less
days with each; hoping when that was over, he should have some little
time to spend in retirement with his daughter before her departure, who
now began to be uneasy for you, who, she said, would suffer the greatest
concern in her absence: but upon their return from those visits, at
about the end of four months' progress, they found themselves in as
little likelihood of retirement as the first day; for the inferior
colambs were continually posting away, one after another, to perform
their respects to my father, and all the inferior magistrates of smaller
districts sending to know when they might be permitted to do the same.
Poor Youwarkee, who saw no end of it, expressed her concern for you in
so lively a manner to my father, that finding he could by no means put
a stop to the goodwill of the people, and not bearing the thoughts of
You-warkee's departure till she had now received all their compliments,
he resolved to keep her with him till the next winter set in in these
parts, and then to accompany her himself to Graundevolet. In the
meanwhile, that you might not remain in an uneasy suspense what was
become of my sister, he ordered me to despatch messengers express to
inform you of the reasons of her stay; but I told him, if he pleased,
I would execute that office myself, with my friend Rosig, with which he
was very well pleased, and enjoined me to assure you of his affection,
and that he himself was debtor to you for the love and kindness you had
shown his daughter.

"Thus, brother," says Quangrollart, "I hope I have acquitted myself of
my charge to your satisfaction, and it only now remains that I return
you my acknowledgments for your hearty welcome to myself and friend;
which (with concern I speak it) I am afraid I shall not have an
opportunity to return at Arndrumnstake, the distance being so immensely
great and you not having the graundee. To-morrow morning my friend and I
will set out on our return home."

Quangrollart having done, I told him I could not but blush at the load
of undeserved praises he had laid on me; but as he had received his
notion of my merits from a wife too fond to let my character sink for
want of her support, it would be sufficient if himself could conceive
of, and also represent me at his return, in no worse a light than other
men; and though it gave me pain to think of losing my wife so long, yet
his account of her health and the company he assured me she would return
in, would doubly compensate my loss; and I begged of him, if it might
be with any convenience, he would let some messenger come the day before
her, to give me notice of their approach. As to their departure on the
morrow, I told them I could by no means think of that, as I had proposed
to catch them a dinner of fresh fish in the lake, and to show them my
boat, and how and where I came into this arkoe, believing, by what I had
observed, it would be no small novelty to them. So, having engaged them
one day more, we parted for that night to rest.

[Illustration: 5027]

[Illustration: 0028]




CHAPTER II.

_The Author shows Quangrollart and Rosig his poultry--They are surprised
at them--He takes them a-fishing--They wonder at his cart, and at his
shooting a fowl--They are terribly frightened at the firing of the
gun--Wilkins pacifies them._


I WAS heartily sorry to lose my brother thus quickly, and still more so
to find it would be a long time yet ere I should see my wife; however, I
was resolved to behave as cheerfully as possible, and to omit nothing
I could do, the few remaining hours of Quangrollart's stay with me, to
rivet myself thoroughly in his esteem, and to dismiss him with a most
cordial affection to me and the rest of my children here with him. I
rose early in the morning, to provide a good breakfast for my guests,
and considering we should be in the air most part of that day, I treated
them with a dish of hot fish-soup, and set before them on the table a
jovial bottle of brandy and my silver can; this last piece I chose to
show them, as a specimen of the richness of my household furniture, and
the grandeur of my living, concealing most of my other curiosities
till Pendlehamby my father-in-law's arrival, for I thought it would
be imprudent not to have somewhat new of this kind to display at his
entertainment.

After a plenteous meal, we set out on our pleasurable expedition, having
told Pedro what to get for dinner, and that I believed we should not
return till late.

We first took a turn in the wood, but I did not lead them near my tent,
because I did not choose my wife should hear of that till she came.
I then showed them my farmyard and poultry, which they were strangely
surprised at, and wondered to see so many creatures come at my call, and
run about my legs only upon a whistle, though before there were only two
or three to be seen. They asked me a hundred questions about the fowl,
which I answered, and told them these were some such as they had eaten,
and called crullmotts, the day before. I afterwards carried them to hear
the music of those plants that I call my cream-cheese, which, as there
happened to be a small breeze stirring, made their usual melody.

When we had diverted ourselves some time in the wood, we went to the
wet-dock, where I showed them my boat. At first view they wondered what
use it was for; to satisfy them in that I stepped in, desiring them
to follow me; but seeing the boat's agitation, they did not choose to
venture till I assured them they might come with the greatest safety;
at length, with some persuasion and repeated assurances, I prevailed on
them to trust themselves with me.

We first rowed to the bridge, where I informed them by what accident
I was drawn down the stream on the other side of the rock, and after a
tedious and dangerous passage, discharged safe in the lake through that
opening.

I then told them how surprised I had been, just before I knew Youwarkee,
with the sight of her country-folks, first on the lake, and then taking
flight from that bridge, and what had been my thoughts, and how great my
terrors on that occasion.

After we had viewed the bridge, I took them to my rill (for by this
time they were reconciled to the boat, and would help me to row it),
and showed them how I got water. I then landed them to see the method of
fishing, for which purpose I laid my net in proper order, and fixing it
as usual, I brought it round out at the rill, and had a very good haul,
with which I desired them to help me up; for though I could easily have
done it myself, I had a mind to let them have a hand in the sport,
with which they were pleased. I perceived, however, the fish were not
agreeable to them, for when any one came near their hands, they avoided
touching it: notwithstanding, having got the net on shore, I laid it
open; but to see how they stared at the fish, creeping backwards, and
then at me and the net, it made me very merry to myself, though I did
not care to show it.

I drew up at that draught twenty-two fishes in all, of which a few were
near an ell long, several about two feet, and some smaller. When they
saw me take up the large ones in my arms, and tumble them into the
boat, they both, unrequested, took up the small ones, and put them in
likewise; but dropping them every time they struck their tails, the fish
had commonly two or three falls ere they came to the boat.

I asked them how they liked that sport, and they told me, it was
somewhat very surprising that I should know just where the fish were, as
they could see none before I pulled them up, and yet they did not hear
me whistle. I perceived by this they imagined I could whistle the fish
together as well as the fowls, and I did not undeceive them, being well
enough pleased they should think me excellent for something, as I really
thought they were on account of the graundee.

Upon our return, when I had docked my boat, as there were too many fish
to carry up by hand to the grotto, I desired them to take a turn upon
the shore till I fetched my cart for them. I made what haste I could,
and brought one of my guns with me, which I determined, upon some
occasion or other, to fire off; for I took it they would be more
surprised at the explosion of that than at anything they had yet seen.
Having loaded my fish, and marched backwards, they eyed my cart very
much, and wondered what made the wheels move about so, taking them for
legs it walked upon, till I explained the reason of it, and then they
desired to draw it, which they did with great eagerness, one at a time,
the other observing its motions.

As we advanced homewards, there came a large water-fowl, about the size
of a goose, flying across us. I bid them look at it, which they did.
Says my brother, "I wish I had it!"

"If you have a mind for it," says I, "I'll give it you."

"I wish you would," says he, "for I never saw anything like it in my
life!"

"Stand still then," says I; and stepping two or three yards before
them, I fired, and down it dropped. I then turned about to observe what
impression the gun had made on them, and could not help laughing to see
them so terrified. Rosig, before I could well look about, had got fifty
paces from me, and my brother was lying behind the cart of fish. I
called and asked them what was the matter, and desired them to come to
me, telling them they should receive no harm, and offered my brother
the gun to handle; but he, thanking me as much as if he had, retired to
Rosig.

Finding they made a serious affair of it (for I saw them whispering
together), I was under some apprehension for the consequences of my
frolic. Thinks I, if under this disgust they take flight, refusing to
hear me, and report that I was about to murder them, or tell any other
pernicious story to my father of me, I am absolutely undone, and shall
never see Youwarkee more. So I laid down the gun by the fish, and
moving slowly towards them, expostulated with them upon their disorder;
assuring them that though the object before them might surprise them, it
was but a common instrument in my country, which every boy used to
take birds with; and protested to them that the gun of itself could do
nothing without my skill directing it, and that they might be sure I
should never employ that but to their service. This, and a great deal
more, brought us together again; and when we came to reasoning coolly,
they blamed me for not giving them notice. Says I, "There was no room
for me to explain the operation of the gun to you whilst the bird was
on the wing, for it would have been gone out of my reach before I could
have made you sensible of that, and so have escaped me; which, as you
desired me to get it you, I was resolved it should not do. But for
yourselves, surely you could have no diffidence in me; that is highly
unbecoming of man to man, especially relations; and, above all, a
relation to whom you have brought the welcomest news upon earth, in the
love of my dear father, and his reconciliation to my wife."

At last, by degrees, I brought them to confess that it was only a
groundless sudden terror which suppressed their reason for a while,
but that what I said was all very true; and as their serious reflection
returned, they were satisfied of it. I then stepped for the bird, and
brought it to them; it was a very fine-feathered creature, and they were
very much delighted with the beauty of it, and desired it might be laid
upon the cart and carried home.

All the way we went afterwards to the grotto, nothing was to be heard
from them but my praises, and what a great and wise man brother Peter
was. "And no wonder now, sister Youwarkee," says Quangrollart, "once
knowing him, could never leave him." It was not my business to gainsay
this, but only to receive it with so much modesty as might serve to
heighten their good opinion of me; and I found, upon my wife's return,
that Quangrollart had painted me in no mean colours to his father.

I once more had the pleasure of entertaining them with the old fare,
and some of the fresh fish, part boiled and part fried, which last they
chose before the boiled. We made a very cheerful supper, talking over
that day's adventures, and of their ensuing journey home, after which we
retired to rest, mutually pleased. We all arose early the next morning.
We took a short breakfast, after which Quangrollart and Rosig stuck
their chaplets with the longest and most beautiful feathers of the bird
I shot, thinking them a fine ornament. Being now ready for departure,
they embraced me and the children, and were just taking flight, when it
came into my head, that as the king's mistress had taken Tommy into
her protection, it might possibly be a means of ingratiating him in her
favour if I sent him the flageolet (for I had, in my wife's absence,
made two others near as good, by copying exactly after it). I therefore
desired to know if one of them would trouble himself with a small piece
of wood I very much wanted to convey to my son. Rosig answered,
"With all his heart; if it was not very long he would put it into his
colapet." * So I stepped in, and fetching the flageolet, presented it to
Rosig. My brother seeing it look oddly, with holes in it, desired (after
he had asked if it was not a little gun) to have the handling of it. It
was given him, and he surveyed it very attentively. Being inquisitive
into the use of it, I told him it was a musical instrument, and played
several tunes upon it; with which he and his companion were in raptures.
I doubt not they would have sat a week to hear me if I would have gone
on; but I desiring the latter to take care of its safety, he put it in
his colapet, and away they went.

     * A bag they always carry round the neck.

[0036]



CHAPTER III.

_Peter prepares for his father's reception--Arguments about his
beard--Expects his wife--Reflections on her not coming--Sees a messenger
on the rock--Has notice of Pendlehambys arrival, and prepares a treat._


THE news my late visitors had brought me set my mind quite at ease; and
now having leisure to look into my own affairs, with the summer before
me, I began to consider what preparations I must make against the return
of my wife; for, according to the report I had heard, I concluded there
would be a great number of attendants; and as her father would no doubt
pique himself upon the grandeur of his equipage, if his followers should
see nothing in me but a plain dirty fellow, I should be contemned, and
perhaps my wife, through my means, be slighted, or at least lose that
respect the report of me had in a great measure procured her.

The first thing therefore that I did, was to look into my chests again,
wherein I knew there were many of the Portuguese captain's clothes, and
take out such as would be most suitable to the occasion, and lay them
all by themselves. I found a blue cloth laced coat, double-breasted,
with very large gold buttons, and very broad gold button-holes, lined
with white silk; a pair of black velvet breeches, a large gold-laced
hat, and a point neckcloth with two or three very good shirts, two
pair of red-heeled shoes, a pair of white and another of scarlet silk
stockings, two silver-hilted swords, and several other good things; but
upon examination of these clothes, and by a letter or two I found in
the pockets of some of them, directed to Captain Jeremiah Vauclaile,
in Thread-needle Street, London, I judged these belonged to the English
captain, taken by the Portuguese ship in Africa. I immediately tried
some of them on, and thought they became me very well, and laid all
those in particular chests, to be ready when the time came, and set them
into one of my inner rooms.

Upon examining the contents of another chest, I found a long scarlet
cloak laced, a case of razors, a pair of scissors, and shaving-glass, a
long-wig and two bob-wigs, and laid them by; for I was determined, as
I might possibly have no other opportunity, to make myself appear as
considerable as I could.

When I had digested in my mind upon what occasions I would appear in
either of them, and laid them in proper order, Pedro and I went several
days to work with the net, and caught abundance of fish, which I salted
and dried; and we cut a great quantity of long grass to dry, and spread
in my tent for the lower gentry, and made up a little cock of it; we
also cut and piled up a large parcel of firewood; and as I had now about
thirty of the best fish-skins, each of which would cover four chairs, I
nailed them on for cushions to my chairs, and the rest I sewed together,
and made rugs of them.

I had observed that my brother Quangrollart, and Rosig, neither of them
had beards, and as they were quite smooth-chinned, I conjectured that
none of their countrymen had any: So, says I, if that is the case, as I
have now both scissors and razors, I will e'en cut off mine, to be like
them. I then set up my glass, taking my scissors in hand; but had not
quite closed them for a snip, when I considered that as I was not of
their country, and was so different from them in other respects, whether
it would not add to my dignity to appear with my beard before them. This
I debated some time, and then determined in favour of my beard; but as
this question still ran in my mind, and I wavered sometimes this way,
sometimes that, I some days after prepared again for execution, and took
a large slip off; when, says I, how can I tell whether I can shave after
all? I have not tried yet, and if I can't, how much more ridiculous
shall I look with stubbed hair here and there, than with this comely
beard? I must say, I never in my life had so long a debate with myself,
it holding upwards of two months, varying almost every time I thought of
it; till one day, dressing myself in a suit I had not before tried on,
and looking in the glass: It can never be, says I, that this grave
beard should suit with these fine clothes; no, I will have it off, I
am resolved. I had no sooner given another good snip, than spying the
cloak, I had a mind to see how I looked in that. Aye, says I, now I see
I must either wear this beard or not this cloak. How majestic does it
look! So sage, so grave, it denotes wisdom and solidity; and if they
already think well of me, don't let me be fool enough to relinquish my
claim to that for a gay coat. I had no sooner fixed on this, than I took
up all the implements to put again into the chest; and the last of them
being the glass, I would have one more look before I parted with it; but
my beard made such a horrid, frightful figure, with the three great cuts
in it, that though it grieved me to think I must part with it just
when I had come to a resolution to preserve it, I fell to work with my
scissors, and off it came; and after two or three trials I became very
expert with my razor.

Winter coming on, as I knew I must soon have more occasion than ever for
a stock of provision, from the increase of mouths I expected, I laid in
a stock for a little army; and when the hurry of that was over, I kept
a sharp look-out upon the level, in expectation of my company, and had
once a mind to have brought my tent thither to entertain them in; but
it was too much trouble for the hands I had, so I dropped the design. I
took one or other of the children with me every day, and grew more and
more uneasy at hearing nothing of them; and as uncertain attendance
naturally breeds thoughtfulness, and the hours in no employ pass so
leisurely as in that, my mind presaged numberless intervening accidents
that might, if not entirely prevent their coming, at least postpone it.

Thinks I (and that I fixed for my standard), Youwarkee, I am sure, would
come if she could; but then, says I, here is a long flight, and to be
undertaken by an old man too (for I thought my father-in-law much older
than I afterwards found him), who is now quiet and safe at home; and
having his daughter with him, is no doubt desirous of continuing so:
now, what cares he for my uneasiness? He can find one pretence or other,
no doubt, of drilling on the time till the dark weather is over; and
then, forsooth, it will be too late to come; and thus shall I be hung
up in suspense for another year. Or what if my brother, as he called
himself, for he may be no more a brother of mine than the Pope's, for
ought I know, came only on a pretence to see how I went on; and not
finding, for all his sham compliments to me, his sister married to his
father's liking, should advise him not to send my wife back again;
and so all the trouble I have had on their account should only prove a
standing monument of my foolish credulity! Nay, it is not impossible,
but as I have already had one message to inform me Tommy and Hallycarnie
are provided for, as much as to say in plain English I shall see them no
more, so I may soon have another by some sneaking puppy or other, whom
I suppose I am to treat for the news, to tell me my wife and Patty are
provided for too, and I am to thank my kind benefactors for taking so
great a charge off my hands. Am I? No! I'll first set my tent, clothes,
chairs, and all other mementoes of my stupidity on fire, and by
perishing, what's left of us, in the blaze, exterminate at once the
wretched remains of a deserted family. I hate to be made a fool of!

I had scarce finished my soliloquy, when I heard a monstrous sort of
groan or growl in the air, like thunder at a distance. "What's that,
Pedro?" says I.--"I never heard the like before, daddy!" says he.--"Look
about, boy," says I, "do you see anything?"--We heard it again. "Hark!"
says Pedro, "it comes from that end of the lake."--While we were
listening to the third sound, says Pedro, "Daddy, yonder is something
black upon the rock, I did not see just now."--"Why, it moves," says I,
"Pedro; here is news, good or bad."--"Hope the best, daddy," says Pedro;
"I wish it may be mammy."--"No," says I, "Pedro, I don't expect her
before I hear from her."--"Why, then," says Pedro, "here they come; I
can plainly discern three of them. If my brother Tommy should be there,
daddy!"--"No," says I, "Pedro, no such good news; they tell me Tommy's
provided for, and that's to suffice for the loss of my child: and yet,
Pedro, if I could get you settled in England in some good employ, I
should consent to that: but what Tommy's to be I know not."

By this time the three persons were so near that, seeing us, they called
out "Peter!" and I making signs for them to alight, they settled just
before me, and told me that Pendlehamby and Youwarkee would be with me
by light next day.

I had no sooner heard this, but so far was I from firing my tent, that
I invited them to my grotto, set the best cheer before them, and with
overhaste to do more than one thing at once, I even left undone what I
might have done.

I asked them who came with my father; and they told me about two hundred
guards: that knocked me up again, as I had but prepared for about sixty;
thinks I, My scheme is all untwisted. I then asked them what loud noise
it was, and if they heard it just before I saw them over the rock.
They told me they heard only the gripsack they brought with them to
distinguish them from ordinary messengers; and then one of them showed
it me, for I had before only taken it for a long staff in his hand:
"but," says he, "you will hear them much louder to-morrow, and longer,
before they come to you."

Having entertained them to their content, I sent them to rest, not
choosing to ask any questions; for I avoided anticipating the pleasure
of hearing all the news from Youwarkee herself. However, the boys and
I prepared what provisions of fowl and fish we could in the time, to be
ready cold against they came, and then laid down ourselves.

[Illustration: 5043]

[Illustration: 0044]



CHAPTER IV.

_Peter settles the formality of his father's reception-Description of
their march, and alighting; receives his father--Conducts him to
his grotto--Offers to beg pardon for his mandate--Is prevented by
Pendlehamby--Youwarkee not known in the English habit--Quarters the
officers in the tent._


MY mind ran so all night upon the settling the formality with which I
should receive Pendlehamby, that I got little or no rest. In the morning
I spread my table in as neat a manner as I could, and having dressed
myself, Pedro, Jemmy, and David, we marched to the plain; myself
carrying a chair, and each of them a stool. I was dressed in a
cinnamon-coloured gold-button coat, scarlet waistcoat, velvet breeches,
white silk stockings, the campaign-wig flowing, a gold-laced hat and
feather, point cravat, silver sword, and over all my cloak; as for my
sons, they had the clothes my wife made before she went.

When we heard them coming, I marshalled the children in the order they
were to sit, and charged them to do as they saw me do, but to keep
rather a half-pace backwarder than me; and then sitting down in my
chair, I ordered Pedro to his stool on my right hand, and Jemmy to his
on my left, and David to the left of Jemmy.

I then sent two of the messengers to meet them, with instructions to
let Youwarkee know where I waited for them, that they might alight at a
small distance before they came to me. This she having communicated to
her father, the order ran through the whole corps immediately when and
where to alight.

It will be impossible for me by words to raise your ideas adequate to
the grandeur of the appearance this body of men made coming over the
rock; but as I perceive your curiosity is on the stretch to comprehend
it, I shall faintly aim at gratifying you.

After we had heard for some time a sound as of distant rumbling thunder,
or of a thousand bears in consort, serenading in their hoarsest voices,
we could just perceive by the clearness of the dawn gilding on the edge
of the rock, a black stream arise above the summit of it, seemingly
about forty paces broad; when the noise increasing very much the stream
arose broader and broader; and then you might perceive rows of poles,
with here and there a streamer; and as soon as ever the main body
appeared above the rock, there was such a universal shout as rent the
air, and echoing from the opposite rock returned the salute to them
again. This was succeeded with a most ravishing sound of voices in song,
which continued till they came pretty near me; and then the first line,
consisting of all the trumpets, mounting a considerable height, and
still blowing, left room for the next ranks, about twenty abreast,
to come forward beneath them; each of which dividing in the middle,
alighted in ranks at about twenty paces distant from my right and left,
making a lane before me, at the farther end of which Pendlehamby and his
two daughters alighted with about twenty of his guards behind them, the
remainder, consisting of about twenty more, coming forward over my head,
and alighting behind me; and during this whole ceremony, the gripsacks
sounded with such a din, it was astonishing.

Poor Youwarkee, who knew nothing of my dress, or of the loss of my
beard, was thunderstruck when she saw me, not being able to observe any
visage I had for my great wig and hat; but putting a good face upon
the matter, and not doubting but if the person she saw was not me,
she should soon find her husband, for she knew the children by their
clothes, she came forward at her father's right hand, I sitting as great
as a lord, till they came within about thirty paces of my seat; and then
gravely rising, I pulled off my hat and made my obeisance, and again at
ten steps forwarder; so that I made my third low bow close at the feet
of Pendlehamby, the children all doing the same. I then kneeling with
one leg, embraced his right knee; who raising me up, embraced me. Then
retiring three steps, and coming forward again, I embraced Youwarkee
some time; during which the children observed my pattern with
Pendlehamby, who took them up and kissed them.

I whispered Youwarkee to know if any more of her relations were in
the train, to whom I ought to pay my compliments; she told me only her
sister Hallycarnie, just behind her father. I then saluted her, and
stepping forward to the old gentleman's left hand, I ushered him through
the lines of guards to my chair; where I caused him to sit down with
Youwarkee and Hallycarnie on each side, and myself on the left of
Hallycarnie.

After expressing the great honour done me by Pendlehamby in this visit,
I told him I had a little grotto about half a mile through the wood, to
which, if he pleased to command, we would retire; for I had only placed
that seat to relieve him immediately upon his descent.

Pendlehamby rose, and all the gripsacks sounded, he leading Youwarkee in
his right hand, and I Hallycarnie in mine.

At the grotto, my father being seated, taking Youwarkee in my hand, we
paid our obedience to him. I would have asked his pardon for taking his
daughter to wife without his leave, and was going on in a set speech I
had studied for the purpose; but he refused to hear me, telling me I was
mistaken, he had consented. I was replying I knew he had been so good as
to pass it over, but that would not excuse--when he again interrupted
me by saying, "If I approve it and esteem you, what can you desire
more!"--So, finding the subject ungrateful, I desisted.

I then gave each of them a silver can of Madeira, and Youwarkee retired.
I soon made an excuse to follow her to learn if she was pleased with
what I had done. Says she, "My dearest, what is come to you? I will
promise you, but for fear of surprising my father, I had disowned you
for my husband."--"Dear Youwee," says I, "do you approve my dress, for
this is the English fashion?"--"This, Peter," says she, "I perceived
attracted all eyes to you, and indeed is very showy, and I approve it
in regard to those we are now to please; but you are not to imagine I
esteem you more in this than your old jacket; for it is Peter I love
in this and all things else; but step in again, I shall only dress, and
come to you."

My wife, being dressed in her English gown, just crossed the room where
my father sat, to see Dicky, who was in another side-room. I was then
sitting by, and talking with him. "Son," says my father, "I understood
you had no other woman in this arkoe but my daughter; for surely you
have no child so tall as that," pointing to my wife.--"No, sir," said
I, "that is a friend."--"Is she come to you," says he, "in my daughter's
absence?"--"Oh, sir," says I, "she is very well known to my wife."

Whilst we were talking in comes Youwarkee with the child in her arms,
which she kept covered to the wrists with her gown-sleeve, to hide her
graundee; and playing with the child, talked only in English to it.
"Is this your youngest son?" says my father.--I told him yes.--"Pray,
madam," says I, "bring the child to my father."--"Madam," says he, "you
have a fine baby in your arms; has his mother seen him since she came
home?" He speaking this in his own tongue, and Youwarkee looking at me
as if she could not understand him, I interpreted it to her. My sister
then desired to see the child, but I was forced again to interpret there
too. In short, they both talked with my wife near half an hour, but
neither of them knew her; till at last, saying in her own language,
"That is your granddaddy, my dear Dicky!" the old gentleman smoked
her out.--"I'll be slit," says he, "if that is not Youwarkee!"--"It's
impossible!" says Hallycarnie.--"Indeed, sister," says Youwarkee, "you
are mistaken!" and my father protesting he had not the least suspicion
of her, till she spoke in his tongue, rose and kissing her and the
child, desired her to appear in that habit during his stay.

I asked Pedro what provision had been made for the guards: "Son," says
my father, "I bring not this number of people to eat you up; they have
their subsistence with them," and he would by no means suffer me to
allow them any. I then desired to know if there were any officers
or others to whom he would have shown any particular marks of
distinction.--"Son," says the old glumm, "you seem to have studied
punctilios; and though I should be sorry to incommode you for their
sakes, if you could procure some shelter and sleep-room for about twenty
of them who are superiors, ten at a time, while the rest are on duty, I
should be glad." I told him I had purposely erected a tent, which
would with great ease accommodate a greater number; and as they were
of distinction, with his leave I insisted upon providing for them; to
which, with some reluctance, I procured his consent.

When Pendlehamby was refreshed, he would go with me to see the officers'
quarters, and showing him my tent, he having never seen such a thing
before, was going to climb up the outside of it, taking it for earth.
"Hold, sir," said I, "you cannot do so!" Then taking him to the front of
it, I turned aside the blue cloth and desired him to walk in; at which
he seemed wonderfully pleased, and asked me how it was made. I told
him in as few words as I could; but he understood so little of it, that
anything else I had said might have done as well. He mightily approved
it; and calling the chief officer, I desired he would command my house,
and that provision should be supplied to his quarters daily; at which
he hesitating, I assured him I had my father's leave for what I offered;
whereupon he stroked his chin.

I then asked him if he had any clever fellows under him to serve them,
and dress their provisions; but he hoped, he said, they were ready
dressed, as his men knew little of that matter; but for any other piece
of service, as many as I pleased should be at my command.

[Illustration: 5051]

[Illustration: 0052]



CHAPTER V.

_The manner of their dinner--Believe the fish and fowl to be
fruits--Hears his brother and the colambs are coming--Account of their
lying--Peter's reflections on the want of the graundee--They view
the arkoe--Servants harder to please than their masters--Reason for
different dresses the same day._


PENDLEHAMBY having a mind to view my arkoe, took a long walk with
Hallycarnie in the wood till dinner-time; and he having before told me
that some of his guards always waited on him at meals, I ordered their
dinner before his return, sending a large dish of cold fowls, cut into
joints, into the tent, to be spread on clean leaves I had laid on the
chests; and setting a sufficient quantity of bread and fish there also,
I desired the officers present to refresh themselves now, and the rest
when relieved should have a fresh supply. I saw there was an oddity in
their countenances, which at first I did not comprehend; but presently
turning about to the superior, "Sir," says I, "though this food may look
unusual to you, it is what my island affords, and you will be better
reconciled to it after tasting." So taking a piece of fowl and dipping
it in the salt, I ate a bit myself, and recommended another to him; who,
eating it, they all fell to without further scruple, above all things
commending the salt as what they had never tasted the like of before,
though they thought they had both of the fish and fowl.

I then told them where my supply of water came from, and that they must
furnish themselves with that by their own men.

Upon the return of my father and sister, the gripsack sounded for
dinner; when four officers on duty entering, desired, as their posts, to
have the serving up of the dishes. One of them I perceived, having set
on the first dish, never stirred from behind Pendlehamby; but upon his
least word or sign, ordered the others what to do or bring, which he
only presented to my father; and he frequently gave him a piece from his
own plate; but the other officers served at the table promiscuously.

After dinner I brought in a bowl of punch; when begging leave to proceed
in my country method, I drank to my father's health. "So, daughter,"
says he to my wife, "we are at the old game again. Son," says he, "this
is no novelty to me, Youwarkee constantly drinking to the health of her
dear Peter, and the children at Graundevolet, and obliging us to pledge
her, as she called it; but I thank you, and will return your civility;"
so taking a glass, "son and daughter," says he, "long life, love, and
unity attend you and my grandchildren!" Youwarkee and I both rising till
he had done, returned him our thanks.

When we had sat some time, "Son," says my father, "you and your wife
having lived so retired, I fear my company and attendants must put you
to an inconvenience; now, as my son intends you a visit also, in company
with several of my brother colambs, if we shall be too great a load upon
you, declare it, for they will be at Battringdrigg arkoe to-morrow, to
know whether it will be agreeable for them to proceed.

"You know, son," says my father, "the mouth is a great devourer, and
that the stock your family cannot consume in a year, by multiplying
their numbers, may be reduced in a day: now freely let me know (for you
say you provided for us) how your stock stands, that you may not only
pleasure us, but we not injure you."

I told him, as for dried fish I had a vast quantity, and that my fowls
were so numerous I knew not my stock; as to bread, I had a great deal,
and might have almost what more I would; and then for fresh fish, the
whole province of Arndrumnstake could not soon devour them; but for
my pickles and preserves, I had neither such large quantities, nor
conveniences to bestow them if I had.

"If this be the case, son," says my father, "I may send your brother
word to proceed;" and despatched ten messengers with a gripsack to
hasten his son's arrival.

It now began to be time for rest, and the old gentleman growing pretty
mellow with the punch, which, by the heavy pulls he took at it, I
perceived was no disagreeable entertainment to him, I conducted him to
his repose; and disposing of the rest of the family, Youwarkee and I,
with great impatience, retired.

You may imagine I was sincerely glad to find myself once more alone with
my Youwarkee; when, after a transport of mutual endearments, I desired
to know how Pendlehamby first received her; which she told me, with
every circumstance, in so affecting a manner that the tears forced
passage from mine eyes in perfect streams; and I loved the dear man ever
after as my own father.

She told me Tommy was in great favour at court before her brother
returned from me; but ever since I sent him the flageolet he had been
caressed above measure, and would soon be a great man; that Hallycarnie
was a constant attendant on Jahamel both in her diversions and
retirement; and, she did not doubt, would in time marry very well; as
for Patty, she said her father intended, with my leave, to adopt her as
his own child.

My wife slept very sound after her journey; but my hurry of spirits
denying me that refreshment, I never so much as now lamented the want of
the graundee.--"For," thinks I, "now I have once again tasted the sweets
of society, how shall I ever relish a total desertion of it, which in a
few days must be the case, when all this company are fled, and myself am
reduced to my old jacket and water-cart again! Now, if I was as
others here are, I might make a better figure than they by my superior
knowledge of things, and have the world my own; nay, I would fly to
my own country, or to some other part of the world, where even the
strangeness of my appearance would procure me a good subsistence. But,"
says I, "if with my graundee I should lose my sight, or only be able to
live in the dark in England, why, I should be full as bad as I am here!
for nobody would be able to keep me company abroad, as my hours for the
air would be theirs of retirement; and then, at home, it would be much
the same; no one would prefer my company in a dark room in the daytime,
when they could enjoy others in the light of the sun; then how should
I be the better for the graundee, unless I fixed a resolution of living
here, or hereabouts? and then to get into company, I must retire to
still darker regions, which my eyes are no ways adapted to: in short,
I must be quite new moulded, new made, and new born too, before I can
attain my desires. Therefore, Peter," says I, "be content; you have been
happy here in your wife and children without these things; then never
make yourself so wretched as to hope for a change which can never
possibly happen, and which, perhaps, if obtained, might undo you; but
intend only what you can compass, by weighing all circumstances, and
your felicity will lie in very narrow bounds, free from two of the
greatest evils a man can be beset by, hopes and fears; two inseparable
companions, and deadly enemies to peace; for a man is destroyed by
hope through fear of disappointment."--This brought me a show of peace
again.--"Surely," says I, "I am one of the most unaccountable amongst
mankind! I never can reflect till I am worn down with vexation. O
Glanlepze! Glanlepze!" says I, "I shall never forget thy speech after
engaging the crocodile, that everything was to be attained by resolution
by him that takes both ends of a thing in his view at once, and fairly
deliberates what may be given and taken from end to end. Surely," says
I, "this ought to be engraven on brass, as I wish it was on my heart; it
would prevent me many painful hours, help me with more ease to compass
attainable ends, and to rest contented under difficulties insuperable:
and if I live to rise again, I will place it where it shall never be
more out of my sight, and will enforce it not only more and more on
myself, but on my children."

With this thought I dropped to sleep, and with this I awaked again, and
the first thing I did was to find a proper place to write it, which,
having fixed for the door of my cupboard, I took a burnt stick for my
pencil, and wrote as follows:--"He that is resolved to overcome, must
have both ends of an object in view at once, and fairly deliberate what
may be given and taken from end to end; and then pursue the dictates
of cool reason." This I wrote in English, and then in the Doorpt
Swangeantine tongue; and having read it twice or thrice over, I went for
water and fish, and returned before the family were up.

I took care to-day also that the officers should be as well served as
possible, and where an accommodation must be wanting, I rather chose to
let it fall on my father than on them; for I had ever observed it to be
an easier thing to satisfy the master than the man; as the master weighs
circumstances, and from a natural complacency in himself, puts a humane
construction upon that error or omission which the servant wholly
attributes to slight and neglect.

My company being abroad, about the time I expected their return I
dressed myself as the day before, only without my cloak, and in a black
bob-wig, and took a turn to meet them.

Pendlehamby spying me first among the trees, "Daughter Youwarkee," says
he, "you have a husband, I think, for every day in the week. Who's this?
my son Peter! Why, he is not the same man he was yesterday." She told
him she had heard me say we changed our apparel almost every day in
England; nay, sometimes twice or thrice the same day.--"What!" says
Pendlehamby, "are they so mischievous there they are fearful of being
known in the latter by those who saw them in the former part of the
day?"

By this time I was come up, and after paying due compliments, says
Youwarkee--"My father did not know you, my dear, you are so altered
in your other wig; and I told him in your country they not only
change wigs, but their whole clothing, two or three times a day
sometimes."--"Son," says my father, "if it be so, I cannot guess at the
design of a man's making himself unlike himself."--"Oh, sir," says I,
"it is owing to the different functions he is to perform that day: as,
suppose, in the morning he is to pursue business with his inferiors, or
meet at our coffee-houses to hear and chat over the news of the day, he
appears in a light easy habit proper for despatch, and comes home dirty;
then, perhaps, he is to dine with a friend at mid-day, before whom, for
respect's sake, not choosing to be seen in his dirty dress, he puts on
something handsomer; and after spending some time there, he has, it may
be, an appointment at court, at play, or with his mistress, in all which
last cases, if he has anything better than ordinary, it is a part of
good breeding to appear in that; but if the very best was to be used in
common, it might soon become the worst, and not fit for a nice man to
stir abroad in."--"The different custom of countries you have told me
of," says my father, "is surprising: here are we born with our clothes
on, which always fit, be we ever so small or large; nay, are never
the worse for constant wearing; and you must be eternally altering and
changing colour, shape, and habit. But," says he, "where do they get all
these things? Does every man make just what he likes?"--"No," says I,
"there are a particular set of men whose business it is to make for all
the rest."--"What!" says he, "I suppose their lasks make them?"--"No,
sir, they are filgays," says I. "It is their trade, they do it for a
livelihood, being paid by them they work for. A suit of their clothes,"
says I, taking up the flap of my coat, "will cost what we call twelve
or fourteen pounds in money."--"I don't understand you," says he.--"Why,
sir," says I, "that is as much as will provide one moderate man with all
the necessary things of life for two months."--"Then," says he, "these
nice men must be very rich."--"No, sir," said I, "there you are under
a mistake; for if a man, very rich, and who is known to be so, neglects
his habit, it is taken to be his choice; but one who is not known to be
rich, and is really not so, is, by appearing gay sometimes, thought to
be so; for he comes little abroad, and pinches miserably at home, first
to get that gay suit, and then acts on the same part to preserve it,
till some lucky hit may help him to the means of getting another, as it
frequently happens, by a good marriage; for though he is but seldom seen
in public, yet always appearing so fine when he is, the ladies, whose
fancies are frequently more tickled with show than sense, admitting him
only at first as a companion, are at last, if worth anything, taken in
the toils he is ever spreading for them; and, becoming his wife,
produce a standing fund to make him a rich man in reality, which he but
personated before."

Pendlehamby could not well understand all I said; and I found by him
that all the riches they possessed were only food and slaves; and as I
found afterwards when amongst them, they know the want of nothing else;
but I am afraid I have put them upon another way of thinking, though I
aimed at what we call civilising of them.

[Illustration: 5061]

[Illustration: 0062]




CHAPTER VI.

_Quangrollart arrives with the colambs--Straitened for
accommodation--Remove to the tent--Youwarkee not known--Peter relates
paid of his travels--Dispute about the beast-fish skins._


SLEEPING longer than usual, I was awakened next morning by a gripsack
from Quangrollart; upon hearing of which I roused immediately, thinking
they were at my door; but the messenger told me they could not be there
in what I understood by his signs to be about two hours, for they have
no such measure for time as hours; so I dressed at leisure, and then
went to Youwarkee and waked her. "Youwee," says I, "your brother will
be here presently, and I having a mind you should appear as my
countrywoman, would have you dress yourself."

We walked down to the level, and but just saved our distance; for the
van of them were within the arkoe before we arrived, and with such a
train after them as seemed to reach the whole length of the arkoe. The
regularity and order of their flight was admirable, and the break of the
trumpets so great, sounding all the way they came (for we had not only
one set of them, but at least thirty, there being so many colambs and
petty princes in the train, each with fifty attendants), that I wondered
how they could bear it. As the principals alighted, which was at least
a hundred paces from me, the gripsacks still kept wing, sounding as long
as we stayed.

This was a very tedious ceremony, for the guards alighting with their
colambs, ranged just as Pendlehamby's had done, but reached as far as
the eye could see. As they moved towards us, You-warkee and I, having
stood still some time, moved slowly forward to meet them.

It would have surprised you to have seen the deference they paid us;
and I believe the guards took us for something above the mortal race.
You-warkee showed no part of her graundee, having on sleeves down to her
wrists, white silk stockings and red-heeled shoes; so that none of them
knew her for one of them.

The first that we met was my brother, to whom we had only an opportunity
of paying our compliments _en passant_ before another graundee came up,
who was succeeded by another and another, to the number of thirty; some
out of respect to my father and brother, and some out of mere curiosity
to see me; and as fast as each had paid his salutes, he passed us, till
we found we had no more to meet, when we turned about, and fell in with
the company.

When we came to the grotto, I was very much put to it for room, we
scarce being able to stand upright by each other, much less to sit down;
which my father perceiving, "My dear friends," says he, "had my son
known in time of so much good company, he would have been better
provided with seats for us all; but considering all we see is the labour
only of his own hands, we should rather admire at the many conveniences
we see here, than be uneasy there are no more. And, son," says he,
"as we are now so large a body, I propose we adjourn to the officers'
quarters and let them take ours." I returned my father thanks for the
hint, and led the way, the rest following, where we found room enough
and to spare.

Though Youwarkee was with us all dinner-time helping the guests, we had
no sooner done, "But," says Quangrollart aloud, "Brother Peter, are we
not to see my sister?" I not hearing perfectly what he said, though I
perceived he spoke to me, "Sir," says I.--"My sister Youwarkee!" says
he, "why won't she appear? Here are several of her good friends as well
as myself will be glad to see her." My father then laughed so heartily
that the rest taking notice of it, my poor brother was put to the blush.
"Son," says my father, "don't you know your own sister?"--"We have not
seen her yet," says one of the colambs, "or any lady but your daughter
Hallycarnie and that attendant." My brother then seeing how it was came
up to salute my wife; but even then had his scruples, till he saw her
smile, and then begged pardon for his oversight, as did all the colambs
upon saluting her; my brother declaring that, as she was somewhat behind
me on the level, he had only paid her the respect of his chin, taking
her for some one attending me. The colamb following my brother, assured
her the little regard shown her by Quangrollart, who, he thought,
should know best where to bestow his respects, was the reason of his
taking no more notice of her; and each confessing his mistake arose from
too nearly copying the steps of his immediate predecessor, they all made
excuse, and the mistake made us very merry, till they proposed taking
a turn in the woods, it being a great novelty to them, they said; but I
begged they would leave me behind to prepare for their return.

Having refreshed themselves after they came home, Quangrollart (being
put upon it by some of the colambs) told me I could not render a more
acceptable favour to the whole company than to relate to them an account
of my adventures; "for though," says he, "I told them last night what I
remembered to have heard from you, yet the variety was so great I could
not deliver the facts in order as I heard them, but was obliged to take
here a piece and there another, as they occurred to me, making rather
several stories of it than a continued series of facts."

All the colambs immediately seconded the motion, and desired me to
begin. I then ordering a clear table and a bowl of punch, and having
drank all the company's healths, began my narration, hoping to have
finished it before bedtime; but they pressing me to be very particular,
and frequently one or other requiring explanations upon particular
facts, and then one making a remark upon something which another
answered, and a third replied to, they got the talk out of my hands so
long that, having lost themselves in the argument, and forgot what I
said last, they begged my pardon and desired me to go on; when one, who
in contemplation of one fact had lost best part of another, prayed me to
go on from such an incident, and another from one before that; so that
I was frequently obliged to begin half-way back again. This method not
only spun out my story to a very great length, but instead of its being
finished that evening, as I had proposed, it was scarce well begun
before bedtime drew on; so I just having brought them to Angola, told
them, as it grew late, if they pleased, I would finish the remainder
next night, which they agreed to.

Quangrollart then asked my father if he had been fishing since he came;
but he told him he knew not what he meant. Then all the company desired
I would show them what that was. I told them they might command me as
they pleased; so we appointed the next morning for that exercise. "But,
gentlemen," says I, "your lodging to-night gives me the greatest pain;
for I know not what I shall do about that. I have a few beast-fish skins
which are very soft and hairy, but not a sufficiency for so many friends
as I would at present be proud to oblige; but I can lay them as far as
they will go upon as much dry reeds and grass as you please." I then
sent a servant to Youwarkee for the skins; after which, they one and
all crying out if they had but good dry reeds they desired no better
lodging, I despatched hands to bring away a large parcel of them to the
tent, which they did in a trice. Then waiting on those few who lay at
the grotto to their quarters, and having sent Youwarkee to her sister,
I returned to the tent to take up my own lodging with those I had left
there.

I had not yet entered the tent when I heard a perfect tumult within,
every one talking so loud, and all together, that I verily thought they
had fallen out and were going to handicuffs. However, I resolved to go
in amongst them and try to compose their difference; when just entering,
and they spying me, several ran to me with each a skin in his hand, the
rest following as fast as they could. "Gentlemen," says I, "I hoped
to have found you all at rest."--"So we should have been," says one
of them, "but for these what you call 'ems."--"It is my unspeakable
misfortune," says I, "that I have no more at your service, and am sorry
that I should cause them to be brought, since each of you cannot have
one." Says one of them, "I don't want one, I have seen enough of it."--
"Then, gentlemen," says I, "it is possible there may be so many more of
that colamb's mind that there may be sufficient for those who desire
them." They neither knew what to make of me nor I of them all this
while; till an old colamb perceiving our mistake, "Mr. Peter," says he,
"we have only had a dispute."--"I am sorry at my heart for it," says I,
"but I perceived you were very warm before I entered, and am in great
hopes of compromising matters to all your satisfactions."--"I was
going," says the same colamb, "to tell you we had a dispute about what
these things were, nothing else." I was then struck on a heap, being
quite ashamed they should think I suspected they had been quarrelling
for the skins; and how to come off I knew not. "You'll excuse me, sir,"
says I, "for expressing a concern that you could not each have one to
examine into at the same time, that one of you need not have waited to
make your remarks till the other had done."--"No occasion, no occasion
for that, Mr. Peter," said they all together; "we shall have leisure
enough to examine them to-morrow; but we want to know what they are, and
where they grow."--"Gentlemen," says I, "each of these is the clothing
of a particular fish. And where do they grow?" said they. "In the lake,"
says I; "they are a living creature, who inhabit that great water; I
often catch them when I am fishing, the same exercise we shall go upon
to-morrow."

I had much ado to persuade them they did not grow on trees, which I was
then much more surprised at than some time after, that I returned their
visit; but having satisfied them, and given them some possible hopes
they might see one alive next day, they were very well contented, and we
all lay down to rest.

[Illustration: 5069]

[Illustration: 0070]



CHAPTER VII.

_Go afishing--Catch a beast-fish--Afraid of the gun--How Peter altered
his net--Fish dinner for the guards--Method of dressing and eating it._


I APPEARED before them in the morning, in my old jacket, and an old
hat with brims indented almost to the crown, a flannel nightcap,
and chequered shirt. "How now, son!" says my father, "what have we
here?"--"Sir," says I, "this will show you the use of our English
fashion I mentioned the other day, and the necessity of it. You see me
in this indifferent habit, because my next business requires it; but
when I come back, and have no further dirty work to do, I shall then
dress, as near as I can, to qualify me for your company."

"Are you for moving, gentlemen?" says my brother; "I believe it is
time." They then all arising we went to the lake, where getting into my
boat, and telling them that any six of them might go with me, they never
having seen such a thing before, and not much liking the looks of it,
all made excuses, till my brother assuring them it was very safe, and
that he had sailed in it the last trip, three or four of them, with my
father, and Hallycarnie, who was very desirous of seeing me fish, got
in, and we sailed a great way up the lake, taking my gun as usual with
me.

It gave me exceeding delight to see the whole body of people then in the
arkoe on the graundee; some hovering over our heads, and talking with
us; others flying this way, others that, till I had pitched upon a spot
to begin my operation; when rowing to shore, and quitting my boat, the
whole body of people settled just by me, staring at me and my net, and
wondering what I was doing. I then taking a sweep as usual, got some of
the soldiers to assist me to shore with it; but when the cod of the net
landed, and the fish began to dash with their tails at the water's edge,
away ran all my soldiers, frighted out of their wits to think what was
coming: but it being a large hale, and a shelving bank, I could not lift
it to the level myself; which my brother, who had seen the sport before,
perceiving, though not one of the rest stirred, lent me a hand, and we
got it up.

You cannot imagine what surprise appeared in every face upon opening the
net, and seeing all the fish naked. They drew up by degrees closer and
closer, for I let the fish lie some time for their observation; but
seeing the large fish, upon my handling them, flap their tails, they
very expeditiously retired again. I then tossed several of them into the
boat; but two of them being very large, and rough-scaled ugly fish,
I did not think I could lift them myself, so desired assistance, but
nobody stirred. I expected some of the colambs would have ordered their
men to have helped me, but they were so terrified with seeing me handle
them, that they could not have the conscience to order their men on so
severe a duty, till a common man came to me, and taking the tail, and I
the head, we tossed them both into the boat.

I went higher up the lake than usual, in hopes of a beast-fish to show
them; but though I could not meet with one, I had several very great
hauls, and took three or four of my lobsters, very large ones. This was
the second trial I had made of my net since I had altered it, and it
gave me great satisfaction, for I could now take as many fish at one
draught as I could before have done at ten. I had found that though my
net was very long, yet for want of a bag, or cod, to enclose the fish,
many that were included within its compass would, whilst I drew round,
swim to the extremes, and so get out, for want of some inlet to enter
at; for which reason I sawed off the top of a tree at about ten feet
from the ground, and drawing a circle of six feet diameter round the
tree, on the ground, I stuck it round with small pegs, at two inches'
distance. Then I drove the like number of nails round the top of the
trunk of the tree, and straining a length of mat-line from each peg on
the ground to a correspondent nail on the tree, I tied my matline in
circles round the strained lines, from top to bottom, about two inches'
distance at the bottom, but at a less distance where the strained lines
grew nearer to each other towards the top; and having secured all the
ends, by some line twisted round them, I cut a hole in the middle of
my net, and tied the large ground-end over the hole in the net, and
gathered the small end up in a purse, tying it up tight; and by this
means I now scarce lost any fish which once were within the sweep of my
net.

Having had so good success, I had a design of returning, but thought,
as I could now so easily entertain a multitude, I might as well take
another haul or two, and make a handsome treat for the soldiery. Then
coming up to my drill's mouth, I fixed my implements for a draught
there, and beginning to draw up, I found great resistance in the net,
and got two or three to help me; but, coming near shore, when the
company saw the net tumble and roll, and rise and fall, they all ran as
if they were mad, till I called them and told the colambs it was only
one of the fish whose skins I had shown them; upon which, by that time I
had discharged the fish from the net, they were all round me again; but
no sooner had he got loose, than up he rose, whirled his wings, and at
the same instant uttered such a groan that my whole company retreated
again, thinking me somewhat more than a man, who could face so dreadful
an enemy. I entreated them to come and view it; but finding no arguments
could bring them nearer, I edged round till I got him between me and the
water, and shot him dead.

Upon the report of my gun the whole field was in the air, darting
and screaming, as I have often seen a flight of rooks do on the same
occasion; and I am apt to believe some of them never returned again, but
went directly home.

I was a little concerned to see the confusion I had caused; and laying
down my gun, my brother, who though at a distance when I shot,
knowing what I was at, and coming up to me, it put the rest upon their
consideration; and they alighted one by one, at a distance, till they
were all on the level again.

My father and the colambs, who were the first that durst approach,
wondered what I had done, and how the fish came to be dead, and whence
so much fire and smoke proceeded, for they were sure I brought none
with me, and asked me abundance of questions; but as I knew I must
have occasion for answering to the same thing twenty times over, had I
entered upon an explanation there, I deferred giving them satisfaction
till we came home, when all at once might be capable of hearing what was
said. So I told them the most necessary thing at present was to stow the
fish in the boat; for it was the largest I had ever taken, and I could
not wholly do it myself. I made several efforts for help, but in vain,
till the same soldier who had helped me with one of the first fish, came
to my relief, and desiring my orders what to do, assisted me; and the
rest seeing the difficulty we both had to manage it, one or two more of
them came up, and we shipped it on board.

I then called the colambs to me, telling them I was sorry I had given
such a general disturbance to them, by shooting the fish; but as they
kept at too great a distance from me to have notice of my design, and if
I had followed them the fish might have escaped before my return, I was
obliged to do as I did, which was without any possibility of hurting
them. But, as I had given them such a fright, I hoped they would this
one day give me an opportunity of complimenting their guards with a
fish-dinner, if we could any way contrive to dress it; for whoever did
that must be able to bear the close light of a large fire. They all
shook their heads but my brother, who told me he had in his retinue
six men from Mount Alkoe, purposely retained for their strong sight, to
attend him always to Crashdoorpt, who, he believed, for the benefit
of the rest, would undertake the cookery if I would show them how. I
desired he would give them orders to attend me on the other side of the
lake, and I would instruct them at my landing; and then I crossed over
with my booty.

Finding the Mount Alkoe men waiting for my landing, I asked if they
could bear the sight of fire. They told me they were used to much
greater light and flames than I had ever seen, they believed.--"Very
good," said I; "then get into my boat, three of you, and hand out that
fish to the shore."--I found they were more afraid of the fish than
of the fire, for not one of them stirred till I got in and tossed out
several small ones; and then taking up a large one, "Help me, somebody!"
says I, they looking a little at one another, till one of them venturing
to take it, the rest fell heartily to work, and despatched the whole
lading presently. I then laid a small parcel upon my cart, for our own
eating and the officers', and sending them to the grotto, I gave the
cooks their charge.

"Now," says I, "my lads, do you serve all the rest of the fish as I do
this," cutting it open at the same time, and throwing away the guts,
"and I will send each of you such an instrument as I use here," pointing
to my knife. "I shall order six large heaps of wood to the level, to
be piled up there. When you have done the fish, do you set fire to the
heaps, and let them burn till the flame is over and the coals are clear;
then lay on your fish, and if any are too large to be manageable, cut
them in proper pieces, and with sticks, which I will send you, turn them
over and over, walking round the fire, and with the forked end of the
stick toss the least off first, and afterwards the greater; but be sure
throw the fish as far as ever you can from the fire, amongst the men,
that they may not be obliged to come too near it: and in this manner go
on, till either they have enough, or your fish are gone; and when you
have done, come to the grotto for your reward."

I then set abundance of hands to work to carry wood, to be laid in six
heaps, two hundred paces from each other, and told them how to pile it.
I then prepared six long taper sticks with forked ends, and ordered more
hands to divide the fish equally to the piles. I sent others with salt
and bread; and I ordered them to let me know when all was ready.

While these preparations were making, my tent-visitors had all dined,
and my cart had returned with the beast-fish, which the company desired
might be brought in, when every one passed his judgment upon it, and a
long dissertation we had on the marvellous works of Collwar. I let
them go on with their show, though I could have disproved most of their
conclusions from the little knowledge I had of things; but I never was
knight-errant enough to oppose my sentiments to a multitude already
prepossessed on the other side of the question; for this reason, because
I have ever observed that where several have imbibed the same ridiculous
principle in infancy, they never want arguments, though ever so
ridiculous, to support it; and as no one of them can desert it without
impeaching the judgment of the rest, they encourage each other in their
obstinacy, and quite out-vote a single person; and then, the laugh
beginning on the strongest side, nothing is so difficult as to get it
out of their hands. But when a single man in the wrong hears a just
argument from a single antagonist which he cannot contradict, he imbibes
its force, and whilst that lasts, as nothing but a better argument,
with better reasons, can remove it, he from thenceforth adapts his
adversary's reasons for his own, to oppose against his own former
opinion.

In the height of our disputations on the beast-fish, came news that the
broil was going to begin; and as I expected very good diversion at it, I
invited the company to go see it, telling them, in my opinion, it would
exceed the sport in taking them. We passed through the wood till we came
amongst the shrubs, where I placed them to be out of harm's way; and
the fire, which was now nothing but cinders, was of no inconvenience to
them. They were pleased with it to perfection; for, first, the six men
who walked round the fires, by the glowing light of the embers and the
shining of their graundees, looked like men on fire; then, to see each
fire surrounded with a circle of men at the diameter of near two hundred
paces, as close as they could well stand, by a more distant shine of the
fire, had a very pleasing effect; but when the broilers began to throw
the fish about (for each man stood with some salt and a cut of bread
in his hand), to see a body of a hundred men running for it, and whilst
they were stooping and scrambling for that, to see a hot fish fall on
the back of one, which was whipped off by another, who, scalding his
mouth with it, threw it in the face of a third; when a fourth, fifth,
and sixth, pulling it in pieces, ran away with it; and to see the
different postures, courses, and groups, during this exercise and
running feast, was the most agreeable farce my guests had ever seen in
their lives; and, to the great saving of my liquors, kept us in the wood
for full three hours, not a soul stirring till the feast was over.

We spent best part of this evening in discourse on the passages of
the day, the reflections on which not being concluded till bedtime,
my adventures were postponed till the next night; but we had first
concluded upon a shooting for the next morning (for they were all
extremely desirous of knowing how I did it), at a time they should have
opportunity of seeing me and making remarks; and I, being unwilling they
should think me a conjuror, agreed to make them masters of part of the
mystery of powder and ball.

[Illustration: 0080]



CHAPTER VIII.

_A shooting proposed--All afraid of the gun but one private
guard--His behaviour---Pendlehamby, at Peter's request, makes him a
general--Peter's discourse thereon--Remainder of his story--The colambs
return._


THIS being the fifth morning, I cleaned up my best gun, and prepared my
balls, and we all took a walk towards the bridge, every one admiring my
gun as we went; but I could get none of them to carry it, and we had at
least five hundred questions proposed about it. I told them they need
not be afraid of it, for it was only wood and iron; but they knew
nothing of iron. I then showed them how I made it give fire, by snapping
the cock; they thought it was very strange. I then put a little powder
in the pan, and made it flash, and showing them the empty pan, they
would not be persuaded but I had taken away the powder before the flash,
or else, they said, it was impossible that should be all gone upon
flashing only; for they said it was a little nut, using the same word
to express both nut and seed. I then desired one of them to put in some
powder and snap it himself; but having prevailed with him to try the
experiment, if I had not through caution held my hand upon the barrel,
the gun had been on the ground, for the moment it flashed, he let go and
ran for it.

I had a great inclination to gain the better of their prejudices, and
used abundance of arguments to prove the gun as innocent a thing as a
twig I took up; and that it was the powder which, when set on fire,
the flame thereof wanting more room than the powder itself did, forced
itself, and all that opposed it, out of the mouth of the gun with such
fury as to make the noise they heard; and being just come to the rock,
"Now," says I, "you shall see that what I tell you is true." They told
me they desired nothing more than that I would make them understand it,
for it was the strangest thing they had ever seen. "Well, then," says
I, "observe; I put in this much powder only, and with this rag I stop it
down close. Now," says I, "you see by the length of this stick that the
rag and powder take up the space only of a finger's depth on the inside
of the gun." They saw that plainly they said; "But how could that kill
anything?"--"Now, look again," says I, "I put in a little more powder,
as I did before when I made a flash, and you see there is a little hole
from this powder through the side of the gun to the powder within. Do
you observe that this communicates with that through this hole?"--"Yes,"
said they, they did.--"Now," says I, "when I put fire to this, it sets
fire to that within, which fire turning to flame, and wanting room,
bursts out at the mouth of the gun; and to show you with what force it
comes out, here handle this round ball," giving them a bullet to handle;
"you feel how heavy it is: now, can any of you throw this ball as far
as that rock?" for I stood a good hundred paces from it.--They told me
No.--"And don't you think," says I, "that if the force of the fire made
by this powder can throw this ball to that rock, that force must be
very great?"--They said, they thought it must, but believed it to be
impossible.--"But," says I, "if it not only throws it to the rock but
beats out a piece of the stone, must not that be much more violent?"
They agreed it must.--Then putting in the ball, "Now," says I, "we will
try." I then ordered one to daub a part of the rock, about breast high,
with some mud, and first to observe about it if the rock was anywhere
fresh broken, or not; who, returning, reported that the rock was all of
a colour and sound, but somewhat ragged all about the mud.--"Did you lay
the mud on smooth?" says I. He replied, "Yes."--Then lifting up my
gun, I perceived they were creeping off; so I took it down again, and
calling, reasoned with them upon their fears. "What mischief," says I,
"can you apprehend from this gun in my hand! Should I be able to hurt
you with it, are you not all my friends or relations--could I be willing
to do it? If the gun of itself could hurt, would I handle it as I do?
For shame! be more courageous; rouse your reason, and stand by me; I
shall take care not to hurt you. It looks as if you mistrust my love to
you, for this gun can do nothing but what I direct it to." By such like
persuasions, rough and smooth, I prevailed upon the major part of the
colambs and officers to stand near me to see me fire, and then I shot;
but though my words had engaged them to stand it, I had no sooner
snapped but the graundees flew all open, though they closed again
immediately; and then we fell to question and answer again. I desired
them to walk to the rock; and sent the person who put up the mark
before, to see and show us exactly what alteration there was. He told
us there was a round hole in the mud, pointing to it, which he did
not leave there, and taking away the mud, a thick shiver of the rock
followed it. They then all agreed that the ball must have made both the
hole in the mud and also splintered the rock, and stood in amaze at it,
not being able to comprehend it: but, by all the art I had, I could not
prevail with a man of them to fire the gun himself, till it had been
buzzed about a good while, and at last came to my ears, that a common
soldier behind said he should not be afraid of it if the gentleman would
show him how.

I then ordered the fellow to me, and he told me, with a composed look,
that it had always been his way of thinking, that what he saw another do
he could do himself, and could not rest till he had tried. "And, sir,"
says he, "if this gun, as you call it, does not hurt you, why should it
hurt me? And if you can make it hit that rock, why should not I, when
you have told me how you manage it?"--"Are not you the man that first
helped me up with the large fish yesterday?" says I. He told me he was.

I was prodigiously pleased with the fellow's spirit, "And," says I, "my
friend, if you will, and I live, you will hit it before you have done."
I then showed him the sight of the gun, and how to hold it; and being
perfect in that, "Now," says I, "shut your left eye, and observe with
your right, till this knob and that notch are exactly even with each
other and the middle of that mark; and when they are so, pull this bit
with your fore-finger, holding the gun tight to your shoulder." He so
exactly pursued my directions that he hit the very middle of the mud;
and then, without any emotion, walked up with the gun in his hand, as I
had done before; and turning to me very gravely, "Sir," says he, "it is
hit." I told him the best marksman on earth could not be sure of coming
so near his mark. He stroked his chin, and giving me the gun again, was
walking to his place; but I stopped him, and seeing something so modest
and sincere in his countenance and behaviour, and so generous in his
spirit, I asked him to which colamb he belonged. He told me to colamb
Pendlehamby.--"To my father?" says I; "then sure I shall not be denied."

I took him with me to my father, who was not yet come up to the rock.
"Sir," says I, "there is a favour I would beg of you."--"Son," says
he, "what is it you can ask that I can refuse you?" Says I, "'This man
belongs to your guards; now there is something so noble and daring in
his spirit, and yet so meek and deserving in his deportment, that if you
will load me with obligation, it is to make him an officer; he is not
deserving of so ill a station as a private man."

My father looking at me, "Son," says he, "there is something to be done
before he can be qualified for what you require." This, thinks I, is a
put-off. "Pray, sir," says I, "what can a man of courage, sense, and a
cool temper, want to qualify him for what I ask?"--"'Something," says
he, "which none but myself can give; and that, at your desire, I will
supply him with." Then, my father calling him, "Lask Nasgig, bonyoe,"
says he; that is, Slave Nasgig, lie down. Nasgig (for that was his name)
immediately fell on his face, with his arms and hands straight by
his sides; when my father, setting his left foot on Nasgig's neck,
pronounced these words: "Lask, I give thee life, thou art a filgay!"
Then Nasgig, raising himself on his knees, made obeisance to my father,
and standing up, stroked his chin; and my father taking him by the hand
in token of equality, the ceremony ceased.

"Now, son," says my father, "let me hear your request."--"It is only,
sir," said I, "preferment for the deserving, equal to his merit." My
father asked him if he understood the duty of a gorpell. He did not
reply yes, but beginning, gave a compendious sort of history of his
whole duty; at which all the colambs were very much surprised, for
even his comrades were not apprised, or ever imagined, he knew more of
military affairs than themselves. My father then asked him if he knew
how to behave as a duff; but he made as little difficulty of that as
the other, going through the several parts of duty in all the different
branches, in peace and war, at home and abroad. "Son," says my father,
"it is a mystery to me you should have found out more in an hour than I
myself could in half an age; for this man was born in my palang, of my
own lask, and has been mine and my father's these forty years. I shall
be glad if you will look on the rest of my lasks, and give me your
opinion; I may have more as deserving." I told him such as Nasgig were
not to be met with very often; but when they were found, ought to be
cherished accordingly.

"Sir," says I, "nature works upon the same sort of materials divers
ways; on some in sport, and some in earnest; and if the necessary
qualifications of a great man are impressed on our mass, it is odds but
we improve regularly into one, though it may never be publicly known, or
even to ourselves, till a proper occasion; for as a curious genius
will be most inquisitive after, and is most in the end retentive of
knowledge, so no man is less ostentatious of it. He covets knowledge,
not from the prospect of gain, but merely for its own sake; the very
knowing being his recompense: and if I may presume to give you a hint
how properly to bestow your favours, let it be on persons like this; for
the vain, knowing man, who is always showing it, as he for the most part
labours for it, to show out with, and procure his rise by it, were it
not for the hopes of that, would not think knowledge worth attaining;
and as his rise is his aim, if he could invent any more expeditious
method than that, he would not pretermit any ill act that might advance
him according to his lust of rising. But the man who aims at perfection,
from his natural inclination, must, to attain his end, avoid all ill
courses, as impediments to that perfection he lusts after; and that,
by Nasgig's worth being so little known, I'll answer for it is his
character. And this being true, yourself will deduce the consequence,
which is the fitter man to bear place; for with me it is a maxim, he
that labours after truth for truth's sake (and that he surely must
who proposes no worldly view in it) can't arrive at his ends by false
methods, but is always the truest friend to himself and others, the
truest subject to his lord, and the most faithful servant to his God."

My father then turning to me, "Son," says he, "you have enlightened me
more than ever I was before, and have put me on a new way of thinking,
for which I am to return you many thanks." And the whole company doing
the same, says my father, "I lost a brave general officer lately, who
was destined to the western wars which are breaking out, and have been
long debating in my mind to whom I should commit his corps; and but for
the hazard of the enterprise, I would have now given it to Nasgig; but
shall be loth to lose him so soon after I am acquainted with his
worth, so will think of some other post nearer my person for him, less
dangerous, though perhaps not so honourable."

"Great sir," says Nasgig, "I am too sensible of the honour already done
me, to think any post wherein I may continue to serve you either too
mean or too hazardous for me; and as valour is nowhere so conspicuous
as in the greatest dangers, I shall esteem my blood spent to great
advantage in any enterprise where my duty under your command leads me.
I therefore rather humbly request this dangerous post, that I may either
lose my life in your service, or live to see you justified in your
advancement of me by the whole nation. For what can I do, or how can
I demonstrate my affection to your person and pleasure, in an inactive
state?"

Here the whole level rang with applause to Nasgig.

My father then giving his hand to Nasgig, in token of friendship, and
his word for investiture in the command of that vacant post, the whole
level again resounded with, "Long live Pendlehamby, and his servant
Nasgig!"

This being the last day of my company's stay, for they had agreed to go
homewards next morning, some of them moved to return the sooner, that
they might have time to hear out my story. So that our stay was very
little longer.

In our return home, Nasgig singled me out to return his acknowledgments
for my favour; and viewing my gun told me they had no such thing growing
in his country. I told him if he had it, it would do no good without my
powder. I then, at his request, described what I had heard of our method
of fighting in battle in Europe; and mentioning our cannon, he said he
supposed they killed every man they hit. "No," says I, "not so bad as
that. Sometimes they hit the flesh only, and that is commonly cured;
sometimes break a leg or arm, and that may in time be cured--some so
well as to be useful again, and others are cut off, and healed up again;
but if the ball hits the head or vitals, it is commonly mortal."--"Oh,"
says he, "give me the head or vitals, then; no broken limbs for me."

After dinner, at their request, I went on with my story, at repairing
the castle, and my escape with Glanlepze, and so on to the crocodile;
when I repeated his speech to me on that account, and told them it had
made such an impression upon me that I had endeavoured to make it the
leading thought of my mind, and had set it down upon one of my doors at
the grotto that it might the oftener be in my sight when any difficulty
arose.

One of the colambs begged pardon for interrupting, but told me, though
he understood what Glanlepze meant, he could not tell how I could set
what he said down at my grotto, or have it in my sight, and desired me
to explain that. I would have told my guest I took it down in writing,
if that would not have puzzled the cause more; but to go the nearest way
I could, I told him we had a method in my country of conveying to a man
at a great distance whatever we have a mind to say to him, and in such
a manner that nobody but himself would know what we would have him
know. And pausing here a little to consider the easiest method of
demonstrating this to their senses, they told me they had gone as far
as their conjectures could carry them, but could conclude on nothing so
improbable as sending it by a messenger. I told them that in part was
my way, but my messenger should not know the message he carried. That
gravelled them quite, and they were unanimous that was what could not
be done. By this time I had sent for a wood-coal, to write with upon my
deal table, and kneeling down to the table, I began to write, "Honoured
sir, I send this to gain by your answer to it an account of your arrival
at Arndrumnstake." I then called them all to me. "Now," says I, "suppose
I want to know how my father gets back to Arndrumnstake, my way is
this--I set down so many words as will express my meaning to my father,
after the manner you see on this table, and make a little distance
between each word, which is the same thing as you do in speaking; for
there, if you run one word into another, and don't give each its proper
sound, who can understand you? For though you speak what contains all
the words, yet without the proper sound and distinction it is only
confusion. Do you understand that?" They told me they did. "Then," says
I, "these are the words I would have my father know, I being at this
arkoe, and he at Arndrumnstake. Honoured sir," and so I read on. "Here,"
says I, "you must take us to be countrymen, and that he and I understand
both the same method. Now look, this word, which ends where you see the
gap, stands for _honoured_, and this next for _sir_, the next for _I_,
and so on; and we both using the same method, and seeing each other's
words, are able to open our minds at a distance." I was now in hopes
I had done, and was going on with my story: "But," says one of
the colambs, "Mr. Peter, though this is a matter that requires
consideration, I plainly see how you do it, by agreeing that all these
strokes put into this form shall stand for the word honoured, and so on,
as you say, let who will make them; but have not you set down there the
word Arndrumnstake?"--"Yes," says I.--"Why then," says he, "none of your
countrymen could understand what that means."--"No," says I, smiling;
"but they could."--Says he, "You say you agree what strokes shall stand
for one word, and what for another; but then how could your countrymen,
who never knew what strokes you would set down for Arndrumnstake, know
that your strokes meant that very country? for that you could not have
agreed upon before either of you knew there was any such place."

I was at a loss, without spending more words than I was willing about
it, how to answer this close reasoner; and talking of syllables and
letters would only have perplexed the affair more, so I told him the
readiest for despatch; that as every word consisted of one or more
distinct sounds, and as some of the same sounds happened in different
words, we did not agree so much upon making our strokes stand for
several words, as for several sounds; and those sounds, more or less of
them, added together, made the particular words. "As, for example,"
says I, "_Arn_ is one sound, _drumn_ is another sound, and _stake_ is
another; now, by our knowing how to set down these several sounds by
themselves, we can couple them, and apply them to the making up any
word, in the manner we please; and therefore he, by seeing those three
sounds together, knows I mean _Arndrumnstake_, and can speak it as well,
though he never heard the whole word spoken together, as if he heard me
speak to him."--"I have some little notion of what you mean," says he,
"but not clear enough to express myself upon it; and so go on! go on!
And pray what did you do about the reeds?"

I then resuming my discourse where I left off, completed my narration
that night; but I could perceive the water in my father's eyes when I
came to the account of Youwarkee's fall and the condition I took her up
in.

When I had done, they adjusted the order of their flight, for avoiding
confusion, one to go so long before another, and the junior colambs to
go first.

In the morning nothing was to be heard but the gripsacks: the men were
all ranged in order to go off with their respective colambs; and after
all compliments passed, the junior colamb arising, walked half-way to
the wood, where his gripsack standing to wait for him, preceded him
to the level, the next gripsack standing ready to sound as soon as the
first removed; and this was the signal for the second colamb to move, so
that each colamb was a quarter of a mile before the other.

My father was the last but two; but I shall never forget his tenderness
at parting with his daughter and grandchildren, and I may say with
myself too; for by this time he had a high opinion of me. Patty went
with my father, she so much resembling my wife, that my father said he
should still have his two daughters in his sight, having her with him.

At parting, I presented Nasgig with a broadsword; and showing him the
use of it, with many expressions of gratitude on his part, and respect
on mine, he took flight after the rest.

[Illustration: 5094]

[Illustration: 0095]



CHAPTER IX.

_Peter finds his stores low--Sends Youwarkee to the ship--Receives an
invitation to Georigetti's court._


FOR the first few days after our company had left us, Youwarkee could
not forbear a tear now and then for the loss of her father and sister;
but I endeavoured not to see it, lest I should, by persuading her to the
contrary, seem to oppose what I really thought was a farther token of
the sweetness of her disposition; but it wore off by degrees, and having
a clear stage again, it cost us several days to settle ourselves and
put our confused affairs in order; and when we had done we blessed
ourselves that we could come and go, and converse with the pleasing
tenderness we had hitherto always done.

She told me nothing in the world but her concern for so tender a father,
and the fear of displeasing me if she disobliged him, should have kept
her so long from me; for her life had never been so sweet and serene as
with me and her children; and if she was to begin it again, and choose
her settlement and company, it should be with me in that arkoe. I told
her though I was entirely of her opinion for avoiding a life of hurry,
yet I loved a little company, if for nothing else but to advance topics
for discourse, to the exercise of our faculties; but I then agreed it
was not from mere judgment I spoke, but from fancy. "But, Youwee," says
I, "it will be proper for us to see what our friends have left us, that
we don't want before the time comes about again." Then she took her
part, and I mine; and having finished, we found they would hold out
pretty well, and that the first thing to be done was to get the oil of
the beast-fish.

When we came to examine the brandy and wine, I found they had suffered
greatly; so I told Youwarkee, when she could spare time, she should make
another flight to the ship. "And," says I, "pray look at all the small
casks of wine or brandy, or be they what they will, if they are not
above half-full, or thereabouts, they will swim, and you may send them
down." I desired her to send a fire-shovel and tongs, describing them
to her: "And there are abundance of good ropes between decks, rolled
up, send them," says I, "and anything else you think we want, as plates,
bowls, and all the cutlasses and pistols," says I, "that hang in the
room by the cabin: for I would, me-thinks, have another cargo, as it may
possibly be the last, for the ship can't hold for ever."

Youwarkee, who loved a jaunt to the ship mightily, sat very attentive
to what I said, and told me, if I pleased, she would go the next day; to
which I agreed.

She stayed on this trip till I began to be uneasy for her, being gone
almost four days, and I was in great fear of some accident; but she
arrived safe, telling me she had sent all she could any ways pack up;
and any one who had seen the arrival of her fleet would had taken it for
a good ship's cargo, for it cost me full three weeks to land and draw
them up to the grotto; and then we had such a redundancy of things, that
we were forced to pile them upon each other to the top of the room.

It began to draw towards long days again, when one morning, in bed, I
heard the gripsack. I waked Youvarkee, and told her of it; and-we both
got up, and were going to the level, when we met six glumms in the wood,
with a gripsack before them, coming to the grotto. The trumpeter, it
seems, had been there before; but the others, who seemed to be of
a better rank, had not. We saluted them, and they us; and Youwarkee
knowing one of them, we desired them to walk to the grotto.

They told us they came express from Georigetti's palace, with an
invitation to me and Youwarkee to spend some time at his court. I
let them know what a misfortune I lay under in not being born with a
graundee, since Providence had pleased to dispose of me in a part of the
world where alone it could have been of such infinite service to me,
or I should have taken it for the highest honour to have laid myself at
their master's feet: and after some other discourse, one of them pressed
me to return his master my answer, for they had but a very little time
to stay. I told them they saw plainly, by baring my breast to them, that
I was under an absolute incapacity for such a journey, and gratifying
the highest ambition I could have in the world; for I was pinned down to
my arkoe, never more to pass the barrier of that rock. One of them
then asking, if I should choose to go if it was possible to convey me
thither, I told him he could scarce have the least doubt, was my ability
to perform such a journey equal to my inclination to take it, that I
should in the least hesitate at obeying his master. "Sir," says he,
"you make me very happy in the regard you show my master; and I must
beg leave to stay another day with you." I told him they did me great
honour; but little thought what it all tended to.

We were very facetious; and they talked of the number of visitors I
had had here; and they mentioned several facts which had happened, and,
amongst the rest, that of Nasgig, who, they said, since his return,
had been introduced by Pendlehamby to the king, and was, for his great
prudence and penetration, become Georigetti's great favourite. They told
me war was upon the point of breaking out, and several other pieces of
news, which, as they did not concern me, I was very easy about.

The next morning they desiring to walk, and view what was most
remarkable in my arkoe, and above all to see me fire my gun, which they
had heard so much of; I gratified them at a mark, and hit the edge of
it, and found them quite staunch, without the least start at the report.
I paid them a compliment upon it, and told them how their countrymen
had behaved, even at a second firing: "But," says he who was the chief
spokesman, and knew, I found, as much as I could tell him, "that second
fright was from seeing death the consequence of the first; and though
you had then to do mostly with soldiers, you must not think they choose
death more than others, though their duty obliges them to shun it less."

The same person then desired me to show him how to fire the gun; which
I did, and believe he might hit the rock somewhere or other; but he did
not seem to admire the sport, and I, having but few balls left, did not
recommend the gun to the rest.

A little before bedtime the strangers told me they believed I should see
Nasgig next morning. I presently thought there was somewhat more than
ordinary in this visit, but could noways dive to the bottom of it.

Just before they went to rest, they ordered the trumpeter to be early
on the rock next morning; and upon the first sight of Nasgig's corps, to
sound notice of it, for us to be ready to receive him.

[Illustration: 0100]



CHAPTER X.

_Nasgig comes with a guard to fetch Peter--Long debate about his
going--Nasgig's uneasiness at Peter's refusal--Relates a prediction to
him, and proceedings thereon at Georigetti's court--Peter consents to
go--Prepares a machine for that purpose._


WE were waked by the trumpet giving notice of Nasgig's coming; I
did not care to inquire of the strangers into the particulars of his
embassy; "for be it what it will," thinks I, "Nasgig is so much my
friend that I can know the motives of it from him, and, or I am much
deceived, he is too honest to impose upon me." But I had but little
time for thought, for upon our entering the level, we found him and his
train, of at least a hundred persons, just alighting before us.

We embraced, and professed the particular pleasure fortune had done us
in once more meeting together. When we arrived at the grotto, he told
me he was assured I had been informed of the occasion of his visit; and
that it would be the greatest honour done to his country that could be
imagined. He then laid his hand on my beard, which was now of about five
months' growth, having never shaved it since my father went, and told
he was glad to see that.--"And are you not so to see me?" says I.--"Yes,
surely," says he, "for I prize that for your sake."--"But," says I,
"pray be open with me, and tell me what you mean by my being informed of
the occasion of your coming?"--"Why," says he, "of Georigetti's message
to you, as it will be of such infinite service to our country: and,"
says he, "if you had not consented to it, the messengers had returned
and stopped me."--"True," says I, "one of the messengers told me the
king would be glad to see me; which as I, so well as he, knew it was
impossible he should, in return to his compliment, I believe I might say
what a happiness it would be to me if I could wait on him. But pray what
is your immediate message? for I hear you are in great favour at court,
and would never have come hither with this retinue in so much ceremony
on a trifling account."

"My dear Peter," says Nasgig, "know that your fame has reached far and
near since I saw you before; and our state, though a large and populous
one, and once of mighty power and twice its present extent, by the
revolt of the western part of it, who chose themselves a king, has
been so miserably harassed by wars, that the revolters, who are
ever fomenting discontent and rebellion amongst us, will, by the
encroachments they daily make on us, certainly reduce us at last to a
province under their government; which will render us all slaves to a
usurped power, set up against our lawful sovereign. Now these things
were foretold long enough before they actually began to be transacted;
but all being then at peace, and no prospect of what has since happened,
we looked not out for a remedy, till the disease became stubborn and
incurable."--"Pray," says I, "by whom were the things you mention
foretold?"--"By a very ancient and grave ragan," says he.--"How long
ago?" says I.--"Oh, above four times the age of the oldest man living,"
says he.--"And when did he say it would happen?" says I.--"That," says
he, "was not quite so clear then."--"But how do you know," says I, "that
he ever said any such thing?"--"Why, the thing itself was so peculiar,"
says he, "and the ragan delivered it so positively, that his successors
have ever since pronounced it twelve times a year publicly, word for
word, to put the people in mind of it, and from whom they must hope for
relief; and now the long-expected time being come, we have no hopes but
in your destruction of the tyrant-usurper."--"I destroy him!" says I:
"if he is not destroyed till I do it, I fear your state is but in a
bad case."--"My good friend Peter," says he, "you or nobody can do
it."--"Pugh," says I, "Nasgig, I took you for a man of more sense,
notwithstanding the prejudices of education, than to think, because you
have seen me kill a beast-fish that could not come to hurt me at the
distance of twenty paces, that I can kill your usurper at the distance
he is from me."--"No, my good friend," says Nasgig, "I know you take
me to have more judgment than to think so."--"Why, what else can I do,"
says I, "unless he will come hither to be killed by me?"--"Dear Peter,"
says he, "you will not hear me out."--"I will," says I, "say on."--"You,
as I said before, being the only person that can, according to our
prediction, destroy this usurper and restore peace among us, my master
Georigetti, and the whole state of Normnbdsgrsutt, were going to send
a splendid embassy to you; but your father advising to repose the
commission wholly in me, they all consented to it, and I am come to
invite you over to Brandleguarp for that purpose. I know you will tell
me you have not the graundee, and cannot get thither: but I am assured
you have what is far better; the wisdom you have will help you to
surmount that difficulty, which our whole moucheratt cannot get over.
And I am sure did you apply half the thought to accomplish it you seem
to do to invent excuses against it, you would easily overcome that. And
now, dear friend," continues he, "refuse me not; for as my first rise
was owing to your favour, so my downfall as absolutely attends your
refusal."

"Dear Nasgig," says I, "you know I love you, and could refuse you
nothing in my power; but for me to be mounted in the air, I know not
how, over these rocks, and then drowned by a fall into the sea, which
is a necessary consequence of such a mad attempt; and all this in
prosecution of a project founded upon an old wife's tale, is such a
chimera as all men of sense would laugh at; as if there was no way of
destroying me, but with a guard of a hundred men to souse me into the
wide ocean. A very pretty conqueror of rebels I should prove, truly,
kicking for life till the next wave sent me to the bottom."

Nasgig looked then so grave, I almost thought I should have heard no
more of it; but after a short pause, "Peter," says he, "I am sorry you
make so light of sacred things; a thing foretold so long ago by a holy
ragan, kept up by undoubted tradition ever since, in the manner I have
told you; in part performed, and now waiting your concurrence for its
accomplishment; but if I cannot prevail with you, though I perish at
my return, I dread to think you may be forced without thanks to perform
what generously to undertake will be your greatest glory."

"Pray," says I, "Nasgig (for now I perceive you are in earnest), what
may this famous prediction be?"

"Ah, Peter!" says Nasgig, "to what purpose should I relate so sacred
a prediction to one who, though the most concerned in it, makes such a
jest of it?"

His mentioning me as concerned in it, raised my curiosity once more to
desire a relation of it. "Why should I relate it," says he, "if you
are resolved not to fulfil it?"--I told him I had no resolution against
anything that related to my own good, or that of my friends. "But the
greatest question with me," says I, "is, whether I am at all concerned
in it."--"Oh clearly, clearly!" says he, "there is no doubt of it; it
must mean you or nobody."--I told him I must judge by the words of it
that I was the person intended by it; and till that was apparent to my
reason, it would be difficult to procure my consent to so perilous
an undertaking.--"And," says he, "will you, upon hearing it, judge
impartially, and go with me if you can take the application to
yourself?"--"I cannot go quite so far as that," says I; "but this I'll
promise you, I'll judge impartially, and if I can so apply it to myself,
that it must necessarily mean me, and no other, and if you convince me I
may go safely, I will go."

Nasgig was so rejoiced at this, he was at a loss how to express himself.
"My dear Peter," says he, "you have given me new life! our state is
free! our persons free! we are free! we are free! And, Peter," says he,
"now I have given vent to my joy, you shall hear the prediction.

"You must know, this holy ragan lived four ages ago; and from certain
dreams and revelations he had had, set himself to overturn our
country-worship of the Great Image; and by his sanctity of life, and
sound reasonings, had almost effected it under the assistance of
Begsurbeck, then our king, who had fully embraced his tenets; but the
rest of the ragans opposing him, and finding he could not advance his
scheme, he withdrew from the ragans to a close retirement for several
years; and just before his death, sending for the king and all the
ragans, he told them he should certainly die that day, and that he could
not die at peace till he had informed them what had been revealed to
him; desiring them to take notice of it, not as a conjecture of his own,
but a certain verity which should hereafter come to pass. Says he, 'you
know you have rejected the alteration in your religion I proposed to
you; and which Begsurbeck, here present, would have advanced; and now I
must tell you what you have brought upon yourselves. As for Begsurbeck,
he shall reign the longest and most prosperously of all your former and
future kings; but in twice his time outrun, the west shall be divided
from the east, and bring sorrow, confusion, and slaughter, till the
waters of the earth shall produce a glumm, with hair round his head,
swimming and flying without the graundee; who, with unknown fire and
smoke, shall destroy the traitor of the west, settle the ancient limits
of the monarchy, by common consent establish what I would have taught
you, change the name of this country, introduce new laws and arts, add
kingdoms to this state, and force tributes from the bowels of the earth
of such things as this kingdom shall not know till then, and shall never
afterwards want; and then shall return to the waters again. Take care,'
says he, 'you miss not the opportunity when it may be had; for once
lost, it shall never, never more return; and then, woe, woe, woe to my
poor country!'--The ragan having said this, expired.

"This prediction made so great an impression on Begsurbeck, that he
ordered all the ragans singly before him, and heard them repeat it;
which having done, and made himself perfect in it, he ordered it to
be pronounced twelve times in the year on particular days, in the
moucherait, that the people might learn it by heart; that they and their
children being perfect in it, might not fail of applying it, when the
man from the waters should appear with proper description.

"Thus, Peter," says he, "has this prediction been kept up in our
memories as perfectly as if it had but just been pronounced to
us."--:"'Tis very true," says I, "here may have been a prediction, and
it may have been, as you say, handed down very exactly from Begsurbeck's
days till now; but how does that affect me? how am I concerned in it?
Surely, if any marks would have denoted me to be the man, some of the
colambs who have so lately left me, and were so long with me, would have
found them out in my person, or among the several actions of my life
I recounted to them."--"Upon the return of the colambs from you,"
says Nasgig, "they told his majesty what they had heard and seen at
Graundevolet, and the story was conveyed through the whole realm: but
every man has not the faculty of distinction. Now, one of the ragans,
when he had heard of you, applying you to the prediction, and that to
you, soon found our deliverer in you; and at a public moucheratt,
after first pronouncing the prediction, declared himself thereon to the
following effect:

"'May it please your majesty--and you the honourable colambs--the
reverend ragans--and people of this state,' says he, 'you all know that
our famous king Begsurbeck, who reigned at the time of this prediction,
did live sixty years after it in the greatest splendour, and died at the
age of one hundred and twenty years, having reigned full ninety of them;
and herein you will all agree with me, no king before or since has done
the like. You all likewise know, that within two hundred years after
Begsurbeck's death, that is, about twice his reign of ninety years
outrun, the rebellion in the west began, which has been carried on ever
since; and our strength diminishing as theirs increases, we are now no
fair match for them, but are fearful of being undone. So far you will
agree matters have tallied with the prediction; and now, to look
forward to the time to come, it becomes us to lay hold of the present
opportunity for our relief, for that, once slipped, will never return;
and if I have any skill in interpretations, now is the time of our
deliverance.

"'Our prediction foretells the past evils, their increase and
continuance, till the waters of the earth shall produce a glumm. Here
I must appeal to the honourable colambs present, if the waters have
not done so in the person of glumm Peter of Graundevolet, as they have
received it from his own report.'

"All the colambs then rising, and making reverence to the king, declared
it was most true.

"'The next part,' says the ragan, 'is, he is to be hairy round his head;
and how his person in this respect agrees with the prediction, I beg
leave to be informed by the colambs.'

"The colambs then rising, declared that having seen and conversed with
him, they could not observe any hair on the fore part of his head; but I
answered that when I left you I well remembered your having short stubbs
of hair upon your cheeks and chin; which I had no sooner mentioned than
your father arose and told the assembly that though he did not mind
it whilst he was with you, yet he remembered that his daughter, a year
before, had told him that you had hair on your face before as long as
that behind.

"This again putting new life into the ragan, he proceeded--'Then let
this,' says he, 'be put to the trial by an embassy to glumm Peter; and
if it answers, there will be no room to doubt the rest. Then,' says the
ragan, 'it is plain by the report of the colambs, that glumm Peter has
not the graundee.

"'As to the next point, he is to swim and fly. Now I am informed he
swims daily in a thing he calls a boat.'--To which the colambs all
agreed.--'And now,' says he, 'that he flies too, that must be fulfilled;
for every word must have a meaning, and that indeed he must do if ever
he comes hither. I therefore advise that a contrivance be somehow found
out for conveying glumm Peter through the air to us, and then we shall
answer that part of the prediction; and I think, and do not doubt, but
that may be done.

"'Now,' says he, 'let us see the benefit predicted to us upon the
arrival of glumm Peter. Our words are: "Who, with unknown fire and
smoke, shall destroy the traitor of the west." What can be plainer than
this? For I again appeal to the colambs for his making unknown fire and
smoke.

"'Thus far,' says the ragan, 'we have succeeded happily towards a
discovery of the person; but it ends not here with the death of the
traitor; but such other benefits are to accrue as are mentioned in the
following part of the prediction: they are blessings yet to come, and
who knows the end of them?

"'I hope,' says the ragan, 'I have given satisfaction in what I have
said, and shall now leave it to the care of those whose business it is
to provide that none of those woes pronounced against us may happen, by
missing the time which, when gone, will never return.'

"The assembly were coming to a resolution of sending you a pompous
embassy, but your father prevailed for sending me only; 'For,' says he,
'my son thinks better of him than of the rest of our whole race.' So
this important affair was committed to me, with orders to prepare a
conveyance for you, which I cannot attempt to do; but shall refer myself
to your more solid judgment in the contrivance of it."

I had sat very attentive to Nasgig, and from what he had declared, could
not say but there was a very great resemblance between myself and the
person predicted of. "But then," says I, "they are idolaters: Providence
would not interpose in this affair, when all the glory of its success
must redound to an idol. But," says I, "has not the same thing often
happened from oracular presages, where the glory must redound to the
false deity? But what if, as is predicted, their religion is to be
changed to the old ragan's plan, and that will be to the abolition of
idolatry? I know not what to say; but if I thought my going would gain a
single soul to the eternal truth, I would not scruple to hazard my life
in the attempt."

I then called in Youwarkee, told her the whole affair of the prediction,
which she had often heard, I found, and could have repeated. I told her
that the king and states had pitched on me as the person intended by
their prediction, and that Nasgig was sent to fetch me over: "And
indeed," says I, "Youwee, if this be a true prediction, it seems very
applicable to me as far as I can see."--"Yes, truly," says she, "so it
does, now I consider it in the light you say the ragan puts it."--

"Why," says I, "prophecies and predictions are never so plain as to
mention names; but yet, upon the solution, they become as intelligible
as if they did, the circumstances tallying so exactly. But what would
you have me do? Shall I, or shall I not, go?"--"Go!" says she, "how can
you go?"--"Oh," says I, "never fear that. If this is from above, means
will soon be found; Providence never directs effects without means."

Youwarkee, whose head ran only on the dangers of the undertaking, had
a violent conflict with herself; the love of me, of her children, and of
her country, divided her so, she was not capable of advising. I pressed
her opinion again, when she told me to follow the dictates of my own
reason; "And but for the dread of losing you, and for my children's
sakes," says she, "I should have no choice to make when my country is at
stake: but you know best."

I told Youwarkee that I really found the prediction the plainer the more
I thought of it; and that, above all, the change of religion was the
uppermost; for if I can reduce a State from the misery and bondage of
idolatry to a true sense of the Supreme Being, and seemingly by His own
direction, shall I fear to risk my own life for it? or, will He suffer
me to perish till somewhat at least is done towards it? And how do I
know but the whole tendency of my life has been by impulse hither for
this very purpose? "My dear Youwee," says I, "fear nothing, I will go."

I called Nasgig, and told him my resolution, and that he had nothing now
to do but prepare a means of conveying me.--He said he begged to refer
that to me, for my own thoughts would suggest to me both the safest and
easiest means.

I wanted to venture on the back of some strong glumm; when Nasgig told
me no one could endure my weight so long a flight. But what charmed me
most was, the lovely Youwarkee offered to carry me herself if she could:
"And if I can't hold out," says she, "my dear, we can but at last drop
both together." I kissed the charming creature with tears in my eyes,
but declined 'the experiment.

I told Nasgig I wanted to divide my weight between two or four glumms,
which I believed I could easily do; and asked if each could hold out
with a fourth part of my weight.--He told me there was no doubt of that;
but he was afraid I should drop between their graundees, he imagining I
intended to lie along on their backs, part of me on each of them, or
should bear so much on them as to prevent their flight. I told him I did
not purpose to dispose of myself in the manner he presumed, but if two
or four could undoubtedly bear my weight so long a flight, I would order
myself without any other inconvenience to my bearers than their burden.
He made light of my weight between four, as a trifle, and said he would
be one with all his heart.--"Nay," says I, "if four cannot hold out, can
eight?" He plainly told me, as he knew not what I meant, he could say
nothing to it, nor could imagine how I could divide so small a body as
mine into eight different weights, for it seemed impossible, he said, to
him; but if I would show him my method, he would then give me his
opinion.

I then, leaving him, took out my tools: I pitched upon a strong board my
wife had sent me from the ship, about twelve feet long, and a foot and
a half broad, upon the middle of which I nailed down one of my chairs;
then I took one cord of about thirty-four feet long, making handloops
at each end, and nailed it down in the middle to the under-side of my
board, as near as I could to the fore-end of it, and I took another cord
of the same length and make, and this I nailed within three feet of the
farther end of my board. I then took a cord of about twenty feet long,
and nailed about three feet before the foremost, and a fourth of the
same length, at the farther end of my board; by which means the first
and third ropes being the longest and at such a distance from the short
ropes, the glumms who held them would fly so much higher and forwarder
than the short-rope ones, that they and their ropes would be quite out
of the others' way, which would not have happened if either the ropes
had been all of one length, or nearer to or farther from one another;
and then considering that if I should receive a sudden jerk or twitch,
I might possibly be shook off my chair, I took a smaller rope to tie
myself with fast to the chair, and then I was sure if I fell into the
sea I should at least have the board and chair with me, which might
possibly buoy me up till the glumms could descend to my assistance.

Having carried the machine down to the level with the help of two
of Nasgig's men, he being out on a walk, and having never seen it, I
ordered one of the men to sit upon the chair, and eight more to hold by
the loops and rise with him; but, as I found it difficult at their first
rising, not being able to mount all equally, to carry the board up even,
and the back part rising first, the front pitched against the ground
and threw the fellow out of the chair, I therefore bade them stop, and
ordering eight others to me, said I, "Hold each of you one of these
ropes as high as you can over your heads; then." says I to the eight
bearers, "mount on your graundees, and come round behind him in the
chair gently, two and two, and take each of you a loop, and hover with
it till you are all ready, and then rise together, keeping your eye on
the board that it rises neither higher at one end nor one side than the
other, and see you all feel your weight alike; then fly across the lake
and back again." They did so, and with as much ease, they told me, as if
they had nothing in their hands; and the man rode with so much state and
composure, he said, that I longed to try it myself; so, shifting places
with the glumm, I mounted the chair, and tying myself round, I asked if
any one knew which way Nasgig walked. One of them pointing to where he
saw him just before in the wood, I ordered them to take me up as before,
and go that way.

Upon coming to the place where I expected Nasgig was, I hallooed and
called him; who, knowing my voice, ran to the skirt of the wood; and
seeing me mounted in my flying chair, I jokingly told him I was going,
if he had any commands; but he mounting immediately came up to me, and
viewing me round, and seeing the pleasure the men seemed to carry
me with, says he, "Are you all sure you can carry him safe to
Battringdrigg?"--They all replied, "Yes, with ease."--"This then," says
he, "is your doom: if you perform it not, every one shall be slit; but
if you carry the deliverer safe, you are filgays every man of you!" he
verily thinking I was then going off; but I undeceived him, by ordering
them to turn about and set me down where I was taken up.

Nasgig alighting and viewing my contrivance, "This, Peter," says he, "is
but a very plain thing."--"It is so," says I, "but it is as far as my
ingenuity could reach."--"Ah, Peter!" says he "say not so, for if the
greatest difficulties, as I and all my nation thought it would be to
convey you to them, are so plain and easy to you, what must lesser
things be? No, Peter, I did not call it plain because it might be easily
done when it was seen, but in respect to the head that formed it; for
the nearest way to attain one's end is always the best, and attended
for the most part with fewest inconveniences; and I verily think, Peter,
though we believe the rise or fall of our State wholly depends on you,
you must have stayed at Graundevolet but for your own ingenuity. Well,
and when shall we set out?" says he.--I told him it would take up some
time to settle the affairs of my family, and to consider what I had best
take with me; and required at least three days, being as little as I
could have told him for that purpose.

Nasgig, who as he was an honest man, and for making the best for his
patrons, was sorry it was so long, though he, imagining at the same time
it was short enough for one who was to go on such an enterprise, was
glad it was no longer; and immediately despatched a trumpet express
with notice, that on the fourth day he should be at the height of
Battringdrigg, and that having myself formed a machine for that purpose,
I would accompany him.

I began next to consider what part I had to act at Doorpt Svangeanti
(for I neither could nor would call it by any other name when I came
thither), and what it was they expected from me. I am, says I, to kill
a traitor; good, that may be, but then I must take a gun and ammunition;
and why not some pistols and cutlasses? If I cannot use them all, I can
teach others who may. I will take several of them, and all my guns but
two, and I will leave a pair of pistols; I may return and want them. I
will take my two best suits of clothes, and other things suitable; for
if I am to perform things according to this prediction, it may be a long
time before I get back again. Thinks I, Youwarkee shall stay here with
the children, and if I like my settlement I can send for her at any
time. I then began to see the necessity of making at least one more
machine to carry my goods on. And says I, as they will be very weighty,
I must have more lasks to shift in carrying them, for I will retain
sixteen for my own body-machine, in order to relieve each other; and as
the distance is so great, I will not be stinted for want of fresh hands.

Being come to this resolution, I called Nasgig, and ordered eight
fresh lasks to attend my baggage; these he soon singled out: so,
having settled all matters with my wife, and taken leave of her and the
children, I charged them not to stir out of the grotto till I was gone;
and leaving them all in tears, I set out with a heavy heart for the
level, where the whole convoy and my two machines waited for me.

[Illustration: 5119]

[Illustration: 0120]



CHAPTER XI.

_Peter's speech to the soldiery--Offers them freedom--His journey--Is
met by the king--The king sent back, and why--Peter alights in the
king's garden--His audience--Description of his supper and bed._


WHEN we came to the level, I desired Nasgig to draw all his men into
a circle as near as they could stand. I then asked them who would
undertake to carry me: when not a man but proffered his service, and
desired to have the post of honour, as they called it. I told them my
question was only in case of necessity to know whom I might depend upon,
for my bearers were provided, saving accidents. "But, my friends," says
I, "as you are equally deserving for the offered service, as if you were
accepted, are any of you desirous of being filgays?" They all answering
together, "I, I, I!"--"Nasgig," says I, "you and I must come to
a capitulation before I go, and your honour must be pledged for
performance of articles."

I began with telling them what an enemy I was to slavery: "And," says I
to Nasgig, "as I am about to undertake what no man upon earth ever did
before: to quit my country, my family, my every conveniency of life, for
I know not what, I know not where, and from whence I may never return;
I must be indulged, if I am ever so fortunate as to arrive safe in your
country, in the satisfaction of seeing all these my fellow-travellers as
happy as myself: for which reason I must insist upon every man present
alighting with me in safety, being made free the moment we touch the
ground; and unless you will engage your honour for this, I will not stir
a step farther."

Nasgig paused for an answer, for though my bearers were his own lasks,
and he could dispose of them at pleasure, yet as the rest were the
king's, he knew not how far he might venture to promise for them; but
being desirous to get me over the rock, fearing I might still retract
my purpose, he engaged to procure their freedom of the king. And this, I
thought, would make the men more zealous in my service.

I then permitting them to take me up, we were over the rock as quick as
thought, and when I had a little experienced the flight, I perceived I
had nothing to fear; for they were so dexterous on the graundee, that
I received not the least shock all the way, or scarce a wry position,
though every quarter of an inch at hand made a considerable deflection
from the perpendicular. We shifted but twice till we came to
Battringdrigg, the manner, of which I directed as I sat in my chair; for
I ordered the new man to hover over him he was to relieve, and reaching
down his hand to meet the others which were held up with a rope, the old
bearer sunk beneath the chair, and the reliever took his course. This we
did one by one, till all were changed; but there was one, a stout young
fellow, at the first short rope on my right hand, who observing me to
eye him more than the rest, in a bravado would not be relieved before
we arrived at Battringdrigg arkoe; and I afterwards took him into my
family.

As it was now somewhat advanced into the light season, I had hopes of
a tolerable good prospect; but had it been quite light, I should have
never been the better for it. I had been upon very high mountains in the
inland parts of Africa, but was never too high to see what was below
me before, though very much contracted; but here, in the highest of our
flight, you could not distinguish the globe of the earth but by a sort
of mist, for every way looked alike to me; then sometimes on a cue
given, from an inexpressible height my bearers would dart as it were
sloping like a shooting star, for an incredible distance, almost to the
very surface of the sea, still keeping me as upright as a Spaniard on my
seat. I asked them the reason of their so vast descent, when I perceived
the labour they had afterwards to attain the same height again. They
told me they not only eased their graundees by that descent, but could
fly half as far again in a day, as by a direct (they meant horizontal)
flight; for though it seemed laborious to mount so excessive high, yet
they went on at the same time at a great rate; but when they came
to descend again, there was no comparison in their speed. And, on my
conscience, I believe they spoke true, for in their descents I think no
arrow could have reached us.

In about sixteen hours, for I took my watch with me, we alighted on the
height of Battringdrigg: when I thought I had returned to my own arkoe,
it was so like it, but much larger. Here we rested for hours; I opened
my chest, and gave each of my bearers a drop of brandy. Nasgig and I
also just wetted our mouths, and ate a piece of preserve to moisten
us; the rest of the lasks sitting down, and feeding upon what they had
brought with them in their colapets; for their method is, when they
take long flights, to carry a number of hard round fruits, flat like my
cream-cheeses, but much less, which containing a sort of flour they eat
dry; then drinking, which swells, and fills them as much as a good meal
of anything else would. Here we met with abundance of delightful pools
of water on the vast flat of the rocks. They told me, in that arkoe
the young glumms and gawrys came in vast flights separately, to divert
themselves on the fine lakes of water, and from thence went sometimes as
far as my arkoe for that purpose; but that was but seldom.

When we had sufficiently rested, they shut their colapets, which
sometimes hung down from their necks, and were sometimes swung round to
their backs, and crossing the arkoe and another large sea, but nothing
comparable to the first, arrived in about six hours more to the height
of the White Mountains, which Nasgig told me were the confines of
Georigetti's territories. But, thinks I, it may belong to whom it will
for the value of it; for nothing could be more barren than all the top
of it was; but the inside of it made amends for that, by the prodigious
tall and large trees it abounded with, full of the strangest kinds of
fruits I had ever seen; and these trees, most of them, seemed to grow
out of the very stone itself, not a peck of dirt being to be collected
near them. Without-side of these mountains, it was scarce darker than
at my arkoe; for I made all the observation my time would allow me; when
spying at a vast distance several lights, which were unusual things to
me in that country, they told me the largest was the burning mountain
Alkoe: this I remembered to have heard the name of upon some former
occasion, though I could not recollect what; and that the rest were
of the same sort, but smaller. I asked if they were in Georigetti's
territories. They said no, they belonged to another king formerly, whose
subjects were as fond of fire as Georigetti's were of avoiding it;
and that many of them worked with it always before them, and made an
insufferable noise by it.

At hearing the above relation, an impression struck my fancy, that they
might be a sort of smiths or workers in iron, or other metals; and I
wished myself with them, for I had a mighty notion of that work, having
been frequently at a neighbouring forge when a boy, and knew all their
tools, and resolved to get all the information I could of that country
some other time; for our company drawing to their posts, and preparing
to set forward again, I could have no more talk now; and you must know,
I had observed so many idle rascals before I left England, who could
neither strike a stroke nor stir a foot whilst you talked with them,
that I feared if I asked questions by the way, they should in answering
me neglect their duty, and let me drop.

When we came near our journey's end, Nasgig asked me where I would
please to alight I told him I thought at my father's; for though I came
on a visit to the king, it would not show respect to go before him just
off a journey. But I might have spared me the trouble of settling that
point; for we were not gone far from the Black Mountain, it going by
that name within side, though it is called the White without, before we
heard the gripsacks, and a sort of squeaking or screaming music, very
loud. Nasgig told me the king was in flight. I asked him how he knew
that, for I could see nobody. He knew it, he said, by the gripsack, and
the other music, which never played but on that occasion; and presently
after, I thought the whole kingdom were on the graundee, and was going
to order my bearers back to the mountain, for fear of the concourse.
Thinks I, they will jostle me down out of civility, and I shall break my
neck to gratify their curiosity. So I told Nasgig if he did not somehow
stop the multitude, I would turn back for the mountain, for I would
never venture into that crowd of people.

Nasgig sprung away to the king and informed him; but the king, fearing
the people should be disgusted at his sending them back, gave orders
for the whole body to file off to the right and left, and taking a vast
sweep each way, to fall in behind me; but upon no account to come near
me, for fear of mischief. This was no sooner said than done, and all
spreading into two vast semicircles, met in a train just behind my
chair.

Nasgig had also persuaded the king to retreat back to the palace,
telling him it was not with me as with them, who could help themselves
in case of accident; but as I was under the guidance of others, and on a
foundation he should scarce, in my condition, have ventured upon, he was
sure I should be better satisfied with his intended respect only, than
to receive it there: "But," says he, "that your majesty may see his
contrivance, I will cause him to alight in the palace garden, where you
may have the pleasure of viewing him in his machine."

The king returning, ordered all the colambs, who waited my arrival, to
assemble in council again; and as I went over the city, I was surprised
to see all the rock of which it consisted quite covered with people,
besides prodigious numbers in the air, all shouting out peals of welcome
to me; and as we were then but little above their heads, every one
had something to say of me; one wondering what I had got on; another
swearing he saw hair on my face as long as his arm; and in general,
every one calling on the Image for my safety.

The king was present when I alighted in the garden; and himself taking
me from my chair, I bent on one knee to kiss his hand; but he took me
in his arms, called me his father, and told me he hoped I would make his
days equal in glory to his great ancestor Begsurbeck. We complimented
some time before he took me into a small refectory in the garden,
and gave me some of his sort of wine, which I found was loaded with
ram's-horn, and some dried and moist sweetmeats. He then told me I had
a piece of ceremony to go through, after which he hoped to have me to
himself. I told him, whatever forms of State were customary, they become
necessary, and I should obey him.

His majesty then called one of the persons in waiting, and telling him
he was going to the room of audience, ordered him to conduct me thither
forthwith.

Following my guide, after a long walk through a sort of piazza, we
entered under a stately arch, curiously carved, into a very spacious
room, lighted with infinite numbers of globe-lamps, where he desired me
to sit down on a round stone pedestal covered with leaves, and all round
the sides were running foliages exquisitely wrought; on the walls were
carved figures of glumms in several actions, but chiefly in battle, or
other warlike exercises, in alto-relievo, very bold, with other devices
interspersed. I sat down, having first paid my submission to the throne,
and to the several colambs who sat on the king's right and left, down
the sides of the room.

The person then who introduced me, going into the middle of the room,
spoke to this effect: "Mighty king--and you honourable lords his
colambs--here is present the glumm Peter of Graundevolet; I wait your
commands where to dispose him."

Then the king and all the colambs arising, another person stepped forth,
and looking at me, for I was standing, "Glumm Peter of Graundevolet,"
says he, "I am to signify to you that the mighty king Georigetti, and
all his honourable colambs, congratulate your arrival in Normnbdsgrsutt,
and have commanded me to give you rank according to your merit." Then
the king and colambs sat down, and I was led to the king's right hand,
and placed on the same stone with, but at some small distance from, his
majesty.

The king then told me the great pleasure I had done him and his colambs,
in my so speedy arrival upon their message; but said he would give me no
farther trouble now than to know how I chose to be served; and desired
me to give orders to a bash he would send to me, for whatever I wanted;
and then giving orders to a bash to show me my lodgings, I was permitted
to retire to refresh myself.

I was then conducted to my apartment, up a sloping flight of stone, very
long, with a vast arch over my head; I believed it might be fifty paces
long at least, but being a very broad easy ascent, and smooth, it was
not in the least fatiguing. All the way I went were the same sorts of
globe lights as in the audience-room. The staircase, if I may call it
so, it answering the same purpose, was most beautifully carved, both
sides and top. At length I came into a very large gallery, at least
fourscore paces long, and about twenty broad; on each side of which
hung the same globes. At the farther end of this gallery I entered by
an arch, very narrow, but most neatly wrought, into an oval room; in the
middle of this room, on the right hand, was another small neat archway;
entering through which about ten paces, there were two smaller arches to
the right and left, and within them, with an easy ascent of about three
paces, you came to a flat trough of stone, six or seven feet long, and
about the same width; these, I understood by my bash, were the beds to
lie on.

I asked him if they were used to lie on the bare stone. He told me some
did, but he had orders to lay me on doffee; and presently up came four
fellows with great mats, as I took them for by my globe light, full of
something, which, by their so easily carrying so great bulk, I perceived
was very light. They pitched it down upon my stone bedstead, and first
with great sticks, and then with small switches having beat it soundly,
retired.

Whilst I was looking about at the oddity of the place, I found my bash
was gone too. "So," says I, "all gone! I suppose they intend I shall now
go to bed." I then went into my bed-chamber, for there were globe lights
there too, and observing my bed lay full four feet above the stone, and
sloping higher to the sides and head, I went to feel what it was; but
laying my hand upon it, it was so soft I could feel no resistance till I
had pressed it some way; and it lay so light, that a fly must have sunk
upon it.--"Well," thinks I, "what if I never lay thus before, I believe
I have lain as bad!"

I then took a turn into my oval room again, and observed the floor,
sides, and all was stone, as smooth as possible, but not polished; and
the walls and ceiling, and in short every place where they could be
ornamented, were as well adorned with carvings as can be conceived.

Though nobody came near me yet, I did not care to be too inquisitive all
at once, but I longed to know what they burnt in the globes, which gave
so steady a light, and yet seemed to be enclosed quite round, top and
sides, without any vent-hole for the smoke to evaporate. Surely, thinks
I, they are a dullish glass, for they hung almost above my touch, and
must be exceeding hot with the fire so enclosed, and have some small
vent-hole though I can't see it. Then standing on tiptoe to feel, it
struck quite cold to my finger; but I could only reach to touch that, or
any of the rest, being all of one height.

Whilst I was musing thus, I heard the sound of voices coming along the
gallery; and presently came a train of servants with as much victuals as
a hundred men could eat, and wines proportionable; they set it down at
the upper end of the oval room, on a flat of stone, which on making the
room had been left in the upper bend of the oval quite across it, about
table high, for that purpose. These eatables, such as were liquid, or
had sauces to them, were served up in a sort of grey stone bowls; but
the dry were brought in neat wooden baskets of twig-work.

The servants all retiring into the gallery, except my bash, I asked him
if anybody was to eat with me: he told me no.--"I wonder," says I, "they
should send me so much, then." He replied it was the allowance of my
apartment by his majesty's orders; which silenced me.

I believe there were twenty different things on the table, insomuch that
I did not know where to begin, and heartily wished for an excuse to get
rid of my bash, who stood close at my elbow, that I might have smelt and
tasted before I helped myself to anything, for I knew not what any one
thing was.

In this perplexity, I asked my bash what post he was in under his
majesty. He said, one of the fifty bashes appointed to be near the
king's favourites when at court. "And pray," said I, "are you the person
to attend me?" He was, he said, the principal to wait on my person;
but there were at least sixty others, who had different offices in this
apartment. "I would be glad," said I, "to know your name, that I may the
more readily speak to you." He told me his name was Quilly. "Then, pray,
Quilly," says I, "do you know what is become of my baggage and chair?"
I found, though he guessed at my baggage, he was puzzled at the name of
chair. "My seat," says I. "Oh, I understand you," says he. "Then, pray,
will you go bring me word of them, and see them brought safe up into the
gallery?" He tripped away on my errand. So thinks I, now I am fairly rid
of you! but I had scarce turned any of my viands over, before I found
he had but stepped into the gallery, to send some of the idle
fellows-in-waiting there. And this putting me to a nonplus, "Quilly,"
says I, "you know I am a stranger here; and as different countries have
different ways and customs, as well of dressing their eatables as other
things, and these dishes being dressed contrary to my custom, I shall
be glad if you will name some of them to me, that I may know them when I
see them again."

Quilly began with this, and ran on to that, which was a fine dish; and
the other few but the king have at their tables. "And here," says he,
"is a dish of padsi; and there----"

"Hold, hold," says I, "Quilly, let's try these first before you
proceed;" for I remembered, at my grotto, they all eat my fish for
padsi, and I cut a slice of it; for I always carried my clasp-knife in
my pocket, and they had no such thing there; and laying it on a round
cake I took for my trencher, I tasted it, and found it so, to my
apprehension, in the palate; but it did not look or flake like fish, as
I observed by the slices they had cut it into; for all the victuals were
in long slices ready to bite at. I asked him if these things were not
all cut, and with what; for I understood they had no knives, showing him
mine. He said the cook cut it with a sharp stone. I then asked him the
name of several other things, and at last he came to crullmott, which
having heard of before, I now tasted, and could have sworn it had been a
hashed fowl. I asked him if crullmotts were very common; he told me
yes, towards the bottoms of the mountains there were abundance
of crullmott-trees.--"No, no," says I, "not trees; I mean fowls,
birds."--"I don't know what they are," said he; "but these crullmotts
grow on very large trees." Indeed, I did not know yet what I was at.
"But," says I, "if your fowls do, sure your fish don't grow on trees
too!"--"We have none of them," says he, "in this country."--"Why,"
says I, "it is but this moment I tasted one."--"I don't know," said he,
"where the cook got it."--"Why, here," says I, "what you call padsi
I call fish."--"Aye, padsi," says he, "'grows upon a bush in the same
woods."--"Well done," says I, "this is the first country I was ever in
where the fish and fowl grew on trees. It is ten to one but I meet with
an ox growing on some tree by the tail before I leave you."

I had by this time, out of these two and some other pickings, made up a
very good meal; and putting my knife into my pocket, desired something
to drink. My bash asked me what I pleased to have. I told him, anything
to take a good draught of. Then he filled me a bott of wine, very well
tasted, though too sweet for meals; but putting some water to it, it did
very well.

My messengers being returned, and having set all my things in the
gallery, I desired Quilly to let the victuals be taken away; upon which
there came more servants than dishes, who took all at once, but some
wine and water I desired might remain.

I told Quilly I saw there were two beds. "Who are they for?" says
I.--"One for you and one for me," says he; "for we bashes never leave
the king's favourites."--"Pray, Quilly," says I, "what is the
meaning that to the several rooms I have been in, there is never a
door?"--"Door," says he, "I don't know that."--"What!" says I, "don't
you shut your rooms at night?"--"No, no. Shut at night! I never heard
of that."--"I believe," says I, "Quilly, it is almost bed-time; is it
not?"--"No, no," says Quilly, "the gripsack has not sounded."--"How do
you know," says I, "in this country, when you shall lie down, and when
rise? for my wife has told me you have no clocks."

"No; no clocks," says he.--"Then," says I, "does every one rise and
lie down when they please? or do you all lie down and all rise together
about the same time?"--"Oh," says Quilly, "you will hear the gripsack
presently. There are several glumms who take it by turns to sound it for
the rest, and then we know it is time to lie down; and when they sound
it again, we know it is time to rise." And afterwards I found these
people guessed the time (being twelve hours between sound and sound)
so well, that there were but few minutes' variation at any time between
them and my watch; and I set my watch to go from their soundings at six
o'clock.

I found myself pretty much fatigued after my journey; for though I had
only to sit still, yet the excessive velocity of such an unusual motion
strained every muscle as much as the hardest labour; for you may imagine
I could not at first be without my fears upon ever so small a variation
of my chair, which, though I could not possibly by my own inclination
one way or other rectify, yet a natural propensity to a perpendicular
station involuntarily biasses one to incline this or that way, in order
to preserve it; and then at first my breath being ready to fail me, in
proportion to the celerity of the flight, and to my own apprehensions,
and being upon that exercise near thirty hours, and without sleep for
almost forty, you may judge I wanted rest; so I told Quilly I would lie
down, and ordered him not to disturb me till I waked of myself.

I could not prevent the officiousness of my valet to put me to bed,
and cover me with the down, or whatever it was; for having no sheets,
I pulled off nothing but my coat, wig, and shoes, and putting on my
flannel night-cap, I laid me down.

[Illustration: 0137]



CHAPTER XII.

_The king's apartments described--Is introduced to the king--A
moucheratt called--His discourse with the king about religion._


I HAVE known some travellers so peculiar in their taste as not to be
able to sleep in a strange lodging. But, thanks to my kind stars, that
did not prove my case; for having looked on my watch when I went to bed,
as I call it, and finding it was down, I wound it up, and observed it
began to go at about three o'clock--whether day or night, matters not;
and when I waked it was past nine, so that I know I had slept eighteen
hours; and finding that a very reasonable refreshment, and myself very
hungry, I called Quilly to get me my breakfast.

Quilly told me his majesty had been to visit me, but would not have me
disturbed. I, begging him to despatch my breakfast as soon as possible,
and let me have some water for my hands, he ordered the gallery-waiters,
and everything came immediately.

My breakfast was a brown liquid, with a sort of seeds or grain in it,
very sweet and good; but the fear of the king's return before I was
ready for him, prevented my inquiring into what it was. So, having
finished it, and washed my hands, Quilly presented me a towel, which
looked like an unbleached coarse linen, but was very soft and spongy;
and I found afterwards was made of threads of bark stripped from some
tree. I put on my brown suit, sword, and long wig, and sent Quilly to
know when it was his majesty's pleasure I should wait upon him.

I had been so much used to lamplight in my grotto, that the lights of
this gloomy mansion did not seem so unusual a thing to me as they
would have done to a stranger. The king sent me word he would admit me
immediately, and Quilly was my conductor to his majesty's apartment.

We passed through the gallery, at the farther end of which was a very
beautiful arch, even with the staircase, through which Quilly led me
into a large guard-room, wherein were above a hundred glumms, posted in
ranks, with their pikes in hand, some headed with sharp-pointed stone,
others with multangular stone, and others with stone globes. Passing
through these, we entered another gallery as long as that to my
apartment; then under another arch we came into a small square room,
carved exceeding fine; on the right and left of which were two other
archways, leading into most noble rooms. But we only saw them, passing
quite cross the little room, through an arch that fronted us into a
small gallery of prodigious height; at the farther end of which Quilly,
turning aside a mat, introduced and left me in the most beautiful place
in the universe, where, neither seeing nor hearing anybody stir, I
employed myself in examining the magnificence of the place, and could,
as I then thought, have feasted my eye with variety for a twelvemonth.
I paced it over one hundred and thirty of my paces long, and ninety-six
broad. There were arches in the middle of each side, and in the middle
of each end; the arch ceiling could not be less than the breadth of the
room, and covered with the most delightful carvings, from whence hung
globe-lights innumerable, but seemingly without order, which I thought
appeared the more beautiful on that account. In the centre of the
room hung a prodigious cluster of the same lights, so disposed as to
represent one vast light; and there were several rows of the same lights
hung round the room, one row above another, at proper distances. These
lights represented to me the stars, with the moon in the middle of them;
and after I came to be better acquainted with the country, I perceived
the lights were to represent the southern constellations. The archways
were carved with the finest devices imaginable, gigantic glumms
supporting on each side the pediments.

At every ten paces all along the sides and ends, arose columns, each
upon a broad square base, admirably carved; these reached to the cornice
or base of the arched ceiling quite round the room. On the panels
between each column were carved the different battles and most
remarkable achievements of Begsurbeck himself. Over the arch I entered
at, was the statue of Begsurbeck, and over the opposite arch the old
prophetic ragan. In the middle of the room stood a long stone table
lengthwise, most exquisitely carved, almost the length of the room,
except where it was divided in the middle about the breadth of the
archways, in order for a passage from one arch to the other. In short,
to describe this one room particularly would make a volume of itself.

I stayed here a full hour and a half, wondering why nobody came to me;
at length turning myself about, I saw two glumms coming towards me, and
having received their compliments, they desired me to walk in to the
king. We passed through another middling room, and taking up a mat at
the farther side of it, I was conducted in where his majesty was sitting
with another glumm. They both arose at my entrance, and calling me their
father, and leading me, one by each hand, obliged me to sit down between
them.

After some compliments about my journey, and accommodation since, the
king told me I had not waited so long without, but he had some urgent
despatches to make; and as he chose to have me in private with him, he
imagined, he said, I would be able to divert myself in the boskee. I
declared I had never seen anything like it for grandeur and magnificence
before; but the beauty of the sculpture, and disposition of the lights,
were most exquisite.

All this while I felt the other glumm handling my long wig, and feeling
whether it grew to my head, or what it was; for he had by this time got
his finger under the caul, and was pulling my hair down; when I turning
about my head, "Glumm Peter," says the king, "don't be uneasy, the ragan
will do you no hurt, it is only to satisfy his curiosity; and I chose
to have the ragan here, that we may more leisurely advise with you what
course to take in the present exigencies of my State. I have fully heard
the story of your travels from my colambs, and we have returned
thanks to the Great Image for bringing you, after so many hazards and
deliverances, safe to my dominions for our defence."

The ragan desired to know whether all that hair (meaning my wig) grew
upon my head or not. I told him no, it was a covering only, to put on
occasionally; but that hair did grow on my head, and pulling off my wig
I showed them. The ragan then asked me if I had hair of my own growing
under that too (meaning my beard, which he then had in his hand,
for their glumms have no beards); but I told him that grew there of
itself.--"O parly Puly!" says the ragan, rising up, and smiting his
hands together, "It is he! It is he!"

"Pray," says I, "ragan, who is this Puly you speak of?"--"It is the
image," says he, "of the great Collwar."--"Who is that?" says I.--"Why,
he that made the world," says he.--"And, pray," says I, "what did his
image make?"--"Oh," says he, "we made the image."--"And, pray," says
I, "can't you break it again?"--"Yes," says he, "if we had a mind to be
struck dead, we might; for that would be the immediate consequence
of such an attempt; nay, of but holding up a finger against it in
contempt."--"Pray," says I, "did ever anybody die that way?"--"No,"
says he, "no one ever durst presume to do it."--"Then, perhaps," said I,
"upon trial, the punishment you speak of might not be the consequence
of such an attempt. Pray," says I, "what makes Collwar have so great a
kindness for that image?"--"Because," says he, "it is his very likeness,
and he gives him all he asks for us; for we only ask him. Why," says he,
"it is the image that has brought you amongst us."

I did not then think it a proper time to advance the contrary to the
person I then had to do with, as I was sure it would have done no
good; for a priest is only to be convinced by the strongest party: so I
deferred my argument on that head to a fitter opportunity.

"Most admirable Peter," says the king, "you are the glumm we depend upon
to fulfil an ancient prediction delivered by a venerable ragan. If you
will, Ragan I. O. shall repeat it to you, and therein you will be able
to discern yourself plainly described, in not only similar, but the
express words I myself, from your story, should describe you in."

In good earnest, I had from divers circumstances concluded that I might
be the person; and resolved, as I thought I had the best handle in the
world for it from the prediction, to do what I could in the affair of
religion, by fair means or stratagem (for I was sensible my own single
force would not do it), before I began to show myself in their cause, or
else to desert them; and having had a small hint from Nasgig of what the
old ragan's design was in part, and which I approved of, I purposed to
add what else was necessary as part of his design, if his proposals had
been approved of.

I told the king I would excuse the ragan the repetition of the
prediction, as I had partly been informed of it by Nasgig; and that
conceiving myself, as he did, to be the person predicted of by the
ragan, I had the more readily set out on this expedition, which nothing
but the hopes of performing so great a good could have prevailed with
me to undertake; and I did not doubt, with God's blessing, to accomplish
it.

The king grew exceeding joyous at what I said, and told me he would
call a moucheratt, at which all his colambs should attend, to have their
advice, and then we would proceed to action; and ordered the ragan
to let it be for the sixth day, and in the meantime that he and his
brethren should, day and night, implore the Image to guide their
deliberations.

The ragan being gone, I told the king I had something to impart to him,
in which it was my duty to obtain his majesty's sentiments before I
appeared publicly at the moucheratt. He desired me to proceed: I told
him I had been some time considering the old ragan's prediction, with
the occasion of it; "and," says I, "it is plain to me that all these
mischiefs have befallen you for neglect of the ragan's proposal
concerning religion; as I understand your great ancestor would have come
into it, and would have had his people done so too, but for the ragans,
who hindered it.

"You find," says I, "by your traditional history, that Begsurbeck
lived long, and reigned gloriously; and I would aim at making you as
prosperous as he was, and infinitely more happy, not only in outward
splendour here, but in great glory hereafter."

Perceiving that my discourse had quickened the king's attention, says I,
"I must let your majesty know it is the old ragan's plan I must proceed
upon in every branch of it."--"Why," says the king, "he would have
abolished our worship of the Image."--"And so would I," says I; "nay,
not only would, but must and will, before I engage myself in your
deliverance; and then, with the only assistance of the great Collwar,
whom I adore, and whom you must too, if you expect any service from me,
I don't doubt to prevail.

"Your majesty sees," says I, "in few words, I have been very plain with
you; and I desire you, in as concise and plain a manner, to answer me,
what are your thoughts on this head? for I can say no more till I hear
them."

The king seeing me so peremptory: "Glumm Peter," says he, looking about
to see no one was near, "I have too much sense to imagine our Image can
do either good or hurt; for if it could have done us good, why would it
not in our greatest distress, now near two hundred years past? For my
own part, I put no trust in it, nor did my famous ancestor the great
Begsurbeck; but here is my difficulty, where to choose another object
of worship; for I perceive by myself, mankind must, through natural
impulse, look to somewhat still above them, as a child does to his
father, from whom he hopes for and expects succour in his difficulties;
and though the father be not able to assist him, still he looks to him;
and therefore, I say, we must have another before we can part with this,
or the people, instead of the part who have been in the defection, will
all desert me; for they are easy now in hopes of help from the Image,
and every little gleam of success is attributed to it; but for the
disadvantages we receive, the ragans charge them on the people's not
praying and paying sufficiently; which they, poor souls, knowing in
their consciences to be true enough, are willing rather, as they are
bid, to take the blame upon themselves, than to suffer the least to fall
on the Image.

"All this," says the king, "I am sensible of; but should I tell them so,
my life must pay for it; for the ragans would bring some message from
the Image against me, to desert or murder me; and then happy would be
the first man who could begin the mischief, which the rest would soon
follow."

This so frank and unexpected declaration gave me great confidence in the
king; and I told him, if that was his opinion, he might leave the rest
to me. I would so manage it, that the thing should be brought about
by my means; and I would then satisfy all his scruples, and make him
a flourishing prince. But I could not help reflecting with myself, how
nearly this distant prince, and his State, copied some of my neighbours
in Europe.

[Illustration: 0147]



CHAPTER XIII.

_Peters reflections on what he was to perform--Settles the method
of it--His advice to his son and daughter--Globe-lights living
creatures--Takes Maleck into his service--Nasgig discovers to Peter a
plot in court--Revolt of Gauingrunt._


HAVING now fully entered into the spirit of the business with my own
good liking, I was determined to push it vigorously, or perish in the
attempt. "Have I," says I, "so large a field before me now to manifest
my Maker in to a whole nation, and under His own call, and to fulfil
their own prediction too; and shall I shrink at the possible danger? Or
may there not rather be no probability of danger in it? The nation is in
distress, the readier therefore to try any remedy for help: their Image
has stood idle two hundred years; there has been an old prophecy, or at
least if not true, as firmly believed to be true as if it was so; and
this, in regard to the people, answers in all respects as well. But why
should it not be true? It is better attested by the frequent repetition,
from the original delivery to this time, than are many traditions I have
heard of amongst us Christians, which have come out spick and span new
from the repositories of the learned, of twelve or fifteen hundred years
old, little the worse for lying by; though they are not pretended to
have seen light all that time, and are undoubted verities the moment
they receive the grand sanction. Then if any means but fraud or force
can gain so large a territory to the truth, and I am the only person
can introduce it, shall not I endeavour it? Yes, surely; but I am not
excluded all advantages neither, for all the works of Providence are
brought to pass by appointed means: and indeed, were it otherwise, what
could we call Providence? For a peremptory fiat, and it is over, may
work a miracle, it is true, but will not exhibit the proceedings of
Providence. Therefore let me consider, in a prudential way, how to
proceed to the execution of what I am to set about--and guide me,
Providence! I beseech you, to the end."

Upon the best deliberation I could take, I came to the following
resolutions: First, to insist on the abolition of the Image-worship, and
to introduce true religion by the fittest means I could find opportunity
for.

Secondly, as the revolters had been one people with those I would serve,
and had this prediction amongst them too, and were interested in it,
in hopes of its distant accomplishment; so if they came properly to the
knowledge that the person predicted of had appeared, and was ready for
execution of his purposes, it must stagger their fidelity to their new
master; and, therefore, I would find means to let them know it.

Thirdly, that I would not march till I was in condition not easily to
be repulsed, for that would break both the hopes and hearts of my party,
and destroy my religious scheme, and, therefore, I would get some of my
cannon.

Fourthly, that I would go to the war in my flying-chair, and train up a
guard for my person with pistols and cutlasses.

These resolutions I kept to myself till the moucheratt was over, to see
first how matters would turn out there.

Whilst I waited for the approaching moucheratt, my son Tommy, and
daughter Hallycarnie, paid their duties to me. It is strange how soon
young minds are tainted by bad company. I found them both very glad to
see me, for everybody, they said, told them I was to be their deliverer.
They had both got the prophecy by heart, and mentioned the Image with
all the affection of natural subjects. The moment Tommy spoke of it to
me, "Hold," says I, "young man. What's become of those good principles
I took so much pains to ground you in? Has all my concern for your
salvation been thrown away upon you? Are you become a reprobate? What!
an apostate from the faith you inherited by birthright? Is the God I
have so often declared to you a wooden one? Answer me, or never see my
face more."

The child was extremely confounded to see me look so severe, and hear me
speak so harsh to him. "Indeed, father," says he, "I did not willingly
offend, or design to show any particular regard to the Image, for,
thanks to you, I have none; but what I said was only the common
discourse in everybody's mouth; I meant neither good nor harm by it."

"Tommy," says I, "it is a great fault to run into an error, though
in company of multitudes; and where a person's principle is sound at
bottom, and founded upon reason, no numbers ought to shake it. You are
young, therefore hearken to me; and you, Hallycarnie, whatever you shall
see done by the people of this country, in the worship of this idol,
don't you imitate it, don't you join in it. Keep the sound lessons I
have preached to you in mind; and upon every attempt of the ragans, or
any other, to draw you aside to their worship, or even to speak or act
the least thing in praise of this idol, think of me and my words, pay
your adoration to the Supreme Father of spirits only, and to no wooden,
stone, or earthen deity whatsoever."

The children wept very heartily, and both promised me to remember and to
do as I had taught them.

Being now in my oval chamber, and alone with my children, I had a
mind to be informed of some things I was almost ashamed to ask Quilly.
"Tommy," says I, "what sort of fire do they keep in these globes? and
what are they made of?"--"Daddy," says he, "yonder is the man shifting
them, you may go and see." Being very curious to see how he did it, I
went to him. As I came near him, he seemed to have something all fire
on his arm. "What has the man got there?" says I. "Only sweecoes," says
Tommy. By this time I came up to him; "Friend," says I, "what are you
about?"--"Shifting the sweecoes, sir," says he, "to feed them."--"What
oil do you feed with?" says I.--"Oil!" says he, "they won't eat oil;
that would kill them all."--"Why," says I, "my lamp is fed with oil."

Tommy could scarce forbear laughing himself; but for fear the servant
should do so too, pulled me by the sleeve, and desired me to say no
more. So turning away with him, "Daddy," says he, "it is not oil that
gives this light, but sweecoes, a living creature. He has got his basket
full, and is taking the old ones out to feed them, and putting new ones
in. They shift them every half day and feed them."--"What!" says I, "are
all these infinite number of globes I see living creatures?"--"No,"
says he, "the globes are only the transparent shell of a bott, like our
calibashes. The light comes from the sweecoe within."--"Has that man,"
says I, "got any of them?"--"Yes," says he, "you may see them. The king
and the colambs, and indeed every man of note, has a place to breed
and feed them in."--"Pray, let us go see them," says I, "for that is a
curiosity indeed."

Tommy desired the man to show me the swee-coes; so he set down his
basket, which was a very beautiful resemblance of a common higler's
basket, with a handle in the middle, and a division under it, with flaps
on each side to lift up and down. It was made of straw-coloured small
twigs, neatly compacted, but so light as scarce to be of any weight.
Opening one of the lids, I could make very little distinction of
substances, the bottom seeming all over of a white colour. I looking
surprised at the light, the man took out one, and would have put it into
my hand, but perceiving me shy of it, he assured me it was one of the
most innocent things in the world. I then took it, and surveying it, it
felt to my touch as smooth and cold as a piece of ice. It was about as
long as a large lobworm, but much thicker. The man seeing me admire the
brightness of its colour, told me it had done its duty, and was going to
be fed, but those which were going upon duty were much clearer; and
then opening the other lid, those appeared far exceeding the others in
brightness, and thickness too. I asked what he fed them with. He said,
"Leaves and fruit; but grass, when he could get it, which was not often,
they were very fond of."

Having dismissed my children, I sent for Nasgig, to gain some
intelligences I wanted to be informed of. The moment I saw him it came
into my mind to inquire after my new filgays. He said the king granted
my request at the first word. I told him then he had saved his honour
with me, and I was obliged to him. "But," says I, "you told me my
bearers should be free too."--"They are so," says he.--"Then there is
one thing I want," says I, "and that is to see the second bearer on my
right hand, who came through without shifting. I have a fancy for that
fellow," says I, "to be about my person. I like him; and if you can give
him a good word, I should be glad to treat with him about it."

"My friend Peter," says he, "you are a man of penetration, though it ill
becomes me to say so in regard of persons; but I can say that for him,
if he likes you as well as you seem to like him, he is the trustiest
fellow in the world; but as he knows his own worth, he would not be so
to everybody, I can tell you that."--"I don't fear his disliking me,"
says I, "for I make it my maxim to do as I would be done by; and if he
is a man of honour, as you seem to say, he would do the same, and we
shall be soon agreed."--"But," says Nasgig, "it being now the fourth day
since he was freed, he may be gone home perhaps, for he is not of our
country, but of Mount Alkoe. If Quilly can find him, he will come." So
he ordered Quilly to send for Maleck of Mount Alkoe, with orders to come
to me.

We descended from one discourse to another, and at length to King
Georigetti's affairs, when Nas-gig, giving a sigh, "Ah, Peter!" says he,
"we shall loiter away our time here till the enemy are upon our
backs. There is venom in the grass; I wish my good master is not
betrayed."--"By whom?" says I.--"By those he little suspects," says
he.--"Why," says I, "they tell me you are much in his favour; if so, why
do you suffer it?"--"I believe," says Nasgig, "I am in his favour, and
may continue in it, if I will join in measures to ruin him, but else
I shall soon be out of it."--"You tell me riddles," says I.--"These
things," says he, "a man talks with his head in his teeth. There is
danger in them, Peter; there is danger!"--"You don't suspect me," says
I, "do you?"--"No," says he, "I know your soul too well; but there are
three persons in these dominions who will never let my master rest till
out of his throne, or in hoximo. I am but lately in favour, but have
made as many observations, perhaps, as those who have been longer about
the king."

"Nasgig," says I, "your concern proceeds from an honest heart. Don't
stifle what you have to say; if I can counsel you with safety, I'll do
it; if not, I'll tell you so."

"Peter," says he, "Georigetti was the only son of a well-beloved father,
and ascended his throne ten years ago on his decease: but Harlokin, the
prince of the revolters, whose head is never idle, finding that whispers
and base stories spread about did not hurt Georigetti, or withdraw his
subjects' affections, has tried a means to make him undo himself."--"As
how?" says I.--"Why," said he, "by closely playing his game he has got
one of his relations into the king's service, than whom he could never
have chosen a fitter instrument. He, by degrees, feeding the king's
humour, and promising mountains, has pushed into the best places into
the kingdom. His name is Barbarsa, a most insolent man, who has had the
assurance to corrupt the king's mistress, and has prevailed and
brought her over to his interest."--"Oh perfidy!" says I, "is it
possible?"--"Yes," says he; "and more than that, has drawn in, till
now, an honest man called Nicor; and it has been agreed between them to
protract this war, till by their stratagems in procuring the revolt
of Gauingrunt, a very large and populous province, and now the barrier
between us and the rebels, and two or three more places, they shall
have persuaded Georigetti to fly; and then Barbarsa is to be king, and
Yaccom-bourse his queen. A union is then to be struck between him
and Harlokin, and peace made, by restoring some of the surrendered
provinces; and upon the death of the first of them, or their issue,
childless, the survivor, or his issue, is to take the whole. They laugh
at your uniting the dominions, and the old prediction."

"These," said I, "Nasgig, are serious things, and, as you say, are not
lightly to be talked of; but, Nasgig, know this, he that conceals them
is a traitor. Can you prove this?"--"I have heard them say so," says
Nasgig.--"How!" says I, "and not discover it!"--"I am as anxious for
that as you can be," says he; "but for me to be cashiered, slit, and
sent to Crashdoorpt, only for meaning well, without power to perfect my
good intentions, where will be the benefit to my master or me?"--"When
and where did you hear this?" says I.--"Several and several times," says
he, "in my own bed."--"In your own bed?" says I.--"I'll tell you," says
he; "it so happens that when I rest at the palace, as I am bound to do
when on duty, there is a particular bed for me: now, as the whole palace
is cut out of one solid rock, though Yaccom-bourse's apartment at the
entrance is at a prodigious distance from the entrance to mine, yet my
bed, and one in an inner apartment of hers, stand close together; the
partition, indeed, is stone, but either from the thinness of it, or some
flaw in it, I have not yet discovered, I can plainly hear every word
that is spoken. And there it is, in their hours of dalliance, when they
use this bed, that I hear what I have now told you."--"Say nothing of
it," says I, "but leave the issue to me."

By this time the messenger returned with Maleck, and he and I soon
agreeing, I took him into my service.

I went to bed as usual, but could get no rest, Nasgig's story engrossing
my whole attention; I was resolved, however, to be better informed
before I acquainted the king of it; but rising pretty early next
morning, the king came into my chamber, leaning upon Barbarsa, to
tell me that he had received an express that Gauingrunt had revolted.
"Peter," says he, "behold a distressed monarch; nay, an undone
monarch!"--"Great sir," says Barbarsa, "you afflict yourself too much;
here is Mr. Peter come to assist you, and he will settle all your
concerns, never fear." I eyed the man, and (though prejudice may hang an
honest person) found him a villain in his heart; for even while he was
forcing a feeling tone of affliction, he was staring at my laced hat and
feather that lay on the seat, by which I was sure nothing could be at
a greater distance than his heart and tongue. His sham concern put me
within a moment of seizing him in the king's presence; but his majesty,
at that instant speaking, diverted me.

Before the king left me, I told him, having certain propositions to make
to the moucheratt next day, it was possible they might require time to
consider them; wherefore it would be proper, at this critical time, to
let them meet every other day, business or none, till this affair was
over. The king ordered Barbarsa to see it was so, and then we parted.

[Illustration: 0158]



CHAPTER XIV.

_Hold a moucheratt--Speeches of ragans and colambs--Peter settles
religion--Informs the king of a plot--Sends Nasgig to the ship for
cannon_.


ATTENDING at the moucheratt to-day, I happened to be seated within two
paces of the idol. There was the most numerous assembly that had ever
been seen; and when all was quiet, the king opened with signifying the
revolt of Gauingrunt, the approach of the enemy, and no forces in the
field to stop them. This he set forth in terms so moving, that the whole
assembly were melted into sighs; till one of the colambs rising up,
says he: "His majesty has set forth the state of his affairs in such
a manner, and I am satisfied a true one, that it becomes us all to be
vigilant. We all seem to have, and I believe have, great faith in
the remedy this day to be proposed to us, in answer to our ancient
prediction; and as I doubt not but glumm Peter is the man, so I doubt
not but through his management we shall still receive help; but let
us consider if we might not have prevented these pressing evils, and
especially this last, by speedier preparations against them. What
province, or member of a State, will not revolt to a numerous host just
ready to devour them, if they can receive no assistance from their head?
for, to my certain knowledge, his majesty had ordered this almost a year
ago, and not a man gone yet. Can we expect Peter to go singly to fight
an army? Did your prediction say he should go alone? No, he shall slay;
that is, he and his army; what is done by them being always attributed
to their general. Inquire, therefore, into your past conduct, send
Peter, your general, and trust to the Great Image."

His majesty then said, if there had been any remissness in executing his
commands, he believed it was done with a view to his service; but a more
proper opportunity might be found for an inquiry of that nature. As for
the present moucheratt, it was called solely to propose to Peter the
execution of the remaining part of the prediction; or, at least, such
part of it as seems now, or never, to wait its accomplishment.

Here arose a ragan, and told the assembly, in the name of himself and
brethren, that the prediction had never yet been applicable to any one
person till glumm Peter arrived; and that his sagacity of itself was a
sufficient recommendation of him to the guidance of the enterprise; and
requested that glumm Peter might forthwith be declared protector of the
army, and set forward with it, that the State might receive safety, and
the Great Image its proper honour.

I could now hold out no longer; but, standing up, made my speech in
the following manner, or very near it: "Mighty king--you, reverend
ragans--and honourable colambs--with the good people of this august
assembly--I am come hither, led by the force of your own prediction, at
the request of his majesty and the states, at the peril of my life, to
accomplish things said to be predicted of me, glumm Peter. If, then,
you have a prediction, if, then, your prediction describes me, and the
circumstances of these times, it consisting of several parts, they ought
seriously to be weighed, that I may know when and where I am to begin my
operation, and when and where to leave off; for in predictions the whole
is to be accomplished as much as any member of it.

"It is said I shall destroy the traitor of the ancient limits of your
monarchy. Are you willing, therefore, that should be done? yea, or nay?"
Then every one answered, "Yea."--"And by common consent establish
what the old ragan would have taught you?" Here the king rose up; but
Barbarsa giving him a touch (for every one waited to be guided by the
voice of the ragans), he sat down again; and no one answering Yea, west;
"I am ready to enter upon it and settle the question."

I again put the same question, and told them, as it was their own
concern, I would have an answer before I proceeded. One of the ragans
then rose, and said that part of the prediction was too loose to be
relied on, for it was to settle what he would have taught: "Now, who
knows," says he, "what he would have taught?" The assembly paused a
considerable time, and just as I was opening my mouth to speak, an
ancient and venerable ragan rose: says he, "I am sorry, at my years,
to find that truth wants an advocate; my age and infirmities might well
have excused me from speaking in this assembly, so many of my brethren
being present, younger and better qualified for that purpose than
myself; but as we are upon a sacred thing, and lest, as I find none of
them care to declare the truth, I should also be thought to consent
to its suppression if I sat silent and suffered it to be hid under a
quibble, I must beg to be heard a few words. My brother, who spoke last,
says the words are too loose which say, 'and by common consent establish
what I would have taught;' but I beg leave to think it far otherwise,
for we all know what he would have taught, and the memory of that hath
been as exactly kept as the prediction; for how could our ancestors have
opposed his doctrine, but from hearing and disapproving it? And we all
know, not only the prediction, but the doctrine, hath been punctually
handed down to us; though, woe be to us! we have not proclaimed it as
we have done the prediction; and let me tell you, when you, my brethren,
severally come to my years, and have but a single step farther to
hoximo, you will wish you had taught it, as I do, who believe and
approve it." The poor old man, having spoke as long as his breath and
spirits would permit him, sat down, and I again resumed the question,
as I now thought, on a much better foundation than before, and was
immediately told by another ragan that there would be no end to the
assembly if we considered every point at once, for we might next go upon
what countries we should conquer, and of whom to demand tribute; which
would be debating about the fruit before the seed was sown. But his
opinion was, to go on and quell the rebellion, and restore the monarchy,
and then go upon the other points.

I told them, if they had made so light of the prediction as not to
declare publicly, since they knew it, what the ragan would have taught,
it ill became me to be more zealous in their own concerns than they were
themselves; and I should imagine there was very little truth in any
part of it, and would never hazard my life for their sakes who would not
speak the truth to save the kingdom, and desired leave of the states for
my departure; for I was not a person, I told them, to be cajoled into
anything. I undertook it at first voluntarily; and no man could, or
should, compel me to it: my life they might take, but my honour they
should never stain, though I was assured I could easily, with their
concurrence, complete all that related to them.

The senior colamb immediately rising, desired me to have a little
patience, and not to leave the assembly (for I was going out) till I had
heard him.

"Here is," says he, "this day a thing started, which, I think, every
whit as much concerns us all, and the body, and every member of the
people to know, as it does Peter; and I am surprised, unless the present
ragans believe what their predecessor would have taught to be better
than what they now teach (for nothing else can make us consent to it),
that they should scruple to let us know it, and keep us ignorant, who
are worshippers as well as themselves, of any matter which so nearly
concerns us to know. I am for obliging the ragans to declare the truth.
If this be a true prediction, all the relatives to it are true, and I
insist that we hear it."

This speech emboldened several others; and all the populace siding with
the colambs out of curiosity, cried out to know it.

Perceiving the ragans still hush, I rose; and beckoning the populace to
silence, "Mighty king--you, honourable colambs--and you, good people,"
says I--"for it is to you I now speak, hear me with attention. You
think, perhaps, that the suppression of the truth by your ragans
(charged to their teeth by the most reverend of their whole body, whose
infirmities rendering him unable, though his will is good, to declare
this secret to you) will prevent the knowledge of that truth your old
ragan would have taught, but you are mistaken; and that you may know I
don't come here at a venture to try if I can relieve you, but with an
assurance of doing it if you consent, I must let you know from me
what the ragan would have taught. The ragan would have demolished this
trumpery piece of dirt, this grimalkin, set out with horrid face and
colour to fright children; this," I say, "he would have demolished,
being assured it could neither do good nor hurt, give joy or grief
to any man, or serve any other purpose whatsoever, but to procure a
maintenance to a set of men who know much better than they dare to tell
you. Can any of you believe this stupid piece of earth hears me?" Some
of the ragans cried, "Yes!"--"And that he can revenge any affront I
shall give him?" Again, "Yes, to be sure!"--"Let him then, if he dare,"
says I, whipping out my cutlass, and with the backside of it striking
his head off. "This," says I, "O glumms, is what the ragan knew, and
what I defy them to deny. Now," says I, "I will further show you to whom
the old ragan would have taught you to make your petitions and pay your
adorations; and that is to the Supreme Being, Maker of heaven and
earth, of us and all things; who provides for us meat and drink, and
all things, by causing the earth, which He has made, to produce things
necessary for our use; that Being, whom you have heard of by the name
of Collwar, and are taught at present to be afraid to speak to. And
I appeal to your own hearts if many of you have ever thought of him.
Again," says I, "let anything in the shape of man, that gives himself
leave to consider at all, only tell me if what he can make, and does
make, with his own hands, hath not more occasion to depend on him as its
maker than he on that? Why, then, should not we depend upon and pray to
our Maker?

"You very greatly mistake me, O glumms," says I, "if you imagine I would
have all those reverend men turned out of employment as useless. No, I
find they know too much of what is valuable; and therefore those who are
willing to continue in the service of the mouch, and faithfully to teach
you the old ragan's doctrine, and such farther lights of the great Being
as they shall hereafter receive, let them continue your ragans still,
and let others be chosen and trained up in that doctrine."

Here the poor old man got up again with much difficulty. "Mr. Peter,"
says he, "you are the-man predicted of; you have declared the old
ragan's mind, and all my brethren know it."

Finding I had the populace on my side (for I did not doubt the king and
the colambs), I put the question to the ragans: "Reverend ragans," says
I, "you see your prediction this day about to be fulfilled; for if it
is a true one, no force of man can withstand it. You see your Image
disgraced; you see, and I appeal to you all for the truth of it, that
what the ragan would have taught has, without your assistance, been
disclosed. I therefore would have you the first to break the bondage of
idolatry and turn to the true Collwar, as it will be so much glory to
you. Will you, and which of you, from henceforth serve Collwar, and no
longer worship an idol? Such of you as will do so, let them continue
in the mouch: if none of you will, it shall be my business to qualify a
sufficient number of true ragans to form a succession for that purpose.
The issue of this great affair depends upon your answers." They waited
some time for a spokesman to begin, and so soon as he was able to get
up, the poor old ragan said, "I will continue in it, and do all the good
I can: and blessed be the day this prediction is fulfilled to succeeding
generations! I have lived long enough to have seen this." Then the
rest of the ragans, one by one, followed his example. And thus, with
prodigious acclamations, both the ragans and people ended the great
affair of religion.

I now more and more believed the truth of the prediction, and told them
I should have occasion for seven hundred men before I set out against
the rebels; and desired that they might be commanded by Nasgig. This was
readily granted. I then told them, as I purposed to act nothing without
their concurrence, I desired the colambs would remain in the city till I
set out, that they might be readily called together.

I then desired I might be quite private from company till I departed.

I took Nasgig home with me; and when we came there, "My dear friend,"
says he, "what have you done to-day! You have crushed a power hitherto
immovable; and I shall never more think anything too difficult for you
to attempt."--"Nasgig," says I, "I am glad it is over. And now," says
I, "you must enter on a new employ: but first, can you provide me
fifty honest, faithful glumms for a particular expedition? they must
be sensible, close, and temporising." He said he would, and come to me
again.

I then desired a private audience with the king; who, on seeing me,
began upon my success at the moucheratt. I told his majesty, if I alone,
and a stranger, could gain such influence there, I might have had much
more if he had joined me, especially as he had told me he gave no credit
to the Image; and that I expected he would have appeared on my side.
"Ah, Peter!" says he, "monarchs neither see, hear, nor perceive with
their own eyes, ears, or understandings. I would willingly have done it;
but Barbarsa prevented me, by assuring me it would be my ruin; and as he
is my bosom friend, what reproaches must I have suffered if it had gone
amiss! Nay, I will tell you that he and Nicor are of opinion that your
coming hither, which is looked upon by us all as such a blessing, will
one day undo me; 'for,' say they, 'though he may perform what you expect
from him, it is not to be supposed he should suffer it to redound to
you.' 'No,' say they, 'if he can do these great things, he can soon set
you aside.' Thus, though I have no doubt of you, is my spirit wasting
within me through perpetual fears and jealousies; and I cannot get these
men, who, knowing all my secrets, are feared by me, into my own way of
thinking."

"Mighty sir," says I, "don't think I came hither to possess, but redress
a kingdom. I lived far more to my ease in my grotto than I can in this
palace; but I now desire you," drawing my sword and putting it into his
hand, "to pierce this heart's blood and make yourself easy in my death,
rather than, suffering me to survive, live in distrust of me. No, great
king," says I, "it is not that I would injure you; but though I have
been so short a time in your dominions, I find there are those who
would, and will too, unless you exert the monarch, and shake off those
harpies which, lying always at your ear, are ever buzzing disquiet and
mischief to you."--"Peter," says he, "what do you mean? sure I have no
more traitors in my State!"--"Your majesty has," says I.--"How can you
prove it?" says he. "But pray inform me who they are?"--"I came not
hither, great king," says I, "to turn informer, but reformer; and so far
as that is necessary in order to this, I will give you satisfaction.
I only desire you will wholly guide yourself by my direction for three
days, and you shall be able to help yourself to all the information you
can require without ray telling you. In the meantime, appear no more
thoughtful than usual, or in any other way alter your accustomed
habits.".

Nasgig having sent me the fifty men, I asked them if they were to be
trusted, and if they could carefully and artfully execute a commission
I had to charge them with. They assuring me they would, I told them I
would let them into my design, which would be the best instructions I
could give them, and left the management alone to them.

My confidence in them made them twice as diligent as all the particular
directions in the world would have done; so I only told them I had a
mind the revolted towns and also the enemy's army should know that the
person so long ago predicted of was now at Brandleguarp, and had, as
the first step towards reducing them and killing the traitor Harlokin,
already altered their religion to the old ragan's plan; and that they
had now nothing to expect but destruction to themselves as soon as I
appeared against them with my unknown fire and smoke, which I always
had with me; and that the thing was looked upon to be as good as done
already at Brandleguarp; and then to slip away again unperceived. They
all promised me exact performance, and went off.

Nasgig then coming in, I told him he was now under my command, and must
take six hundred glumms with him to Graundevolet; tell Youwarkee to show
him my ship, and then he must bring me the things I had described to her
by the name of cannon. He must bring them by ropes, as I was brought;
and bring powder, which she would direct him to, and the heavy balls
which lay in the room with the powder. I told him if he thought he
should not have men enough he must take more; and must be as expeditious
as was consistent with safety. I desired him to tell Youwarkee I hoped
in a short time to send for her and all the family over to me. "And now,
Nasgig," says I, "my orders are finished; but," says I, "the king! I
must assist that good man. I therefore want to know the particular times
Barbarsa and Yaccombourse usually meet."--"That," says he, "is every
night when she is not with the king; for he is excessively fond of her,
and seldom lies without her; but whenever he does, Barbarsa is admitted
to her."--"And how can I know," says I, "when she will or will not lie
with the king?"

"When she is to lie with him," says he, "the king never sups without
her."--"-Now," says I, "you must show me your lodging, that I may find
it in your absence; and give orders to the guard to let me, and whoever
comes with me, enter at any time." He then took me to his chamber; but I
passed through so many rooms, galleries, and passages, that I was sure
I should never find it again, so I asked him if Maleck knew the way?
and he assuring me he did, I took my leave of him, and he set out for
Graundevolet.

[Illustration: 5171]

[Illustration: 0172]



CHAPTER XV.

_The king hears Barbarsa and Yaccombourse discourse on the plot--They
are impeached by Peter at a moucherait--Condemned and executed--Nicor
submits, and is released._


I HAD now several important irons in the fire, and all to be struck
whilst hot; there was the securing religion, sowing sedition amongst the
enemy, tripping up the heels of two ministers and a she-favourite, and
transporting artillery in the air some hundred leagues; either of which
failing might have been of exceeding bad consequence; but as the affair
of the ministers now lay next at hand, I entered upon that in the
following manner.

The king coming to me the next day, as by appointment, and having
assured me he had hinted nothing to any one, no, not to Barbarsa or
Yaccom-bourse, told me that Barbarsa had given orders for stopping
Nasgig and his men; and had persuaded him not to be in such haste in
suffering me to do as I pleased, but to show his authority and keep me
under. Says I, "Your majesty's safety is so near my heart, that even
want of confidence in me shall not make me decline my endeavours to
serve you. But have you suffered him to stop Nasgig?"--"No," says he,
"Nasgig was gone some time before he sent."--"Oh, sir!" says I, "you do
not half know the worth of that man! but you shall hereafter, and will
reward him accordingly. But now, sir," says I, "to what we meet upon;
if you will, as I told you, but comply with me for three days, without
asking questions, I will show you the greatest traitors in your
dominions, and put them into your power too." He promised me again he
would. "Then, sir," says I, "you must not send to Yaccombourse to sup
with you to-night."--"Nor lie with me?"--"No," says I.--"Pray, what
hurt can arise to my affairs from her?" says he.--"Sir," says I, "you
promised me to ask no questions."--"Agreed, agreed!" says he.--"Then,"
says I, "please to meet me at Nasgig's lodgings without being perceived,
if you can; at least without notice taken."--"Good," says he.--"And when
you are there, see or hear what you will, you must not say a word till
you are retired again." All which the king engaging to perform, we
parted till evening.

I called Maleck, and asked if he knew the way to Nasgig's lodging. He
told me, very well: and, the time being come, he conducted me thither,
where I had not waited long before the king came, most of the court
being in bed. I desired the king to stay in the outer room till I went
into the bedchamber two or three times, and I thought we must have put
it off till another night: but listening once again, I found they were
come, so I called the king, and led him to the place, entreating him,
whatever he heard, to keep his patience or he would ruin all. We first
heard much amorous discourse between Barbarsa and Yaccombourse, and then
the ensuing dialogue.

_Yac_. My dearest Barbarsa, what was all that uproar at the moucheratt
the other day?

_Bar_. Nothing, my love, but that mad fellow Peter, who sets up for a
conjuror, and wants us all to dance to his pipe.

_Yac_. I heard he overcame the ragans at an argument about the Image.

_Bar_. Why, I don't know how that was, but it was the doating old ragan
did their business; and truly the king's fingers itched to be on
Peter's side, but I gave him a judicious nod, and you know he durst not
displease so dear a friend as I am; ha, ha, ha! Am not I a sad fellow,
my love, to talk so of my king?

_Yac_. He that wants but one step to a throne, is almost a king's fellow

_Bar_. And that but a short one too, my dear Yaccee; but I must get rid
of that Nasgig, though I think I have almost spoiled him with the king,
too. I don't love your thinking rascals: that fellow thinks more than I
do, Yaccee.

_Yac_. He'll never think to so good purpose, I believe. But how goes
cousin Harlokin on? I find Gauingrunt is gone over.

_Bar_. And so shall Bazin, Istell, Pezele, and Ginkatt too, my dear; for
I am at work there. And then good-night, my poor King Georigetti; thou
shalt be advised to fly, and I'll keep the throne warm for thee.--I
don't see but King Barbarsa and Queen Yaccombourse sound much better
than Georigetti. Well, my dear, whenever we come to sovereignty, which
now cannot be long, if Nicor has but played his part well, for I have
not had an account of his success yet; I say, when we come into power,
never let us be above minding our own affairs, or suffer ourselves to be
led by the nose, as this poor insignificant king does. For, in short,
he may as well be a king of mats, as a king of flesh, if he will not use
his faculties, but suffer me to make a fool of him thus; and I should
be a fool indeed to neglect it, when he thinks it the greatest piece of
service I can do him.

_Yac_. Come, come, my dear! let us enjoy ourselves like king and queen
till we come to the dignity.


Finding a pause, the king, who had admirably kept his temper, even
beyond imagination, stole into the outer room. "Peter," says he,
"I thank you; you have shown me myself. What fools are we kings! In
endeavouring to make others happy, how miserable do we make ourselves!
How easily are we deceived by the designing flattery of those
below us!--Ungrateful villain!--Degenerate strumpet!--I hate you
both.--Peter," says he, "give me your sword; I'll destroy them both
immediately."

"Hold, sir," says I, "your majesty has heard sufficient to found a true
judgment upon; but kings should not be executioners, or act by passion
or revenge; but as you would punish that in others, so carefully avoid
it yourself. You who are in so exalted a station, as always to have
it in your power to punish a known crime in individuals, have not that
necessity to prompt you to a violent act that private persons have, to
whom it may be difficult to obtain justice. Therefore my advice is, that
you summon the colambs to-morrow, when Barbarsa and Nicor cannot fail
to attend; and I would also desire Yaccombourse to be there, you having
great proposals to make to the states which you shall want her to hear.
I will in the meantime prepare the servants under Quilly, and order
Maleck with another posse to attend, as by your command, to execute
your orders given by me, and I myself will impeach those bad persons in
public; and Nicor, if he will not ingenuously confess what commission
he was charged with from Barbarsa, shall be put to the torture I direct,
till he discovers it."

The king was very well pleased with this method; so I ordered Quilly, as
from the king, to bring all my servants to the assembly, appointing him
his place, and Maleck to select me fifty stout persons and to wait to
execute my orders on a signal given. So soon as the assembly met, I told
them, since I had concerned myself in their affairs, I had made it my
business to search into the cause of their calamities; and finding some
of the traitors were now approached, not only near to, but even into the
capital city, his majesty had therefore ordered me to ask their advice,
what punishment was adequate, in their judgments, to the crime
of conspiring against him and the State, and holding treasonable
correspondence with his enemies under the show of his greatest friends.

I stopped, and looked at Barbarsa; he turned as pale as ashes and was
rising to speak, when the senior colamb declared, if any such thing
could be made appear, the common punishment of Crash-doorpt was too
trivial; but they deserved to be dropped alive either to hoximo or Mount
Alkoe. The several colambs all declaring the same to be their judgment,
and even those to be too mild for their deserts, I then stepped up to
Barbarsa, who sat at the king's left hand, as did Yaccombourse at his
right, and telling them and Nicor they were all prisoners of state, I
delivered Barbarsa and Yaccombourse in custody to Quilly and his men,
and Nicor to Maleck and his men, ordering them into separate apartments,
with strict commands that neither should speak to the other upon pain of
the last pronounced judgment.

Barbarsa would have spoke, and called out to the king, begging him not
to desert so faithful a servant for the insinuations of so vile a man
as Peter; but the king only told him the vile man could be made appear
presently, and he hoped he would meet his deserts.

I then stood up and told the assembly the whole of what we heard, how
it first came to be discovered, and that the king himself had been an
ear-witness of it, which the king confirming, the whole assembly rang
with confusion, and revenge and indignation appeared in every face.

I then proposed, as we yet knew not what that secret commission was
which Nicor was charged with, having enough against the rest, that
Nicor might be brought forth; and upon refusal to answer, be put to the
torture.

Nicor appearing before the assembly, I told him I was commanded by the
king to ask him what commission he was charged with by Barbarsa, and
to whom. I told him the safest way for his life, his honour, and his
country, was to make a true confession at first, or I had authority to
put him to the torture; for, as for slitting and banishment, as they
were too slight to atone for this offence, he might rest satisfied his
would be of another sort, if he hesitated at delivering the thing in its
full truth.

My prelude terrifying him, he openly confessed that his last commission
was to several towns, as from the king, and with his gripsack, to order
their submission to Harlokin, the king not being in any condition to
relieve them; and that as soon as they had submitted, Harlokin would be
let into this city, which could not stand against him.

He also declared that it had been agreed, and the boundaries settled,
how far Barbarsa, who was to be declared king and marry Yaccombourse,
should govern, and how far Harlokin; that Barbarsa was to be styled King
of the East, and Harlokin King of the West; and that either of them, on
the other's dying childless, was to inherit the whole monarchy.

The king declaring this to be all true, and that by my procurement
he heard it all mentioned but the last night between Barbarsa and
Yaccombourse as they were solacing themselves in bed, the whole assembly
ordered them to be brought out, carried with cords about their necks,
and precipitated into Mount Alkoe.

I then begged they might be suffered to speak for themselves before
execution; and acquainting them severally with the evidence, I first
asked Barbarsa what he had to say against his sentence. He declared his
ambition, and the easiness of his master's temper, had instigated him
to attempt what had been charged upon him; having, as he thought, a fair
opportunity of so doing.--I then asked Yaccombourse the same question;
she answered me, her ambition had been her sole governor from a child,
and I had done my worst in preventing the progress of that; and whatever
else I could do was not worth her notice; "But to have reigned,"
says she, with some emotion, "was worth the lives of millions, and
overbalanced everything!"

I pleaded hard for Nicor, as I perceived him to be only the favourite's
favourite, and not in the scrape for his own views, more than what he
might merit from his new master; and as he had declared the truth, and
I believed I might make further use of him, I obtained that he might
be only committed to me, and that I might have liberty of pardoning or
slitting as I saw fit; and, as I expected, he afterwards proved very
useful to me and my designs, and I pardoned him.

Before the assembly rose, a party of the natives of Mount Alkoe were
ordered to convey Yaccombourse and Barbarsa to the mountain, slip their
graundees, and drop them there; and thus ended the lives of these two
aspiring persons.

When I came home, I called Nicor before me. "You know," says I, "Nicor,
you are obliged to me for this moment of your life; but I don't remind
you of it for any return I want to myself; but as you are sensible my
endeavours are to serve this State, I offer you life and freedom upon
condition you employ your utmost diligence to repair your past conduct,
by a free declaration of everything in your power that may be for the
benefit of the kingdom, as you know the springs by which all these bad
movements have been set at work; and I desire your opinion how best to
counteract the schemes formed, and redress the evils."

Nicor being fully convinced of his error, and having lost his patron,
was very submissive; and declared he believed none of the provinces
would have gone over to Harlokin, unless they had thought it was the
king's order Barbarsa had acted by, which, by bearing his gripsack, they
made no doubt of. He advised to send expresses with the king's gripsack
to such places as had lately submitted, and to such as were about it,
to put a stop to them. I told him I had done that; "But not by the
gripsack," says he, "and unless they see and hear that, they will give
no credit to the message." He then gave me some particular hints in other
affairs of no mean consequence; and seeing him truly under concern, and,
to my thinking, sincere in what he said, I told him I was an absolute
enemy to confinement, and if any person of repute would engage he should
be forthcoming upon all occasions that I might have recourse to him, I
would let him have his liberty.

Poor Nicor, as it commonly happens to great men in disgrace, finding
himself abandoned by all his friends, after trying everybody, dropping
some tears, told me next morning he was highly sensible of what a dye
his offences had been, for that not one amongst all his former friends
would even look upon him in his present circumstances, wherefore he must
submit to fate.

Nicor having borne a good character before seduced by Barbarsa, and
knowing that an obliged enemy often becomes the sincerest friend, I
pressed him again to try his friends. He told me everybody was shy of
engaging in such an affair; and that he had rather suffer himself, than
meanly to entreat any one into an unwilling compliance.--"Come, Nicor,"
says I, "will you be your own security to me? May I take your own
word?"--He said he could not expect that; for as the terror of slitting
lay over him, and in my hands too, he could not answer but he might
deceive me in case he should conceive I had a design against him; which
I myself, too, might have from a mistaken motive.

"Why, then, Nicor," says I, "you are free; now use your own discretion.
I think you will never cause my judgment to be impeached for what I have
done; but if you do, I can't condemn myself for it, and hope I shall
have no reason to repent it."

Nicor fell at my feet, embraced them, and was so overcome with my
generosity to him, that I could with difficulty prevail on him to rise
again; saying he was now more than ever ashamed to see my face. I told
him I had not done with him, but would use him henceforth as my
friend, and ordered him to call upon me daily, for I might have several
occasions for him; and, truly, next to Nasgig, he proved the usefullest
man in the kingdom.

[Illustration: 5183]

[Illustration: 0184]



CHAPTER XVI.

_Nasgig returns with the cannon--Peter informs him of the
execution--Appoints him a guard--Settles the order of his march against
Harlokin--Combat between Nasgig and the rebel general--The battle--Peter
returning with Harlokids head, is met by a Sweecoan--A public
festival--Slavery abolished._


THE tenth day Nasgig arrived, whilst I happened to be in the king's
garden; and hearing the trumpet coming before, I called out to him to
give Nasgig notice where I was, and to desire him to alight there.

After ceremonies past, and I had inquired after my wife and children,
and his answers had informed me of their healths, "Well," says Nasgig,
"my friend, am I to live or die?"--"Explain yourself," says I.--"Nay, I
only mean," says he, "have you discovered me to the king?"--"Pardon me,"
says I, "dear Nasgig, I must own the truth, I have."--"Then," says he,
"I suppose his majesty has no more commands for me?"--"No," says I,
"it is not so bad as that neither."--"But, pray," says he, "what says
Barbarsa to it?"--"Oh, nothing at all!" says I; "quite quiet."--"Nor
Yaccombourse? Did you discover her baseness to the king?"--"Yes," says
I, "and the king behaved like a king upon the occasion."--"And where
are they now?" says he.--"Only in Mount Alkoe," says I.--"Mount Alkoe!"
replies he, "what do you mean by that? How can they be in Mount Alkoe?
Did they go of their own accords?"--"They fled off, I suppose,
with ropes about their necks," says I, "as your criminals go to
Crashdoorpt."--"Are they slit too?" says he.--"No," says I, "but slipt,
I'll assure you. Come, my good friend, I'll let you into the history of
it." And then I told all that had happened, and the king's satisfaction
at the judgment of the moucheratt "And now," says I, "Nasgig, you may
call yourself the favourite, I promise you, for his majesty enjoys
himself but to greet you on your return: but have a care of power; most
grow giddy with it, and the next thing to that is a fall."--"Pray," says
he, "what is become of Nicor? Is he under the same condemnation?"--"No,"
says I, "Nicor is now by my means absolutely free, and no two greater
than he and I." I told him then my proceedings with him; he was glad of
it; for, he said, Nicor he believed was honest at bottom.

By this time up came the cannon; and truly had my countrymen but the
graundee to convey their cannon at so easy an expense from place to
place, the whole world would not stand before us. They brought me five
cannon, and three swivel guns, and a larger quantity of ammunition than
I had spoken for.

I introduced Nasgig to the king upon his return, as the person to whose
conduct the safe arrival of my cannon was owing. His majesty embracing
him, told him the service he had done him was so great in the affair
of Barbarsa, and his management of it so prudent, he should from
thenceforth take him into his peculiar confidence and esteem.

Nasgig thanked his majesty for his acceptance of that act of his duty,
and desired to know when he pleased the operations for the campaign
should begin.--"Ask my father," says the king; "do you conduct the war,
and let him conduct you."

Then Nasgig desired to know what number of troops would be requisite.
I asked him what number the enemy had; he said about thirty
thousand.--"Then," says I, "take you six only, besides the bearers of me
and the artillery; and pick me out fifty of the best men you have, as a
guard for my person, and send them to me."

I showed these men my cutlasses and pistols, and showed them the use
and management of them: "And," says I, "as our enemies fight with pikes,
keep you at a distance first, and when you would assault, toss by the
pike with your hand, and closing in, have at the graundee; and this
edge" (showing them the sharpness of it) "will strip it down from
shoulder to heel; you need strike but once for it, but be sure come near
enough; or," says I, "if you find it difficult to turn aside the pike,
give it one smart stroke with this; it will cut it in two, and then the
point being gone, it will be useless."

"These instructions," says I, "if rightly observed, will make us
conquerors."

The next thing was to settle the order of my march, which I did in the
following manner; and, taking leave of the king, I set out.

First, ten companies of one hundred men, including officers, with each a
gripsack, in ten double lines, fifty abreast.

Secondly, four hundred bearers of the cannon, with two hundred to the
right, the like to the left, as relays.

Thirdly, two hundred men with the ammunition, stores, hatchets, and
other implements.

Fourthly, fifty body-guards, in two lines.

Fifthly, myself, borne by eight, with twelve on the right, and as many
on the left, for relays.

Sixthly, two thousand men in columns, on each side the cannon and me,
fifty in a line, double lines.

Seventhly, one thousand men in the rear, fifty in a line, double lines.

I consulted with Nasgig how Harlokin's army lay, that I might avoid the
revolted towns, rather choosing to take them in my return; for my design
was to encounter Harlokin first, and I did not doubt, if I conquered
him, but the towns would surrender of course.

When we arrived within a small flight of his army, I caused a halt at
a proper place for my cannon, and having pitched them, which I did by
several flat stones, one on another to a proper elevation, I loaded
them, and also my small-arms, consisting of six muskets and three
brace of pistols, and placing my army, two thousand just behind me, two
thousand to my right, and the same number to my left, I gave a strict
command for none of them to stir forwards without orders, which Nasgig,
who stood just behind me, was to give. I then sent a defiance to
Harlokin by a gripsack, who sent me word he fought for a kingdom, and
would accept it; and, as I heard afterwards, he was glad I did, for
since the intelligence I had scattered in his army, they had in great
numbers deserted him, and he was afraid it would have proved general. I
then putting the end of a match into a pistol-pan with a little powder,
by flashing lighted it; and this I put under my chair, for I sat in
that, with my muskets three on each side, a pistol in my right hand, and
five more in my girdle. In this manner I waited Harlokin's coming, and
in about an hour we saw the van of his army, consisting of about five
thousand men, who flew in five layers, one over another. I had not
loaded my cannon with ball, but small-sized stones, about sixty in
each; and seeing the length of their line, I spread my cannons' mouths
somewhat wider than their breeches, and then taking my observation by
a bright star, for there was a clear dawn all round the horizon, I
observed, as I retired to my chair, how that star answered to the
elevation of my cannon; and when the foremost ranks, who, not seeing my
men stir, were approaching almost over me, to fall on them, and had come
to my pitch, I fired two pieces of my ordnance at once, and so mauled
them, that there dropped about ninety upon the first discharge, together
with their commander; the rest being in flight and so close together,
not being able to turn fast enough to fly, being stopped by those behind
them, not only hindered those behind from turning about, but clogged
up their own passage. Seeing them in such a prodigious cluster, I so
successfully fired two more pieces, that I brought down double the
number of the first shot; and then giving the word to fall on, my
cutlass-guard and the pikemen did prodigious execution. But fearing the
main body should advance before we had got in order again, I commanded
them to fall back to their former stations, and to let the remainder of
the enemy go off.

This did me more good in the event than if I had killed twice as many;
for they not only never returned themselves, but flying some to the
right, some to the left, and passing by the two wings of their own army,
consisting of six thousand men each, they severally reported that
they were all that was left of the whole van of the army; and that the
prediction would certainly be fulfilled, for that their companions had
died by fire and smoke. This report struck such terror into each wing,
that every one shifted for himself, and never appeared more.

The main battle, consisting of about ten thousand men, knowing nothing
of what had happened to the wings--for Harlokin had ordered the wings to
take a great compass round to enclose us--hearing we were but a handful,
advanced boldly; and as I had ordered my men not to mount too high, the
enemy sunk to their pitch. When they came near, I asked Nasgig who led
them; if it was Harlokin. He told me no, his general, but that he was
behind; and Nasgig begging me to let him try his skill with the general,
I consented, they not being yet come to the pitch of my cannon. Nasgig
immediately took the graundee, and advancing singly with one of my
cutlasses in his hand, challenged the general in single combat. He, like
a man of honour, accepting it, ordered a halt, and to it they went, each
emulous of glory, and of taking all the advantage he could, so that they
suddenly did not strike or push; but sometimes one, then the other
was uppermost, and whirling expeditiously round, met almost breast to
breast; when the general, who had not a pike, but a pikestaff headed
with a large stone, gave Nasgig such a stroke on his head that he
reeled, and sunk considerably, and I began to be in pain for him, the
general lowering after him. But Nasgig springing forward beneath him,
and rising light as air behind the general, had gained his height again
before the general could turn about to discern him, and then plunging
forward, and receiving a stroke across his left arm, at the same time
he gave the general such a blow near the outside of the shoulder as slit
the graundee almost down to his hip, and took away part of the flesh of
the left arm, upon which the general fell fluttering down in vast pain
very near me; but not before Nasgig, in his fall, descending, had taken
another severe cut at him.

[Illustration: 0192]

[Illustration: 0191]

Immediately upon this defeat Nasgig again took his place behind me, our
army shouting to the skies; but no sooner had the general dropped,
but on came Harlokin, with majesty and terror mixed in his looks, and
seeming to disdain the air he rode on, waved his men to the attack
with his hand. When he came near enough to hear me, I called him vile
traitor, to oppose the army of his lawful sovereign, telling him, if he
would submit, he should be received to mercy. "Base creeping insect,"
says Harlokin, "if thou hast aught to say to me worth hearing, meet me
in the air! This hand shall show thee soon who'll most want mercy; and
though I scorn to stoop to thee myself, this messenger shall satisfy the
world thou art an impostor, and send thee back lifeless to the fond
king that sent thee hither." With that he hurled a javelin pointed with
flint, sharp as a needle, at me; but I avoiding it, "This, then," says
I, "if words will not do, shall justify the truth of our prediction."
And then levelling a musket at him, I shot him through the very heart,
that he fell dead within twenty paces of me. But perceiving another
to take his room, notwithstanding the confusion my musket made amongst
them, I ran to my match, and giving fire to two more pieces of ordnance
at the same time, they fell so thick about me, that I had enough to
do to escape being crushed to death by them; and the living remainder
separating, fled quite away, and put an end to the war. I waited in the
field three days, to see if they would make head again; but they were so
far from it, that before I could return, as I found afterwards, most of
the revolting provinces had sent their deputies, who themselves carried
the first news of the defeat, to beg to be received into mercy; all of
whom were detained there till my return with Harlokin's head.

At my return to Brandleguarp I was met by the king, the colambs, and
almost the whole body of the people; every man, woman, and child, with
two sweecoe lights in their hands, which unusual sight in the air gave
me great alarm, till I inquired of Nasgig what it meant, who told me it
must certainly be a sweecoan, or he knew not what it was. I asking
again what he meant by that, he told me it was a particular method of
rejoicing he had heard of, but never seen; wherein, if the king goes
in triumph, all the people of Brandleguarp, from fifteen to sixty, are
obliged to attend him with sweecoes. He said it was reported amongst
them that in Begsurbeck's time there were two of them, but there had
been none since.

When we met them, I perceived they had opened into two lines or ranks
of a prodigious length; at the farther end of which was the king, with
innumerable lights about him, the whole looking like a prodigious avenue
or vista of lights, bounded at the farther end, where the king was, with
a pyramid light. This had the most solemn and magnificent effect on the
eye that anything of light could possibly have; but as we passed through
the ranks, each of the spectators having two lights, one was given to
each soldier of the whole army. And then to look backward, as well as
forward, the beauty of the scene was inexpressible. We marched all the
way amidst the shouts of people, and the sounds of the gripsacks, going
very slowly between the ranks; and at length arriving at the pyramid
where the king was, I heard abundance of sweet voices, chanting my
actions in triumphal songs; but I could take little notice of these,
or of my son with his flageolet amongst them, for the extravagant
appearance of the pyramid, which seemed to reach the very sky. For,
first, there was a long line of a full half-mile, which hovered at even
height with the two side ranks; in the centre of that, and over it,
was the king single; over him another line, shorter than the first,
and again over that, shorter and shorter lines; till, at a prodigious
height, it ended in one single light *These all hovering, kept their
stations; while the king darted a little space forward to meet me,
and congratulate my success; then turning and preceding me, the whole
pyramid turned, and marched before us, singing all the way to the city,
the pyramid changing several times into divers forms, as into squares,
half-moons, with the horns sometimes erect and again reversed, and
various other figures. And yet amongst this infinite number of globes
there was not the least glaring or offensive light, but only what was
agreeable to the people themselves. As the rear of the army entered the
lines, they closed upon it, and followed us into Brandleguarp. While we
passed the city to the palace, the whole body of people kept hovering
till the king and myself were alighted, and then every one alighted
where he best could. All the streets and avenues to the palace were
blocked up with people, crowding to receive the king's beneficence; for
he had proclaimed a feast and open housekeeping to the people for six
days. The king, the colambs, ragans, and great officers of state, with
myself, had a magnificent entertainment prepared us in Begsurbeck's
great room; and his majesty, after supper, being very impatient to know
how the battle went, I told him the only valorous exploit was performed
by my friend Nasgig, who opened the way to victory by the slaughter of
Harlokin's general. Nasgig then rose, desiring only that so much might
be attributed to him as fortune had accidentally thrown into his scale;
for it might have been equally his fate as the general's to have fallen.
"But except that skirmish," says he, "and some flying cuts at the van,
we have had no engagement at all, nor have we lost a single man; Peter
only sitting in his chair, and commanding victory. He spake aloud but
thrice, and whispered once to them, but so powerfully that, having
at the two first words laid above three hundred of the enemy at their
lengths, and brought Harlokin to his feet, with a whisper, at the third
word he concluded the war. The whole time, from the first sight of
the enemy to their total defeat, took not up more space than one might
fairly spend in traversing his majesty's garden. In short, sir," says
Nasgig, "your majesty needs no other defence against public or private
enemies, as I can see, than Peter; and my profession, whilst he is with
us, can be of little use to the State."

After these compliments from Nasgig, and separate ones from the king and
the rest, I told them it was the highest felicity to me to be made
an instrument by the great Collwar in freeing so mighty a kingdom and
considerable a people from the misery of a tyrannical power. "You live,"
says I, "so happily under the mild government of Georigetti, that it is
shocking but to think into what a distressed state you must have fallen
under the power of a usurper, who, claiming all as his own by way of
conquest, would have reduced you to a miserable servitude. But," says I,
"there is, and I am sorry to see it, still amongst you an evil that you
great ones feel not, and yet it cries for redress. Are we not all, from
the king to the meanest wretch amongst us, formed with the same members?
Do we not all breathe the same air? inhabit the same earth? Are we
not all subject to the same disorders? and do we not all feel pain and
oppression alike? Have we not all the same senses, the same faculties?
and, in short, are we not all equally creatures of, and servants to, the
same master, the great Collwar? Would not the king have been a slave but
for the accident of being begotten by one who was a king? and would
not the poorest creature amongst us have been the king had he been so
begotten? Did you great men, by any superior merit before your births,
procure a title to the high stations in which you are placed? No, you
did not. Therefore give me leave to tell you what I would have done. As
every man has equal right to the protection of Collwar, why, when you
have no enemy to distress you, will you distress one another? Consider,
you great ones, and act upon this disinterested principle; do to
another, what you, in his place, would have him do to you; dismiss your
slaves, let all men be what Collwar made them, free. But if this unequal
distinction amongst you, of man and man, is still retained, though you
are at present free from the late disaster, it shall be succeeded with
more, and heavier. And now, that you may know I would not have every
man a lord, nor every one a beggar, remember I would only have every
serving-man at liberty to choose his own master, and every master his
own man; for he that has property and benefits to bestow will never want
dependants, for the sake of those benefits to serve him, as he that has
them not must serve for the sake of obtaining them. But then let it be
done with free-will; he that then serves you will have an interest in
it, and do it, for his own sake, with a willing mind; and you, who are
served, will be tenderer and kinder to a good servant, as knowing by a
contrary usage you shall lose him. I desire this may now be declared to
be so, or your reasons, if any there are, against it."

One of the ragans said he thought I spoke what was very just, and would
be highly acceptable to Collwar.

Then two of the colambs rose to speak together, and after a short
compliment who should begin, they both declared they only arose to
testify their consents.

The king referring it to me, and the colambs consenting, I ordered
freedom to be proclaimed through the city; so that every one appeared at
their usual duties, to serve their own masters for a month, and then to
be at liberty to come to a fresh agreement with them, or who else they
pleased.

"This, sir," says I to the king, "will now be a day of joy indeed to
those poor hearts who would have been in no fear of losing before, let
who would have reigned; for can any man believe a slave cares who is
uppermost? he is but a slave still. But now," says I, "those who were
so before may by industry gain property; and then their own interest
engages them to defend the State.

"There is but one thing more I will trouble you with now--and that,"
says I to the ragans, "is, that we all meet at the mouch to-morrow, to
render Collwar thanks for the late, and implore future favour." And this
passed without any contradiction.

When we met, the poor ragans were at a great loss for want of their
image, not knowing what to do or say; for their practice had been to
prostrate themselves on the ground, making several odd gestures; but
whether they prayed, or only seemed to do so, no one knew.

While the people were gathering, I called to a ragan, seeing him out of
character. "Suppose," said I "(for I see you want your image), you and
your brethren had received a favour of the king, and you was deputed
by them to thank him, you would scarce be at a loss to express your
gratitude to him, and tell him how highly you all esteemed his benefits,
hoping you should retain a just sense of them, and behave yourselves as
dutiful subjects for the future, and then desire him to keep you still
in his protection. And this," says I, "as you believe in such a Being as
Collwar, who understands what you say, you may with equal courage do
to Him, keeping but your mind intent upon Him, as if you saw Him
present."--"Indeed," says he, "I believe you are right, we may so; but
it is a new thing, and you must excuse us if we do it not so well at
first."

I found I had a very apt scholar, for after he had begun, he made a
most extraordinary prayer in regular order, the people standing very
attentive. It was not long, but he justly observed the points I hinted
to him.

When he had done, another and another went on, till we had heard ten of
them, and in every one something new, and very _ propos;_ and several
of them afterwards confessed they never had the like satisfaction in
their lives, for they had new hearts and new thoughts, they said.

We spent the sixth-day feast in every gaiety imaginable, and especially
of dancing, of which they were very fond in their way; but it was not so
agreeable to me as my own country way, there being too much antic in it.
New deputies daily arrived from the revolted towns, and several little
republics, not claimed by Georigetti before, begged to be taken under
his protection; so that in one week the king saw himself not only
released from the dread of being driven from his throne, but courted
by some, submitted to by others, and almost at the summit of glory a
sovereign can attain to.

[Illustration: 5202]

[Illustration: 0203]



CHAPTER XVII.

_A visitation of the revolted provinces proposed by Peter--His new name
of the country received--Religion settled in the west--Slavery abolished
there--Lasmeel returns with Peter--Peter teaches him letters--The king
surprised at written correspondence--Peter describes the make of a beast
to the king._


THE festival being over, the colambs begged leave to depart; but the
king, who now did nothing without me, consulted with me if it was yet
proper. I told him, as things had so long been in confusion in the west,
that though the provinces had made their submission, yet the necessity
of their circumstances, and the general terror, might have caused them
only to dissemble till their affairs were composed again, and that as it
was more than probable some relations of the deceased Harlokin, or other
popular person, might engage them in another revolt, I thought it would
not be improper to advise with his colambs about the establishment of
the present tranquillity, and not by too great a security, give way to
future commotions; and as all the colambs were then present, it might be
proper to summon them once more.

When they were met, the king declared the more particular satisfaction
he took in that meeting than he had heretofore done, when they had been
put to it for means to secure their lives and properties: "For
now," says he, "our deliberations must turn upon securing our new
acquisitions, and on settling those provinces which, till now, have
never fallen under my power. But," says he, "I shall refer it to Peter
to propose to you what at present seems most necessary for you to
consider of; and that adjusted, shall dismiss you."

I told them that as the too sudden healing of wounds in the body
natural, before the bottom was clean and uncorrupt, made them liable to
break out again with greater malignity, so wounds in the body political,
if skinned over only, without probing and cleansing the source and
spring from whence they arose, would rankle and fret within till a
proper opportunity, and then burst forth again with redoubled violence.
I would therefore propose a visitation of the several provinces; an
inquiry into their conduct; an examination into the lives and principles
of the colambs, the inferior officers, and magistrates; and either
to retain the old, or appoint new, as there should be occasion. This
visitation I would have performed by his majesty--"and so many of you,
the honourable colambs," says I, "as he shall see fit should attend him
in royal state, that his new subjects may see his majesty, and hear his
most gracious words; and being sensible of his good disposition towards
them, may be won, by his equity and justice, to a zealous submission to
his government, which nothing but the perception of their own senses
can establish in the heart This, I don't doubt, will answer the end I
propose, and consolidate the peace and happiness of Norm--Normns--I must
say Doorpt Swangeanti."

Hearing me hesitate at the word Normndbsgrsutt, and call it Doorpt
Swangeanti, the whole assembly rang with Doorpt Swangeanti! and, at
last, came to a resolution that the west being now again united to the
east, the whole dominions should be called Sass Doorpt Swangeanti, or
the Great Flight Land.

They approved the visitation, and all offered to go with the king, but
insisted I should be of the party, which agreeing to do, I chose me out
two of the most knowing ragans to teach the new religion amongst them,
for in every project I had my view to advance religion.

Some were for having the deputies released, and despatched with notice
of the king's intentions; but I objecting that they might disrelish
their confinement, and possibly raise reports prejudicial to our
proceedings, it was thought better to take them with us, and go
ourselves as soon as possible.

We set out with a prodigious retinue, first to the right, in order to
sweep round the whole country, and take all the towns in our way, and
occasionally enter the middle parts, as the towns lay commodious.

We were met by the magistrates and chief officers of each district, at
some distance from each city, with strings about their necks, and the
crashee instrument borne before them in much humility. His majesty said
but little to them on the way, but ordered them to precede him to the
city, and conduct him to the colamb's house; when he was commanded to
surrender his employment to his majesty, as did all the other officers
who held posts under him. Then an examination was taken of their lives,
characters, and behaviour in their stations; and finding most of them
had behaved well to the government they had lived under (for their
plea was, they had found things under a usurpation, and being so, that
government was natural to them, having singly no power to alter it);
upon their perfect submission to the king, and solemn engagement to
advance and maintain his right, they received their commissions anew
from his majesty's own mouth. But where any one had been cruel or
oppressive to the subjects, or committed any notorious crime, or breach
of trust (for the meanest persons had liberty to complain), he was
rejected, and for the most part sent to Crashdoorpt, to prevent the ill
effects of his disgrace.

We having displaced but five colambs and a few inferior officers, the
moderation and justice of our proceedings gave the utmost satisfaction
both to the magistrates and people.

Having observed at Brandleguarp abundance of the small images my
wife had spoken of, and thinking this a proper opportunity to show my
resentment against them, I ordered several of the ragans of the west
before me, and asked what small images they had amongst them. One, who
spoke for the rest, told me, very few, he believed; for he had scarce
had any brought to him to be blessed. "Where," says I, "is your Great
Image?" He told me, "At Youk."--"And have not the people here many small
ones?"--"Very few," says he; "for they have not been forced upon
us long."--"How forced upon you!" says I; "don't the people worship
them?"--"A small number now do," says he.--"Pray speak out," says I.
"When might you not worship them?"--"Never, that I know of," says he,
"in our state, till about ten years ago, when Harlokin obliged us to
it."--"What! did you worship them before?" says I.--"No," says he,
"never since it has been a separate kingdom; for we would follow the old
ragan's advice of worshipping Collwar, which they not admitting of, the
State was divided between us who would and them who would not come
into the ragan's doctrine: and though Harlokin was a zealous
image-worshipper, yet all he could do would not bring the people
heartily into it, for Collwar never wanted a greater majority." This
pleased me prodigiously, being what was never hinted to me before; and I
resolved not to let my scheme be a loser by it.

As we were to visit Youk in about eight days, I summoned the ragans and
people to meet at the mouch; there recounting the great things done by
Collwar in all nations. "This I could make appear," says I, "by many
examples; but as you have one even at your own towns, I need go no
farther.

"I must begin in ancient times, when, I presume, you all worshipped
an idol; have you any tradition before this?"--They said, "No."--"This
image," says I, "was worshipped in Begsurbeck's days, when an old ragan,
whose mind Collwar had enlightened with the truth, would have withdrawn
your reverence from the image to the original Collwar himself; you would
not consent: he threatens you, but promises success to Begsurbeck, who
did consent; and he had it to an old age. Then those who would also
consent, were so far encouraged as to be able to form an independent
kingdom. Could nobody yet see the cause? was it not apparent Collwar was
angry with the east, that would not follow the old ragan, and cherished
the west, who would?

"But, to be short, let us apply the present instance, and sure it will
convince us who is right, who wrong.

"So long as the west followed Collwar, they flourished, and the east
declined; but no sooner had the west degenerated under the command of
Harlokin, and the east by my means had embraced Collwar, but the tables
were turned: the east is found weighty, and the west kicks the beam.
These things whoso sees not, is blind indeed: therefore let publication
be made for the destruction of all small images, and let the harbourers
of them, contrary to this order, be slit; and for myself, I will destroy
this mother-monster. Take you, holy ragans, care to destroy the brood."
And having said this, I hacked the new idol to pieces.

I ordered proclamation for abolishing slavery, under the restrictions
used at Brandleguarp: and thus having composed the west, and given a
general satisfaction, we returned, almost the whole west accompanying
us, till the east received us; and never was so happy a union, or more
present to testify it, since the creation, I believe.

I ordered several of the principal men's sons to court, in order for
employments, and to furnish our future colambs; and this I did, as
knowing each country would rather approve of a member of their own
body for their head than a stranger; and, in my opinion, it is the most
natural union. And then breeding them under the eye of the king eight or
ten years, or more, they are, as it were, naturalised to him too, and in
better capacity to serve both king and country.

As my head was constantly at work for the good of this people, I
turned the most trifling incidents into some use or other; and made
the narrowest prospects extend to the vastest distances. I shall here
instance in one only. There was at Youk a private man's son, whom by
mere accident I happened to ask some slight question of; and he giving
me, with a profound respect and graceful assurance, a most pertinent
answer; that, and the manner of its delivery, gave me a pleasure, which
upon farther discourse with him, was, contrary to custom, very much
increased; for I found in him an extensive genius, and a desire for my
conversation. I desired his father to put him under my care, which the
old man, as I was then in so great repute, readily agreed to; and his
son desiring nothing more, I took him with me to Brandleguarp. I soon
procured him a pretty post but of small duty, for I had purposed other
employment for him, but of sufficient significancy to procure him
respect. I took great delight in talking with him on different subjects,
and observed by his questions upon them, which often puzzled me, or his
answers to them, he had a most pregnant fancy and surprising solidity,
joined to a continual and unwearied application. I frequently mentioning
books, writing, and letters to him, and telling him what great things
might be attained that way, his inquisitive temper, and the schemes
he had formed thereon, put me upon thinking of several things I should
never have hit upon without him. I considered all the ways I could
contrive to teach him letters; and letting him into my design, he asked
me how I did to make a letter. I described a pen to him, and told him I
put a black liquor into it, and as I drew that along upon a flat white
thing we made use of, called paper, it would make marks which way ever I
drew it, into what shape I pleased. "Why then," says he, "anything that
will make a mark upon another thing as I please, will do."--"True,"
says I, "but what shall we get that will make a black mark?"--We were
entering further into this debate; but the king sending for me, I left
him unsatisfied. I stayed late with the king that night, so did not
see Lasmeel (for that was his name) till next night, wondering what was
become of him. I asked him then where he had been all the day. He told
me he had been looking for a pen and paper. I laughed, and asked him if
he had found them.--"Yes," says he, "or something that will do as well:"
so he opened one side of his graundee, and showed me a large flat leaf,
smooth and pulpy, very long and wide, and about a quarter of an inch
thick, almost like an Indian fig-leaf.--"And what am I to do with this?"
says I.--"To mark it," says he, "and see where you mark."--"With what?"
says I.--"With this," says he, putting his hand again into his graundee,
and taking out three or four strong sharp prickles. I looked at them
both; and clapping him on the head, "Lasmeel," says I, "if you and I
were in England, you should be made a privy-councillor."--"What! won't
it do, then?" says he.--I told him we would try.--"I thought," says he,
"it would have done very well; for I marked one all about, and though I
could not see much at first, by that time I had made an end, that I did
first was quite of a different colour from the leaf, and I could see it
as plain as could be." I told him as he was of an age to comprehend what
I meant, I would take another method with him than with a child; so I
reasoned from sentences backwards to words, and from them to syllables,
and so on to letters. I then made one, the vowel A, told him its sound,
and added a consonant to it, and told him that part of the sound of each
distinct letter put together, as the two letters themselves were, made
another sound, which I called a syllable; and that joining two or more
of them together made a word, by putting the same letters together as
made the sounds of those syllables which made that word. Then setting
him a copy of letters, which with very little difficulty were to
be drawn upon the leaf, and telling him their sounds, I left him to
himself; and when he had done, though I named them but twice over, his
memory was so strong as to retain the sounds, as he called them, of
every one but F, L, and Q.

In two months' time I made him master of anything I wrote to him; and
as he delighted in it, he wrote a great deal himself, so that we kept
an epistolary correspondence, and he would set down all the common
occurrences of the day, as what he heard and saw, with his remarks on
divers things.

One day, as the king and I were walking in the gardens, and talking
of the customs of my country, and about our wars, telling him how our
soldiers fought on horseback, the king could not conceive what I meant
by a horse. I told him my wife had said there were neither beasts nor
fishes in the country; which I was very much surprised at, considering
how we abounded with both: "And therefore," says I, "to tell your
majesty that a horse is a creature with four legs, you must naturally
believe it to be somewhat like a man with four legs."--"Why, truly,"
says he, "I believe it is; but has it the graundee?" I could not forbear
smiling, even at his majesty, and wanted to find some similitude to
compare it to, to carry the king's mind that way; for else he would
sooner, I thought, conceive it like a tree or a mountain than what
it really was; and as I was musing, it came into my head I had given
Lasmeel a small print of a horse, which I found in one of the captain's
pockets at Graundevolet, and believing it to be the stamp of a
tobacco-paper, had kept it to please the children with; so I told the
king I believed I could show him the figure of a horse. He told me it
would much oblige him.

Seeing several of the guards waiting at the garden arch, I looked, and
at last found one of Lasmeel's leaves in the garden, and cutting one of
them up with my knife, I took the point of that, and wrote to Lasmeel
to send me by the bearer the picture of a horse I gave him, that I
might show it the king. And calling one of the guards, "Carry that to
Lasmeel," says I; "he is, I believe, in my apartment, and bring me an
answer directly." Then falling into discourse again with the king, and
presently turning at the end of the walk, I saw the same guard again.
Says I "You cannot have brought me an answer already."--"You have not
told me," says he, "what to bring you an answer to."--"Nor shall I,"
says I; "do as you are bid;" for I perceived then what the fellow stuck
at. He walked off with the leaf, but very discontentedly. The king said
he wondered how I could act such a contradiction. "This, father," says
he, "is not what I expected from you; to order a man to bring an answer
without giving him a message." I desired his patience only till the man
came back. Presently says the king, "Here he comes!--Well," says he,
"what answer?"--"Sir," says the fellow, "I have only had the walk for
my pains: for he sent it back again, and a little white thing with
it."--"Ha, ha!" says the king, "I thought so.--Come, father, own you
have once been in the wrong; for I am sure you intended to give him
a message, but having forgot it, would not submit to be told of your
mistake by a guard." I looked very grave, reading what Lasmeel had
wrote; which was to tell me he had obeyed my orders by sending the
horse, for he was just then drawing it out upon a leaf.

"Come, come," says the king, "give the man his message, father, and
let him go again."--"Sir," says I, "there is no need of that, he has
punctually obeyed me; and Lasmeel was then at the table in my oval
chamber with a leaf, and this picture in my hand, before him."

The king was ready to sink when I said so, and showed the print. "Truly,
father," says he, "I have been to blame to question you; for though
these things are above my comprehension, I am not to think anything
beyond your skill." I made no reply to it; but showing the king the
picture, the guard sneaked off; and glad he was, I believe, he could do
so.

I went then upon the explanation of my horse, and answering fifty
questions about him, at last he asked what his inside was: "Exactly the
same as your majesty's," said I.--"And can he eat and breathe too?" says
he.--"Just as you can," says I.--"Well," says he, "I would never have
believed there had been such a creature: what would I give for one of
them!"--I set forth the divers other uses we put them to, besides the
wars; and by the picture, with some supposed alterations, I described a
cow, a sheep, and numberless other quadrupeds; my account of which gave
him great pleasure.

[Illustration: 0216]



CHAPTER XVIII.

_Peter sends for his family--A rising of former slaves on that
account--Takes a view of the city--Description of it, and of the
country--Hot and cold springs._


HAVING now some leisure time on my hands to consider over my own
affairs, I had thoughts of transporting my family, with all my effects,
to Sass Doorpt Swangeanti, but yet had no mind to relinquish all thought
of my ship and cargo; for the greatest part of this was still remaining,
I having had but the pickings through the gulf. I once had a mind to
have gone myself; but considering the immense distance over sea, though
I had once come safe, I thought I ought not to tempt Providence, where
my presence was not absolutely necessary.

Nasgig, to whose care and conduct any enterprise might be trusted,
offered his service to go and execute any commands I should give him.
His only difficulty, he said, was that it would be impossible for him to
remember the different names of many things, which he had no idea of, to
convey the knowledge of them to his mind when he saw them; but barring
that, he doubted not to give me satisfaction. I told him I would send
an assistant with him, who could remember whatever I once told him; and
that I might not burden his memory with names only, Lasmeel should carry
his memory with him, and that he, Nasgig, should only have the executive
part.

Lasmeel, who had sat waiting an opportunity to put in for a share in the
adventure, having a longing desire to see the ship, told Nasgig he had
a peculiar art of memory, so as to remember whatever he would as long
as he pleased, and that if he carried that with him, they need fear no
mistakes.

The king having granted me as many of his guards as I pleased, for the
carriage of my things, we appointed them to be ready on the fourth day;
when Nasgig and Lasmeel set out with them.

I ordered Lasmeel, however, to be with me the next morning, that we
might set down proper instructions; which I told him would be very long,
and that he must bring a good number of leaves with him.

When Lasmeel entered my chamber next morning, he informed me that the
whole city was in an uproar, especially those who had been freed by me.
"What!" says I, "have they so soon forgot their subjection, to misapply
their liberty already? But step and bring me word what's the matter, and
order some of the ringleaders hither to me." Lasmeel upon inquiry found
that it had been given out I was going to leave the country, and they
all said, wherever I went they were determined to go and settle with me;
for if I left them, they should be reduced to slavery again. However, he
brought some of them to me, and upon my telling them I thanked them for
their affection to me, but blamed them for showing it in so tumultuous a
manner, and that I was so far from intending to leave them, that I was
sending for my family and effects in order to settle amongst them, they
rejoiced very much, and told me they would carry the good news to their
companions, and disperse immediately. But I was now in more perplexity
than before, for they having signified my designs to the rest, they
rushed into the gallery in such numbers that they forced me up to my
very chamber. I told them this was an unprecedented manner of using a
person they pretended a kindness for; and told them if they made use of
such risings to express their gratitude to me, it would be the direct
means to oblige me to leave them: "For," says I, "do you think I can be
safe in a kingdom where greater deference is paid to me than to the
crown?" They begged my pardon, they said, and would obey me in anything;
but the present trouble was only to offer their services to fetch my
family and goods, or to do anything else I should want them for; and if
I would favour them in that, they would retire directly. I told them
when I had considered of it they should hear from me; and this again
quieted them.

This disturbance not only took up much of my time, which I could have
better employed, but put me to a non-plus how to come off with them;
till I sent Maleck to tell them though I set a great value upon their
esteem, yet after what had passed, it would be the most unadvisable
thing in nature for me to accept their kindness; for having before
requested a body of men of the king, as he had graciously granted them,
it would be preferring them to the king, should I now relinquish his
grant and make use of their offer; and after this I heard no more of it.

I had scarce met with a more difficult task than to fix exact rules for
the conduct of my present undertaking, there being so many things to be
expressed, wherein the least perplexity arising, might have caused both
delay and damage; for I was not only forced to set down the things I
would have brought, but the manner and method of packing and securing
them; but as Lasmeel could read my writing to Pedro at home, and
Youwarkee on board, it would be a means, though far from an expeditious
one, of bringing matters into some order; and after I had done as I
thought, I could have enumerated many more things, and was obliged to
add an _et ctera_ to the end of my catalogue; and while they were ready
for flight, I added divers other particulars and circumstances. Nay,
when they were even upon the graundee, I recollected the most material
thing of all; for my greatest concern was, having broke up so many of my
chests, to find package for the things; I say, even so late as that, I
bethought me of the several great water-casks I had on board, that would
hold an infinite number of small things, and would be slung easily; so I
stopped them and set down that, and they were no sooner out of sight and
hearing, but remembering twenty more, I was then forced to trust them to
my _et ctera_.

I had sent my own flying-chair to bring the boys who had not the
graundee, with orders for Pedro to sit tied in the chair, with Dicky
tied in his arms; Jemmy to sit tied to the board before the chair, and
David behind: so I hoped they would come safe enough; and then my wife
and Sally were able to help themselves.

Having despatched my caravan, and being all alone, I called Quilly the
next morning, and telling him I had thoughts of viewing the country, I
bade him prepare to go with me.

I had now been here above six months, and yet upon coming to walk
gravely about the city, I found myself as much a stranger to the
knowledge of the place as if that had been the first day of my arrival,
though I had been over it several times in my chair.

This city is not only one of, but actually the most curious piece
of work in the world, and consists of one immense entire stone of a
considerable height, and it may be seven miles in length, and near as
broad as it is long. The streets and habitable part of it are scooped,
as it were, out of the solid stone, to the level with the rest of the
country, very flat and smooth at bottom, the rock rising perpendicular
from the streets on each side.

[Illustration: 8221]

The figure of the city is a direct square; each side about six miles
long, with a large open circle in the centre of the square, about a
mile in diameter, and from each of the sides of the outer streets to the
opposite side runs another street, cutting the centre of the circle as
in the figure.

Along the whole face of the rock, bounding the streets and the circle,
there are archways; those in the circle, and the four cross streets, for
the gentry and better people; and those in the outer streets, for the
meaner; and it is as easy to know as by a sign where a great man lives,
by the grandeur of his entrance, and lavish distribution of the pillars,
carving, and statues about his portico, within and without: for as they
have no doors, you may look in, and are not forbid entrance; and though
it should look odd to an English reader, that an Englishman should
speak with pleasure of a land of darkness, as that almost was, yet I am
satisfied whoever shall see it after me will be persuaded, that for
the real grandeur of their entrances, and for the magnificence of the
apartments and sculpture, no part of the universe can produce the like;
and though within doors there is no other manner of light than the
sweecoes, yet that, when you are once used to it, is so agreeable and
free from all noisome savour, that I never once regretted the loss of
the sun within doors, though I often have when abroad; but then that
would be injurious to the proper inhabitants, though they can no more
see in total darkness than myself.

I have been over some of these private houses, which contain, it may
be, thirty rooms, great and small, some higher, some lower, full of
sweecoe-lights, and extremely well proportioned and beautiful.

The king's palace, with all the apartments, stands in, and takes up,
one full fourth part of the square of the whole city; and is, indeed, of
itself a perfect city.

There is no great man's house without one or more long galleries for
the ladies to divert themselves at divers sports in, particularly at one
like our bowls on a bowling-green, and at somewhat like nine-holes, at
which they play for wines, and drink a great deal, for none of them will
intoxicate.

In my walk and survey of the city, one of the colambs being making a
house to reside in when at Brandleguarp, I had the curiosity to go in.
I saw there abundance of botts stand filled with a greenish liquor, and
asked Quilly what that was. He said it was what the stone-men used in
making houses. I proceeded farther in, where I saw several men at work,
and stayed a good while to observe them. Each man had a bott of this
liquor in his left hand, and stood before a large bank of stone, it may
be 30 feet high, reaching forward up to the ceiling of the place, and
ascending by steps from bottom to top; the workmen standing some on one
step, some on another, pouring on this liquor with their left hands, and
with their right holding a wooden tool, shaped like a little spade. I
observed wherever they poured on this water, a smoke arose for a little
space of time, and then the place turned white, which was scraped off
like fine powder with the spade-handle; and then pouring new liquor, he
scraped again, working all the while by sweecoe-lights.

Having my watch in my pocket, I measured a spot of a yard long, about a
foot high, and a foot and a half on the upper flat, to see how long he
would be fetching down that piece; and he got it away in little above
two hours. By this means I came to know how they made their houses;
for I had neither seen any tool I thought proper, nor even iron itself,
except my own, since I came into the country. Upon inquiry, I found that
the scrapings of this stone, and a portion of common earth, mixed with a
water they have, will cement like plaster; and they use it in the small
ornamental work of their buildings. I then went farther into this house,
where I saw one making the figure of a glumm by the same method; but it
standing upright in the solid rock against the wall, the workman held
his liquor in an open shell, and dipping such stuff as my bed was made
of, bound up in short rolls, some larger, some less, into the liquor,
he touched the figure, and then scraped till he had reduced it into a
perfect piece.

It is impossible to imagine how this work rids away; for in ten months'
time after I saw it, this house was completed, having a great number
of fine, large, and lofty rooms in it, exquisitely carved to all
appearance.

My wonder ceased as to the palace, when I saw how easily this work was
done; but sure there is no other such room in the world as Begsurbeck's,
that I described above.

The palace, as I said before, taking up one quarter of the city, opens
into four streets by four different arches; and before one of the sides,
which I call the front, is a large triangle, formed by the entrance
out of one of the cross streets, and the two ends of the front of
the palace. Along the lower front of it, all the way runs a piazza of
considerable height, supported by vast round columns, which seemed to
bear up the whole front of the rock, over which was a gallery of equal
length, with balustrades along it, supported with pillars of a yet finer
make, and over that a pediment with divers figures, and other work, to
the top of the rock, which being there quite even for its whole length,
was enclosed with balustrades between pedestals all the way, on which
stood the statues of their ancient kings, so large as to appear equal to
the life. The other two sides of the triangle were dwellings for divers
officers belonging to the palace. Under the middle arch of the piazza
was the way into the palace, through a long, spacious arched passage,
whose farther end opened into a large square; on each side of this
passage were large staircases, if I may so call them, by which you
ascend gradually, and without steps, into the upper apartments.

The next morning we took another walk, for I told Quilly I had a mind to
take a prospect of the country. We then went out at the back arch of the
palace, as we had the day before at one of the sides, there being a like
passage through the rock from that we went out at, to an opposite arch
leading into the garden. I say, we went out at the back arch, and after
passing a large quadrangle with lodgings all round it, we ascended
through a cut in the rock to a large flat, where we plainly saw the
Black Mountain with its top in the very sky, the sides of which afforded
numberless trees, though the ground within view afforded very little
verdure, or even shrubs. But the most beautiful sight from the rock
was to see the people come home loaded from the mountain, and from the
woods, with, it may be, forty pound weight each on their backs; and
mounting over the rock, to see them dart along the streets to their
several dwellings, over the heads of thousands of others walking in all
parts of the streets, while others were flying other ways. It was very
pleasant to see a man walking gravely in one street, and as quick as
thought to see him over the rock, settled in another, perhaps two miles
distant.

The near view of the country seeming so barren, naturally led me to ask
Quilly from whence they got provision for so many people as the city
contained, which, to be sure, could not be less than three hundred
thousand. He told me that they had nothing but what came from the Great
Forest on the skirts of the mountain. "But for the grain of it, and some
few outward marks," says I, "I could have sworn I had eaten some of my
country beef the other day at the king's table."--"I don't know what
your beef, as you call it, is; but I am sure we have nothing here but
the fruit of some tree or shrub, that ever I heard of."--"I wonder,"
says I, "Quilly, how your cooks dress their victuals. I have eaten many
things boiled, and otherwise dressed hot, but have seen no rivers, or
water, since I came into this country, except for drinking, or washing
my hands, and I don't know where that comes from. And another thing,"
says I, "surprises me, though I see no sun as we have to warm the air,
you are very temperate in the town, and it is seldom cold here; but I
neither see fire nor smoke."--"We have," says Quilly, "several very good
springs under the palace, both of hot water and cold, and I don't know
what we should do with fires; we see the dread of them sufficiently at
Mount Alkoe. Our cooks dress their fruits at the hot springs."--"That is
a fancy," said I; "they cannot boil them there."--"I am sure we have no
other dressing," says he.--"Well, Quilly," says I, "we will go home the
way you told me of, and to-morrow you shall show me the springs; but,
pray, how come you to be so much afraid of Mount Alkoe? I suppose your
eyes won't bear the light; is not that all?"--"No, no," says Quilly,
"that is the country of bad men. Some of us have flown over there
accidentally, when the mountain has been cool, as it is sometimes for
a good while together, and have heard such noises as would frighten any
honest man out of his senses, for there they beat and punish bad men."
I could not make much of his story, nor did I inquire further, for I had
before determined, if possible, to get over thither. As we were now come
into the garden, I ordered Quilly to get ready my dinner, and I would
come in presently.

We went next morning to view the springs, and indeed it was a sight
well worth considering. We were in divers offices under the rock (Quilly
carrying two globe-lights before me), in which were springs of very
clear water, some of hot, and some of cold, rising within two or three
inches of the surface of the floor. We then went into the kitchen, which
was bigger than I ever saw one of our churches, and where were a great
number of these springs, the hot all boiling full speed day and night,
and smoking like a caldron, the water rising through very small chinks
in the stone into basons, some bigger, some less; and they had several
deep stone jars to set anything to boil in. But what was the most
surprising was, you should see a spring of very cold water within a few
feet of one of hot, and they never rise higher or sink lower than they
are. I talked with the master cook, an ingenious man, about them; and he
told me they lie in this manner all over the rocky part of the country,
and that the first thing any one does in looking out for a house, is
to see for the water, whether both hot and cold may be found within the
compass he designs to make use of; and finding that, he goes on, or else
searches another place. And he told me where this convenience was not
in great plenty the people did not inhabit, which made the towns all so
very populous. He said, too, that those warm springs made the air more
wholesome about the towns than in other parts where there were none of
them. I thanked him for his information, which finished my search for
that time.

[Illustration: 0229]



CHAPTER XIX.

_Peter sends for his family--Pendlehamby gives a fabulous account of the
peopling of that country--Their policy and government--Peter's
discourse on trade--Youwarkee arrives--Invites the king and nobles to a
treat--Sends to Graundevolet for fowls._


THE days hanging heavy on my hands till the arrival of my family, I
sent Pendlehamby word that as I had sent for my family and effects in
order to settle in this country, and expected them very soon, I should
be glad of his, my brother, and sister's company, to welcome them on
their arrival.

My father came alone, which gave me an opportunity of informing myself
in the rise and policy of the State, as I purposed to take several
farther steps in their affairs, if they might prove agreeable and
consistent; for hitherto, having had only slight sketches or hints of
things, I could form no just idea of the whole of their laws, customs,
and government. Explaining myself, therefore, to him, I begged his
instructions in those particulars.

"Son Peter," says my father, "you have already done too much in a short
time to leave any room to think you can do no more: and as you have
hitherto directed your own proceedings with such incredible success,
neither the king nor colambs will interpose against your inclination,
but give you all the advices in our powers; and I shall esteem your
selecting me for that purpose no small honour.

"Know, then, that this State, by the tradition of our ragans, has
subsisted eleven thousand years; for, before that time, the great
mountain Emina, then not far from the Black Mountain, but now fallen and
sunk in the sea, roaring and raging in its own bowels for many ages, at
last burst asunder with great violence, and threw up numberless unformed
fleshy masses to the very stars; two of which happening in their passage
to touch the side of the Black Mountain (for all the rest fell into the
sea and were lost) lodged there, and lying close together as they grew,
united to each other till they were joined in one; and, in process of
time, by the dews of heaven, became a glumm and a gaw-ry; but being so
linked together by the adhesion of their flesh, they were obliged both
to move which way either would. Living thus a long time in great love
and fondness for each other, they had but one inclination, lest both
should be sufferers upon the least disagreement.

"In process of time they grew tired of each other's constant society,
and one willing to go here and the other there, bred perpetual disorders
between them; for prevention whereof for the future they agreed to cut
themselves asunder with sharp stones. The pain indeed was intolerable
during the operation; but, however, they effected it, and the wounds
each received were very dangerous, and a long time before they were
perfectly healed; but at length, sometimes agreeing, sometimes not,
they begat a son, whom they called Perigen, and a daughter they called
Philella. These two, as they grew up, despising their parents, who lived
on the top of the mountain, ventured to descend into the plains, and
living upon the fruits they found there, sheltered themselves in this
very rock. Meantime, the old glumm and gawry, having lived to a great
age, were so infirm that neither of them was able to walk for a long
time; till one day, being near each other, and trying to rise by
the assistance of each other, they both got up, and leaning upon and
supporting each other, they also walked commodiously. This mutual
assistance kept them in good humour a great while, till one day, passing
along near hoximo, they both fell in.

"Perigen and Philella had several children in the plains; who, as they
grew up, increasing, spread into remote parts, and peopled the country.
At last, one of them being a very passionate man, at the instigation
of his wife, became the first murderer, by slaying his father. This so
enraged the people, that the murderer and his wife, in abhorrence of the
fact, were conveyed to Mount Alkoe, where was then only a very narrow
deep pit, into which they were both thrown headlong; but the persons who
carried them thither, had scarce retired from the mouth of the pit, when
it burst out with fire, raging prodigiously, and has kept burning
ever since. Arco and Telamine (the murderer and his wife) lived seven
thousand years in the flames; till having with their teeth wrought a
passage through the side of the mountain, they begat a new generation
about the foot of the mountain; and having brought fire with them,
resolved to keep it burning ever after in memory of their escape; and
power being given them over bad men, they and their progeny are now
wholly employed in beating and tormenting them.

"A great while after Arco and Telamine were thus disposed of, the people
of this country multiplying, it happened one year that all the fruits
were so dry that the people, not able to live any longer upon the
moisture of them only, as they had always done before, and fearing all
to be consumed with drought, one of their ragans praying very much, and
promising to make an image to Collwar and preserve it for ever, if he
would send them but moisture, in one night's time the earth cast up
such a flood that they were forced to mount on the rocks for fear of
drowning. But the next day it all sunk away again, except several little
bubbles which remained in many places for a long time, and the people
lived only on the moisture they sucked from the stone where those
bubbles settled for many years; for they found that the water arose to
the height of the surface, and no higher; and where they found most
of those chinks and bubbles they settled and formed cities, living
altogether in holes of the rock; till one Lallio, having found out the
art of crumbling the rock to dust by a liquor he got from the trees, and
working himself a noble house in the rock, in the place where our palace
now stands, he told them if they would make him their king, they should
each have such a house as his own. To this they agreed, and then he
discovered the secret to them.

"This Lallio directed the cutting out this whole city, divided the
people into colonies where the waters were most plenty; and while half
the people worked at the streets and houses, the other half brought them
provisions. In short, he grew so powerful that no one durst dispute his
commands; all which authority he transmitted to his successors, who,
finding by the increase of the people and the many divisions of them
that they grew insolent and ungovernable, they appointed a colamb in
every province, as a vice-king, with absolute authority over all causes,
except murder and treason, which are referred to the king and colambs in
moucheratt.

"As we had no want but of victuals and habitations, the king, when he
gave a colambat, gave also the lands and the fruits thereof, together
with all the hot and cold springs, to the colamb, who again distributed
parcels to the great officers under him, and they part of theirs to the
meaner officers under them, for their subsistence, with such a number of
the common people as was necessary in respect to the dignity of the post
each enjoyed, who for their services are fed by their masters.

"In all cases of war, the king lays before the moucheratt the number
of his own troops he designs to send; when each colamb's quota being
settled at such a proportion of the whole, he forthwith sends his number
from out of his own lasks, and also from the several officers under
him; so that every man, let the number be ever so great, can be at the
rendezvous in a very few days.

"We have but three professions, besides the ragans and soldiery, amongst
us, and these are cooks, house-makers, and pike-makers, of which every
colamb has several among his lasks; and these, upon the new regulations,
will be the only gainers, as they may work where they please, and
according to their skill will be their provision; but how the poor
labourers will be the better for it, I cannot see."

"Dear sir," says I, "there are, you see, amongst lasks, some of such
parts, that it is great pity they should be confined from showing them;
and my meaning in giving liberty is in order for what is to follow; that
is, for the introduction of arts amongst you. Now, every man who has
natural parts will exert them when any art is laid before him; and he
will find so much delight in making new discoveries that, did no profit
attend it, the satisfaction of the discovery to a prying genius
would compensate the pains; but I propose a profit also to the
artificer."--"Why, what profit," says my father, "can arise but food,
and perhaps a servant of their own to provide it for them?"

"Sir," says I, "the man who has nothing to hope loses the use of one of
his faculties; and if I guess right, and you live ten years longer, you
shall see this State as much altered as the difference has been between
a lask and a tree he feeds on. You shall all be possessed of that which
will bring you fruits from the woods without a lask to fetch it. Those
who were before your slaves shall then take it as an honour to be
employed by you, and at the same time shall employ others dependent on
them; so as the great and small shall be under mutual obligations to
each other, and both to the truly industrious artificer; and yet every
one content only with what he merits."

"Dear son," says my father, "these will be glorious days indeed! But,
come, come, you have played a good part already; don't, by attempting
what you can't master, eclipse the glory so justly due to you."--"No,
sir," says I, "nothing shall be attempted by me to my dishonour; for I
shall ever remember my friend Glanepze. Sir," says I, "see here."
(showing him my watch).--"Why, this," says he, "hung by my daughter's
side at Graundevolet."--"It did so," says I; "and, pray, what did you
take it for?"--"A bott," says he.--"I thought so," says I; "but as you
asked no questions, I did not then force the knowledge of it upon you.
But put it to your ear."--He did so. "What noise is that?" says he. "Is
it alive?"--"No," says I, "it is not; but it is as significant. If I ask
it what time of the day it is, or how long I have been going from this
place to that, I look but in its face, and it tells me presently."

My father, looking upon it a good while, and perceiving that the minute
hand had got farther than it was at first, was just dropping it out
of his hand, had I not caught it. "Why, it is alive," says he; "it
moves!"--"Sir," says I, "if you had dropped it, you had done me an
inexpressible injury."--"Oh ho," says he, "I find now how you do your
wonders; it is something you have shut up here that assists you; it is
an evil spirit!" I laughing heartily, he was sorry for what he had said,
believing he had shown some ignorance. "No, sir," says I, "it is no
spirit, good or evil, but a machine made by some of my countrymen, to
measure time with."--"I have heard," says he, "of measuring an abb, or
the ground, or a rock; but never yet heard of measuring time."--"Why,
sir," says I, "don't you say three days hence I will do so; or such a
one is three years old? Is not that a measuring of time by so many
days or years?"--"Truly," says he, "in one sense I think it is."--"Now,
sir," says I, "how do you measure a day?"--"Why, by rising and lying
down," says he.--"But suppose I say I will go now, and come again, and
have a particular time in my head when I will return, how shall I do to
make you know that time?"--"Why, that will be afterwards, another time,"
says he; "or I can think how long it will be."--"But," says I, "how can
you make me know when you think it will be?"--"You must think too,"
says he.--"But then," says I, "we may deceive each other, by thinking
differently. Now this will set us to rights:" then I described the
figures to him, telling him how many parts they divided the day into,
and that by looking on it I could tell how many of such parts were
passed; and that if he went from me, and said he would come one, or two,
or three parts hence, I should know when to expect him. I then showed
him the wheels, and explained where the force lay, and why it went no
faster or slower, as well as I could; and from my desire of teaching,
insensibly perfected myself more and more in it. So that beginning to
have a little idea of it, he wished he had one. "And," says he, "will
you teach all our people to make such things?"--"Then they would be
disregarded, sir," says I.--"It is impossible," says he.--"I'll tell
you, sir, how I mean," said I. "I can, hereafter, show you a hundred
things as useful as this; now, if everybody was to make these, how would
other things be made? Besides, if everybody made them, nobody would
want them; and then what would anybody get by them, besides the pleasing
their own fancy? But if only twenty men make them in one town, all
the rest must come to them; and they who make these, must go to one of
twenty others, who make another thing that these men want, and so on;
by which means, every man wanting something he does not make, it will be
the better for every maker of everything."

"Son," says my father, "excuse me; I am really ashamed, now you have
better informed me, I asked so foolish a question." I told him we had
a saying in my country, that everything is easy when it is known. "I
think," says he, "a man might find everything in your country."

Two days after, my wife and daughter Sally came very early; but sure no
joy could be greater than ours at sight of each other. I embraced
them both over and over, as did my father, especially Sally, who was a
charming child. They told me I might expect everything that evening,
for they left them alighting at the height of Battringdrigg; for though
they came out the last, yet the body of the people with their baggage
could not come so fast as they did. And little Sally said, "We stayed
and rested ourselves, purely, daddy, at Battringdrigg, before the crowd
came; but as soon as mammy had seen all my brothers safe, who came
before the rest, and kissed Dicky, we set out again."

About seven hours after arrived the second convoy from abroad, that ever
entered that country. I had too much to do with my wife and children
that night, to spare a thought to my cargo; so I only set a guard over
them; for though I had now been married about sixteen years, Youwarkee
was ever new to me.

I was now obliged to the king again, for some additional conveniences to
my former apartment; and the young ones were mightily pleased to have so
much more room than we had at home, and to see the sweecoes; but finding
themselves waited upon in so elegant a manner, and by so many servants
(for with our new rooms, we had all the servants belonging to them),
they thought themselves in a paradise to the grotto, where all we wanted
we were forced to help ourselves to.

The next day Tommy came to see us, the king having given him a very
pretty post, since the death of Yaccombourse; and Hallycarnie, with
the Princess Jahamel, her mistress, who was mightily pleased to see
Youwarkee in her English dress, and invited her and the children to her
apartment.

It was but a few months since my wife saw the children; yet she scarce
knew them, they were so altered; for the two courtiers behaved with so
much politeness, that their brothers and Sally looked but with an
ill eye upon them, finding all the fault, and dropping as many little
invidious expressions on them as possible. But I sharply rebuked them:
"We were all made chiefly," I told them, "to please our Maker, and that
could be done only by the goodness of the heart; and if their hearts
were more pure, they were the best children; but if they liked their
brothers' and sisters' outward behaviour better than their own, they
might so far imitate them."

When we were settled in our new apartment, I unpacked my chairs and
tables, and set out my side-board, and made such a figure as had never
before been seen in that part of the world. I wanted now some shoes for
Pedro, his own being almost past wear, for the young ones never had worn
any, but could find none; till applying to Lasmeel, and showing him what
I wanted, he pointed to one of the great water-casks; but as there were
eleven of them, big and little, I knew not where to begin; till, having
invited the king and several of the ministers to dine with me, I was
forced to look over my goods for several other things I should want.

In my search, I found half a ream of paper, a leathern ink-bottle, but
no ink in it, some quills, and books of accounts, and several other
things relative to writing. The prize gave me courage to attempt the
other casks; but I found little more that I immediately wanted. In
the last cask were several books, two of them romances, six volumes
of English plays, two of devotion; the next were either Spanish or
Portuguese, and the last looked like a Bible; but just opening it, and
taking it to be of the same language, I put them all in again, thinking
to divert myself with them some other time. I here found some more
paper, and so many shoes, as, when I had fellowed them, served me as
long as I stayed in the country.

Having, as I said before, invited the king to eat with me, I was sorry
I had not ordered my fowls to be brought; and Youwarkee said she thought
to have done it, but I had not wrote for them. I told her I would send
Maleck for some of them, I was resolved; for I should pique myself on
giving the king a dish he had never before tasted. So I called Maleck,
telling him he must take thirty men with him to Graundevolet: "And carry
six empty chests with you," says I, "and put eight of my fowls in each
chest, and bring them with all expedition."--"Where do they lie, sir?"
says he.--"You will find them at roost," says I, "when it is dark."--"I
never was there," says he, "and don't know the way."--"What," says
I, "never at Graundevolet!"--"Yes," says he, "but not at roost."--I
laughed, saying, "Maleck, did not you see fowls when you was there?"
He said he did not know; what were they like?--"They are a bird," says
I.--"And what sort of a thing is that?" says he. Youwee hearing us in
this debate, "Maleck," says she, "did not you see me toss down little
nuts to something that you stared at? you saw them eat the nuts."--"Oh
dear," says he, "I know it very well, with two legs and no arms."--"The
same," says I, "Maleck; do you go look for a little house, almost by my
grotto, and at night you will find these things stand on sticks in that
house. Take them down gently, and come away with them in the chests."
Maleck performed his business to a hair; but instead of forty-eight,
brought me sixty, telling me he found the chests would hold them very
well; and I kept them afterwards in the king's garden.

[Illustration: 5242]

[Illustration: 0243]



CHAPTER XX.

_Peter goes to his father's--Traverses the Black Mountain--Takes a
flight to Mount Alkoe--Gains the miners--Overcomes the governor's
troops--Proclaims Georigetti king--Seizes the governor--Returns him the
government--Peter makes laws with the consent of the people, and returns
to Brandleguarp with deputies._


NO further project being ripe for execution, I took a journey home with
my father to Arndrumnstake, and he would take all the children with him.
Youwarkee and I stayed about six weeks, leaving all the children with my
father.

Upon my return, I frequently talked with Maleck about his country; who
they originally were, and how long it had been inhabited, and what other
countries bordered thereon, and how they lay. He told me his countrymen
looked upon themselves to be very ancient, but they were not very
numerous; for the old stock was almost worn out by the hardships they
had undergone; that about three hundred years before, he said, as he
had it from good report, there were a people from beyond the sea, or,
as they called themselves, from the Little Lands, had strangely overrun
them; and he had heard say they would have overrun this country too,
but they thought it would not answer. He said, "when those people first
came, they began to turn up the earth to a prodigious depth; and now,"
says he, "bringing some nasty hard earth of several sorts, they put it
into great fires till it runs about like water, and then beat it about
with great heavy things into several shapes; and some of it, sir," says
he, "looks just like that stuff that lay at the bottom of your ship, and
some almost white, and some red; for when I was a boy I was to have been
sent to work amongst them, as my father did; but it having killed him, I
came hither, as many more have done, to avoid it."--"And what do they
do with it," says I, "when they have beat it about as you say?"--"Then,"
says he, "they carry it a long way to the sea."--"What then?" says
I.--"Why, then the Little-landers take it, and swim over the sea with
it."--"And what do they do with it?" says I.--"Why," says he, "there are
other people who take it from them, and go away with it."--"Why do they
let them take it?" says I.--"Because," says he, "they give them clothes
for it."--"Do they want clothes," says I, "more than you?" He told me
they had no graundee.--"And what other countries have you hereabout?"--
"There is one country," says he, "north of Alkoe, where they say there
is just such another people as the Little-landers, and they get some of
the things from Mount Alkoe."--"What do they do with them?" says I.--"I
don't know," says he; "they fetch a great deal; but they won't let
anybody come into their country."--"Is there nobody inhabits between the
Mountain Alkoe and the sea?" He told me no, the Little-landers would not
let them.

Having got what information I could from Maleck, and also from a
countryman or two of his he had brought to me, I considered it all over;
And, thinks I, if I could but get Mount Alkoe to submit (for they had
told me they were only governed by a deputy from the Little Lands) to
see the work done, I might, by intercepting the trade to the sea, turn
the profit of the country my own way, and make it pass through our
hands.

I next inquired of those who brought the fruits from the Great Forest,
what sort of land they had there, and found, by their description, it
was a light mould, and in many places well covered with grass and herbs;
and by all the report I could hear, must be a fruitful country, well
managed; and being a flat country and not encompassed on that side with
the Black Mountain, was much higher than Doorpt Swangeanti. This news
put me upon searching the truth of it; and I made the tour of the Black
Mountain and the Great Forest, alighting often to make my observations.

The forest is a little world of wood without end, with here and there
a fine lawn very grassy; and indeed the wood-grounds bear it very well,
the trees not standing in crowds, but at a healthy distance from each
other. I went abundantly farther than any one had before been, but saw
no variation in the woody scene; and coming round westward home, I had a
view of hoximo; which is nothing but a narrow cleft in the earth, on
the top of the Black Mountain, of a most extraordinary depth; for upon
dropping a stone down, you shall hear it strike and hum for a long time
before all is quiet again; and laying my ear over the cleft, whilst
I ordered one of my attendants to throw a large stone down, after the
usual thumps and humming, I imagined I heard it dash in water, so that
it is not impossible it may reach to the sea; which is at least six or
seven miles below it. Into this hole all dead bodies are precipitated,
from the king to the beggar; for four glumms holding by the ankles and
wrists of the deceased, fly with them to hoximo and throw them down,
whilst the air is filled with the lamentations of the relations of the
deceased, and of such others as are induced to follow the corpse for
the sake of the wines, on such occasions plentifully distributed to all
comers by the gentry, and in the best proportion they are able by even
the meanest amongst them.

After a stay of about fourteen days at home, I fixed my next trip for
Mount Alkoe; and having told Maleck my design, he said he would go with
me with all his heart, but feared I should get no Brandleguarpine to
bear me; for he told me they had an old tradition that Mindrack lived
there, and would not go for all the world; which has been the greatest
security that country has had, for this would have devoured them else,
says he.

I spoke to the king, to Nasgig, and the ragans, and found them all
unanimous that the mountain Alkoe was the habitation of Mindrack, and
that the noises which had been heard there were his servants beating bad
men. Says I to myself, Here is one of the usefullest projects upon earth
spoiled by an unaccountable prepossession; what must be done to overcome
this prejudice?

I told Maleck I found what he said to be too true, as to the people of
Brandleguarp: "But," says I, "are there not enough of your countrymen
here to carry me thither?" He believing there were, I ordered him to
contract with them; but it vexed me very much to be obliged to take
these men. However, though I resolved to go, yet I chose to reason the
ragans into the project if I could; thinking they would soon bring the
people over.

I called several of the ragans together, and said: "Because you are a
wiser and more thinking people than the vulgar, I have applied myself
to your judgments in the affair of Mount Alkoe. Now, consider with
yourselves whether you have any real reason beyond a prepossession, for
thinking these people fiends, or devil's servants, as you call them,
without further examination; for according to my comprehension, they
only, understanding the nature of several sorts of earth, reduce them by
labour and fire to solid substances for the use of mankind; and the
want of these things is the reason of your living as you do, without
a hundredth part of the benefits of life. These sort of people, these
noises and these operations, which you hear and see carried on at Alkoe,
are to be heard and seen in my country; and we deal and traffic with
their labours, from one end of the world to the other; and we who are
with them the happiest, without them should be the most miserable of
people. Did not some of you see, at my entertainment, what I called my
knives and forks and spoons, my pistols, cutlasses, and silver cup?
All these, and infinitely more, are the produce of these poor men's
industry. Now," says I, "if we settle a communication with these
people, your dues will be all paid in these curious things; you will
have your people employed in working them, and have strangers applying
to you to serve them with what they want; who in return will give you
what you want; and you will find yourselves known and respected in the
world." Finding some of these arguments applied to the men had staggered
them a little, I applied to their senses. Says I, "It still appears to
me that you have your prejudices hanging on you; but what will you say
if I go thither and return safe? will you be afraid to follow me another
time?" They persuaded me from it, as a dangerous experiment; but said,
if I did return, they would not think there was so much in it as they
suspected.

Maleck having chose me out fourscore of his countrymen, in about a
month's time I trained them up to the knowledge of my pistols and
cutlasses, and the management of them; and taking a chest with me for
the arms and other necessaries, we sallied up to the Black Mountain. I
rested there; and there Nasgig and Lasmeel overtook me, saying that when
they found me obstinate to go, they could not in their hearts leave me,
happen what would. This put new spirits into me, and we consulted how
the noises lay, and agreed to engage first upon the skirts of them,
where the smokes were most straggling. I charged six guns and all my
pistols, which I kept in my chest, and ordered them to alight with me
about a hundred paces from the first smoke they saw; then ordered three
of them to carry my guns after me, and twelve of them to take pistols
and follow me; but not to fire till I gave orders. The remainder I left
with the baggage.

We marched up to the smoke, which issued out of a low archway just at
the foot of the mountain. It was very light there with the flames of the
volcano; and entering the arch, a fellow ran at me with a red-hot iron
bar; him I shot dead: and seeing two more and a woman there, who stood
with their faces to the wall of the hut or room, as unwilling to be
seen, I ordered Maleck to speak to them in a known tongue, and tell
them we were no enemies, nor intended them any hurt; and that their
companion's fate was owing to his own rashness in running first at me
with the hot bar; and that if they would show themselves good-natured
and civil to us, we should be so to them; but if they offered to resist
openly, or use any manner of treachery towards us, they might depend
upon the same fate their companion had just suffered.

Upon hearing this, they approached us; and showing great tokens of
submission, I delivered my gun to Maleck, and bade them go on with their
work, ordering all the guns out of the shop for fear of a spark. I then
perceived they were direct forges, but made after another manner
from ours, their wind being made by a great wheel, like a wheel of a
water-mill, which worked with the fans or wings in a large trough, and
caused a prodigious issue of air through a small hole in the back of the
fireplace. They were then drawing out iron bars.

I gave each of these men, and also to the woman, a dram of brandy; which
they swallowed down very greedily, and looked for more, and seemed very
pleasant. I then inquired into the trade--by whom and how it was carried
on; and they told me just as Maleck had done. I then asked where the
mines lay; and one of them looking full at me said, "Then you know what
we are about."--"Yes," says I, "very well."--He told me the mine was (in
his language as Maleck interpreted it) about a quarter of a mile off,
and directed me to it. I ordered them to go on with their work, telling
them, though I left a guard over them, it was only that they might not
raise their neighbours to disturb me; though if they did, I should serve
them all as I had done their companion; and left four men with pistols
at the archway.

I proceeded to the iron mine, but supposed the men were all within, for
I saw nobody; but there were many large heaps of ore lying, which I felt
of; and, being vastly heavy, I supposed it might be rich in metal.

I returned to my men at the arch, and asked them what other mines there
might be in that country, and of what other metals; but Maleck not
knowing the metals themselves, was not able to interpret the names they
called them by. I then showed them an English halfpenny, a Portuguese
piece of silver money, and my gold watch; and asking if they had any of
those, they pointed to the halfpenny and silver piece, but shook their
heads at the watch. I then showed them a musket-ball, and they said they
had a great deal of that.

I desired them to show me the way to the copper-mine (pointing my finger
to the halfpenny), and told them if they would go with me, they should
have some more (pointing to my brandy); and they readily agreed, if I
would stand by them for leaving their work. I believe it might be two
miles farther on the right to the copper-mine; and as these men had the
graundee, I expected they would have flown by me; but I found they had a
light chain round their graundee which prevented them; so I walked too,
and having made them my friends by being familiar with them, I desired
they would go in, and let the headman of the works know that a stranger
desired to speak with him and view his works, and to inform him how
peaceable I was if he used me civilly, but that I could strike him dead
at once if he did not.

I do not know how they managed, or what report they made; but the
man came to me very courteously, and I bade Maleck ask if he came in
friendship, as I did to him; and he giving me that assurance, I went
in with him, taking Nasgig and Maleck with me, and leaving our firearms
without. I ordered them both, as I did myself, to carry their cutlasses,
sheathed in their hands, for fear of a surprise. We saw a great quantity
of copper ore and several melting-vats, being just at the mouth of the
mine, the mine running horizontally into the side of the mountain, and,
as they said, was very rich. I gave the headman a little brandy, and
two or three more of them, who had been industrious in showing and
explaining things to me.

I desired the foreman to walk out with me; and asking how long he had
been in that employ, he told me he was a native of the Born Isles, and
was brought thither young, where he first wrought in the iron, then in
the silver, and now in this mine: that he had been there twenty years,
and never expected to be delivered from his miserable slavery; but as he
was now overseer of that work, he did pretty well, though nothing like
freedom. He told me they expected several new slaves quickly, for the
mines killed those they did not agree with so fast they were very thinly
wrought at present, and that the governor was gone to the isles to get
more men. I was glad to hear this. "And, pray," says I, "where does the
governor reside?" He (pointing to the place) told me. "And what guard,"
says I, "may he keep?"--"About four hundred men; but nobody durst molest
him," says he; "for he tortures them in such a manner, never killing
them, that not the least thing can be done against his will."

After we had talked a good while on the misery of slavery, and finding
him a man fit for my purpose, I asked him if he would go with me to
Brandle-guarp: "For," said I, "there are certainly good mines in those
mountains; and if you will overlook them, you shall be free, and have
whatever you desire." He shook his head, saying, how could he expect to
be free where all the rest were slaves. "And besides," says he, "they
are in such commotions among themselves, that it is said the State will
be torn to pieces."--"You are mistaken," says I, "very much; I myself
have settled peace amongst them, and killed the usurper."--"Is it
possible?" says he; "and are you the man it was said they expected to
come out of the sea?"--"The very same," says I: "and as to slavery,
there is not a slave in the kingdom; nor shall be here, if you will
hearken to me."--"That would be a good time indeed," says he.--"Well,"
says I, "my friend, I promise you it shall be so; only observe this,
that when I come to reduce the governor, do none of you miners assist
him." He promised he would let the other miners secretly know it, and
all should be as I wished; but desired me to be expeditious, for the
governor was expected every day.

I went from him to the other mines, and my guides with me; who seeing me
so well received at the copper-mine and reporting it to the others, it
caused my proceedings to go on smoothly, and my offers to be readily
embraced wherever I came.

Having prepared matters thus, I set Maleck and his countrymen upon the
natives, to treat with them about submission to Georigetti, on promise
of freedom; who being assured of what I had done at Brandleguarp, and
in hopes of like liberty, readily came into it; so that the only thing
remaining was, before the governor's return, to attack the soldiery.
Having, therefore, renewed my engagements with the miners, and believing
myself upon as good terms with the natives as I could wish, I was
advised by Nasgig and Lasmeel to return for cannon and a large army
before I attacked the soldiery: but I, who had all my life rode upon
the spur, having considered that an opportunity once lost is never to be
regained; and though I could have wished for some cannon, I valued the
men but for show: I therefore formed my resolves to march with the
force I had next morning, and pitch upon a plain just by the governor's
garrison, in order, if I could, to draw his men out. I did so, and it
answered; for upon the first news of my coming, they appeared with a
sort of heavy-headed weapons, which hurling round, they threw upwards
aslope, in order to light upon the backs of their enemies in flight, and
beat them down; but they could not throw them above thirty paces.

I sat still in my chair, with a gun in my hand, and Maleck with another
at my elbow, with four more lying by me, ready to be presented; Lasmeel
standing by to charge again as fast as we fired. I ordered a party
of twenty of my men with cutlasses to attack the van of the enemy, by
rushing impetuously upon them, they coming but thin against me; for I
was not willing to employ my pieces till I could do more execution. They
began the attack about a hundred yards before me, not very high in
the air; and my cutlass-men having avoided the first flight of their
weapons, fell upon them with such fury, that chopping here a limb and
there a graundee, which, disabling their flight, was equally pernicious,
they fell by scores before me: but I seeing those in the rear, which
made a body of near three hundred, coming very swift and close in treble
ranks, one above the other, hoping to bear down my handful of men with
their numbers, I ordered my men all to retire behind me, and not till
the enemy were passed over my head to fall on them. Maleck and I, as
they came near, each firing a piece together, and whipping up another,
and then another, in an instant they fell round us roaring and making
a horrid yell. This the rest seeing, went over our men's heads, not
without many falling from the cuts of my men; and those who escaped were
never heard of more.

The miners, who from their several stations had beheld the action, came
singing and dancing from every quarter round me, and if I had not drawn
my men close in a circle about me, would probably, out of affection,
have done me more hurt than two of the governor's armies; for against
these common gratitude denied the use of force; and they crowding every
one but to touch me, they said, for fear of being pressed to death
myself, as some of them almost were, I ordered them to be let in through
my men at one side of the ring, and, passing by and touching me, to be
let out on the other side; and this quieted them, but kept me in penance
a long time.

We then marched in a body all into the town, where we were going to
proclaim Georigetti King of Mount Alkoe, when a surly fellow, much wiser
than the rest, as he thought, being about to harangue the people against
being too hasty in it, was knocked down and trod to death for his pains;
and we went on with the proclamation, giving general liberty to all
persons without exception.

The next thing to be considered was how to oppose the governor when he
came; and for that purpose I inquired into the manner of his coming, the
road he came, and his attendants; and being informed that a hundred of
his guards who had not the graundee waited for him at the sea-side, and
that he had got no other guard, except a few friends and the slaves
he went for, and that the slaves always came first, six in a rank tied
together, under convoy of a few of his guards, I went in person to view
the route he came, and seeing a very convenient post in a thick wood
through which they were to pass, from whence we might see them before
they came near us, I posted a watch on the sea side of the wood, and
myself and men lay on the hither side of it, just where the governor's
party must come out of it again: so that my watch giving notice of their
approach, we might be ready to fall on at their coming out of our side
of the wood.

When we had waited three days, our watch brought word they were coming;
so we kept as close as possible, letting the slaves and guards march on,
who came by about two hours' march before the governor: but so soon as
he approached I drew up my men on the plain within the wood in ranks,
ordering them to lie close on their bellies till they saw me rise, and
then to rise, follow me, and obey orders.

Several of the first ranks having passed the wood, just as the governor
had entered the open country, I rose and bade Maleck call aloud that if
any of them stirred or lifted up a weapon he was a dead man; and
then seeing one of the foremost running, I fetched him down with a
musket-shot, bidding Maleck tell the rest that if they submitted and
laid down their weapons they were safe; but if they refused, I would
serve them all as I had done him who fled. This speech, with the terror
of the gun, fixed every man to his place like a statue.

I then went forward to the governor, and by Maleck, my interpreter,
asked him who they all were with him: he told me his slaves. I then made
him call every man before him and give him freedom; which finding no way
to avoid (for I looked very stern), he did, and I had enough to do to
quiet my new freemen, who I thought would have devoured me for joy. I
asked him whither he was going; he said to his government.--"Under whom
do you hold it?" says I.--"Under the zaps of the isles," says he. I then
told him that whoever held that government for the future, must receive
it from the hands of Georigetti, the king of that country, to whom all
the natives and miners had already engaged their fidelity. I told him
both natives and foreigners had been all declared free.

The governor seemed much dejected, and told me he hoped I would not use
him or his company ill. I told him that depended entirely on his own and
their good behaviour. I asked him who his friends were that were with
him; he said they were some of the zap's relations, who were come to see
the method of the government and inspect the mines.

Ordering all the governor's guards and friends to go before, and all my
own, but Maleck, to keep backwards some paces, I entered into discourse
with him about the state of the isles, and the country of Alkoe;
and finding him a judicious person, and not a native of the isles, I
thought, with some management, he might prove a useful person to me,
but did not like the character I had heard of his severity: so I plainly
told him that only one thing prevented my making him a greater man than
ever he was; which was, I had been informed he had a roughness in his
nature which drove him to extremities with the poor slaves, which
I could not bear. "Sir," says he, "whatever a man is in his natural
temper, where slavery abounds it is necessary to act, or at least
be thought to do so, in a merciless manner. I am intrusted with the
government of a land of only slaves; who have no more love, nor are
they capable of any, for me, than the herbs of the ground have. I am to
render an account to my masters of their labours; they work by force,
and would not stir a step without it, or the fear of correction; for
which reason the rod must be ever held over them; and though I seldom
let it fall, when I do the suffering of one is too long remembered to
permit others quickly to subject themselves to the like punishment: and
this method I judged to be the most mild, as the death or sufferings of
one but seldom, must, though ever so severe, be milder than the frequent
execution of numbers. And as to my appearing severe to them, my post
required it; for mercy to slaves being interpreted into fear, arms them
with violence against you."

I could not gainsay this, especially as he told me he was glad that I
had freed them all: "For no man," says he, "but if he were to choose,
would rather reign by love (which he may in a free country, but it is
impracticable in one of slaves) than by fear, which alone will keep the
latter in subjection."

I asked him whether, as he knew the nature of the country, and the
business of the governor, he could become faithful to my master
Georigetti. He told me he had ever been faithful to his masters the
zaps, and would till he was sure (without suspecting in the least my
veracity) all was true that I was pleased to tell him; for nothing could
satisfy his conscience but being an eye-witness of it, and then being
discharged from any further capacity of serving them in an open way, he
should be free to choose his own master; of all whom, Georigetti should
to him be most preferable; but begged me not to interpret his desire
of retaining fidelity to his old masters till he could no longer serve
them, into an implication of assisting them by either open or concealed
practices; for, wherever he engaged, he would be true to the utmost.

At the end of six days (for I travelled on foot with them) we arrived
at the governor's palace, which we found without a guard, and all the
slaves he had sent before him at liberty; so I ordered my men to supply
the usual guard, and took my lodging in the governor's apartment.

As Gadsi (for that was the governor's name) was not confined, or any of
his friends, he came into my apartment, and told me since he had found
all things answered my report, if I pleased, he would quit the palace to
me, and everything belonging to the government. I told him he said well.
He did so, taking with him only some few things, his own property. So
soon as he was without the territory of the palace, I sent for him and
his friends back again. He could not help being dejected at his return,
fearing some mischief. "Gadsi," says I, "this palace and this country,
which I now hold for my master Georigetti, I deliver in custody to
you as his governor; and now charge you to make acknowledgment of your
fidelity to him." Then taking it from him in terms of my own proposing,
I delivered him the regalia, of his government, charging him to maintain
freedom: "But," says I, "let no man eat who will not work, as the
country and the produce are the king's."

I then summoned an assembly of the people, and sent notice to all the
miners to attend me. I told them all that the king desired of them was
to make themselves happy: "And as the mines at present," says I, "are
the only employment of this country, I would have it agreed by your own
consent--for I will force nothing upon you--that every man amongst you,
from sixteen to sixty, shall work every third week at the mines and
other duties of the government; and two weeks out of three shall be your
own to provide in for your families: and if I live to come back again,
you shall each man have so much land of his own as shall be sufficient
for his family; and I will make it my business to see for seeds to
improve it with. And this week's work in three, and if afterwards it can
be done with less in four, shall be an acknowledgment to the king for
his bounty to you. Do you agree to this?" They all, with one voice,
cried out, "We do!"--"Then," says I, "agree amongst yourselves, and
part into proper divisions for carrying on the work; that is, into four
parts, one for each sort of metal; and then again, each of those four
into three parts; and on every seventh day in the morning, let those who
are to begin meet those who are leaving off work; so that there be clear
six days' work, and one of going and returning. Do you all agree to
this?"--All cried, "We do!"--"Then," says I, "whoever neglects his
duty, unless through sickness, or by leave of the governor, shall work
a double week. Do you agree to this?"--"We do!"--"Then all matters of
difference between you shall be decided by the governor; and in case
of any injury or injustice, or wrong judgment in the governor, by
Georigetti. Do you agree?"--"We do!"--"Then," says I, "agree upon ten
men, two for the natives, and two for each mineral work, to send with me
to Brandleguarp, to petition Georigetti to confirm these laws, till you
shall make others yourselves, and to acknowledge his sovereignty. Do you
agree?"--"We do!"

I then told them that as those who had been slaves were now free,
they might, if they pleased, return home; but as I should make it my
endeavour to provide so well for them in all the comforts of life, I
believed most of them would be of opinion their interests would keep
them where they were. And, above all things, recommending a hearty
union between the new freemen and the natives, and to marry amongst each
other, and to continue in love amongst themselves, and duty to the king
and his governor; and promising speedily to return and settle what was
wanting, I dismissed the assembly and set out for Brandleguarp with
the ten deputies; but I left Lasmeel behind with the governor, and two
servants with him, to give me immediate notice in case any disturbance
should happen in my absence.

[Illustration: 5264]

[Illustration: 0265]



CHAPTER XXI.

_Peter arrives with the deputies--Presents them to the king--They
return--A colony agreed to be sent thither--Nas gig made
governor--Manner of choosing the colony--A flight-race, and the intent
of it--Walsi wins the prize, and is found to be a gawry._


AS we alighted at the palace late at night, I kept the deputies with me
till next morning, when I went to the king, desiring them to stay in my
apartment till I had received his majesty's orders for their admission.

The king was but just up when I came in; and seeing me, embraced me,
saying: "Dear father, I am glad to meet you again alive; your stay has
given me the utmost perplexity; and could I have prevailed with any of
my servants to have followed you, I had sent before this time to have
known what was become of you."

I told his majesty, the greatest pleasure of my life consisted in the
knowledge of his majesty's esteem for me; and he might depend upon it,
I would take care of myself from a double motive whilst I was in his
dominions; the one, from the natural obligation of my own preservation,
and the other, equally compulsive, of continuing serviceable to his
majesty, till I had made him more famous than his ancestor, the great
Begsurbeck.

I told his majesty, as a small token of my duty and affection to him, I
was come to make him a tender of the additional title of King of Mount
Alkoe.--"Father," says he, "we shall never be able to get a sufficient
number of my subjects to go thither; for though your safe return may be
some encouragement, yet whilst their old apprehensions subsist (and I
know not what will alter them) we can do no good; and indeed were they
free to go, and under no suspicion of danger, it would cost abundance of
men to conquer Mount Alkoe."

"Great sir," said I, "you mistake me: I told you I came to make you
a tender of it; I have proclaimed you king there, and freedom to the
people; I have held an assembly of the kingdom, placed a governor, taken
the engagement of himself and subjects to you, settled laws amongst them
for your benefit, the full third part of all their labour; have brought
ten deputies, two from each denomination of people among them; and they
only wait your command to be admitted, to beg your acceptance of their
submission, and pray your royal protection."

"Father," says the king, "you amaze me! but as it is your doing, let
them come in."

The deputies being received, and heard by Maleck, their interpreter,
very graciously, the king told them, in a very favourable speech, that
whatever his father had done, or should do, they might accept as done by
himself; and commanded them to remind the governor, for whom he had the
highest esteem, to observe the laws, without the least deviation, till
his father should make such further additions as were consistent with
his own honour and their future freedom; and having feasted them in
a most magnificent manner, they returned, highly satisfied with the
honours they had received.

This transaction being immediately noised abroad, all the colambs came
themselves; and the great cities, by their deputies, sent his majesty
their compliments upon the occasion; and there was nothing but mirth and
rejoicing throughout the whole kingdom. And those who had refused going
with me, as Maleck told me, hung their heads for shame and sorrow that
they had missed the opportunity of bearing a part in the expedition.

I demonstrated to the king that the only way to preserve that kingdom
was to settle a large colony on the plains, between the mountain and the
sea, to intercept clandestine trade, and make a stand against any force
that might be sent from the Little Lands to recover the mines. And I
promised to be present at the settlement, and an assistant in it.

Most of the colambs, as I said, being at court upon this complimentary
affair, the king summoned them for their advice on my proposals, and
told them he had ordered me to lay before them my thoughts on the
affairs of that kingdom; and after many compliments and encomiums had
passed on me, I told them the necessity of the colony, the commodity
that would arise from it, how I intended to manage it, and what prospect
I had of introducing amongst them several extraordinary conveniences
they had never before had.

The colambs, who, for want of practice this way, knew but little of the
matter, thinking, nevertheless, that in the general turn of things they
must somehow come in for a share, approved of all I said. I desired them
then to settle out of what part of the people, and how to be nominated,
such choice of the colony as should be made for the new settlement; but
found them much at a loss to fix on any method of doing it. So I told
them I believed it would be the best way to issue an order for such as
would willingly go, to repair to a particular rendezvous; and in case
sufficient should not appear voluntarily, to issue another order that
the colambs, out of their several districts, should complete the number,
so as to make a body of 12,000 men of arms, besides women and children;
and that such a territory should be allotted to each, with so much
wood-grounds, in common to all, as would suffice for their subsistence;
all which passed the vote.

I then told them that this large people must have a head, or governor,
to keep them to their duties, and to determine matters of property, and
all disputes amongst them. Here they one and all nominated me; but I
told them I apprehended I could be more useful other ways, having too
many things in my head for the general good, to confine myself to
any particular province; but if they would excuse me in presuming to
recommend a person, it should be Nasgig. And immediately Nasgig being
sent for, and accepting it, they conferred it upon him.

All things, as I judged, went on in so smooth a way, in reference to
the new colony, that I was preparing, with the assistance of the proper
officer, expresses to be sent with the king's gripsacks into the
several provinces, with notice of these orders, and an appointment for a
rendezvous. But while this was doing, abundance of people came crowding
about me to be informed whether I thought it safe for them to go; and
I believe I had fully satisfied all their scruples, when by some
management of the ragans, who, having so long declared Mount Alkoe to
be inhabited by Mindrack, did not care the people should all of a sudden
find out they had deceived them, there was a report ran current, that
though I and my bearers, who were all Mount Alkoe men, returned safe,
yet if any of the Brandleguarpines had gone, they would never have come
back again. This rumour coming to my ears, and fearing whitherto it
might grow, I had no small prospect of a disappointment, and I thereupon
stopped issuing the orders till I had considered what farther to do in
the affair. At length, being persuaded I had already satisfied abundance
of their scruples, and in order to dissipate the doubts of others, and
to familiarise them in some measure to the country and people of Mount
Alkoe, I proposed a prize to be flown for, and gave notice of it for six
days all about the country, both to those of Mount Alkoe, and those of
Sass Doorpt Swangeanti, that whoever, except those who were with me
in the late expedition, should make the most speedy flight to the
governor's of Mount Alkoe, to carry a message and bring me an answer
from Lasmeel, should have one of my pistols, with a quantity of powder,
and so many balls; and the person who should be second, should have
a cutlass and belt. The time being fixed, very few had entered in the
first two or three days; but on the third day came several over from
Alkoe to enter, which the Brandleguarpines seeing, and having equal
inclination to the prize, after half a dozen of them had entered on the
fourth morning, before noon on the fifth I had near sixty of them on my
list, besides the Alkoe men, making in all about one hundred.

The time of starting was fixed for the sixth morning, from off the rock
on the back-side of the palace, upon my firing a pistol.

This unusual diversion occasioned a prodigious confluence of spectators;
for scarce a person in Brandleguarp, except those who were either too
young or too old for flight, but were upon one or other of the rocks;
even the king himself and all his court were there, with infinite
numbers from all distant parts.

I had despatched a letter by one of my old bearers to Lasmeel some days
before, to inform him of it, that he might get two letters ready wrote,
one to deliver to the first, and another to the second messenger, but
not to take farther notice of the rest. Now, my flight-race being for
the equal benefit of both the kingdoms, it happened, as I was in hopes
it would, that so many of the Mount Alkoans coming over to me to be
entered, and staying with me till the flight began, and such vast
numbers of persons meeting of both nations upon the Black Mountain, to
see them go and return, and several of the Swangeantines going, out
of bravado, quite through with the flyers; the intercourse of the two
nations was that day so great, and the discourse they had with
the natives and miners so stripped the Swangeantines of their old
apprehensions of danger from Mount Alkoe, that in three days after
the whole dread of the place was vanished, and he would then have been
thought mad who had attempted to revive it.

The time being come, I set my flyers in a row on the outer edge of the
rock; and having given notice that no one should presume to rise till
the flyers were on the graundee, and at such a distance, I then let the
flyers know I should soon give fire; which I had no sooner done but down
they all dropped as one man, as it were, headlong from the edge of the
mountain, and presently the whole field were after them. They skimmed
with incredible swiftness across the face of the plain, between the rock
and the mountain; the force of which descent swung them as it were up
the mountain's side in an almost upright posture, till seeming to sweep
the edge of the mountain with their bellies, they slid over its surface
till they were lost in the body of the Swangean, our rocks echoing the
shouts of the mountaineers. I fired my pistol, by my watch, at nine
o'clock in the morning, but had no occasion to inquire when it was
thought they would return, for every one was passing his opinion upon
it. Some said it could not be till midnight, or very near it; and
others, that it would be almost next morning. However, we went to
dinner, and coming again about six o'clock by my watch, I was told
by the people on the rock, as the general opinion (for it was then
topfull), that they could not yet be expected for a long time; and the
major part concluded they could not be half-way home yet; when, on a
sudden, we heard a prodigious shout from the mountain, which growing
nearer and nearer to us, and louder and louder, in a few moments came
a slim young fellow, and nimbly alighting on the rock, tripped briskly
forward, as not being able to stop himself at once from the violence of
the force he came with, and delivered me a letter from Lasmeel as I was
sitting in my chair. I gave him joy of the prize, and ordered him to
come to my apartment so soon as I got home, and he should have it. I
then asked him where he had left the other flyers; he told me he knew
nothing of them since he came past the forges in his return; for there
he met them going to Lasmeel.--"Why that," says I, "must be a great way
on this side the governor's." He told me about an hour's flight. I then
told him, as he must be strained with so hard a flight, it would be
better if he lay down, and called on me in the morning. He thanked me,
and after he had told me his name was Walsi, he said he would take my
advice, and springing up as light as air, went off, the rock being
quite thronged with those who had followed from the mountain to see the
victor.

When Walsi came in, it was just seven o'clock by my watch; so that,
according to the best computation by miles I could make from their
descriptions of things, I judged he had flown at little more or less
than at the rate of a mile a minute.

I stayed till near nine o'clock upon the rock, where it being cold and
the time tedious, I was taking Quilly home with me, and designed that
Maleck should wait for the coming of the second; but hearing again a
shout from the mountain I resolved to see the second come in myself. The
noise increasing, I presently saw the whole air full of people very near
me, for I had retired near two hundred paces from the edge of the rock
to give room to the flyers to alight, and expected nothing less than to
be borne down by them; when I spied two competitors, one just over the
back of the other, the uppermost bearing down upon the other's graundee,
their heads being just equal; so that the under man perceiving it
impossible to sink lower for the rock, or to mount higher for the man
above him, and as darting side-ways would lose time, and fearing to
brush his belly against the rock, he slackened, just to job up his head
in his antagonist's stomach; which giving the upper man a smart check
with the pain, and the under one striking at that instant one bold
stroke with his graundee, he fell just with his head at my feet, and the
other man upon him, with his head in the under man's neck.

Thus they lay for a considerable time, breathless and motionless, save
the working of their lungs, and heaving of their breasts; when each
asked me if he was not the first, and the under man giving me a letter,
I told them "No, Walsi had been in almost two hours ago." They both said
it was impossible; they were sure no glumm in the Doorpt could outfly
either of them. I ordered them both to call on me in the morning, and
I would see they should have right done to their pretensions. The under
man had but just told me his name was Naggitt, when another arrived,
who, seeing Naggitt before him, told me he was sure he was second; but
on seeing the other also he gave it up.

I would stay no longer, it being now so late; but the next morning I was
informed that all the rest had stopped at the mountain but two, who were
obliged to give out before, being overstrained, and unable to hold it.

The next morning Walsi was the first at my apartment, when I happened to
be with the king; and speaking of his business to Quilly, he ordered
him to stay in my gallery till I came back; and Quilly presently after
seeing Youwarkee, told her the victor at the flight-race was waiting for
me in the gallery. Youwarkee, who had great curiosity to see him, having
heard how long he came in before the rest, stepped into the gallery,
and taking a turn or two there, fell into discourse with him about his
flight. And as women are very inquisitive, she distinguished, by the
flyer's answers, speech, shape, and manner of address, that it was
certainly a gawry she was talking with; though she had endeavoured to
disguise herself by rolling in her hair, and tying it round her head
with a broad chaplet, like a man; and by the thinness of her body, and
flatness of her breasts, might fairly enough have passed for one, to
a less penetrating eye than Youwarkee's. But Youwarkee putting some
questions to her, and saying she was more like a gawry than a glumm,
she put the poor girl--for so it was--to the blush, and at last she
confessed the deceit; but upon her knees begged Youwarkee not to mention
it, for it would be her undoing.

This confession gave Youwarkee a fair opportunity of asking how she came
to be an adventurer for this sort of prize. The girl, finding there was
no remedy, frankly confessed she had a strong affection for a glumboss,
who was a very stout glumm, she said, but somewhat too corpulent for
speedy flight; who ever since the prize had been proposed, could rest
neither night nor day, to think he was not so well qualified to put
in for it as others, especially one Naggitt, who he well knew made his
addresses to her, and also was an adventurer. "Had it been a matter of
strength, valour, or manhood," says he, "I had had the best of chances
for it; but to be under a natural incapacity of obtaining so glorious a
prize, as even the king himself is not master of such another, I cannot
bear it." She then said he had told her he was resolved to give in his
name and do his utmost, though he died in the flight. "What!" said he,
"shall I see Naggitt run away with it, and perhaps with you too, when he
has that to lay at your feet which no glumm else can boast of? No; I'll
overcome, or never come home without it!"--"I must confess, madam," says
Walsi, "as I knew his high spirit could never bear to be vanquished,
I was afraid he would be as good as his word, and come to some unlucky
end; and told him that though he need not have feared being conqueror in
anything else, had it been proposed, yet in flight there were so many,
half glumms as they were, who from their effeminate make and size, and
little value for anything else, would certainly be in before him; that
it was unworthy of a thorough glumm to contend with them for what could
be obtained only by those who had no right to or share in anything more
excellent; and that he must therefore not think of more than his fatigue
for his pains. But as he had set his heart so much upon it, I would
enter, and try to get it for him, as from my size and make, I believed
few would have a better chance for it than myself. And, thanks to
Collwar, madam," says she, "I hope to make him easy in it, if you will
but please to conceal your knowledge of who and what I am."

Youwarkee was mightily pleased with her story, and promised she would;
but engaged her to come again to her apartment so soon as she was
possessed of the prize.

When I returned, hearing Walsi waited for me, I called him in, read the
letter he brought, and finding it Lasmeel's, I looked over my list for
Walsi's name, for I set them all down as they entered; and finding it
the very last name of all, and that it was entered but on the morning
the race was flown: "So," says I, "Walsi, I find the last at entering is
the first at returning; but I see you have been there, by what Lasmeel
has sent me; though there were some last night who questioned it, by
your so speedy return. Here," says I, "take the prize, and see they are
only used in the service of your country;" and then I dismissed her.

My two competitors appeared next for the cutlass, and had each of them
many arguments to prevail with me in favour of him; but I told them I
must do justice, and that though the difference was so small between
them, yet certainly Naggitt was the nearest me at the time they
both ceased flight, his face lying on my foot; so that as they both
complained of foul play, and were therefore equal in that respect,
Naggitt in justice must have it. And I gave it him with these words,
however: "Take it, Naggitt, as certainly yours by the law of the race,
but with a diffidence in myself who best deserves it."

I own I pitied the other man's case very much, as I should Naggitt's,
had the other won it; but seeing the other turning away, and hearing him
say, "But by half a head; when I had strove so hard!" as in a sort of
dejection, I told them they were both brave glumms, and of intrepid
resolution; and gave him also one, with the like instruction as to
Walsi.

Walsi went from me, as she had promised, to Youwarkee, who wanted more
discourse with her; for in an affair of love her gentle heart could
have dwelt all day upon the repetition of any circumstances which would
create delight in the enamoured. Walsi sat on thorns, wanting to be
gone; but Youwarkee asking question upon question, Walsi got up and
begged she would excuse her, she would come and stay at any other time.
"But," says she, "madam, when the man one loves is in pain--for I am
sure he is on the rack for fear of a discovery, till he sees me--if you
ever loved yourself, you can't blame me for pressing to relieve him."

When she was gone, Youwarkee finding me alone, was so full of Walsi's
adventure she could not be silent; but after twenty roundabout speeches
and promises that I was to make, not to be angry with anybody, or undo
anything I had done that day, and I know not what, out came the story. I
was prodigiously pleased with it, and wished I had taken more notice
of her. Says Youwarkee, "I endeavoured to keep her till you had done,
that you might have seen her."--"And why did not you?" says I.--"My
dear," says Youwarkee, "had you seen the poor creature's uneasiness
till she got off with it, yourself could not have had the heart to have
deferred that pleasure you would have perceived she expected when she
came home; nor could you in conscience have detained her."

[Illustration: 0280]



CHAPTER XXII.

_The race reconciles the two kingdoms--The colony proceeds--Builds a
city--Peter views the country at a distance--Hears of a prophecy of
the King of Norbon's daughter Stygee--Goes thither--Kills the king's
nephew--Fulfils the prophecy by engaging Stygee to Georigetti--Returns._


THIS race, notwithstanding all that the ragans could say to keep up
their credit, and to prevent the people's perceiving what fools they
had made of them, had so good and sudden an effect on the people's
prejudices, that upon issuing the first proclamation, there was no
occasion for the second; for at least twenty-five thousand men appeared
voluntarily at the rendezvous of the old slaves, whose masters, though
they were declared free, had used divers devices to oppress them, and
render even their freedom a sort of slavery, besides women and children;
so that we had now only to pick and choose those who would be likeliest
to be of service to the new colony.

Nasgig and I differed now about the choice of persons. He, as a soldier,
was for taking mostly single young men, and I for taking whole families,
though some were either too old or too young for war. And upon farther
consideration he agreed with me; for I told him young men would leave
a father, mother, or mistress, behind them, which would either cause a
hankering after home, and consequently the bad example of desertion,
or else create an uneasy spirit, and perhaps a general distaste to the
settlement. So we chose those whole families where they offered, which
had the most young men in them, first; then others in like order; after
that, man by man, asking them severally if any woman they liked would go
with them, and if so, we took her, till we had about thirteen thousand
fighting men, besides old men, women, and children; and then, marching
by the palace, the king ordered ten days' stores for every mouth, and
with this we took our flight; but as I was always fearful of a concourse
in the air, Nasgig led them, and I brought up the rear.

Besides the above number of people, I believe we could not have less
than ten thousand volunteers to the Black Mountain; some to take leave
of their friends, and others out of curiosity, to see our flight. I took
three pieces of cannon with me, and proper stores.

Our first stage, after a short halt on the Black Mountain, was to the
governor's palace, where Gadsi received us with great respect. I told
him my errand, which he approved: "For," says he, "countryman, it is now
as much my interest to keep my old masters out, as ever it was to serve
them when in; and you have taken the only method in the world to do it
effectually." I consulted him where I should fix my colony; and, by his
advice, fixed it on this side the wood, with some scattering habitations
behind the wood, as watch-houses, to give notice of an enemy, having the
wood for shelter, before they could reach the town, and, at the worst,
the town for a retreat.

I found by Gadsi, that the ships from the Little Lands were soon
expected, for that he said the zaps knew nothing yet of the change of
government, nor could, till the ships returned. He asked me, as there
was now a good lading, whether I thought fit to let them have it upon
proper terms. I told him I would not hinder their having the metals, or
endeavour to stop their trade in the least, but should be glad to treat
with them about it myself.

I gave the forgemen descriptions for making shovels, spades, pick-axes,
hammers, and abundance of other iron implements I should want in the
building the new town: all which we got ready and carried with us. We
then took flight, and alighted on the spot of our intended city; and
having viewed the ground some miles each way, we drew the outlines, and
set a great number of hands to cutting down trees, digging holes, and
making trenches for the foundations. In short, we were all hands at it,
and the women fetched the provisions; but I was obliged to show them
every single step they were to take, towards the new erections; and, I
must say, it was with great pleasure I did it, they seldom wanting to be
told twice, having as quick an apprehension of what they heard or saw,
as any people I had ever met with.

The whole city, according to our plan, was to consist of several long
straight streets, parallel to each other, with gardens backwards each
way, and traverse-passages at proper distances, to cross each street,
from one to the other, quite through the whole city.

While this work was in hand, I took a progress to view the other country
Maleck had told me of. We had not taken a very long flight, before we
saw at a distance several persons of that country travelling to Mount
Alkoe for metals. I had a great mind to have some talk with them about
their kingdom, and ordered my bearers to go to them; they told me they
durst not, for one of them would kill ten men. I did not choose to force
them to it, for fear of some mischief; but observing which way they
came, and that they came in several small bodies, of six or eight
together, and that there was a little wood and some bushes between me
and them, I ordered my bearers to sink beneath the trees out of their
sight, and to ground me just at the foot of the wood; for I resolved to
know something more of them before we parted.

I lay perdue till they arrived within sixty paces of me; then asking
Maleck if he knew their language, and he telling me he did, having often
conversed with them at the mines, I bid him greet them, and tell them I
was a friend, and be sure to stand by me. There were seven of them, and
many more at different distances. I showed myself, and Maleck spoke to
them, when two or three of the hindermost ran quite away; one stood and
looked very surly, but the rest, who had stood with him, turning to run,
I bid Maleck tell him if he did not call them back I would kill them. He
that stood then called to them, but they mending their pace upon it, I
let fly, and shot one in the shoulder, who dropping, I was afraid I had
killed him. I then went up to the other, who had not stirred even at the
report of the gun, seeming quite terrified. I took him by the hand and
kissed it, which made him recover himself a little, and he took mine and
kissed it.

I bid Maleck tell him I was a great traveller, and only wanted to talk
with him; but seeing the man I had shot stir, I went to him, and told
him I was sorry I had hurt him, which I should not have attempted had he
not shown a mistrust of me by running away, for I could not bear that:
this I said to keep the other with me. I saw I had hurt his shoulder,
but being at a great distance, the ball had not entered the blade-bone,
but stopping there, had fallen out; so tying my handkerchief over it, I
told him I hoped it would soon be well.

I inquired into their country, its name, the intent of their journey
this way, their trades, the fruits, birds, and beasts of the country.

The man I had shot, I found, was in pain, which gave me no little
concern; so I chiefly applied myself to the other, who told me the name
of his country was Norbon, a large kingdom, and very populous, he said,
in some parts of it, and was governed by Oniwheske, an old and good
king. "He has only one daughter," says he, "named Stygee; so that I am
afraid when he dies it will go to a good-for-nothing nephew of his, a
desperate debauched man, who will probably ruin us, and destroy that
kingdom which has been in the Oniwheske family these fifteen hundred
years."--"Won't his daughter have the kingdom," says I, "after his death,
or her children?"--"Children," says he, "no, that's the pity; all would
be well if she had but children, and the state continue fifteen hundred
years longer in the same good family."--"How is it possible for any one
to know that?" says I. "You may know how long it has, but how long it
will last, is mere guess-work."--"No," says he, "this very time, and the
present circumstances of our kingdom, were foretold at the birth of the
first king we ever had, who was of the present royal family."--"How so?"
says I.--"Why," says he, "before we had any king, we had a very good old
man, who lived retired in a cave by the sea; and to him everybody under
their difficulties repaired for advice. This old man happening to be
very ill, everybody was under great affliction for fear they should lose
him; when flocking to his assistance, he told them they need not fear
his death till the birth of a king who should reign fifteen hundred
years. At hearing this all persons then present apprehended that his
disorder had turned his brain; but he persisted in it, and recovered.

"After a few years, a great number of persons being about him, he told
them he must now depart, for that their king was born, and pointed to
a sucking child a poor woman had then in her arms. It caused a great
wonder in his audience at the thoughts of that poor child ever becoming
a king; but he told them it was so decreed, and farther, that as he was
to die the next day, if they would gather all together, he would let
them know what was to come in future times.

"When they were met, the woman and child being amongst them, he told
them that child was their king, and that his loins should produce them
a race of kings for fifteen hundred years, during which time they should
be happily governed; but then a female inhabitant of the skies
should claim the dominion, and, together with the kingdom, be utterly
destroyed, unless a messenger from above, with a crown in each hand,
should procure her a male of her own kind; and then the kingdom should
remain for the like number of years to her posterity. Now," says he,
"the time will expire very soon, and as no one has been, or it is
believed will ever come, with two such crowns, the princess Stygee,
though she undoubtedly will try for it, has little hopes of succeeding
her father; for her cousin Felbamko pretends, as no woman ever reigned
with us, he is the right heir, and will have the kingdom."--"Pray," says
I, "what do you mean by an inhabitant of the air?"--"Oh," says he,
"she flies."--"And do most of your country folks fly?" says I; "for
I perceive you don't."--"No," says he, "no one but the princess
Stygee."--"How comes that about?" says I.--"Her mother, when she was
with child with her," says he, "being one day in a wood near the palace,
and having straggled from her company, was attacked by a man with a
graundee, who, not knowing her, clasped her within his graundee, and
would have debauched her; but perceiving her cries had brought some
of her servants to her assistance, he quitted her and went off: this
accident threw her into such a fright, that it was a long time
before she recovered; and then was delivered of a daughter with a
graundee."--"My friend," says I, "your meeting with me will be a very
happy affair for your kingdom. I am the man the princess expects: go
back to the princess and let her and her father know I will be with them
in six days, and establish his dominions in the princess."

The fellow looked at me, thinking I joked, but never offered to stir a
foot. "Why don't you go?" says I. "And for the good news you bear to the
princess, I'll see you shall be made one of the greatest men in Norbon."
The man smiled still, but could not conceive I was in earnest. I asked
him then how long he should be in going to the palace; he said, "Three
days at soonest."--"Deliver but your message right," says I, "and I'll
assure you it shall be the better for you." The man seeing me look
serious, did at length believe me, and promised he would obey me
punctually; but he had not seen how I came to the place he met me at,
for I had ordered my bearers into the wood with my chair before I showed
myself.

He arrived, as I afterwards found, at the palace, the fourth morning
very early; and passing the guard in a great heat, with much ado was
introduced to the king, and discharged himself of my message. His
majesty, giving no credit to him, thought he had been mad; but he
affirming it to be true, and telling the king at what a distance I had
knocked down his companion, and made a great hole in his back, only
holding up a thing I had in my hand, which made a great noise, Oniwheske
ordered his daughter to come before him, who having herself heard the
man's report, and being very willing to believe it, with the king's
leave, desired that the messenger might be detained till the appointed
day, and taken care of; and that preparation should be made for the
reception of the stranger, in case it should be true.

The noise of my coming, and my errand, excited every one's curiosity
to see me arrive; and the day being come, I hovered over the city a
considerable time, to be sure of grounding right. The king and his
daughter, on the rumour of my appearing, came forth to view me and
receive me at my alighting. The people were collected into a large
square, on one side of the palace, and standing in several clusters at
different places, I judged where the king might seem most likely to be,
and ordered my bearers to alight there; but I happened upon the most
unlucky post, as it might have proved, and at the same time the most
lucky I could have found there; for I had scarce raised myself from my
chair, but Felbamko pushing up to me through the throng, and lifting up
a large club he had in his hand, had certainly despatched me, if I had
not at the instant drawn a pistol from my girdle, and shot him dead
upon the spot; insomuch that the club, which was then over my head, fell
gently down on my shoulder.

I did not then know who it was I had killed, but for fear of a fresh
attempt, I drew out another pistol and my cutlass, and inquiring at
which part of the square the king was, I walked directly up to him, he
not as yet knowing what had happened. His majesty and his daughter
met me, and welcomed me into his dominions. I fell at the king's feet,
telling him I brought a message, which I hoped would excuse my entering
his majesty's dominions without the formality of obtaining his leave.

When we came to the palace, the king ordered some refreshments to be
given me and my servants; and then that I should be conducted to the
room of audience.

The report of Felbamko's death had reached the palace before us, and
that it was by my hand; this greatly surprised the whole court, but
proved agreeable news to Stygee.

At my entrance into the room of audience, the king was sitting at the
farther end of it against the wall, with his daughter on his right hand;
and a seat was placed for me at his left, but nearer to the middle
of the room side-ways, on which I was ordered to sit down. There were
abundance of the courtiers present, and above me was a seat ordered for
one of them, who I found afterwards was one of the religious.

His majesty asked me aloud how it happened that the first moment of my
entering his dominions I should dip my hands in blood, and that, too, of
one of his nearest relations.

I then got up to make my answer, but his majesty ordering me to my seat
again, I told him that as it was most certain I knew no one person in
his kingdom, so it could not be supposed I could have an ill design
against any one, especially against that royal blood, into whose hands
I then came to render myself; but the truth was that what I had done
was in preservation of my own life, for that the person slain had rushed
through the crowd upon me with a great club, intending to murder me, and
that whilst the blow was over my head, I killed him in such position,
that by his fall the club rested on my shoulder, but was then too weak
to hurt me.

The king asking if that was the real case, several from the lower end of
the room said they were informed it was, and one in particular said he
saw the transaction, and I had declared it faithfully. "Then," says the
king, "you are acquitted; and, now, what brings you hither? relate your
business."

"Great sir," says I, "it is my peculiar happiness to be appointed by
Providence as the proposer of a marriage for the princess Stygee your
daughter, with a potent neighbouring monarch, having already been
enabled to perform things past belief for his honour. Know then,
great sir, I am a native of the north, and through infinite perils and
hardships at last arrived in the dominions of Georigetti, where I have
given peace to his State by the death of the usurper Harlokin. I have
also just conquered the kingdom of Mount Alkoe for my master, and am
here come to make your daughter an offer of both crowns, and also of all
that is my master's, with his person in marriage."

The old priest then rose, and said: "May it please your majesty, we are
almost right; but what has always staggered me is, how the person should
come, for the messenger to us on this errand is to come from above.
Now this person has not the graundee, and therefore could not come from
thence. As for the rest, I understand the prince from whom he brings
this offer to your daughter has the graundee, and so is a male of her
own kind; and I understand the two kingdoms in his possession to be the
two crowns in the messenger's hands; but, I say, what I stick at is his
coming from above."

"What!" says Stygee, "did not you see him come?"--"No," says he.--"Oh,"
says she, "he came in the air, and was a long time over the city before
he descended."--"That's impossible," says the old priest, "for he is
smooth like us."--"Indeed, sir," says she, "I saw him, and so did most
of the court." The king and nobles then attesting this truth: "Sir,"
says the priest to the king, "it is completed, and your majesty must do
the rest."

"I little expected," says the king, "to see this day; and now, daughter,
as this message was designed for you, you only can answer it. But
still I must say it surpasses my comprehension, that in the decree of
Providence it should be so ordered that the very hand which brings
the accomplishment of what has been so long since foretold us, should,
without design, have first destroyed all that could have rendered the
marriage state uncomfortable to you."

Stygee then declared she submitted to fate and her father's will.

I stayed here a week to view the country and the sea, which I heard was
not far off. Here were many useful beasts for food and burden, fowls
also in plenty, and fish near the sea-coasts, and the people eat flesh,
so that I thought myself amongst mankind again. I made all the remarks
the shortness of the time would allow, and then taking my leave
departed.

I returned to the colony, where I heard that the Little-landers had been
on the coast; but I not being there, or any lading ready, they were gone
away again; however, they had detained two of them. I was pleased with
that, but sorry they were returned empty.

I examined the prisoners, and by giving them liberty and good usage they
settled amongst us; and the next fleet that came, the sailors to a
man were all my own the moment they could get to shore. This, though I
thought it would have spoiled our trade at first, brought the islanders
and me to the following compromise, and upon this occasion. Their ships
having laid on our coasts one whole season for want of hands to carry
them back, I came to an agreement with their commanders (for they were
all willing to return), that such a number of them should be left as
hostages with me till the return of a number of my own men, which I
should lend them to navigate their ships home; and I sent word to the
zaps that as it might be beneficial to us both to keep the trade still
on foot, to prevent the like inconveniences for the future, I would buy
their shipping, paying for them in metals, and agree to furnish them
yearly with such a quantity of my goods at a stated price, and would
send them by my own people; which they approving, the trade went on in
a very agreeable and profitable manner, and we in time built several new
vessels of our own, and employed abundance of hands in the trade, and
had plenty of handicraftsmen of different occupations, each of whom
I obliged to keep three natives under him, to be trained up in his
business.

[Illustration: 5294]

[Illustration: 0295]



CHAPTER XXIII.

_A discourse on marriage between Peter and Georigetti--Peter proposes
Stygee--The king accepts it--Relates his transactions at Norbon--The
marriage is consummated--Account of the marriage-ceremony--Peter goes
to Norbon--Opens a free trade to Mount Alkoe--Gets traders to settle at
Norbon--Convoys cattle to Mount Alkoe._


AT my return to Sass Doorpt Swangeanti, I went directly to the king,
and giving him an account of the settlement, and my proceedings thereon,
he told me his whole kingdom would not be an equivalent for the services
I had done him. I begged of him to look on them in no other light than
as flowing from my duty; but if, when I should be no more, he or his
children would be gracious to my family, it was all I desired.

"This, father," says the king, "I can undertake for myself; but who's to
come after me, nobody knows, for I shall never marry. No! Yaccom-bourse
has given me a surfeit of womankind; and unless the states will settle
the kingdom on you, to which I will consent, it will probably be torn to
pieces again by different competitors, for I am the last of the line of
Begsurbeck, and of all the blood-royals; and indeed who is so proper
to maintain it flourishing as he who has brought it to the present
perfection?"

"Great sir," says I, "my ambition rises no higher than to abound in good
deeds whilst I live, and to perfect my children in the same principle;
and this, I hope, will entitle them to a support when I am gone. But,"
says I, "why is your majesty so averse from marriage, merely on account
of a woman you could not expect to be true to you?"--"Not expect it!"
says he; "what stronger tie upon earth could she have had to be true
than my affection, and all that my kingdom could afford her?"--"Weak
things all, sir," says I.--"Why, what could she have had?" said he,
in some warmth.--"Honour, sir," says I, "and virtue, both which she
abandoned to become yours; and those once lost, how could you expect her
to be true?"--"You are too hard for me, father," says he; "but they
are all alike, and I don't believe there's a grain of honour in any of
them."--"In any of them like Yaccombourse, I admit, sir," says I; "but
think not so of others, for no part of our species abounds more with
it, or is more tender of it, than a good woman; and take my word for it,
sir, there is more real sincerity in an ordinary wife than in the most
extraordinary mistress. We are all biassed naturally by interest, and
as there can be but one real interest between the man and wife, so the
interest of a mistress is, and ever will be, to accommodate herself;
for 'tis all one to her with whom she engages, so she can raise but
the market by a change. Now if your majesty could find an agreeable and
virtuous wife, one deserving of your royal person and bed, and perhaps
with a kingdom for her dowry, a partner fit to share your cares as well
as glory, would it not be a great pleasure to you to be possessed of'
such a mate, and to see heirs arising under your joint tuition, to
convey down your royal blood to the latest posterity? Would not this, I
say, be a grateful reflection to you in your declining years?"

"Truly, father," says the king, "as you have painted it, the prospect
could not fail to please, and under the circumstances you have put it,
it would meet my approbation; but where is such a thing as a woman of
this character to be found? I fear only in the imagination."

"Sir," says I, after a seeming muse for some time, "what should you
think of Oniwheske, the king of Norbon's daughter? he has but that one
child, I hear."--"Dear father, have done," says his majesty; "to what
purpose should you mention her? We but barely know that there is such
a State, we have never had any intercourse; and, besides, as you say he
has but one child, can you suppose she will ever marry, to leave so fine
a kingdom, and live here?"--"But, sir," says I, "now we are supposing,
suppose she should, with her father's consent, be willing to marry
you, would you have her for your queen?"--"To make any doubt of that,
father," says he, "is almost to suppose me a fool."--"Then, sir," says
I, "her father has consented, and she too; and if I durst have presumed
so far, or had known your mind sooner, she would I believe have ventured
with me to have become yours, but you might have slighted her, and
crowned heads are not to be trifled with; but since you are pleased
to show your approbation of it, I can assure you, sir, her person will
yield to none in your majesty's dominions; for, sir, I have been there,
and have seen her, and she is your own, and her kingdom too, upon
demand."

"Father," says the king, looking earnestly at me, "I have been
frequently, since I knew you first, in doubt of my own existence. My
life seems a dream to me; for if existence is to be judged of by one's
faculties only, I have been in such a delusion of them ever since, that
as I find myself unable to judge with certainty of any other thing, so
I am subject to doubt whether I really exist. Are these things possible
that you tell me, father?"

I then told him the whole affair, and advised him by all means to accept
the offer, and marry the princess out of hand.

His majesty, when I had brought him thoroughly to believe me, was
as eager to consummate the marriage, as I was to have him; but then,
whether he should go to her, or she come to him, was the question.
I told him it was a thing unusual for a sovereign to quit his own
dominions for a wife; but would advise an embassy to her father, with
notice that his majesty would meet and espouse her on the frontiers of
the two kingdoms.

The ambassadors returning with an appointment of time and place, it was
not above a month before I had settled Stygee on the thrones of Sass
Doorpt Swangeanti and Mount Alkoe, with the reversion of the kingdom of
Norbon, without a competitor.

I shall here give you an account of the marriage ceremony. The king
being arrived on the borders, Stygee, who had waited but a few hours
at the last village in Norbon, advanced to his majesty on the very
division, as they called it, of the two kingdoms, a line being drawn to
express the bounds of each. The king and Stygee having talked apart from
the company a little space, each standing hand in hand, on their own
respective ground, the chief ragan advanced, and began the ceremony.

He first asked each party aloud, if he and she were willing to be united
in body and affections, and would engage to continue so their whole
lives to which each party having answered aloud in the affirmative,
"Show me then a token!" says he; and immediately each expanding the
right side of their graundees, laid it upon the other's left side, so
that they appeared then but as one body, standing hand in hand, encased
round with the graundee. The ragan then having descanted upon the duties
of marriage, concluded the ceremony with wishing them as fruitful as
Perigen and Philella. So soon as it was over, and the gripsacks and
voices had finished an epithalamium, the bride and bridegroom taking
wing, were conducted to Brandleguarp, amidst the acclamations of an
infinite number of Georigetti's subjects.

The king had made vast preparations for the reception of the princess
Stygee; and nothing was to be heard or seen but feastings and rejoicing
for many days; and his majesty afterwards assured me of his entire
satisfaction in my choice of his bride, without whom he confessed,
that notwithstanding the many other blessings I had procured him, his
happiness must have been incomplete.

Intending another flight to Norbon, I was charged with the king and
queen's compliments to Oniwheske; which having executed, I opened a free
trade to Mount Alkoe; and hearing that small vessels came frequently on
the Norbonese coast, to carry off the iron and other metal from thence
unwrought, and paid part of their return in wrought metals, I ordered
some of the next that came to be stopped and brought to me; and the
day before I had fixed for my departure, notice was sent that twelve of
those traders were stopped, and in custody at the sea-side. I longed to
see them, but then considering that it would take up more time to bring
them to Apsilo the capital, where I was, than I should take in going to
them and returning, I resolved to go and examine them myself.

They told me they traded with small vessels to Norbon for metals, which
they carried home, and wrought great part of it themselves, sending it
to and dispersing it in several islands at a distance; and also sold
the unwrought to several people who carried it they knew not whither
in great ships. They said they kept abundance of hands at work in the
trade. I asked if their artificers wrought it for their own profit,
or their masters'. They told me for masters, themselves being all
slaves.--"And are you all slaves?" says I.--They told me "Yes, all but
one," pointing to him. I then ordered him to be secured and removed; and
told them if they would procure some hands to settle at Norbon and Mount
Alkoe, they should all be made free, have lands assigned them, and have
other privileges, and I did not doubt in time would become the richest
men in the country; for I understood by them they were acquainted with
the use of money. I asked them what other commodities they brought to
Norbon in exchange.

They said clothes for the people, both what they received in exchange
from others who bought their iron, and some of a coarser sort of their
own making. I found in my discourse I had with them, that out of my
eleven men there were persons of four different occupations; so I
promised those who would stay with me their freedoms, good houses, and
other rewards: and sending three hands home with the vessel, and a full
freight, according to the value of the cargo they brought, I ordered
them to engage as many as they could of their countrymen of distinct
trades, to come and settle with me; and to be sure, if they had any
grain, corn, roots, plants, or seeds, usually eaten for food, to bring
all they could get with them, and they should have good returns for
them; and as to those good hands that settled here, they should be
allowed all materials to work for their own profit the first year,
and after that they should also work for themselves, allowing the king
one-tenth of the clear profit. This took so far with them, that it was
with the utmost difficulty I got any of them to carry the ship back, for
fear they should not be able to return.

Before I parted from them, I assigned the eight who were left all proper
conveniences, and recommended them to the king's protection; and I
ordered the owner, then in custody, to be conducted to Mount Alkoe, and
from thence to Brandleguarp; where, treating him kindly and giving him
liberty, I made my proper use of him.

The king having lent me a convoy to conduct my prisoner, and given me a
license for as many cattle of the sorts I chose as I pleased to drive to
Georigetti's dominions, I made them drive a great number of sheep of the
finest wool I ever saw, and very large also; a great number of creatures
not unlike an ass for shape, but with two upright horns and short ears,
which gave abundance of rich milk; and also some swine. All these were
drove to, and distributed at my new colony, where I let them remain till
I had provided a proper receptacle for them at Doorpt Swangeanti, near
the woods; when I brought many over the Black Mountain, and distributed
there, with directions how to manage them; and in about seven years'
time we held a little beast-market near Brandle-guarp twice a year,
where the spare cattle were brought up, and preserved in salt till the
next market; for I had some years before made large salt-works near
the sea at Mount Alkoe, which employed abundance of hands, and was now
become a considerable trade.

We had iron, copper, and silver money, which went very current; and had
butter and cheese from the farms near the woods, as plenty as we had the
fruits before, great numbers of families having settled there; and there
was scarce a family but was of some occupation or other.

By the accounts I received from the mines, from time to time, it was
prodigious to hear what vast quantities of metals were prepared in
one year now, by little above one-third of the hands that were usually
employed in them before; for now the men's ambition was to leave a
good week's work done at their return, for an example to those who were
coming; and the overseers told me they would sing and work with the
greatest delight imaginable, whilst they pleased themselves with telling
one another how they intended to spend the next fourteen days.

[Illustration: 5304]

[Illustration: 0305]



CHAPTER XXIV.

_Peter looking over his books finds he has got a Latin Bible--Sets
about a translation--Teaches some of the ragans letters--Sets up a paper
manufacture--Makes the ragans read the Bible--The ragans teach others to
read and write--A fair kept at the Black Mountain--Peter's reflection on
the Swangeantines._


ALL things being now so settled that they would go on of themselves,
and having no further direct view in my head, I spent my time with
my wife; and looking over my books one day to divert myself, with the
greatest joy imaginable I found that the Bible I had taken to be in the
Portuguese tongue was a Latin one. It was many years since I had
thought of that language; but on this occasion, by force of memory and
recollection, and with some attention, consideration, and practice, I
found it return to me in so plentiful a manner that I fully resolved to
translate my Bible into the Swangeantine tongue.

I sent directly for Lasmeel to be my amanuensis, and to work we went
upon the translation.

We began at the creation, and descending to the flood, went on to the
Jewish captivity in Egypt and deliverance by Moses, leaving out the
genealogies and all the Jewish ceremonies and laws, except the Ten
Commandments. I translated the books of Samuel and Kings, down to the
Babylonish captivity. I then translated such parts of the Prophets as
were necessary to introduce the Messiah, and discover Him; the books of
Psalms, Job, and the Proverbs, and with the utmost impatience hasted to
the New Testament. But then considering that when I had done, as only
Lasmeel and myself could read it, in case of our deaths, the translation
must die with us, I chose out six of the junior ragans, and two of the
elder, to learn letters; and in less than twelve months I had brought
them all to read mine and Lasmeel's writings perfectly well.

I instructed these ragans at spare hours, whilst I went on with my
translation; but finding my paper grow low, having had a great supply of
coarse linen, and a sort of calicoes from the isles, in return for our
metals, I set up a manufactory from that, and some gums of the trees,
which we boiled with it to a pulp in iron pans, and beating it to
pieces, made a useful paper which would bear ink tolerably. But I could
find nothing to make ink of, though I sent over all the country to
search for every herb and fruit not commonly used; till at last I found
an herb and flower on it, which, if taken before the flower faded,
would, by boiling thoroughly, become blue; this, by still more boiling
in a copper pan till it was dry and burnt hard to the bottom, in some
measure answered my purpose, and I fixed upon it as the best I could
obtain from all my experiments.

When the ragans were masters of their pens, I set six of them to copy
what Lasmeel had finished, and the other two to teach their brethren;
and in two years' time, by a pretty constant application (for I made
them transcribe it perfectly fair and intelligible), we finished our
translation, and two fair copies.

I then ordered the ragans to read a portion of it to the people
constantly, in the mouch; they, from the novelty of the story, at first
grew so exceeding fond of it, that upon the proper expositions of it I
taught the ragans afterwards to make, they began to apply it seriously
to religious purposes.

My writing ragans were very fond of their knowledge of letters; and
trade and commerce now increasing, which put every one more or less
in want of the same knowledge, they made a great profit of it,
by instructing all who applied to them. This increase of writing
necessarily provided a maintenance for several persons who travelled
to Norbon for quills, and sold them to the Swangeantines at extravagant
rates; till the Norbonese hearing that, brought them themselves to the
foot of the mountain, where the Swangeantines bought them, as they did
several other commodities which one country had and the other wanted,
especially iron wares of almost every denomination: so that the
mountain, being so excessively high, was the barrier; for the
Norbonese finding that difficulty in ascending and descending which the
Swangeantines with their graundees did not, there was a constant market
of buyers and sellers on the Mount Alkoe side of the Black Mountain,
which by degrees grew the general mart of the three kingdoms.

I have often reflected with myself, and have been amazed to think, that
so ingenious and industrious a people as the Swangeantines have since
appeared to be, and who, till I came amongst them, had nothing more than
bare food, and a hole to lie in, in a barren rocky country, and then
seemed to desire only what they had, should in ten years' time be
supplied not only with the conveniences, but superfluities of life; and
that they should then become so fond of them, as rather willingly to
part with life itself than be reduced to the state I found them in.
And I have as often, on this occasion, reflected on the goodness of
Providence, in rendering one part of mankind easy under the absence of
such comforts as others could not rest without; and have made it a great
argument for my assent to well-attested truths above my comprehension.
"For," says I, "to have affirmed, at my first coming, either that these
things could have been made at all, or when done could have been of any
additional benefit to these people, would have been so far beyond their
imaginations, that the reporter of so plain a truth, as they now find
it, would have been looked upon as a madman or an impostor; but
by opening their views by little and little, and showing them the
dependence of one thing upon another, he that should now affirm the
inutility of them, would be observed in a much worse light." And yet,
without any embellishments of art, how did this so great a people live
under the protection of Providence? Let us first view them at a vast
distance from any sort of sustenance, yet from the help of the graundee
that distance was but a step to them. They were forced to inhabit the
rocks, from an utter incapacity of providing shelter elsewhere, having
no tool that would either cut down timber for a habitation, or dig up
the earth for a fence, or materials to make one; but they had a liquor
that would dissolve the rock itself into habitations. They had neither
beast nor fish, for food or burthen; but they had fruits equivalent
to both, of the same relish, and as wholesome, without shedding blood.
Their fruits were dangerous till they had fermented in a boiling heat;
and they had neither the sun, nor any fire, nor the knowledge how to
propagate or continue it. But they had their hot springs always boiling,
without their care or concern. They had neither the skins of beasts, the
original clothing, nor any other artificial covering from the weather;
but they were born with that warm clothing the graundee, which being of
a considerable density, and full of veins flowing with warm blood, not
only defended their flesh from all outward injuries, but was a most
soft, comely, and warm dress to the body. They lived mostly in the dark
rock, having less difference of light with the change of seasons than
other people have; but either by custom or make, more light than what
Providence has sent them in the sweecoe is disagreeable: so that where
little is to be obtained, Providence, by confining the capacity, can
give content with that; and where apparent wants are, we may see, by
these people, how careful Providence is to supply them; for neither the
graundee, the sweecoes, nor their springs, are to be found where those
necessaries can be supplied by other means.

Amongst my other considerations, I have often thought that if I had gone
to the top of the Black Mountains northward of Brandleguarp, in the very
lightest time, I might have seen the sun; but these mountains were so
elevated, that our lightest time was only the gilded glimmering of their
tops, having never seen so much light on them as totally to eclipse all
the stars, of which we had always the same in view, but in different
positions.

[Illustration: 0311]



CHAPTER XXV.

_Peter's children provided for--Youwarkee's death--How the king
and queen spent their time--Peter grows melancholy--Wants to get to
England--Contrives means--Is taken up at sea._


I HAD now been at Brandleguarp ten years, and my children were all
provided for by the king but Dickey, as fast as they were qualified for
employment, and such as were fit for it were married off to the best
alliances in the country; so that I had only to sit down and see
everything I had put my hand to prosper, and not an evil eye in the
three kingdoms cast at me: but about my eleventh or twelfth year, my
wife falling into a lingering disorder, at the end of two years it
carried her off. This was the first real affliction I had suffered for
many years, and so soured my temper, that I became fit for nothing, and
it was painful to me even to think of business.

The king's marriage had produced four children, three sons and a
daughter, which he would frequently tell me were mine.

Old Oniwheske was dead, and the king and queen divided their whole time
equally between Brandleguarp and Apsillo; but he was building a palace
at my new colony, which by this time was grown to a vast city, and was
called Stygena, in compliment to the queen; and this new palace was
designed to receive the court one-third of the year, as it lay almost
at equal distance between both his other palaces. This method, which
his majesty took, at my persuasion, on the death of Oniwheske, though it
went against the grain at first, was now grown so habitual to him, and
he saw his own interest so much in it in the love and esteem it procured
him from the people, that at last he wanted no spur to it.

My melancholy for the death of my wife, which I hoped time would wear
off, rather gained ground upon me; and though I was as much regarded as
ever by the whole court, yet it grew troublesome to me even to be asked
my advice; and it not only surprised those about me, but even myself,
to see the same genius, without any visible natural decay, in so short
a time, from the most sprightly and enterprising, become the most
phlegmatic and inactive.

My longings after my native country, ever since my wife's death,
redoubled upon me, and I had formed several schemes of getting thither;
as first, I had formed a project of going off by the islands, as I had
so many small vessels at command there, and to get into the main ocean
and try my fortune that way; but upon inquiry I found that my vessels
could not get to sea, or elsewhere, but to the zaps' islands, by reason
of the many rocks and sandbanks which would oppose me, unless I went
through the zaps' country, which, in the light they had reason to view
me, I was afraid to do. Then I had thoughts of going from the coast of
Norbon; but that must have been in one of the foreign vessels, and they
coming from a quite different quarter than I must go, in all probability
if I had put to sea any way they were unacquainted with, they having
no compass, we must have perished; for the more I grew by degrees
acquainted with the situation of Doorpt Swangeanti, the stronger were
my conjectures that my nearest continent must be the southern coast of
America; but still it was only conjecture. At length, being tired and
uneasy, I resolved, as I was accustomed to flight, and loved it, I would
take a turn for some days; carry me where it would, I should certainly
light on some land, whence at first I could but come back again. I then
went to see if my chair, board, and ropes, were sound, for I had not
used them for several years past; but I found them all so crazy, I durst
not venture in them, which disappointment put off my journey for some
time. However, as I had still the thought remaining, it put me on
seeking some other method to put it in practice; so I contrived
the poles from which you took me, being a sort of hollow cane the
Swangeantines make their spears of, but exceeding strong and springy,
which, interwoven with small cords, were my seat, and were much lighter
than my chair; and these buoyed me up when your goodness relieved me.
I had taken Mount Alkoe bearers, as I knew I must come to a country
of more light; and I now find, if I had not fallen, I must soon have
reached land, if we could have held out, for we were come too far to
think of returning, without a resting-place: and what will become of my
poor bearers, I dread to think; if they attempted to return, they must
have dropt, for they had complained all the last day and night, and had
shifted very often. If in your history you think fit to carry down the
life of a poor old man any farther, you will as well know what to say of
me as I can tell you; and I hope what I have hitherto said will in some
measure recompense both your expense and labour.

FINIS.




A TABLE OF THE NAMES OF PERSONS AND THINGS MENTIONED IN THE TWO VOLUMES.


_Abb_, a room.

_Apsillo_, capital of Norbon.

_Arco_, a man who committed the first murder.

_Arhoe_, water surrounded with wood.

_Amdrumnstake_, Pendlehamby's colambat.

_Barbarsa_, Georigetti's favourite.

_Barkett_, a husband.

_Barras_, a leathern apron, or flap behind.

_Bash_, a valet de chambre.

_Battringdrigg_, the name of an arkoe.

_Begsurbeck_, an old king of Sass Doorpt Swangeanti.

_Born Isles_, islands to the right hand.

_Boskee_, a very grand room or saloon.

_Bott_, a gourd.

_Bougee_, lie down.

_Brandleguarp_, chief city of Sass Doorpt Swangeanti.

_Calentar_, a doctor or surgeon.

_Cluff_, a captain.

_Colamb_, a governor.

_Colambat_, a government.

_Colapet_, a bag for provision.

_Collwarr_, God.

_Covett_, a mansion-house or seat.

_Crashdoorpt_, Quangrollart's colambat, or country of the slit.

_Crashee_, slit.

_Crullmott_, a fruit tasting like a fowl.

_David_, Peter's fourth son.

_Doorpt Swangeanti_, the land of flight.

_Doors_, a sort of apples.

_Dossee_, a soft thing.

_Emina_, a rock.

_Felbamko_, Oniwheske's nephew.

_Filgay_, a freeman.

_Filus_, a rib of the graundee.

_Gadsi_, governor of Mount Alkoe.

_Gauingrunt_, a revolted town in the west.

_G awry_, a flying woman.

_Georigetti_, king of Sass Doorpt Swangeanti.

_Glanlepze_, an African who escaped with Peter.

_Glumm_, a flying man.

_Glumm Boss_, a young man.

_Goppo_, a father-in-law.

_Gorpell_, an ensign.

_Gowren_, women.

_Graundee_, the glumms' wings and dress.

_Graundevolet_, Peter's arkoe.

_Gripsack_, a trumpet.

_Gume_, the leather between the filuses of the graundee.

_Hallycarnie_, Youwarkee's sister, also her second daughter.

_Harlokin_, prince of the rebels.

_Hoximo_, a place to bury the dead.

_Hunkum_, marriage.

_Jahamel_, the king's sister.

_Jemmy_, Peter's second son.

_Lallio_, first king of Sass Doorpt Swangeanti.

_Lask_, a slave.

_Laskmett_, slavery.

_Lasmeel_, Peter's scholar.

_Maieck_, Peter's man from Mount Alkoe.

_Mindrack_, the devil.

_Mouch_, a church.

_Moucherait_, an assembly of the states.

_Mount Alkoe_, a kingdom taking name from a burning mountain.

_Nasgig_, a common soldier, made a general at the request of Peter.

_Kicor_, a creature of Barbarsa, the king's favourite.

_Norbon_, the name of the north country.

_Normnbdsgrsutt_, ancient name of Youwarkee's country.

_Onitvheske_, king of Norbon.

_Ors clamm gee_, here am I.

_Padsi_, a fruit tasting like fish.

_Palang_, a town.

_Parky_, sweet.

_Patty_, Peter's eldest daughter, also his first wife.

_Pedro_, Peter's eldest son.

_Pendlehamby_, Youwarkee's father, the colamb of Arndrumn-stake.

_Perigene_, the first-born man.

_Peter_, the author.

_Philella_, the first-born woman.

_Puly_, an image.

_Praave_, modest.

_Quangrollart_, Youwarkee's brother, colamb of Crashdoorpt.

_Quilly_, Peter's bash.

_Ragan_, a priest.

_Razy_, mighty.

_Richard_, Peter's fifth son.

_Roppin_, marmalade.

_Rossig_, Quangrollart's companion.

_Sary_, Peter's youngest daughter.

_Sass Doorpt Sivangeanti_, Peter's new name given to Georigetti's
dominions.

_Slip the graundee_, drawing the graundee tight to the body, by a
running noose on a line.

_Stapps_, minutes.

_Sty gee_, Oniwheske's daughter.

_Swangean_, flight.

_Sweecoan_, a flight with sweecoes.

_Sweecoe_, an insect giving a strong light in the dark.

_Telamine_, a woman whose husband committed the first murder.

_Tommy_, Peter's second son.

_Yaccombourse_, the king's mistress.

_Yacom_, a man-child.

_Youh_, capital of the west.

_Youwarkey_, Peter's wife.

_Zaps_, lords.


THE END.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF PETER WILKINS, VOLUME 2 (OF 2) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


