The Project Gutenberg eBook of Translation of the Life of Omar ibn Said: Manuscript No. 1
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Translation of the Life of Omar ibn Said: Manuscript No. 1

Author: Omar ibn Said

Translator: Isaac Bird

Release date: November 4, 2020 [eBook #63635]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by hekula03, Barry Abrahamsen, and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by the Library of Congress)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSLATION OF THE LIFE OF OMAR IBN SAID: MANUSCRIPT NO. 1 ***

------------------------------------------------------------------------




       Translation of the Life of Omar ibn Said: Manuscript No. 1




 ● Transcriber’s Notes:
    ○ This document was transcribed from a handwritten text. The author
      later made changes and insertions which are marked like this
      [↑my], meaning the word “my” was written as an insertion at that
      point.
    ○ There was no page numbered 5 in the manuscript.
    ○ In the paragraph beginning “I gave alms every year, gold,” there
      is an illegible word.
    ○ Missing or obscured punctuation was silently corrected.
    ○ Typographical errors were silently corrected.
    ○ Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation were made consistent only
      when a predominant form was found in this book.
    ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).




------------------------------------------------------------------------


                                                          Omar ben Saeed




                                  (1)

                          Manuscript, No. 1.—


          In the name of God, the merciful the gracious.—God grant his
blessing upon our lord (seidna) Mohammed. Blessed be He in whose hand is
the kingdom & who is Almighty; who created death & life that he might
make you the best of his works; for he is exalted; he is the forgiver
(of sins,) who created seven heavens one above the other. Do you discern
anything trifling in creation. Bring back your thoughts. Do you see
anything worthless. Recall your vision in earnest. Turn your eye inward
for it is diseased. God has adorned the heavens & the world with lamps,
& has made us missiles for the devils, & given us for them a grievous
punishment, & to those who have disbelieved their Lord, the punishment
of hell & pains of body. Whoever associates with them shall hear a
boiling caldron, & what is cast therein may fitly represent those who
suffer under the anger of God.—Ask them if a prophet (director) has not
been sent unto them. They say, “yes; a prophet has come to us, but we
have lied to him.” We said, “God has not sent us down any thing, & you
are in grievous error.” They say, “If we had listened & been wise we
should not now have been suffering the punishment of the Omniscient.” So
they confess they have sinned in destroying the followers of the
Omniscient. Those who fear their Lord & profess his name, they receive
pardon & great honor. Guard your words, (ye wicked), make it known that
God is all-wise in all his manifestations. Do you not know from the
creation that God is full of skill? that He has made for you the way of
error, & you have walked therein, & have chosen to live upon what your
god, Nasûr has furnished you. Believe on Him who dwells in heaven, who
has fitted the earth to be your support & it shall give you food.
Believe on Him who dwells in Heaven, who has sent you a prophet, & you
shall understand what a teacher (He has sent you.) Those that were
before them deceived them (in regard to their prophet.) And how came
they to reject him? Did they not [↑see] in the heavens above them, how
the fowls of the air receive with pleasure that which is sent them? God
looks after all. Believe ye: it is He who supplies your wants, that you
may take his gifts & enjoy them, & take great pleasure in them. And now
will you go on in error, or walk in the path of righteousness. Say to
them; “He who regards you with care, & who has made for you the heavens
& the earth: & gives you prosperity, Him you think little of. This is He
that planted you in the earth, & to whom you are soon to be gathered.”
But they say, “If you are men of truth, tell us when shall this promise
be fulfilled?” Say to them; “Does not God know? & am not I an evident
Prophet?” When those who disbelieve shall see the things draw near
before their faces, it shall then be told them, “these are the things
about which you made inquiry.” Have you seen that God has destroyed me
or those with me? or rather that He has shewn us mercy? And who will
defend the unbeliever from a miserable punishment? Say; “Knowledge is
from God.” Say; “Have you not seen that your water has become impure?
Who will bring you fresh water from the fountain?”


[Illustration]


O Sheikh Hunter I cannot write my life because I have forgotten much of
my own language, as well as [↑of] the Arabic. Do not be hard upon me my
brother.—To God let many thanks be paid for his great mercy & goodness.


                                Page 14—


In the name of God, the Gracious, the Merciful.—Thanks be to God,
supreme in goodness, & kindness, & grace, & who is worthy of all honor,
who created all things for his service, even man’s power of action & of
speech.


[Illustration]


                      From Omar to Sheikh Hunter.


          You asked me to write my life. I am not able to do this
because I have much forgotten my own, as well as the Arabic language.
Neither can I write very grammatically or according to the true idiom.
And so, my brother, I beg you, in God’s name, not to chide me, for I am
a man of weak eyes, & of a weak body.

My name is Omar ibn Seid, (son of Seid.)




                                  (2)


My birth place was Fut Tûr, [↑(Fouta Toro,)] between the two rivers,
(Mesopotamia in Africa?) I sought knowledge under the instruction of
[↑a] Sheikh called Mohammed Seid, my own brother, & Sheikh Soleiman
Kembeh, & Sheikh Gabriel Abdal. I continued my studies twenty five
years, & then returned to my home where I remained six years. Then there
came to our place a large army, who killed many men, & took me, &
brought me to the great sea, & sold me into the hands of the Christians
[↑who bound me] & sent [↑me] on board a great ship & [↑we] sailed upon
the great sea a month & a half, when we came to a place called
Charleston in the Christian language. There they sold me to a small,
weak, & wicked man, called Johnson, a complete infidel, who had no fear
of God at all. Now I am a small man; & unable to do hard work so I fled
from [↑the hand of] Johnson & after a month came to a place called
Fayd-il (Fayette-ville?). Here I saw some great houses (churches). On
the new-moon I went into a church to pray. A lad saw me & rode off to
the place of his father & informed him that he had seen a black man in
the church. A man named Handah (Hunter?) & another man with him on
horseback, came attended by a troop of dogs. They took me & made me go
with them twelve miles to a place called Fayd-il(?) where they put me
into a great house from which I could not go out. I continued in the
great house (which, in the Christian language, they called jail) sixteen
days & nights. One Friday the jailor came & opened the door of the house
& I saw a great many men all Christians, some of whom called out to me,
“what is your name? Is it Omar or Seid?” I did not understand their
Christian language. A man called Bob Mumford took me [↑& led me] out of
the jail, & I was very well pleased to go with them to their place. I
staid at Mumford’s four days & nights, & then a man named Jim Owen, son
in law of Mumford, who married his daughter Betsey, asked me if I was
willing to go to a place called Bladen, (B. Co. N.C.). I said, Yes, I
was willing. I went with them & have remained in the place (house?) of
Jim Owen until now.

Before (after?) I came into the hand of Gen. Owen a man by the name of
Mitchell came to buy me. He asked me if I were willing to go to
Charleston City. I said “no, no, no, no, no, no, no, I not willing to go
to Charleston. I stay in the hand of Jim Owen.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

O ye people of N. Carolina, O ye people of S. Carolina, O ye people of
America, all of you; have you among you any two such men as Jim Owen &
John Owen. These men are good men. What food they eat they give to me to
eat. As they clothe themselves they clothe me. They permit me to read
the gospel of God, our Lord, & Saviour, & King; who regulates all our
circumstances, our health & wealth, & who bestows his mercies willingly,
not by constraint. According to my power I open my heart, as to a great
light, to receive the true way, the way of the Lord Jesus the Messiah.

Before I came to the Christian country, my religion was the religion of
“Mohammed, the Apostle of God—may God have mercy upon him, & give him
peace.” I walked to the mosque before day-break, washed my face & head &
hands & feet. I prayed at noon, prayed in the afternoon, prayed at
sun-set, prayed in the evening. I gave alms every year, gold, silver,
seeds, [_illegible word_], cattle, sheep, goats, rice, wheat, & barley.
I gave tithes of all the above-named things. I went every year to the
holy war against the infidels. I went on pilgrimage to Mecca, as all did
who were able.——My father had six sons & five daughters, & my mother had
three sons & one daughter. When I left my country I was thirty seven
years old;—I have been in the country of the Christians twenty four
years.——Written A.D. 1831—

[↑Written in year one thousand eight hundred and one and thirty of Jesus
the messiah]

O ye people of N. Carolina, O ye people of S. Carolina, O all ye people
of America—the first son of Jim Owen is called Thomas, & his sister is
called Masa-jein (Martha Jane?) This is an excellent family.

Tom Owen & Nell Owen have two sons & a daughter. The first son is called
Jim & the second John. The daughter is named Melissa.

Seid Jim Owen & his wife Betsey have two sons & five daughters. Their
names are Tom, & John, & Mercy, Miriam, Sophia, Margaret & Eliza. This
family is a very nice family.




                                  (3)


The wife of John Owen is called Louisa & an excellent wife she is. She
had five children. Three of them died & two are still living.

O ye Americans,—ye people of N. Carolina—have you, have you, have you,
have you among you a family like this family having so much love to God
as they?

                  *       *       *       *       *

Formerly I, Omar, loved to read the book of the Koran the famous. Gen.
Jim Owen & his wife used to read the gospel, & they read it to me very
much,—the gospel of God, our Lord, our Creator, our King, He that orders
all our circumstances, health & wealth, willingly, not constrainedly,
according to his power.—Open thou my heart to the gospel, to the way of
uprightness.—Thanks to the Lord of all worlds, thanks in abundance. He
is plenteous in mercy & abundant in goodness.

For the law was given by Moses but grace & truth were by Jesus the
Messiah.

When I was a Mohammedan I prayed thus: “Thanks be to God, Lord of all
worlds, the merciful the gracious Lord of the day of Judgment, thee we
serve, on thee we call for help. Direct us in the right way, the way of
those on whom thou hast had mercy, with whom thou has not been angry &
who walk not in error. Amen.”—But now I pray “Our Father” &c.. in the
words of our Lord Jesus the Messiah.

                  *       *       *       *       *

I reside in this our country by reason of great necessity. Wicked men
took me by violence & sold me to the Christians. We sailed a month & a
half on the great sea to the place called Charleston in the Christian
land. I fell into the hand of a small, weak & wicked man, who feared not
God at all, nor did he read (the gospel) at all nor pray. I was afraid
to remain with a man so depraved & who committed so many crimes & I ran
away. After a month our Lord God brought me forward to the hand of a
good man, who fears God, & loves to do good, & whose name is Jim Owen &
whose brother is called Col. John Owen. These are two excellent men.——I
am residing in Bladen county.

I continue in the hand of Jim Owen who never beats me, nor scolds me. I
neither go hungry nor naked, & I have no hard work to do. I am not able
to do hard work for I am a small man & feeble. During the last twenty
years I have known no want in the hand of Jim Owen.—


[Illustration]







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSLATION OF THE LIFE OF OMAR IBN SAID: MANUSCRIPT NO. 1 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


