The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ozymandias
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Ozymandias

Author: Ivar Jorgensen

Illustrator: Dan Adkins

Release date: November 9, 2023 [eBook #72080]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Royal Publications, Inc, 1958

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OZYMANDIAS ***





                              OZYMANDIAS

                           By IVAR JORGENSON

                       Illustrated by DAN ADKINS

              _There was open strife between the military
            and scientific staffs. But which was mightier?_

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                        Infinity November 1958.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


The planet had been dead about a million years. That was our first
impression, as our ship orbited down to its sere brown surface, and
as it happened our first impression turned out to be right. There
had been a civilization here _once_--but Earth had swung around Sol
ten-to-the-sixth times since the last living being of this world had
drawn breath.

"A dead planet," Colonel Mattern exclaimed bitterly. "Nothing here
that's of any use. We might as well pack up and move on."

It was hardly surprising that Mattern would feel that way. In urging
a quick departure and an immediate removal to some world of greater
utilitarian value, Mattern was, after all, only serving the best
interests of his employers. His employers were the General Staff of
the Armed Forces of the United States of America. They expected Mattern
and his half of the crew to produce results, and by way of results
they meant new weapons and sources of strategic materials. They hadn't
tossed in 70% of the budget for this trip just to sponsor a lot of
archaeological putterings.

But luckily for _our_ half of the outfit--the archaeological putterers'
half--Mattern did not have an absolute voice in the affairs of the
outfit. Perhaps the General Staff had kicked in for 70% of our budget,
but the cautious men of the military's Public Liaison branch had seen
to it that _we_ had at least some rights.

Dr. Leopold, head of the non-military segment of the expedition, said
brusquely, "Sorry, Mattern, but I'll have to apply the limiting clause
here."

Mattern started to sputter. "But--"

"But nothing, Mattern. We're here. We've spent a good chunk of American
cash in getting here. I insist that we spend the minimum time allotted
for scientific research, as long as we _are_ here."

Mattern scowled, looking down at the table, supporting his chin in
his thumbs and digging the rest of his fingers in hard back of his
jawbone. He was annoyed, but he was smart enough to know he didn't have
much of a case to make against Leopold.

The rest of us--four archaeologists and seven military men; they
outnumbered us a trifle--watched eagerly as our superiors battled. My
eyes strayed through the porthole and I looked at the dry windblown
plain, marked here and there with the stumps of what might have been
massive monuments millennia ago.

Mattern said bleakly, "The world is of utterly no strategic
consequence. Why, it's so old that even the vestiges of civilization
have turned to dust!"

"Nevertheless, I reserve the right granted to me to explore any world
we land on, for a period of at least one hundred sixty-eight hours,"
Leopold returned implacably.

Exasperated, Mattern burst out, "Dammit, _why_? Just to spite me? Just
to prove the innate intellectual superiority of the scientist to the
man of war?"

"Mattern, I'm not injecting personalities into this."

"I'd like to know what you are doing, then? Here we are on a world
that's obviously useless to me and probably just as useless to you. Yet
you stick me on a technicality and force me to waste a week here. Why,
if not out of spite?"

"We've made only the most superficial reconnaissance so far," Leopold
said. "For all we know this place may be the answer to many questions
of galactic history. It may even be a treasure-trove of superbombs, for
all--"

"Pretty damned likely!" Mattern exploded. He glared around the
conference room, fixing each of the scientific members of the committee
with a baleful stare. He was making it quite clear that he was trapped
into a wasteful expense of time by our foggy-eyed desire for Knowledge.

Useless knowledge. Not good hard practical knowledge of the kind _he_
valued.

"All right," he said finally. "I've protested and I've lost, Leopold.
You're within your rights in insisting on remaining here one week. But
you'd damned well better be ready to blast off when your time's up!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It had been foregone all along, of course. The charter of our
expedition was explicit on the matter. We had been sent out to comb a
stretch of worlds near the Galactic Rim that had already been brushed
over hastily by a survey mission.

The surveyors had been looking simply for signs of life, and, finding
none (of course), they had moved on. We were entrusted with the task
of investigating in detail. Some of the planets in the group had
been inhabited once, the surveyors had reported. None bore present
life. None of the planets we had ever visited had been found to hold
intelligent life, though many had in the past.

Our job was to comb through the assigned worlds with diligence.
Leopold, leading our group, had the task of doing pure archaeological
research on the dead civilizations; Mattern and his men had the more
immediately practical job of looking for fissionable material, leftover
alien weapons, possible sources of lithium or tritium for fusion, and
other such militarily useful things. You might argue that in a strictly
pragmatic sense our segment of the group was just dead weight, carted
along for the ride at great expense, and you would be right.

But the public temper over the last few hundred years in America
has frowned on purely military expeditions. And so, as a sop to
the nation's conscience, five archaeologists of little empirical
consequence so far as national security mattered were tacked onto the
expedition.

Us.

Mattern made it quite clear at the outset that _his_ boys were the
Really Important members of the expedition, and that we were simply
ballast. In a way, we had to agree. Tension was mounting once again
on our sadly disunited planet; there was no telling when the Other
Hemisphere would rouse from its quiescence of a hundred years and
decide to plunge once more into space. If anything of military value
lay out here, we knew we had to find it before They did.

The good old armaments race. Hi-ho! The old space stories used to talk
about expeditions from Earth. Well, we _were_ from Earth, abstractly
speaking--but in actuality we were from America, period. Global unity
was as much of a pipedream as it had been three hundred years earlier,
in the remote and primitive chemical-rocket era of space travel. Amen.
End of sermon. We got to work.

       *       *       *       *       *

The planet had no name, and we didn't give it one; a special commission
of what was laughably termed the United Nations Organization was
working on the problem of assigning names to the hundreds of worlds
of the galaxy, using the old idea of borrowing from ancient Terran
mythologies in analogy to the Mercury-Venus-Mars nomenclature of our
own system.

Probably they would end up saddling this world with something like
Thoth or Bel-Marduk or perhaps Avalokitesvara. We knew it simply as
Planet Four of the system belonging to a yellow-white F5 IV Procyonoid
sun, Revised HD Catalog #170861.

It was roughly Earthtype, with a diameter of 6100 miles, a gravity
index of .93, a mean temperature of 45 degrees F. with a daily
fluctuation range of about ten degrees, and a thin, nasty atmosphere
composed mostly of carbon dioxide with wisps of helium and nitrogen
and the barest smidgeon of oxygen. Quite possibly the air had been
breathable by humanoid life a million years ago--but that was a million
years ago. We took good care to practice our breathing-mask drills
before we ventured out of the ship.

The sun, as noted, was an F5 IV and fairly hot, but Planet Four was a
hundred eighty-five million miles away from it at perihelion and a good
deal farther when it was at the other swing of its rather eccentric
orbit; the good old Keplerian ellipse took quite a bit of punishment
in this system. Planet Four reminded me in many ways of Mars--except
that Mars, of course, had never known intelligent life of any kind, at
least none that had troubled to leave a hint of its existence, while
this planet had obviously had a flourishing civilization at a time when
Pithecanthropus was Earth's noblest being.

       *       *       *       *       *

In any event, once we had thrashed out the matter of whether or not
we were going to stay here or pull up and head for the next planet
on our schedule, the five of us set to work. We knew we had only a
week--Mattern would never grant us an extension unless we came up with
something good enough to change his mind, which was improbable--and we
wanted to get as much done in that week as possible. With the sky as
full of worlds as it is, this planet might never be visited by Earth
scientists again.

Mattern and his men served notice right away that they were going to
help us, but reluctantly and minimally. We unlimbered the three small
halftracks carried aboard ship and got them into functioning order. We
stowed our gear--cameras, pick-&-shovels, camel's-hair brushes--and
donned our breathing-masks, and Mattern's men helped us get the
halftracks out of the ship and pointed in the right direction.

Then they stood back and waited for us to shove off.

"Don't any of you plan to accompany us?" Leopold asked. The halftracks
each held up to four men.

Mattern shook his head. "You fellows go out by yourselves today and let
us know what you find. We can make better use of the time filing and
catching up on back log entries."

I saw Leopold start to scowl. Mattern was being openly contemptuous;
the least he could do was have his men make a token search for
fissionable or fusionable matter! But Leopold swallowed down his anger.

"Okay," he said. "You do that. If we come across any raw veins of
plutonium I'll radio back."

"Sure," Mattern said. "Thanks for the favor. Let me know if you find a
brass mine, too." He laughed harshly. "Raw plutonium! I half believe
you're serious!"

       *       *       *       *       *

We had worked out a rough sketch of the area, and we split up into
three units. Leopold, alone, headed straight due west, toward the dry
riverbed we had spotted from the air. He intended to check alluvial
deposits, I guess.

Marshall and Webster, sharing one halftrack, struck out to the hilly
country southeast of our landing point. A substantial city appeared
to be buried under the sand there. Gerhardt and I, in the other
vehicle, made off to the north, where we hoped to find remnants of yet
another city. It was a bleak, windy day; the endless sand that covered
this world mounted into little dunes before us, and the wind picked
up handfuls and tossed it against the plastite dome that covered our
truck. Underneath the steel cleats of our tractor-belt, there was a
steady crunch-crunch of metal coming down on sand that hadn't been
disturbed in millennia.

Neither of us spoke for a while. Then Gerhardt said, "I hope the ship's
still there when we get back to the base."

Frowning, I turned to look at him as I drove. Gerhardt had always been
an enigma: a small scrunchy guy with untidy brown hair flapping in his
eyes, eyes that were set a little too close together. He had a degree
from the University of Kansas and had put in some time on their field
staff with distinction, or so his references said.

I said, "What the hell do you mean?"

"I don't trust Mattern. He hates us."

"He doesn't. Mattern's no villain--just a fellow who wants to do his
job and go home. But what do you mean, the ship not being there?"

"He'll blast off without us. You see the way he sent us all out into
the desert, and kept his own men back. I tell you, he'll strand us
here!"

I snorted. "Don't be a paranoid. Mattern won't do anything of the sort."

"He thinks we're dead weight on the expedition," Gerhardt insisted.
"What better way to get rid of us?"

The halftrack breasted a hump in the desert. I kept wishing a vulture
would squeal somewhere, but there was not even that. Life had left
this world ages ago. I said, "Mattern doesn't have much use for _us_,
sure. But would he blast off and leave three perfectly good halftracks
behind? Would he?"

It was a good point. Gerhardt grunted agreement after a while. Mattern
would _never_ toss equipment away, though he might not have such
scruples about five surplus archaeologists.

We rode along silently for a while longer. By now we had covered twenty
miles through this utterly barren land. As far as I could see, we might
just as well have stayed at the ship. At least there we had a surface
lie of building foundations.

But another ten miles and we came across our city. It seemed to be of
linear form, no more than half a mile wide and stretching out as far
as we could see--maybe six or seven hundred miles; if we had time, we
would check the dimensions from the air.

Of course it wasn't much of a city. The sand had pretty well covered
everything, but we could see foundations jutting up here and there,
weathered lumps of structural concrete and reinforced metal. We got out
and unpacked the power-shovel.

An hour later, we were sticky with sweat under our thin spacesuits and
we had succeeded in transferring a few thousand cubic yards of soil
from the ground to an area a dozen yards away. We had dug one devil of
a big hole in the ground.

And we had nothing.

Nothing. Not an artifact, not a skull, not a yellowed tooth. No spoons,
no knives, no baby-rattles.

Nothing.

The foundations of some of the buildings had endured, though whittled
down to stumps by a million years of sand and wind and rain. But
nothing else of this civilization had survived. Mattern, in his
scorn, had been right, I admitted ruefully: this planet was as
useless to us as it was to them. Weathered foundations could tell
us little except that there had once been a civilization here. An
imaginative paleontologist can reconstruct a dinosaur from a fragment
of a thigh-bone, can sketch out a presentable saurian with only a
fossilized ischium to guide him. But could we extrapolate a culture, a
code of laws, a technology, a philosophy, from bare weathered building
foundations?

Not very likely.

We moved on and dug somewhere else half a mile away, hoping at least
to unearth one tangible remnant of the civilization that had been. But
time had done its work; we were lucky to have the building foundations.
All else was gone.

"_Boundless and bare, the lone and level sands stretch far away_," I
muttered.

Gerhardt looked up from his digging. "Eh? What's that?" he demanded.

"Shelley," I told him.

"Oh. Him."

He went back to digging.

       *       *       *       *       *

Late in the afternoon we finally decided to call it quits and head back
to the base. We had been in the field for seven hours, and had nothing
to show for it except a few hundred feet of tridim films of building
foundations.

The sun was beginning to set; Planet Four had a thirty-five hour day,
and it was coming to its end. The sky, always somber, was darkening
now. There was no moon to be still as bright. Planet Four had no
satellites. It seemed a bit unfair; Three and Five of the system each
had four moons, while around the massive gas giant that was Eight a
cluster of thirteen moonlets whirled.

We wheeled round and headed back, taking an alternate route three miles
east of the one we had used on the way out, in case we might spot
something. It was a forlorn hope, though.

Six miles along our journey, the truck radio came to life. The dry,
testy voice of Dr. Leopold reached us:

"Calling Trucks Two and Three. Two and Three, do you read me? Come in,
Two and Three."

Gerhardt was driving. I reached across his knee to key in the response
channel and said, "Anderson and Gerhardt in Number Three, sir. We read
you."

A moment later, somewhat more faintly, came the sound of Number
Two keying into the threeway channel, and I heard Marshall saying,
"Marshall and Webster in Two, Dr. Leopold. Is something wrong?"

"I've found something," Leopold said.

From the way Marshall exclaimed "_Really!_" I knew that Truck Number
Two had had no better luck than we. I said, "That makes one of us,
then."

"You've had no luck, Anderson?"

"Not a scrap. Not a potsherd."

"How about you, Marshall?"

"Check. Scattered signs of a city, but nothing of archaeological value,
sir."

I heard Leopold chuckle before he said, "Well, I've found something.
It's a little too heavy for me to manage by myself. I want both outfits
to come out here and take a look at it."

"What is it, sir?" Marshall and I asked simultaneously, in just about
the same words.

But Leopold was fond of playing the Man of Mystery. He said, "You'll
see when you get here. Take down my coordinates and get a move on. I
want to be back at the base by nightfall."

       *       *       *       *       *

Shrugging, we changed course to head for Leopold's location. He was
about seventeen miles southwest of us, it seemed. Marshall and Webster
had an equally long trip to make; they were sharply southeast of
Leopold's position.

The sky was fairly dark when we arrived at what Leopold had computed as
his coordinates. The headlamps of the halftrack lit up the desert for
nearly a mile, and at first there was no sign of anyone or anything.
Then I spotted Leopold's halftrack parked off to the east, and from
the south Gerhardt saw the lights of the third truck rolling toward us.

We reached Leopold at about the same time. He was not alone. There was
an--object--with him.

"Greetings, gentlemen." He had a smug grin on his whiskery face. "I
seem to have made a find."

He stepped back and, as if drawing an imaginary curtain, let us take
a peek at his find. I frowned in surprise and puzzlement. Standing in
the sand behind Leopold's halftrack was something that looked very much
like a robot.

It was tall, seven feet or more, and vaguely humanoid: that is, it had
arms extending from its shoulders, a head on those shoulders, and legs.
The head was furnished with receptor plates where eyes, ears, and mouth
would be on humans. There were no other openings. The robot's body
was massive and squarish, with sloping shoulders, and its dark metal
skin was pitted and corroded as by the workings of the elements over
uncountable centuries.

It was buried up to its knees in sand. Leopold, still grinning smugly
(and understandably proud of his find) said, "Say something to us,
robot."

From the mouth-receptors came a clanking sound, the gnashing of--what?
gears?--and a voice came forth, oddly high-pitched but audible. The
words were alien and were spoken in a slippery singsong kind of
inflection. I felt a chill go quivering down my back. The Age of Space
Exploration was three centuries old--and for the first time human ears
were hearing the sounds of a language that had not been spawned on
Earth.

"It understands what you say?" Gerhardt questioned.

"I don't think so," Leopold said. "Not yet, anyway. But when I address
it directly, it starts spouting. I think it's a kind of--well, guide to
the ruins, so to speak. Built by the ancients to provide information
to passersby; only it seems to have survived the ancients and their
monuments as well."

I studied the thing. It _did_ look incredibly old--and sturdy; it was
so massively solid that it might indeed have outlasted every other
vestige of civilization on this planet. It had stopped talking, now,
and was simply staring ahead. Suddenly it wheeled ponderously on its
base, swung an arm up to take in the landscape nearby, and started
speaking again.

I could almost put the words in its mouth: "--_and over here we have
the ruins of the Parthenon, chief temple of Athena on the Acropolis.
Completed in the year 438 B.C., it was partially destroyed by an
explosion in 1687 while in use as a powder magazine by the Turks_--"

"It does seem to be a sort of a guide," Webster remarked. "I get the
definite feeling that we're being given an historical narration now,
all about the wondrous monuments that must have been on this site once."

"If only we could understand what it's saying!" Marshall exclaimed.

"We can try to decipher the language somehow," Leopold said. "Anyway,
it's a magnificent find, isn't it? And--"

I began to laugh suddenly. Leopold, offended, glared at me and said,
"May I ask what's so funny, Dr. Anderson?"

"Ozymandias!" I said, when I had subsided a bit. "It's a natural!
Ozymandias!"

"I'm afraid I don't--"

"Listen to him," I said. "It's as if he was built and put here for
those who follow after, to explain to us the glories of the race that
built the cities. Only the cities are gone, and the robot is still
here! Doesn't he seem to be saying, '_Look on my works, ye Mighty, and
despair!_'"

"_Nothing besides remains_," Webster quoted. "It's apt. Builders and
cities all gone, but the poor robot doesn't know it, and delivers his
spiel nonetheless. Yes. We ought to call him Ozymandias!"

Gerhardt said, "What shall we do with it?"

"You say you couldn't budge it?" Webster asked Leopold.

"It weighs five or six hundred pounds. It can move of its own volition,
but I couldn't move it myself."

"Maybe the five of us--" Webster suggested.

"No," Leopold said. An odd smile crossed his face. "We will leave it
here."

"What?"

"Only temporarily," he added. "We'll save it--as a sort of surprise for
Mattern. We'll spring it on him the final day, letting him think all
along that this planet was worthless. He can rib us all he wants--but
when it's time to go, we'll produce our prize!"

"You think it's safe to leave it out here?" Gerhardt asked.

"Nobody's going to steal it," Marshall said.

"And it won't melt in the rain," Webster added.

"But--suppose it walks away?" Gerhardt demanded. "It can do that, can
it not?"

Leopold said, "Of course. But where would it go? It will remain where
it is, I think. If it moves, we can always trace it with the radar.
Back to the base, now; it grows late."

We climbed back into our halftracks. The robot, silent once again,
planted knee-deep in the sand, outlined against the darkening sky,
swivelled to face us and lifted one thick arm in a kind of salute.

"Remember," Leopold warned us as we left. "Not one word about this to
Mattern!"

       *       *       *       *       *

At the base that night, Colonel Mattern and his seven aides were
remarkably curious about our day's activities. They tried to make it
seem as if they were taking a sincere interest in our work, but it was
perfectly obvious to us that they were simply goading us into telling
them what they had anticipated--that we had found absolutely nothing.
This was the response they got, since Leopold forbade mentioning
Ozymandias. Aside from the robot, the truth was that we _had_ found
nothing, and when they learned of this they smiled knowingly, as if
saying that had we listened to them in the first place we would all be
back on Earth seven days earlier, with no loss.

The following morning after breakfast Mattern announced that he was
sending out a squad to look for fusionable materials, unless we
objected.

"We'll only need one of the halftracks," he said. "That leaves two for
you. You don't mind, do you?"

"We can get along with two," Leopold replied a little sourly. "Just so
you keep out of our territory."

"Which is?"

Instead of telling him, Leopold merely said, "We've adequately examined
the area to the southeast of here, and found nothing of note. It won't
matter to us if your geological equipment chews the place up."

Mattern nodded, eyeing Leopold curiously as if the obvious concealment
of our place of operations had aroused suspicions. I wondered whether
it was wise to conceal information from Mattern. Well, Leopold wanted
to play his little game, I thought; and one way to keep Mattern from
seeing Ozymandias was not to tell him where we would be working.

"I thought you said this planet was useless from your viewpoint,
Colonel," I remarked.

Mattern stared at me. "I'm sure of it. But it would be idiotic of me
not to have a look, wouldn't it--as long as we're spending the time
here anyway?"

I had to admit that he was right. "Do you expect to find anything,
though?"

He shrugged. "No fissionables, certainly. It's a safe bet that
everything radioactive on _this_ planet has long since decomposed. But
there's always the possibility of lithium, you know."

"Or pure tritium," Leopold said acidly. Mattern merely laughed, and
made no reply.

Half an hour later we were bound westward again to the point where
we had left Ozymandias. Gerhardt, Webster and I rode together in one
halftrack, and Leopold and Marshall occupied the other. The third, with
two of Mattern's men and the prospecting equipment, ventured off to the
southeast toward the area Marshall and Webster had fruitlessly combed
the day before.

Ozymandias was where we had left him, with the sun coming up behind him
and glowing round his sides. I wondered how many sunrises he had seen.
Billions, perhaps.

We parked the halftracks not far from the robot and approached, Webster
filming him in the bright light of morning. A wind was whistling down
from the north, kicking up eddies in the sand.

"Ozymandias have remain here," the robot said as we drew near.

In English.

For a moment we didn't realize what had happened, but what followed
afterward was a five-man quadruple-take. While we gabbled in confusion
the robot said, "Ozymandias decipher the language somehow. Seem to be a
sort of guide."

"Why--he's parroting fragments from our conversation yesterday,"
Marshall said.

"I don't think he's parroting," I said. "The words form coherent
concepts. He's _talking_ to us!"

"Built by the ancients to provide information to passersby," Ozymandias
said.

"Ozymandias!" Leopold said. "Do you speak English?"

The response was a clicking noise, followed moments later by,
"Ozymandias understand. Not have words enough. Talk more."

The five of us trembled with common excitement. It was apparent now
what had happened, and the happening was nothing short of incredible.
Ozymandias had listened patiently to everything we had said the night
before; then, after we had gone, it had applied its million-year-old
mind to the problem of organizing our sounds into sense, and somehow
had succeeded. Now it was merely a matter of feeding vocabulary to the
creature and letting it assimilate the new words. We had a walking and
talking Rosetta Stone!

Two hours flew by so rapidly we hardly noticed their passing. We
tossed words at Ozymandias as fast as we could, defining them when
possible to aid him in relating them to the others already engraved on
his mind.

By the end of that time he could hold a passable conversation with
us. He ripped his legs free of the sand that had bound them for
centuries--and, serving the function for which he had been built
millennia ago, he took us on a guided tour of the civilization that had
been and had built him.

Ozymandias was a fabulous storehouse of archaeological data. We could
mine him for years.

His people, he told us, had called themselves the Thaiquens (or so
it sounded)--they had lived and thrived for three hundred thousand
years, and in the declining days of their history had built him, as an
indestructible guide to their indestructible cities. But the cities had
crumbled, and Ozymandias alone remained--bearing with him memories of
what had been.

"This was the city of Durab. In its day it held eight million people.
Where I stand now was the Temple of Decamon, sixteen hundred feet of
your measurement high. It faced the Street of the Winds--"

"The Eleventh Dynasty was begun by the accession to the Presidium
of Chonnigar IV, in the eighteen thousandth year of the city. It was
in the reign of this dynasty that the neighboring planets first were
reached--"

"The Library of Durab was on this spot. It boasted fourteen million
volumes. None exist today. Long after the builders had gone, I spent
time reading the books of the Library and they are memorized within
me--"

"The Plague struck down nine thousand a day for more than a year, in
that time--"

It went on and on, a cyclopean newsreel, growing in detail as
Ozymandias absorbed our comments and added new words to his vocabulary.
We followed the robot as it wheeled its way through the desert, our
recorders gobbling in each word, our minds numbed and dazed by the
magnitude of our find. In this single robot lay waiting to be tapped
the totality of a culture that had lasted three hundred thousand years!
We could mine Ozymandias the rest of our lives, and still not exhaust
the fund of data implanted in his all-encompassing mind.

When, finally, we ripped ourselves away and, leaving Ozymandias in the
desert, returned to the base, we were full to bursting. Never in the
history of our science had such a find been vouchsafed: a complete
record, accessible and translated for us.

We agreed to conceal our find from Mattern once again. But, like small
boys newly given a toy of great value, we found it hard to hide our
feelings. Although we said nothing explicit, our overexcited manner
certainly must have hinted to Mattern that we had not had as fruitless
a day as we had claimed.

That, and Leopold's refusal to tell him exactly where we had been
working during the day, must have aroused Mattern's suspicions. In
any event, during the night as we lay in bed I heard the sound of
halftracks rumbling off into the desert; and the following morning,
when we entered the mess-hall for breakfast, Mattern and his men,
unshaven and untidy, turned to look at us with peculiar vindictive
gleams in their eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mattern said, "Good morning, gentlemen. We've been waiting for some
time for you to arise."

"It's no later than usual, is it?" Leopold asked.

"Not at all. But my men and I have been up all night. We--ah--did a
bit of archaeological prospecting while you slept." The Colonel leaned
forward, fingering his rumpled lapels, and said, "Dr. Leopold, for
what reason did you choose to conceal from me the fact that you had
discovered an object of extreme strategic importance?"

"What do you mean?" Leopold demanded--with a quiver taking the
authority out of his voice.

"I mean," said Mattern quietly, "the robot you named Ozymandias. Just
why did you decide not to tell me about it?"

"I had every intention of doing so before our departure," Leopold said.

Mattern shrugged. "Be that as it may. You concealed the existence
of your find. But your manner last night led us to investigate the
area--and since the detectors showed a metal object some twenty miles
to the west, we headed that way. Ozymandias was quite surprised to
learn that there were other Earthmen here."

There was a moment of crackling silence. Then Leopold said, "I'll have
to ask you not to meddle with that robot, Colonel Mattern. I apologize
for having neglected to tell you of it--I didn't think you were quite
so interested in our work--but now I must insist you and your men keep
away from it."

"Oh?" Mattern said crisply. "Why?"

"Because it's an archaeological treasure-trove, Colonel. I can't
begin to stress its value to us. Your men might perform some casual
experiment with it and short circuit its memory channels, or something
like that. And so I'll have to invoke the rights of the archaeological
group of this expedition. I'll have to declare Ozymandias part of our
preserve, and off bounds for you."

Mattern's voice suddenly hardened. "Sorry, Dr. Leopold. You can't
invoke that now."

"Why not?"

"Because Ozymandias is part of _our_ preserve. And off bounds for you,
Doctor."

I thought Leopold would have an apoplectic fit right there in the
mess-hall. He stiffened and went white and strode awkwardly across the
room toward Mattern. He choked out a question, inaudible to me.

Mattern replied, "Security, Doctor. Ozymandias is of military use.
Accordingly we've brought him to the ship and placed him in sealed
quarters, under top-level wraps. With the power entrusted to me for
such emergencies, I'm declaring this expedition ended. We return to
Earth at once with Ozymandias."

Leopold's eyes bugged. He looked at us for support, but we said
nothing. Finally, incredulously, he said, "He's--of military use?"

"Of course. He's a storehouse of data on the ancient Thaiquen weapons.
We've already learned things from him that are unbelievable in their
scope. Why do you think this planet is bare of life, Dr. Leopold? Not
even a blade of grass? A million years won't do that. But a superweapon
_will_. The Thaiquens developed that weapon. And others, too. Weapons
that can make your hair curl. And Ozymandias knows every detail of
them. Do you think we can waste time letting you people fool with that
robot, when he's loaded with military information that can make America
totally impregnable? Sorry, Doctor. Ozymandias is your find, but he
belongs to us. And we're taking him back to Earth."

Again the room was silent. Leopold looked at me, at Webster, at
Marshall, at Gerhardt. There was nothing that could be said.

This was basically a militaristic mission. Sure, a few anthropologists
had been tacked onto the crew, but fundamentally it was Mattern's men
and not Leopold's who were important. We weren't out here so much to
increase the fund of general knowledge as to find new weapons and new
sources of strategic materials for possible use against the Other
Hemisphere.

And new weapons had been found. New, undreamed-of weapons, product of a
science that had endured for three hundred thousand years. All locked
up in Ozymandias' imperishable skull.

In a harsh voice Leopold said, "Very well, Colonel. I can't stop you, I
suppose."

He turned and shuffled out without touching his food, a broken, beaten,
suddenly very old man.

I felt sick.

Mattern had insisted the planet was useless and that stopping here was
a waste of time; Leopold had disagreed, and Leopold had turned out to
be right. We had found something of great value.

We had found a machine that could spew forth new and awesome recipes
for death. We held in our hands the sum and essence of the Thaiquen
science--the science that had culminated in magnificent weapons,
weapons so superb they had succeeded in destroying all life on this
world. And now we had access to those weapons. Dead by their own hand,
the Thaiquens had thoughtfully left us a heritage of death.

Grayfaced, I rose from the table and went to my cabin. I wasn't hungry
now.

"We'll be blasting off in an hour," Mattern said behind me as I left.
"Get your things in order."

I hardly heard him. I was thinking of the deadly cargo we carried, the
robot so eager to disgorge its fund of data. I was thinking what would
happen when our scientists back on Earth began learning from Ozymandias.

The works of the Thaiquens now were ours. I thought of the poet's
lines: "_Look on my works, ye mighty--and despair._"





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OZYMANDIAS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


