The Project Gutenberg eBook of Memories (volume 2 of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Memories (volume 2 of 2)

Author: Baron Algernon Bertram Freeman-Mitford Redesdale

Release date: May 29, 2025 [eBook #76183]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Hutchinson & Co, 1915

Credits: MWS and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMORIES (VOLUME 2 OF 2) ***





_MEMORIES_

[Illustration: _King Edward the VIIth._

_Photographed by the Author at Balmoral. October 1904._]




                             _Memories. :: By
                    Lord Redesdale, G.C.V.O., K.C.B._

        _With two photogravure plates and 16 other illustrations_

                                 VOL. II

                        _LONDON: HUTCHINSON & CO.
                         PATERNOSTER ROW ... 1915_




CONTENTS

VOL. II


     CHAP.                                                   PAGE

       XX.—JAPAN. AN ADVENTUROUS JOURNEY                      397

      XXI.—JAPAN. CIVIL WAR                                   413

     XXII.—JAPAN. MUKASHI                                     435

    XXIII.—JAPAN. THE MIKADO                                  447

     XXIV.—JAPAN. SENSATION DIPLOMACY                         462

      XXV.—BETWIXT OLD AND NEW JAPAN                          473

     XXVI.—JAPAN. THE RECEPTION OF THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH      495

    XXVII.—HOME AGAIN                                         512

   XXVIII.—LORD CLARENDON AND LORD GRANVILLE                  523

     XXIX.—1870                                               551

      XXX.—DAMASCUS AND RICHARD BURTON                        558

     XXXI.—GARIBALDI                                          577

    XXXII.—WESTWARD                                           586

   XXXIII.—THE MORMONS AND BRIGHAM YOUNG                      614

    XXXIV.—THE BLACK OPAL                                     640

     XXXV.—LORD BEACONSFIELD                                  661

    XXXVI.—THE OFFICE OF WORKS                                683

   XXXVII.—BATSFORD, AND THE HOUSE OF COMMONS                 710

  XXXVIII.—SIR JOSEPH HOOKER                                  734

    XXXIX.—ANURADHAPURA                                       739

       XL.—KING LEOPOLD II.                                   754

      XLI.—THE VISIT OF THE FRENCH FLEET IN 1905              761

     XLII.—BAYREUTH IN 1912                                   769

    XLIII.—A LAST WORD                                        793




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

VOL. II


    HIS MAJESTY KING EDWARD VII. (_photogravure_)            _Frontispiece_
      _From a photograph by the Author._

    THE AUTHOR, AGED TWENTY-EIGHT                        _Facing page_ 398
      _By Samuel Lawrence._

    OLD JAPAN                                                   ”      412
      _From a water-colour drawing by C. Wirgman._

    OLD JAPAN                                                   ”      474
      _From a water-colour drawing by C. Wirgman._

    GIUSEPPE GARIBALDI                                          ”      578

    FACSIMILE INSCRIPTION BY GARIBALDI                          ”      580

    LORD BEACONSFIELD AND LORD ROWTON                           ”      668
      _From the “Vanity Fair” cartoon (“Spy”)._




MEMORIES




CHAPTER XX

JAPAN. AN ADVENTUROUS JOURNEY


We returned to Yedo and the next few weeks were spent in the usual
humdrum way, transacting routine business, cursing the heat and the
mosquitoes, until towards the end of July, when Sir Harry Parkes and I
started for the Island of Yesso; I, with Sir Harry Keppel in his yacht,
the _Salamis_; my chief in the _Basilisk_. It was a very interesting
trip, for apart from all else it gave me my first and only sight of the
Ainu aborigines. The business part of the trip was concerned with an
inquiry into the commerce of the western coast of Japan, and especially
with an endeavour to find some suitable port for opening to foreign
trade. And so it happened that on the 7th of August the _Salamis_, the
_Basilisk_ under Captain Hewitt, with Satow on board, and the surveying
ship _Serpent_ (Commander Bullock), were assembled in the harbour of
Nanao, a town of Noto on the west coast belonging to the principality of
Kaga, the richest noble in Japan.

The Bay of Nanao is partially closed by a small island and Sir Harry
Parkes felt that it would be valuable as a port for foreign trade—far
more useful than Niigata, with its open roadstead and treacherous bar.
As he was extremely anxious to enter into communication with the clan of
Kaga, it was arranged that two of the Prince’s councillors should come
from Kanazawa, the capital of the province, to hold a conference. There
was some delay about this and it was not until Friday, the 9th of August,
that the meeting took place.

Sir Harry used every endeavour to impress upon the Kaga representatives
the desirability of entering into friendly relations with foreigners,
as the Princes of Satsuma, Tosa and Uwajima had done; but his arguments
were of no great avail. Kaga had evidently not yet quite made up his
mind as to which side he would take in the impending struggle; the plea
put forward by his agents as a reason for not opening Nanao as a port
to foreign trade was that if they did so the Government of the Tycoon
would inevitably seize upon it, and take possession of what had been
the birthright of Kaga since remote times. The emissaries raised every
possible objection, and the more they opposed the more determined Sir
Harry was to get something out of them. At last, after giving them the
roughest edge of his tongue, which in his case meant a good deal, he said
that since they were so unfriendly he should send two of his officials,
Mr. Satow and myself, to Kanazawa and thence we should travel overland
to join him at Ōsaka. This suggestion, as may be supposed, was not very
favourably received, and the interview broke up with a little less than a
show of politeness.

When the Tycoon’s people, officers who had been detailed to help
Commander Bullock on his surveying expedition, heard that Mr. Satow
and I were to undertake this journey overland, they made a great fuss,
declared that it was impossible; that they could not be answerable for
our lives, and that on behalf of their Government they must decline
all responsibility. The Tycoon’s writ clearly did not run in such
provinces as Kaga and Echizen, through which we must pass. But these were
considerations which left Sir Harry unmoved.

Still, though he was determined to gain some knowledge of the west coast,
where no foreigners had ever penetrated, and, if possible, to establish
relations with the clans and people, he was evidently a little nervous,
for when we were taking leave of him, and the Admiral and Captain Hewitt
went so far as to express great fear of the dangers which we must face,
he tried to make out that it was our own foolhardiness which prompted
the idea. This I repudiated at once, saying that we were quite willing
to obey his orders in the matter, as a question of duty, but that we
certainly should not have thought of undertaking the journey for a whim,
which would not be fair upon our people at home. Sir Harry only laughed.
To do him justice it was just the sort of trip that he himself would have
delighted in, for where his own life was concerned he was always as big a
gambler as the ace of spades.

[Illustration: THE AUTHOR, AGED 28.

_By Samuel Lawrence._]

We landed in the afternoon. The _Salamis_ got up steam and was off. The
_Basilisk_ followed. The _Serpent_ was still lying peacefully at anchor.
That evening we spent in making ready for our start the next morning.
The Tycoon’s officers tried hard to persuade us that they must go with
us. This we stoutly resisted; they would have been absolutely worse
than useless, for they were mere underlings, they could not protect us,
and would simply be spies interfering with any possibility of friendly
intercourse with the local people.

We pointed out to them that their duty was to remain with Commander
Bullock, under whose orders they at present were. In the end after a good
deal of whining on their part that if any evil thing happened to us they
would suffer, they agreed to leave us in peace provided that we would
absolve them from all responsibility; so at last they went off to the
_Serpent_, after having taken a formal receipt from the Kaga men for our
bodies, certified safe and sound at the time of delivery!

We started on the 10th of August. With the Kaga people sulky and still
sore at the dressing which they had received the day before from our
chief, the outset was not encouraging; however, grumpiness is no feature
of the Japanese nature, and no ill-will could for long make a stand
against Satow’s pleasant and conciliatory ways, and we were soon on far
better terms with our guides than we had any right to expect.

Two smart palanquins had been provided for us and ordinary ones for
our two attendants—Satow’s retainer, a Samurai named Noguchi, and my
Chinese servant Lin Fu. A guard of twenty men armed with sword and dirk,
long staves, and a crest of two paddles crossed, the badge of the Maéda
family,[1] was to escort us, whether for show or for protection might be
reckoned uncertain. They were, at any rate, of use in steering us through
the crowds which in every small town, village, or cluster of houses were
hustling for a first place to see the strange wild beasts.

Hot as it was, so soon as we were out of the town we left the cramping
discomforts of our palanquins and walked along the pretty valley trending
in a south-westerly direction. The scenery was charming—here a lagoon,
there a long stretch of seashore, and, above all, on the east the
towering mountains of Echiu, said to be some ten thousand feet high,
veritable “hills whose heads touch heaven.” Everywhere the characteristic
forest foliage of Japan; and where is foliage more picturesquely
beautiful?

We passed along one stretch of sandy beach fringing a sea the dancing
wavelets of which were as blue as the heaven above them, just the setting
for one of those old world legends in which the Japanese delight. Such
a legend is the story of the invention of the one-stringed lute, which
might have been dear to Paganini, though it is not played with a bow. It
is true that the scene of it lay far away in another province, but it
seems to fit in here, for it came to my mind as we wandered along the
romantic shore.

Once upon a time, in the dark long ago, there was at the Court of Kiōto
a Kugé, or noble, who was dearly loved by the Son of Heaven; but he had
reason to say, “Put not your trust in princes;” like women, they are apt
to change; in the caprice of a moment, the Kugé fell into disgrace and
was banished to a lonely place called Suma, a distant village occupied by
humble fisher-folk. Days and days he spent by the seaside, mourning over
the happiness which seemed to have fled from him for ever. One morning
on the beach he spied a water-worn board, a piece of jetsam from some
perished junk which the ebbing tide had left upon the sand, and as he
looked he wondered, and said to himself, for he was well skilled in art,
“Perhaps even this poor old piece of wreck may have music in it, had I
but the skill to draw out its soul.” So he pondered and racked his brain
to think how if it were fitted with a string and bridge the intervals
should be distanced. Remaining buried in thought, he of a sudden saw a
little flight of sandpipers who came and settled upon the beach near
him, making a pattern which seemed to him to have some mystic meaning in
it, and he wondered whether if he were to copy it on his piece of board
it might be the solution of his problem. When he put it to the test he
discovered to his joy that he had found the one-stringed lute which to
this day is known as Sumagoto, the harp of Suma.

So with sweet strains he beguiled the weariness of the long, lonely
hours. Hard by was a poor fisherman’s cottage, lowly indeed, but
exquisitely clean and dainty, with a whole garden of dark blue iris in
the warmly thatched roof. The old fisherman and his wife became very
friendly with the fallen noble, and their daughter, a lovely maiden of
sixteen, would sit by the hour listening entranced by the sweetness of
his music. They loved one another and were married, and she brought the
light of her beauty and grace to charm into happiness the misery of
his banishment. And so the months sped by until one day there came a
messenger from the court to say that pity had touched the heart of the
Son of Heaven and the Kugé was to be restored to his former dignities.
But he was a faithful lover, and took his humble mate with him to Kiōto,
where she became a great lady and they lived happily ever after. And that
is the story of the harp of Suma.

But this is a digression. Through the great heat we trudged along,
stopping once in a while to rest in the pleasant coolness of some pretty
tea-house, feasting on fragrant melons and those delicious apples which
are a dainty of that countryside. Some of the inns were very attractive
and the people most polite and kindly disposed; we had no reason to
complain of our reception in Kaga. The Kaga Samurai is not a fierce
warrior like the men of Satsuma and Tosa, nor is he an astute politician
like the leaders of the Chōshiu folk. Those we met seemed to be quiet and
peaceful, perhaps a little bit slow-coaches, rich and prosperous, while
their Prince, who, as I have hinted before, was rather inclined to sit
upon the fence, held an important position in the Empire on account of
his huge wealth.

Our second day’s journey lay through very pretty scenery, past Takamatsu,
a picturesque fishing village on the seashore, to Tsubata, a flourishing
little post-town, where we found a capital inn and spent the night
refreshed by an excellent Japanese dinner.

On Monday, the 12th of August, we started at 7.45 on our third day’s
tramp, which was to bring us to Kanazawa, the Kaga capital. We rested
in a temple at a place called Morimoto, where we had the usual feast of
melons and apples. The crowds were now beginning to be enormous; our
guides were anxious that we should walk into the city, the white castle
walls of which were visible peering out of a glorious dark cloud of pine
trees about a mile away.

We, however, had become surfeited of being a raree show at Ōsaka and
elsewhere, and we were conscious that in our shabby travelling clothes
we should present anything but a dignified appearance, so we tucked
ourselves up in our palanquins with the modesty of brides. Hordes of
spectators lined the streets, and even a lotus pond which commanded
a good view of a very pretty resting-place which had been prepared
for us was full of paddlers. The sightseers were of all ages, sorts
and conditions in life, and amongst them we noticed a great number of
comely maidens, for the ladies of Kaga are good to look upon. A tortuous
course brought us to our inn, where we were received with the most
dignified courtesy and all the hospitable politeness of which Japan is
such a pattern. Our sitting-room had been strewed with a huge velvet
pile carpet, and red lacquer chairs had been brought out of a temple
for our use, our hosts not realizing that long custom had inured us to
the native fashion of squatting on the mats. Soon an envoy arrived from
the Prince, expressing anxiety for our healths on account of the great
heat and regretting that he himself was not well enough to receive us;
I answered, swearing eternal friendship with Japan and especially with
Kaga, on behalf of Sir Harry Parkes. A feast was brought in at which the
envoy presided, and soon the very smart but very uncomfortable chairs
were discarded and we were hobnobbing with the _saké_ cups according to
true Japanese etiquette. Presently the Prince’s doctors arrived offering
medical attendance, pills and potions, in case we should need them.

At that time, be it remembered, the medical profession was still under
the Chinese influence, and we should hardly have been prepared to
subscribe to its methods, among which acupuncture and the burning with
moxa held a high but painful place. So we expressed our gratitude,
pleading excellent health as an excuse for not submitting to a
consultation. A political conversation followed, which was supposed to be
absolutely confidential, though as it was carried on in the presence of
apparently anybody who chose to come in and listen, the maintenance of
its deadly secrecy was not much to be relied upon.

That, however, was not our affair; we had nothing to conceal, for the
Tycoon’s Government knew perfectly well what was the object of our visit,
and that we should do all in our power to bring about the opening of
Nanao to foreign trade. The Kaga people used the old arguments. They
were perfectly ready to admit foreign trade, but they could not agree
to their harbour being made anything more than an anchorage where goods
might be landed; the rest would follow—but they repeated that they were
in deadly fear lest the Tycoon should make an attempt to seize it. By the
time the envoy left we had become excellent friends, and Satow had made
arrangements for carrying on communications with Kanazawa from Yedo. A
great point gained, for as I have said, the clan was one to be held in
reckoning. Satow even went so far as to offer to take two Kaga men as
pupils; two of the clan, we heard, were already studying in England.

As soon as our official interview was over we set out to see the town, a
huge place, hilly and picturesquely planted, of which the size had not
been exaggerated. It was said to hold 500,000 inhabitants. We found some
excellent shops where silks and lacquer and fans (for which the town is
famous, the sticks being the special secret of a family called Suba) were
to be had at exorbitant prices; but I managed to secure a very ancient
piece of lacquer, one of the three or four best specimens that ever came
in my way, and one or two other treasures. Kutani (“The nine valleys”)
is close to Kanazawa, and as a matter of course we had to buy a few
specimens of the curious red ware for which it is famous. We also found
some capital book-shops.

The civility and kindness of all the people whom we met was beyond
praise. In the evening we received a message from the _machi-bugiyo_, the
Governor of the city, begging us to prolong our stay and to make some
excursions in the neighbouring country. The invitation was so pressing
that we could not well refuse, and so on the following day, after a
morning of shopping at prices enhanced by the intermediary of the inn
servants, who could not resist the temptation of a small squeeze, we
started on horseback for Kanaiwa, an open roadstead about four miles off.
Our saddles, of European fashion, made of paper in imitation of leather,
and the bridles, were something that must be seen to be believed. The
unshod ponies were as bad as usual, but Japan is not a horsey country.

Two resting-places had been made ready to break this five-mile ride,
and another at the end! There was not much to be seen when we reached
our destination—a sandy beach and open sea, with a tiny stream running
into it. It was not easy to guess why our kind hosts had been so keen to
show it to us. We got home again before dark. In the evening two of the
Prince’s gentlemen came in for an after-dinner chat. They talked again
about the possibility of opening Nanao to foreign trade, saying very
sensibly that it would not be well to do anything which might have the
appearance of smuggling, and that it would be best to tell the Bakufu
(Government of the Tycoon) that if foreign vessels were admitted there
would surely be a certain amount of goods exchanged. We urged them to
write in that sense to Yedo. We then started upon general politics. Their
view as to the state of parties at that moment was that the Bakufu ought
to be supported on general principles, but that its power should be kept
within bounds. We talked on till late into the night, my conviction
still being that Kaga had not at that time any determined policy. It was
obvious that there was no leading influential man such as those whom
we knew in other clans. I handed them a letter of thanks for all the
kindness which we had received, which Satow translated into Japanese; and
they took their leave with great courtesy.

The following morning (August 14) we started off again after a most
friendly leave-taking, everybody begging us to come again. Our host
begs us to stop at a medicine shop kept by his father-in-law to buy a
wonderful drug called _shisetsu_, made of nitre and musk, a panacea for
all the ills to which flesh is heir. The crowds were as thick as ever,
with many very attractive young ladies. From our first resting-place we
looked back upon the great city where we had been so kindly received,
and saw the castle, typical of a feudalism that was so near its end,
standing with its high white towers on rising ground, lording it over the
burghers’ houses below, among the pine trees with which the whole town is
planted. A striking and picturesque view, and a happy memory, the value
of which is enhanced by that patina in which time enwraps all beautiful
things.

The rest of our journey through the province of Kaga was not very
eventful. Wherever we went we were met with the same gracious and
unexpected kindness that had made our stay at Kanazawa so pleasant. We
could not help being struck by the great prosperity of the country. We
passed through such towns as Mattō, with two thousand houses, Komatsu,
with two thousand five hundred, all under the mild rule of the Prince of
Kaga, and a happier people it would be difficult to find.

On the 15th we reached the frontier of Echizen, where to the outspoken
indignation of our Kaga friends, a petty official, a mere understrapper,
had been sent to meet us. Here again the Kaga people exacted from the
Echizen men a receipt for our bodies. I wonder how it was worded? Item,
received, two English officials, sound in wind and limbs, etc.? I should
have liked to have seen the document.

It pretty soon became evident that although the Echizen people were ready
to entertain us, and even to go to considerable expense in so doing, we
must not look for any real friendship. It was, no doubt, kind to give us
champagne and to provide smart pages of honour to fan us in the great
heat—small gentlemen who reminded one of the dear little boys who waited
upon the great Lord Cardinal when the wicked jackdaw of Reims stole his
ring, but there was no show of civility, and in Fukui, the capital, such
persons of gentle birth as flocked to the temple of Honguanji, where we
were, to tell the truth, magnificently lodged, only came to crowd the
passages and stare at us as if we had been gorillas. The intentional
rudeness was unmistakable. The Prince of Echizen was at that time
notoriously opposed to all foreign intercourse, and his feelings were
reflected in the conduct of his people.

On the 17th we crossed the Echizen boundary, glad to be quit of an
unfriendly and surly people, who again handed us over against a formal
receipt to the representatives of Ii Kamon no Kami. On the following
day we reached Nagahama, a place which had been visited by Sir Harry
Parkes and his party in May, so we were no longer a novelty and attracted
little attention, which was a mercy. Here we were met by an officer of
the Tycoon with a guard of eighteen of the Bettégumi (foreign guards),
which very much robbed the journey of its interest, for under the eyes
and ears of the Bakufu it was of course out of the question to hold any
familiar intercourse with the people of the various places through which
we might pass. This day we came to a place called Yanagosé, where there
was a curious institution, a _sekisho_, or barrier, which no woman might
go through without a passport. Talk about women’s rights!

On the 20th of August we reached Kasatsu, where we proposed to remain
for the afternoon to enable me to write up my report, which was bound
to be rather a long affair, for we had gathered together a formidable
budget of political and commercial information—now, after nearly half a
century crowded with stirring events, altogether obsolete, but at that
time full of interest. Here we met two or three officials with whom Satow
was acquainted, and with whom, after dinner, we were engaged until past
midnight in the usual discussions about politics, which, when held with
persons connected with the Bakufu, were as tedious as they were vapid.
More interesting, and as it turned out more fortunate for us, was the
interminable wrangle about the road which we were to take on the morrow.
We had determined on taking the shortest cut to Ōsaka, through Ōtsu, a
little town at the further end of the Biwa lake. The Japanese officials
were equally determined that we should not go to Ōtsu at all, making
every sort of difficulty, obviously on account of its proximity to Kiōto,
the sacred city. As a bait they offered to show us the famous temple of
Ishiyama, which had been closed to Sir Harry. We were obstinate, Satow
not a little suspicious at this great eagerness to take us sightseeing,
and quite appreciating what the real object was. The landlord of the
inn put in a word: “If the gentlemen are so eager to obtain commercial
information, why don’t they go to see the famous Uji tea-district? That
will be of great interest to them, whereas there is nothing to see at
Ōtsu.” We stuck to our guns, and expressed our unalterable decision to
take the nearest road by Ōtsu. We told them that we knew quite well what
they were driving at, and that they had been sent on purpose to play this
trick upon us; that if they had been candid with us we might have agreed,
but in the circumstances, No! They seemed very much crestfallen, but
returned to the charge.

At last I lost patience, and turning suddenly round, told them that if
they would write me an official letter explicitly stating their reasons,
I would go by Uji, if not, guard or no guard, we would go through
Ōtsu. After a little grumbling, they agreed to write such a letter,
and went away to draft it. No fewer than three drafts were rejected
as inadmissible, because they stated that we had not the Government
permission to travel, which as diplomatists we had a right to do, and
otherwise confused the issue; but at last they brought a satisfactory
letter, in which they said that great complications had arisen at Kiōto
on account of Sir Harry’s passing through in May, and they begged us
therefore as a favour to go by Uji. It was a hard-won triumph for us.

I have dwelt upon this midnight parley at Kusatsu at greater length than
would have been justifiable had it not been for its consequences.

When we reached Ōsaka two days later, Noguchi, Satow’s Samurai attendant,
went to a tea-house in the city in which he overheard a party of men
belonging to the Tosa clan, in a compartment separated from him by a
paper screen, telling of their disappointment at having the day before
missed the chance of murdering the two foreigners who were defiling the
neighbourhood of the sacred city. It appeared that a band of four hundred
men of the Tosa, Satsuma and Chōshiu clans had gone out to Ōtsu to lie in
wait for us. Had we taken the route which we proposed, through Ōtsu, we
should have been dead men. It was a narrow escape; a very near thing!

The fun of the thing was that the Japanese officials, in persuading us to
change our route, had not the remotest suspicion of what they were saving
us from.

Weeks afterwards I heard the whole story confirmed by Gotō Shōjirō. He
was at the time _rusui_, or agent in charge of the _yashiki_ (palace) of
the Prince of Tosa at Kiōto, and heard of the plot which he did all in
his power to stop. But his men broke out of the _yashiki_, determined to
wreak their hatred of foreigners on us. Gotō’s name must appear often
in these recollections; he became one of my best friends in Japan, and
risked his own life in the attack upon the Legation, when we were on our
way to the Mikado’s Court in the following year—as I shall presently
relate.

August 21st.—We left Kusatsu at 5.45 a.m. The heat was appalling; what
with mosquitoes and discussions we had had but scanty sleep; moreover
we had for the last day or two had little food, save rice with tea,
of which we could not eat our fill, for the condiments with which the
Japanese encourage their appetite for rice were as salt as brine, and to
us impossible. Partly by river, and partly on the tramp, stopping every
now and then to wash out our mouths, through beautiful scenery with a
glorious view of the great plain in which lie Kiōto and Fushimi—the
place of the thrilling memories of the civil war—we reached Uji at four
o’clock, very much done up with the heat and very tired.

As for the famous Temple of Ishiyama, which was to be the reward of our
listening to the blandishments of our friends of the night before, it
had been hermetically sealed to us, and all our knocking at the door
brought no answer. Seven years afterwards, on board a steamer in the
Pacific, I met a Japanese gentleman who had been present and had watched
our discomfiture and vain knockings. We bought a little tea at Uji, as
a matter of course; and at six o’clock got into a comfortable houseboat
in which we drifted down the stream, resting and looking back upon the
entrancing view. Toward morning we fell asleep.

August 22nd at 5.30 a.m. we were in sight of the glorious old Castle of
Ōsaka, and landing at six, took up our quarters in our old temple in
the Nakadéramachi. So our venturesome eleven days’ journey came to an
end; it had been intensely interesting and exciting. We never knew what
might happen; when we lay down at night we blessed our luck that there
had been no mischance, and when the morning came we pinched ourselves to
see whether we were really still alive: there were so many wandering
anti-foreign fanatics throughout the country, against whom even our kind
Kaga friends could not have protected us! However, it all ended well, and
we were successful in gaining all the information that our chief wanted.
Unfortunately the interest of our expedition paled before a tragedy. For
at five Sir Harry Parkes arrived with the news of the cruel murder of two
bluejackets of H.M.S. _Icarus_. They had been literally hacked to pieces
by a party of brawling Samurai. These poor fellows’ fate brought home to
us the danger to which we had so nearly fallen victims.

This murder led to endless interviews and discussions, which were
complicated by the fact that our people were on the wrong tack. There was
a suspicion that the murderers were Samurai of the Tosa clan—a suspicion
born of the fact that a small steamer and a sailing vessel belonging to
Tosa had slipped secretly out of Nagasaki harbour before daylight on the
morning after the crime had been committed. It was afterwards proved that
they belonged to a quite different clan, which was duly punished later.
But the chief murderer had previously committed suicide by _hara-kiri_.

The discussions served to make us better acquainted and increased our
respect for Gotō Shōjirō, who represented his Prince and who proved
himself to be a man of first-rate ability, quite able to hold his own
against our rather peppery chief—not an easy man to discuss matters with.
He turned out to be one of the three or four ablest men who engineered
the revolution. Like the famous Saigo, of Satsuma, and others of the
leaders in the various clans, Gotō expressed himself as keenly anxious to
establish a Gi-ji-in, or parliament. That did not come about until some
eighteen months later, and when it did ripen into being it turned out to
be a very embryonic affair.

Mercifully for Japan, speech-making had never played the same part in her
public life that it has done in some other countries, and the Parliament
started more like a debating society in a public school than a grave
assembly of legislators, which, as a matter of fact, they were not. They
might register their opinions, but they could not enact laws.

August 31st.—Satow and myself had been invited by the Prince of Awa
to go and pay him a visit at his castle in the Island of Shikoku (“the
four countries,” so called from the principalities of Awa, Tosa, Sanuki
and Iyo into which it was divided). Had the visit taken place as it was
originally meant, we should no doubt have been able over the wine-cups
to gather a good deal of information as to the attitude of the four
clans in the crisis, together with a good many particulars in regard to
the personalities of their leading men. But unfortunately at the last
moment Sir Harry Parkes insisted on going too, with the Admiral and
their respective staffs, in the _Salamis_ and the _Basilisk_; so the
whole expedition was spoilt, and degenerated into a sort of official
demonstration, at which the usual stale old political platitudes were
served up—perfectly useless discussions, in which sincerity was apt to
play a very meagre part on both sides. The weather, moreover, played us
every conceivable trick by which to make us uncomfortable.

The Prince, however, was very kind and courteous, and he had prepared
a most amusing theatrical entertainment for us, in which his retainers
acted with great spirit. They were dressed in the long trousers worn
at Court, but did not wear the _yéboshi_ (black lacquer cap). The plot
of the first piece, which consisted of three characters, the master, a
servant and a guest, was very funny. The master tells his servant to
imitate him in everything that he does, and the servant takes the order
literally, and passes on to the guest everything that the master says to
him. The enraged master cuffs the servant, who passes the thrashing on to
the guest, and so it goes on—a series of practical jokes like the “spill
and pelt” scene in a pantomime, until the master’s patience is exhausted
and he finally kicks the servant out.

Then came what was a sort of Oriental first-cousin to Offenbach’s _Les
Deux Aveugles_. A man advertises for persons deprived by nature of their
senses or limbs to enter his service. In answer to this there arrive a
lame man, a dumb man, and a blind man—all these parts capitally acted.
These three cripples are ruined gamblers who have adopted their disguises
as beggars to get employment. The great man accepts them, and having
placed them in charge of three storehouses, goes out. The men recognize
one another and propose to go to the storehouse where the _saké_ is
kept and have a drink, after which they may divide the money in the
treasure-house. Of course they get roaring drunk, and by the time the
master comes back each has forgotten his part. The blind man becomes
dumb, the lame man blind, and the dumb man is afflicted with deafness.
The exposure of the impostors is full of fun.

After the play—the wine-cup and bibulous affection. The Prince of Awa
swears that he is the Admiral’s son and elder brother to Sir Harry
Parkes; Awaji no Kami, the Prince’s son, claims intimate relationship
with Satow.

The next day there was a review of some five hundred men in a sort of
tatterdemalion European dress, some with boots, some without, those who
had them being as “justly vain” as Sir Plume “of amber snuff-box and the
nice conduct of a clouded cane.” The drill was capital.

In the evening I left for Yedo in the _Salamis_ with the Admiral. Satow
went to Sasaki in Tosa with Sir Harry to investigate the case of the
_Icarus_ murders. The Tosa people, who, as I have said, were ultimately
proved to be innocent, with Gotō as spokesman, took up a very dignified
position. Yōdo (the _de facto_ ruler of the clan, though he had nominally
become _inkiyō_ (retired) whom Satow visited) declared that if his men
were proved guilty he would punish them; if they were innocent nothing
should stir him from his line of conduct. It must have been galling to
Sir Harry to be told by Gotō that he was allowing his temper to get the
better of his discretion. A dignified demeanour is the only attitude
to observe with the Japanese, who, whatever their faults may be, are
gentlemen to their finger-tips. Bluster does not succeed, but that was a
lesson which our chief, with all his great qualities, never learned, and
in this case he was completely worsted.

Satow remained at Nagasaki till the 7th of November, so I was all alone
at Yedo in my little temple Monriuin. As a precaution I had the walks
all round the garden strewn with cockle-shells to sound an alarm in the
event of there being any unwelcome visitors after dark. One night I was
awakened about twelve o’clock by the crunching of my faithful guardian
cockles. I jumped up and lighted candles and lamps, roused the servants,
gave my sword and revolver to my Chinese servant, Lin Fu, upon whom I
could depend, and stood at the chief door with my Spencer rifle. The
ruffians, seeing that we were ready for them, made off. There were five
or six of them, as I knew, for it had been raining heavily and the
following morning I found the marks in the grass where they had slid in a
sitting position down the little hill, which was deeply scored with their
posteriors and heels—mighty unpleasant! I was too near the evilly-reputed
wine-shops of Shinagawa, famous like the wynds of Old Edinburgh for
brawls between the clans, and as the haunts of the Jō-i, the fanatics
opposed to foreign intercourse.

Another time, as I was leaving home in the morning to go to the
Legation, I saw the dead body of a Samurai lying in a pool of blood
outside my gate. It was covered with a piece of matting, but the head
had been carried off to be deposited, according to the strict rules of
_Kataki-uchi_ (vendetta), upon the grave of an enemy killed by last
night’s victim in some previous quarrel.

These were quite everyday occurrences in the Yedo of what the Japanese
now call “the olden time” (_mukashi_)—that is the period before the
revolution, only forty-eight years ago!

Meantime, although there was no great outward show politically, the
underground fires of revolution were silently gathering strength. The
Tycoon had resigned his office—in fact abolished it—though he still in
some inconsistent way claimed to be conducting affairs, and of course
remained at the head of the Tokugawa clan. The Daimios, with Satsuma,
Chōshiu and Tosa at their head, were said to be arming, and even to have
established a camp at Ōsaka. The Tosa people asserted that the Tycoon,
in his resignation, had only followed the advice contained in a memorial
from their clan, dated in October, which they showed to Satow. The
document advocated the establishment of a Parliament consisting of an
upper and lower house, the erection of schools of science and learning
in the great cities, and the negotiation of new foreign treaties. The
emissaries of the Daimios were more than ever keen to obtain instruction
in Parliamentary procedure. They were evidently all anxiety to stand well
with us.

[Illustration: OLD JAPAN.

_From a water-colour drawing by C. Wirgman._]




CHAPTER XXI

JAPAN. CIVIL WAR


On the 30th of November at daylight, Satow and I, in our usual characters
as diplomatic stormy petrels, sailed for Ōsaka to make all preparations
for the opening of that city and Hiōgo on the first day of that new year
which was to come big with the birth of a new power and fraught with
events as momentous, perhaps, as any that the history of the world has
seen. We reached Ōsaka on the 3rd of December, and were at once plunged
in the political whirlpool. Besides that we had to prepare quarters
for the Minister and his staff and the mounted escort, with fifty men
of the 9th Regiment. Much building of palisades, bonded warehouses,
custom houses, etc., was going on at what was to be the future foreign
settlement. This was going a little too fast, and we had to put a stop
to any further work until the Ministers should arrive. They might have
a good deal to say upon the subject, especially as to the palisades,
which were not a very encouraging indication of the intentions of the
Government to promote intercourse between West and East.

On the 7th we had an interview with members of the Tycoon’s Council of
State who were on their way to Yedo, and whom he had ordered to see us.
We did not get much information out of them except that the Tycoon’s
resignation was merely the carrying out of an intention formed long ago.
We were not convinced, nor were we shaken in our belief that he had been
driven to it by the persistent attitude of the clans.

On the 12th of December we had to leave for Hiōgo in order to see what
preparations were being made there for the great event. We found that
the people were in high spirits at the prospect of the opening of the
port. In Kōbé, where the foreign settlement was to be, there had been
seven days of feasting and merry-making, and there had been processions
of people dressed in red crape with carts which were supposed to carry
earth for the site of the new settlement. Similar fêtes were in prospect
in the town of Hiōgo itself. The people obviously saw that foreign trade
would spell prosperity for them.

When we got back to Ōsaka on the 13th, we found the city in an uproar
of joy and excitement. It appeared that all this was in honour of a
miraculous shower which had recently taken place of slips of paper
bearing the titles of the Gods of Isé—the ancestral shrine of Old Japan
and the chief place of the Shintō cult. Thousands and thousands of happy
fanatics were dancing along the streets dressed in holiday garb of red
and blue crape and carrying red lanterns on their heads, shouting till
they must have been hoarse, “I ja nai ka, i ja nai ka!” “How delightful,
how delightful!” The houses were decorated with many-coloured cakes,
oranges, silken bags, emblematic ropes of straw such as are hung before
the Shintō shrines, and a profusion of flowers.

It was a weird and wonderful sight, such as, maybe, will never be seen
again; and yet folk-lore and old reverences die hard. Even though all
this should be _mukashi_, as much so as the mysteries of Stonehenge are
to us, one may hope that it may yet have some life in it. “Le respect du
passé est la piété filiale des peuples,” was a fine saying of the Duc de
Broglie; one which, in these degenerate days, I never weary of quoting,
and we foreigners must not forget what the Japanese owe to the Yamato
Damashii, the spirit of old Japan. It is upon the legends of the Shintō
that it is founded. Then let the simple folk, “the hundred names,” dance
like David before the Ark, in honour of showers of paper, for to them
they mean the sacred traditions of a glorious past, and upon these is
based a heroism before which the world has bowed its head in admiration.

No sooner were we back in Ōsaka than the old political conversations
began again. Satsuma, Chōshiu, Tosa, Uwajima and Geishiu were solid for
a change; other Daimios inclined to join, but vacillating. One thing we
were clearly given to understand: if the intrigues now going on at Kiōto
failed, the Daimios would revert to the old game of murderous attacks
upon foreigners, not from any dislike of foreign intercourse, of which
they were indeed in favour, but simply in order to embroil the Tycoon
with the Treaty Powers. The obvious answer to this was that whatever
might happen in that way, the Tycoon could not be held responsible for
the action of persons over whom he, as they admitted, had no control!

The arrival of leading men in Ōsaka, so near Kiōto, at this time was very
significant. Saigo, the famous Satsuma general, who died years afterwards
by _hara-kiri_ in the rebellion of his clan, and Gotō Shōjirō were very
conspicuous figures. The latter talked a great deal about the scheme to
murder Satow and myself at Ōtsu in August and gave us many particulars.
It was a merciful escape.

Letters from Yedo showed that there the demolition of the Bakufu was an
accomplished fact. On the 20th we had an interview with Ito Shunské,
which is worth noting because it was one of our first communications
with a man, then in a humble position, who afterwards, as Prince Ito,
became the most powerful political personage in Japan. He told us that
war was quite inevitable, the object being to deprive the Tycoon of his
territory, which was far too large for the peace of the country. He would
have preferred to put off the arrival of the Foreign Representatives
and the opening of the ports, but when he was told that this was out of
the question, he said that in that case the opening must take place in
order to keep foreigners quiet whilst the plans for the reformation of
the country went on. We both warned him that if, in the course of the
revolution, foreigners were attacked or any attempt should be made to
upset the Treaties, the Japanese would be bringing upon themselves a very
grave responsibility. He admitted the force of this and promised to keep
Satow posted as to any movement that might be on foot.

On the 24th Sir Harry Parkes arrived with the other members of the
Legation, and took possession of the quarters which we had prepared in
a great tumbledown _Yashiki_ behind the castle; not perhaps the safest
place in case trouble should arise, for fighting would be focussed upon
the stronghold, but all things considered, the best that could be had.

Satow and myself were now very much more under observation than we had
been, and it was not easy to keep up our communications with the Daimios
party. The Tycoon’s guard kept a pretty sharp look-out, but we managed
to defeat them by climbing over the walls of the Legation buildings at
night, and joining our friends outside, who led us by tortuous ways to
one or other of their _Yashikis_ where we were able to confer with them
comfortably. In this way, like a couple of boys breaking out to rob a
neighbour’s apple-orchard, we contrived to keep our chief posted as to
what was going on; practical, but hardly very dignified. The end must be
held as justification for the means.

The 1st of January, 1868, was really the birthday of the new
dispensation. Up to this time, for many months, the country had been in
a fever of unrest; there had been plots and counterplots, conspiracies
and intrigues of which I have tried to give some indication, though
their details would fill volumes; there had been the resignation, or
sham resignation, of the Tycoon; there had been a gradual massing of
troops near Kiōto: the Prince of Chōshiu, who had been in disgrace, had
been forgiven, save the mark! by the Tycoon, and the Prince of Aidzu
was said to have resigned the guardianship of the palace as a sign of
his resentment of this leniency—but the report was not true, as will
be seen presently: the witch’s cauldron was seething and boiling, but
so far the peace had not actually been broken; the Daimios were still
protesting that their object was only to curb the Tycoon and restrain an
overwhelming power which had been abused.

We began to feel that the dogs of war were loose. We learned that the
Prince of Satsuma had proposed the abolition of the Tycoon and the
other old officers of State, substituting for them something analogous
to a Constitutional Government with Secretaries of State and the whole
machinery of an executive; a proposal in which we could not but recognize
the reflection of hints which, at his request, Satow and I had given
to Gotō Shōjirō. Satsuma’s views met with great opposition, many men
dreading such Radical ideas as perhaps likely to end by threatening
the kingship of the Mikado himself. Our informant said that this was no
matter for argument, it must be decided by war. The Tycoon, he admitted,
would raise no difficulties, being bent on preserving the peace of the
country at whatever cost to himself. But he could not control his people.

Things were now moving at lightning speed and every day brought some
new development. Rumours came flying fast and furious—some true, some
garbled, some false—but all pointing in one direction.

On the 7th of January an official of the Bakufu came to tell us that the
Tycoon had left Kiōto and was on his way to Ōsaka to have an interview
with M. Roches. This naturally was a mere pretext; as a matter of fact he
was leaving Kiōto because his office had come to an end. The Aidzu men
who had charge of the nine gates of the Mikado’s palace had been ousted
by Imperial command and the sacred precincts and the Emperor himself were
in the hands of the coalition Daimios. Practically the end had come.

Satow and I went out to see what was going on. We found the streets
being patrolled by soldiers with field pieces placed so as to sweep
the approaches to the castle. It was bitterly cold and the men had
their heads wrapped in mufflers—a curious addition to the pomp and
circumstance of uniform. The Aidzu people, who were posted about, told
us that the reason for the Tycoon’s withdrawal was his unwillingness to
allow fighting to take place near the precincts of the palace—a sort of
“Star Chamber” reason. They said that Satsuma wanted to do everything by
force—so like that martial clan! Tosa, on the other hand, was all for
proceeding by reason; but in either case the object was the same. As for
Gotō’s scheme for a Constitution, Japan was not ripe for that: the change
would be too sudden and too violent.

In the afternoon it became evident that the Tycoon was now close by. We
saw wonderful groups of men clad in armour. They were very civil and full
of patriotic declarations of readiness to die in the Tycoon’s cause, and
indeed, as events proved, these were no empty boasts. They were beaten,
but not before hundreds of Tokugawa men had died the death of heroes.
Presently the bugles sounded and we saw a long procession of troops
coming towards the castle.

A more extravagantly weird picture it would be difficult to imagine.
There were some infantry armed with European rifles, but there were also
warriors clad in the old armour of the country carrying spears, bows and
arrows, falchions, curiously shaped, with sword and dirk, who looked
as if they had stepped out of some old pictures of the Gem-Pei wars in
the Middle Ages. Their _jimbaoris_, not unlike heralds’ tabards, were
as many-coloured as Joseph’s coat. Hideous masks of lacquer and iron,
fringed with portentous whiskers and moustachios, crested helmets with
wigs from which long streamers of horsehair floated to their waists,
might strike terror into any enemy. They looked like the hobgoblins of a
nightmare. Soon a troop of horsemen appeared. The Japanese all prostrated
themselves and bent their heads in reverent awe. In the midst of the
troop was the fallen Prince, accompanied by his faithful adherents, Aidzu
and Kuwana. The Prince himself seemed worn and dejected, looking neither
to the right nor to the left, his head wrapped in a black cloth, taking
notice of nothing. Some of those with him recognized us and returned
our salutes. It was a wild and wonderful sight and one of the saddest
that I ever beheld. At the gate all dismounted, according to custom—save
only the War Lord himself; he rode in, a solitary horseman. It was the
last entry of a Shōgun into the grand old castle which had come into the
heritage of the Tokugawa by one tragedy, and was to pass out of their
possession by another. In each case fire, “the calamity of the dancing
horse,”[2] played its cruel part.

Sir Harry Parkes at once asked for an appointment to see the Shōgun on
the following day, which was declined; but hearing that M. Roches was
to be received, our chief was not to be held; he insisted upon making
his way in, with Satow and me—to the outspoken disgust of the French
colleague—and the two ministers were received together—not without some
recriminations and angry words between them. The Shōgun, or rather
ex-Shōgun, as he now was, seemed greatly depressed; he was a very
different man from the handsome, proud noble who had received us with
so much dignity in the preceding May. The many troubles, sorrows and
indignities which he had undergone were written in his face. He repeated
the old story of his having left Kiōto from patriotic motives, in order
to avoid civil war, which would be waged almost in the sacred presence
of the Emperor. He said that he should remain in Ōsaka, but did not
know whether he would be attacked. As to the existing order of things,
he said that the Mikado nominally ruled, but that Kiōto was occupied by
an unruly set of men, who did nothing but quarrel among themselves and
had no notion of governing. The two ministers applauded his action—the
Frenchman in fulsome language, Sir Harry in more measured terms. There
was obviously nothing much to be drawn from him, and as he complained of
feeling tired, the rather barren conference came to an end.

That evening Sir Henry Keppel, who, with my old friend, his flag
lieutenant (now Admiral Sir Henry Stephenson, Black Rod), and that
grand sailor and gallant gentleman, Captain Chandos Scudamore Stanhope,
of H.M.S. _Ocean_,[3] was on shore, insisted on my going off with him
to Hiōgo to sleep on board the _Rodney_, and hear the band play. It
was blowing great guns, and I felt pretty certain that the perfidious
bar which I knew only too well would be dangerous if not impassable. I
told this to the Admiral, but he pooh-poohed the objections of a mere
landsman, and said that I “did not know what a steam-launch could do.” So
off we went with a second boat in tow. Darkness set in, and by the time
we reached the mouth of the river it was black night.

The wind was howling like Bedlam; the sea was terrific; now and then
there was a rift in the clouds, and we could see the mockery of the
wicked moon shining luridly through the ugly green waves which towered
over us, hungry to swallow us up; we expected to go under any minute.

It soon became evident that we must cast off the boat which we were
towing; there was no other chance for her, and our desertion saved her.
Captain Stanhope took the helm, keeping the launch’s bows to the beating
seas; as he stood in the stern with his teeth set, a grim statue, as if
he had been carved in stone, he was splendid. There was one specially
evil moment, when the Admiral turned to me and said: “I don’t know what
you think, but I have never seen death so near.” This coming from the
hero of the Fatshan Creek—when his coxswain had his telescope driven
into his stomach, his boat was sunk and five of his crew killed—the old
sea warrior, who had survived heaven knows how many deadly fights with
the wild head-hunters and pirates of Borneo—was not reassuring. Stanhope
gave a sort of ghastly grin, but he went on doing battle with the demons
in the waves; it was a tough fight, but at last he managed to bring us
alongside a French man-of-war, the _Laplace_, which was lying in the
roads, with H.M. surveying ship _Sylvia_ about a mile away. We hung on to
the Frenchman; the officers were very kind to us; they lowered sardines
and biscuits and mulled claret to us—the latter most acceptable, for we
were up to our waists in water, drenched to the skin and half-frozen.

They tried to send a chair down to hoist us on board, but the sea was
running so high that it was impossible; the chair and its occupant would
have been dashed to pieces against the ship’s side. So there we remained,
being played cup and ball with for five hours; at last there came a
slight—a very slight—lull in the storm; the Admiral determined to avail
himself of it in order to make the _Sylvia_; it was a critical moment,
for we had to turn in the trough of the sea and a second too late would
have been fatal; had we shipped a wave our fires would have gone out,
and then! But Stanhope was not the man to make a mistake; we danced on
to the curled crest of the preceding wave, and after a struggle for life
reached the _Sylvia_; by that time there was some further abatement of
the weather, and we were able to be hoisted up one by one into safety and
the joy of sleep between hot blankets, after a steaming and strong glass
of grog.

When we reached Hiōgo on the next afternoon, we were met by the news that
the United States Admiral Bell, with his flag lieutenant and all his
boat’s crew, had been drowned on the bar in the same storm. The English
newspapers made a muddle between the two Admirals, and in London we were
reported lost.[4]

On the 10th I had to go back to Ōsaka with despatches for Sir Harry. I
was sent in a steam launch commanded by Lieutenant Leventhorpe. The storm
had hardly abated. The wind was still raging furiously. The impression of
the night of the 8th, heightened by the death of Admiral Bell, was upon
me, and I confess that I did not like it! But we all had on life-belts,
and we got past the bar in safety. Still our troubles were not over, for
as we neared the castle, we saw that one of the bridges was crowded with
a very hostile mob, some of whom were making ready to sink our launch
with a huge block of stone. In the nick of time our coxswain saw it, gave
the boat’s nose a twist, and the great rock splashed harmlessly into
the waves within a couple of feet of us. Some forty years later I had a
very nice letter from that good fellow, who had done us such excellent
service, asking me whether I remembered the occurrence, and the glee with
which I called out to him, “Well done, coxswain!”

When I reached Ōsaka on the evening of the 10th I found that on
that afternoon a conference had taken place between the Foreign
Representatives and the ex-Shōgun, as he now was, on the invitation
of the latter, who was desirous of making a statement on the present
condition of affairs. In the meantime it should be mentioned that
following the example of his own officials, he was no longer addressed by
his former high-sounding titles, but simply as Uyé-sama, which I should
translate by “Highness.”

Great interest attaches to this address, for it contained internal
evidence that it was his own composition and new even to those of his
advisers who were present, for the gentlemen of the Foreign Office,
who feared to see their occupation gone and themselves reduced to the
condition of “the hundred names,” could hardly suppress their surprise
and joy when he announced that he would continue to direct foreign
affairs. Their pleasure, however, was fated to be short-lived. The
statement ran as follows:

    “My ancestor, Iyéyasu, settled the form of government in Japan
    in its fundamental principles and all its details; for upwards
    of two centuries there has been no one, from the Emperor down
    to the humblest of the people, who has not paid respect to
    his virtue, or who has not reaped the benefit of his good
    intentions. But the world has changed. Since the conclusion
    of the treaties with Foreign Powers it has been impossible
    not to be aware of certain shortcomings in laws which, up to
    that time, had been held to be all-sufficient and good. From
    the first moment when I succeeded my predecessor I felt this,
    and determined, in collaboration with Kiōto, to introduce a
    reformation of these laws. Inspired by an honest love for my
    country, and for the people, I laid down the Power which I had
    inherited, and with the understanding on the other hand that I
    should call a meeting of all the Princes of the country, with
    a view to discussing the matter from the point of view of a
    reform of the constitution for the public weal, and deciding it
    by the vote of the majority, I placed the conduct of affairs in
    the hands of the Imperial Court.

    “In order to the fulfilment of this great work, my resignation
    of the government was accepted by His Highness the Regent,
    who had been appointed by the late Emperor as protector and
    adviser of the young Ruler and by several of the Princes of the
    blood and Nobles of the Court; at the same time I received the
    Imperial command to carry on the government as before, until a
    decision of the assembly of territorial Lords should be arrived
    at. I waited for this assembly and was firmly resolved to take
    part in it. In the most unexpected way, however, one morning
    several Princes broke into the Palace with an armed force,
    drove out His Highness the Regent, who had been appointed by
    the Emperor, together with the Princes of the blood and the
    Nobles of the Court, introducing in their stead certain Nobles
    who had been banished by the dead Emperor, and abolished
    the office of Shōgun, without waiting for the decision of
    the proposed general meeting of the Council. My Hatamotos”
    (petty nobles of the Tycoon’s court) “and vassal Princes were
    profoundly indignant, and pressed upon me day and night the
    absolute necessity of resisting by force of arms a crime which
    broke the laws and set at nought the will of the people. But
    inasmuch as my original intention in laying down the government
    had been to assure the union of all classes of the people, such
    exaggerated zeal was in contradiction to the determination
    which I had adopted.

    “Whatever my rights might be I would not be the cause of a
    national revolution. It is with a view to avoiding such an
    unhappy disturbance of the peace that I have come to Ōsaka.
    My reasons for this procedure are not those which superficial
    observers might presuppose. When I consider this criminal
    proceeding from the point of view of love for my country and
    its people, I cannot look with indifference upon the fact that
    they have made themselves masters of the person of the young
    Emperor, and under the pretext of the Imperial will, have given
    the reins to their own egotistical desires, bringing suffering
    upon the people. This is a complication which I am bound to
    disentangle for the benefit of my people. Should there be any
    people who disagree with me, I shall endeavour to persuade
    them to bow to a majority of a general assembly and to pray
    earnestly for a successful government of the country. Sharing
    as I do the zeal of my ancestor, Iyéyasu, in his love for
    the people, and striving with all my might to carry out the
    intentions left behind him by the dead Emperor, I am inspired
    by the earnest desire to unite my strength with that of the
    whole nation, to carry out with all right and wisdom the task
    which I have set myself, and to give effect to the views of the
    assembly.

    “There is no need for the Powers with which we have concluded
    treaties of amity to trouble themselves about our internal
    affairs. All that is of importance is that they should not
    hinder the course of just principles. Insomuch as I have
    loyally observed all the conditions of the treaties, I hope
    all the more to deserve your approbation if I protect the
    interests of all the Powers. You will, moreover, understand
    that until the form of government shall have been settled by
    a general discussion in an assembly of the people, it is my
    duty to observe the treaties, and to carry out the agreements
    which have been come to with Foreign Powers, and in general to
    maintain relations with abroad.” (See Herr von Brandt’s “Drei
    und dreissig Jahre in Ost Asien,” Vol. II., p. 170.)

After this remarkable address, which seems to me to be of sufficient
interest to be given in full, the leave-taking was preceded by an
anti-climax of the usual platitudes.

In the meantime the Daimios were becoming more and more united, and
were pressing for the Tycoon’s reply to the proposal that he should
surrender to the Mikado property to the value of two million Kokus of
rice, in order to form the nucleus of a national revenue. Tosa and other
chieftains proposed that they should follow suit, but Satsuma, not yet
quite educated up to the glories of self-sacrifice, was said to shy at
this idea, for which the time was not quite ripe; yet only a few more
months were needed for its consummation.

The next few days were full of interest, though there was nothing more
to be got out of the Uyésama, who by pertinacious questions about the
British Constitution adroitly parried all attempts on the part of Sir
Harry Parkes to draw him. In the meanwhile Satow and myself continued
our surreptitious visits to the Satsuma Yashiki, where we met important
men who had been sent down from Kiōto to confer with us. We had but one
doctrine to preach: let the Mikado invite the Foreign Representatives to
audience at Kiōto, and himself take over the direction of Foreign Affairs.

The news from Yedo was as bad as could be. A Satsuma Princess, widow of
the last Tycoon but one, had been spirited away by the Satsuma clansmen
in Yedo, upon which the Tycoon’s people retaliated by burning the three
Satsuma Yashikis in that city. The clansmen took refuge in a steamer
belonging to their Prince and put to sea with the Tycoon’s ships in hot
pursuit. This resulted in an insignificant sea action.

Two of our student interpreters, Messrs. Quin and Hodges, had been fired
upon as they passed in a native boat under the Satsuma battery; but no
damage was done. The Tycoon’s ship _Eagle_ was met by H.M.S. _Rodney_ off
Cape Ōshima on the 23rd—minus a foreyard arm; obviously the position was
acute and fighting there must be.

On the 27th of January we saw the sky lurid with fire in the direction of
Kiōto and heard that there had been fighting between the Tycoon’s troops
and the Daimios at Fushimi. A servant in Willis’ employ came in from that
direction; he reported large numbers of clansmen camped round great fires
in the streets. On the hither side of Fushimi were a regiment of the
Tycoon’s troops and bands of irregulars all eager for the fray.

On the 28th the Satsuma Yashiki, where we used to visit our friends from
Kiōto, was burned down—either by its inmates or, as some said, fired by
shells from the Tycoon’s troops. The Satsuma men escaped in boats, but
were fired upon from the banks and two men were killed. News came in
that Fushimi was in flames—burnt by the Daimios men who had disputed the
entry into Kiōto of the Tycoon’s troops. More soldiers of the latter were
going up. All sorts of rumours were flying about, among others a report
that the Daimios were tired of Satsuma and his arrogance. This did not
stop the fighting, nor alas! the burning of small towns and villages, the
flames of which we could see in the distance. It was heart-rending.

On the evening of the 29th we heard that the Tycoon’s troops were beaten.
At eleven o’clock of the 30th we received an intimation from the Tycoon
that he could no longer protect us. The Tycoon’s messenger promised to
get us boats to take us down the river, and we set to work to pack up the
Legation archives and what we could of our belongings.

At four o’clock in the morning a letter came from M. Roches, telling us
that he had learned that the clansmen’s troops would enter the town soon
after daylight.

It would be of but moderate interest now to relate in detail our troubles
of the next day or two, the difficulty of getting boats, the labour of
moving such chattels as we could, leaving the rest to be burnt or looted
with the Legation buildings. On the 2nd of February a first puff of smoke
announced the firing of the castle with all its glories of art. It was
time that we should leave Ōsaka. It had not been easy in those distracted
times to procure fresh food, and our men were beginning to suffer from
scurvy; a change to Hiōgo was to them a godsend.

On the 31st of January the Uyésama himself, who had been all this time in
the Castle of Ōsaka waiting the course of events, escaped in disguise in
the U.S. ship _Iroquois_, from which he transhipped into one of his own
steamers and made off to Yedo.

There has been much exaggeration as to the numbers of troops engaged at
Fushimi. There were probably not more than ten thousand of the Tycoon’s
men against some six thousand of the clansmen. And no doubt the former
would have given a better account of themselves had there not been
treachery in their camp. The General in command at a most important point
turned traitor, and the enemy suddenly poured in upon them in a quarter
where they believed themselves to be perfectly safe. Then the Tycoon’s
Commander-in-Chief deserted to the enemy. The game was up.

My part in the flight from Ōsaka was very exciting. The rest of the
Legation went down the river in boats, as I have said, and so by sea
to Hiōgo. (Shall I ever forget the sight of our dear old giant Willis,
squatting like a man-mountain on the top of the great boxes containing
the archives—for he was Chancelier as well as Doctor?) I, on the other
hand, was ordered to ride to Hiōgo in charge of the mounted escort.
We started in bitter weather with a blizzard in our teeth from the
north-west; it pricked so hard that now and then the horses would try
to turn round, and only with spur and whip could they be made to face
it. The case was awkward, for having no more to go by than the points of
the compass, we missed our way, and had to travel for a good many miles
through paddy fields of which the narrow banks were slippery with sleet
and ice. At one place two of the men, whose horses absolutely refused to
go forward, were deposited in the horrible slush of the field and were,
of course, drenched. Those who know rice fields need not be told of their
condition.

In great misery our beasts skated along the banks making very slow
progress, and I was in despair of reaching Hiōgo before dark, when at
last, after several hours, I came upon the high road at a place where
the left bank of a broad river was occupied by some eight hundred or a
thousand soldiers, waiting to be ferried across. I did not know to what
clan, or even to what party, they belonged, and I confess that my heart
was in my mouth. However, as my men came up in single file, I passed
down the word to them to take no notice whatever might happen, but if
they should be in any way insulted or molested to come to me. I went up
at once to the commander of the troops and addressed him with the utmost
ceremony, telling him who we were, and expressing the warmest friendship.
To my great relief he was quite polite and most amiable, making many
excuses for the delay which the ferrying over of his men would cause us;
I, on the other hand, apologizing to him for disturbing his men. We were
soon on the best of terms, and as soon as his soldiers were all on the
other side he sent back the ferry-boat for us. After crossing the river
we overtook him and his men again at Amagasaki; they were marching in a
great open space near the castle. My friend the commander gave a word
of command: “Halt! Front! Present arms!” My men carried their lances
and so we rode through the town in great state, and without any further
adventures good or bad reached Hiōgo a little after dark.

It had been a bitter ride, with rather more than a spice of emotion, and
I doubt whether a more shivering lot of men and horses, starved with cold
and hunger, faced the mangers that night in any part of the habitable
globe. Happily the two men who slipped into the rice-field were none the
worse for their dirty ducking.

The Ministers were lodged in the old Custom House, Satow in an
outbuilding, I in a shanty that might best be described as a Hiōgesque
version of a fifth-rate Margate lodging house. At any rate we had roofs
over our heads, we had fresh food, and our good friend, Herr von Brandt,
had unearthed a bottle of Curaçoa, over which the diplomatic body made
merry. He had already triumphed over the hungry colleagues in Ōsaka by
the acquisition of a pig; but that led to difficulties, as the priests of
the temple in which he was lodged stoutly objected to the slaying of the
unclean beast—not on account of its uncleanness, but on account of its
being a beast and therefore under the protection of Buddhistic law. The
difficulties were overcome by a compromise whereby the place of execution
was fixed in a vegetable garden adjoining a remote corner of the temple
grounds.

February 3rd.—We had news from Kiōto to the effect that the Satsuma and
Daimios party regretted our having left Ōsaka, where they stated that
they could have guaranteed our safety. However, the trick was done, and
there was plenty of work to keep us at Hiōgo. The clansmen told us that
the Tycoon had received orders to invite the Foreign Ministers to an
audience of the Mikado at Kiōto. This invitation was never delivered,
having been burked at the instigation of our good colleague, M. Léon
Roches, whose great object it was, hoping against hope, to bolster up the
Tycoon, without whom all his schemes for monopolies would of necessity
miscarry; so he never ceased throwing obstacles in the way of the
acknowledgment of the Mikado’s sovereign state.

With the restoration to power of the true Emperor the influence which he
had been at such pains to build up must tumble to pieces; it was a house
built upon foundations as unstable as the shifting sand. In his intrigues
to keep back the invitation to Kiōto M. Roches’ action was both vain and
foolish. Vain, because it did not and could not retard the visit to Kiōto
by one hour, and foolish, in that it was bound to break the eleventh
commandment.

Established at Hiōgo we were under the impression that we might now in
peace set about our business and go on with the first steps for the
opening of two ports. Never were men more deluded. We had avoided the
Scylla of Ōsaka, where, as we now knew, we should have been perfectly
safe, and had steered into the Charybdis of Hiōgo, where we were within
a few hours to undergo an experience which, by the merest luck, did not
end in a general massacre of the whole of the Foreign Representatives,
together with numbers of Consuls and subjects of various nations, and
which did end in a tragedy, gruesome and of haunting memory.

On the 4th of February, about two in the afternoon, the Foreign Ministers
were busily employed upon the land at Kōbé, which had been assigned as
a foreign settlement, when a regiment of men of the Bizen clan, coming
out of the gate of Hiōgo, halted at the word of command and opened a
murderous fire upon the foreigners. Happily they did not understand
the sights of their rifles, which, as it subsequently appeared, they
had recently received from America. They fired upon the principle laid
down, according to my old friend Lord Dorchester’s story, by one of his
sergeants in the trenches before Sevastopol. A Russian head appeared
above the battlements of the town. “What’ll I give him?” asked a private
of the Coldstream Guards. “Give the beggar a thousand yards and make
sure of him!” Several volleys were fired. Sir Harry Parkes and Captain
Stanhope were in the thick of it. All the other Ministers and many people
were under fire. Mercifully only one American sailor lad of the _Oneida_
was slightly wounded.

As soon as the British escort and the other foreign guards could be got
together they went in hot pursuit of the Bizen men, who were now in full
flight, dropping their baggage as they went. The baggage consisting
of various goods and chattels, including two small field-pieces and
a writing-desk belonging to one Ōmori Shinské, containing a burning
love-letter from a young lady of none too severe morals called Kotozawa
San! The pursuit yielded nothing; only one old woman of the Éta or Pariah
class was wounded. Being what she was, she would have fared badly had it
not been for the kindness of our good old Doctor Willis, who took her in
and nursed her when no Japanese would come near her.

Now for the so-called provocation which should justify such an outrage.
The evidence that we were able to take went to show that the men of
Bizen, notorious for their _Jō-i_ or anti-foreign feelings, on marching
through Hiōgo had lost no opportunity of insulting any foreigners whom
they met. As they went along the road north of the foreign settlement
that was to be a Frenchman named Callier, one of M. Roches’ escort, came
out of a wine-shop, and being rudely spoken to asked what was the matter.
To this the Japanese replied with threatening gestures. There was a
hubbub, and a soldier took the cover off his lance and pricked Callier,
who dashed on one side and bolted into a house. At this moment the
officer in command, Taki Zenzaburō, dismounted and gave the order to fire
on the assembled foreigners.

I am such an admirer of Mr. Longford’s “History of Japan” that it is with
regret that I feel compelled to join issue with him upon his account of
this affair, the importance of which he unaccountably slurs over. For
some reason or other a few newspaper writers who were not present and
with whom Mr. Longford sides, were minded to belittle the significance
of the attack. As a matter of fact it was about as gross a violation, not
only of constitutional custom, but of the laws of humanity, as could be
conceived. Mr. Longford characterizes the incident in his own way, saying
that subsequent investigation “shows that it was not one over which
Europeans can now feel pride.”

He tells the story as follows: “A detachment of Samurai of the Bizen
clan, escorting the Karō, the chief councillor of the Prince, passed Kōbé
on their way to Kiōto to join the loyal party. A French marine broke
the line of their procession, a gross insult in the eyes of a Japanese
Samurai, and though an attempt was made to stop him, he persisted in
passing through it. He received a lance prick for his pains, and he and
his comrades, one of whom was also slightly wounded, then ran away. The
Japanese followed them with a desultory fire which did no harm. Panic
seems to have seized the whole of the residents in the new Foreign
Settlement in the direction of which the fire went. Large forces were
immediately landed from the great fleet of men-of-war of all Western
nationalities.”

This statement of the case is wrong throughout. Mr. Longford goes on to
imply that the punishment of the officer in command of the Bizen men
was unjustifiable. Mr. Longford’s account is, as I can aver, absolutely
misleading and contrary to the evidence. He was not at Kōbé at the
time.[5] I was. But lest my version of the story should be deemed
one-sided, let me call into court a witness whose testimony is beyond
reproach. In his “Drei und Dreissig Jahre in Ost Asien” Herr von Brandt,
who was Prussian Minister in Japan at the time, puts a very different
complexion upon the episode.

“As we—that is to say, Count de la Tour, the Italian Minister, the
commanders of the U.S. warships _Iroquois_ and _Oneida_, and myself—left
the Custom House and stepped on to the open sandy space which surrounded
it we saw there a great number of foreigners, who had probably been
attracted by the sight of Japanese troops that were marching through.
There appeared to be several hundred men, who were marching towards
Ōsaka in regular order along the road which bounded the wide open space
on the north.

“We were about three or four hundred paces away from the troops, though
many of the foreigners were far nearer. All of a sudden I saw the
soldiers halt, front, and immediately I heard the rattle of a volley of
musketry and the whistling of bullets mostly over our heads. At first I
thought that it was a fight between the Mikado’s troops and the Tycoon’s
men, and was about to give expression to my indignation that such an
occurrence should be possible in the foreign settlement when a second
volley, and the flight of the Europeans who were between us and the
Japanese, told another tale. The Japanese troops had opened fire upon the
whole crowd of promenaders, among whom was Sir Harry Parkes.... I must
confess that I expected nothing else than that we should have to fight
for our lives, for I could not but think that the Japanese would follow
us up.

“I was not a little astonished when I saw that after they had fired six
or seven volleys—they were armed with repeating rifles—they quietly
marched off.” (Here follows an account of the landing of bluejackets
and marines and the fruitless pursuit of the Japanese soldiers.) “Only
one ship’s boy and another foreigner had been slightly wounded, a piece
of luck which I attribute to the Japanese having fired too high; they
must have fired many times at the flags of the treaty Powers which were
flying over the Custom House, at any rate the building was riddled with
bullets.... In the meanwhile, we had had further information as to the
Bizen troops, and had been able to ascertain (_feststellen können_)
that during their whole march through Hiōgo and Kōbé they had behaved
shamefully to all the foreigners whom they met, threatening many of them
and wounding two with their spears.”

This is a very different version of the story; it is told by the
responsible minister of a great Power, a man of singular ability and
circumspection. This version I, who was on the spot, though not myself
under what was only saved from being a deadly fire by the ignorance
of the use of the rifle’s sights, fully confirm—and it is indirectly
endorsed by the action taken not only by the whole body of foreign
ministers but also by the Government of the Mikado. Against that
you have to set the mutterings of irresponsible hearsay, to which,
unfortunately, Mr. Longford has lent the support of his authority as
historian and ex-consul.

To sum up—the attack was made by a clan known to be specially hostile to
all intercourse with the West; it was directed against all the treaty
Powers, whose flags were flying on the building set apart for their
use and whose ministers were engaged peaceably with a great number of
their fellow-subjects in laying out the future settlement under treaty
rights, escaping death by a miracle. The outrage was deliberate, and
absolutely unprovoked, the story of the breaking of the procession being
an afterthought. We heard nothing of it at the time, and that was the
view which the Japanese themselves took of it, for the guilty officer was
condemned to _hara-kiri_, and the rest of the sad story is told in my
“Tales of Old Japan.” I have only dwelt upon it because I wished to clear
up a story which, as told in Mr. Longford’s book, would remain a blot
upon the memory of men, who, after long and anxious debate, by a vote
of the majority took upon themselves a grave responsibility, in which
they were fully justified by the incontrovertible evidence which, to my
knowledge, they sifted with the most painstaking care. Mr. Longford fixes
upon Sir Harry Parkes the responsibility of the death sentence. Wrong
again!

As a matter of fact, when, on March the 2nd, two leading men, Godai and
Ito (Prince Ito) came to see whether the life of Taki Zenzaburō might not
possibly be spared, at the Council of Ministers which followed Sir Harry
Parkes and M. de Graef van Polsbroek argued and actually voted in favour
of the condemned man—but they were in a minority, and it was decided,
wisely as I thought at the time, and still think, that the decree of
the Mikado must be carried out. The Japanese petition for clemency was
very half-hearted; and over and over again Japanese gentlemen of high
position, amongst them one of the ablest of the Mikado’s ministers, in
conversation with me endorsed the action of the Representatives; they
took the same view that I did, saying that clemency would be mistaken
for cowardice. There had been too many attacks upon foreigners, many of
which had been unavenged. Here was a man of some condition guilty of what
was the greatest outrage which the anti-foreign party had attempted.
To excuse him would be to invite a repetition of such offences. The
knowledge that this officer had expiated his deed under sentence from his
Emperor would penetrate all Japan, and would prove that the Son of Heaven
was not only in favour of foreign intercourse, but was prepared to punish
any violation of the Treaties.

That night, March the 2nd, came the last act of the tragedy. I have
recounted it in my “Tales of Old Japan”; it need not be repeated here.

       *       *       *       *       *

To go back a step or two. On the 8th of February Higashi Kuzé, one of the
nobles of the Court, who had been banished by the former Emperor, brought
to the Representatives the following notification:

    “The Emperor of Japan announces to the Sovereigns of all
    foreign countries and to their subjects that permission has
    been granted to the Shōgun Tokugawa Yoshinobu in accordance
    with his request to hand back the governing power. We shall
    henceforward exercise the supreme authority in all the internal
    and external affairs of the country. Consequently the title
    of Emperor must be substituted for that of Tycoon under which
    the Treaties have been made. Officers are being appointed by
    us for the conduct of Foreign Affairs. It is desirable that
    the Representatives of the Treaty Powers should recognize this
    announcement.

                                      “Feb. 3, 1868. Mutsuhito—L.S.”

The reading of this document, after it had been translated, led to the
poor envoy being bombarded with questions, relevant and irrelevant. The
Bizen affair, the return of foreigners to Ōsaka and various other matters
were discussed, in the midst of which poor M. Roches lost his temper and
had rather a rough time of it with some of the colleagues. It was almost
his last outburst, for he was soon to leave for Europe when Baron Brin,
a charming man, would take his place as _chargé d’affaires_. Though he
was none too civil to me personally, as an Englishman and quite opposed
to his policy, I always entertained a kind of sneaking regard for M.
Roches. He was in private life a picturesque and rather fascinating
personality. But when, for his undoing, stripped of his white burnous and
his Spahi’s uniform, he was pitchforked into diplomacy he became a round
peg in a square hole. None of his schemes and stratagems outlived the
fœtus stage, and his fireworks were but damp squibs.

His discomfiture was pathetic; the utter failure of his policy,
accentuated by the Imperial manifesto brought by Higashi Kuzé, had
destroyed the last particle of prestige that he had once had with the
colleagues, who now had no better course left to them than to follow the
lead of Sir Harry Parkes.




CHAPTER XXII

JAPAN. MUKASHI


Ito was now appointed Governor of Hiōgo and Kōbé. It is curious that so
comparatively small an office should have been spoken of as an excessive
rise for a man who was destined to become a Prince and great ruler, and
whose name was to become famous throughout the civilized world. He was a
young man of about my own age, a yōnin or man of business of the Chōshiu
clan, which some years before he had left to become a rōnin, when, with
his friend Inouyé, afterwards one of the “Elder Statesmen,” he undertook
a voyage to Europe, the two working their way before the mast. This
journey did much to open his eyes and free his views; but, apart from
that, his energies and talents were bound to push him to the front. Great
as were the services of the other clans—Satsuma especially—it was Chōshiu
that produced the two greatest men of the revolution—Kido and Ito.

On the 5th of March the Foreign Representatives returned to Ōsaka. On
the 7th there came a pressing request to Sir Harry from the Mikado’s
government to allow Dr. Willis to go to Kiōto to visit Yōdo, the Inkiyō
(retired Prince) of Tosa, who was grievously ill. Sir Harry consented on
condition that I should accompany him, for he never lost any opportunity
of getting behind the scenes in the great political drama which was
being played. I should add that during the previous month Dr. Willis had
gone to the capital to give advice and help in the case of the wounded
soldiers of the clans. On that occasion he was accompanied by Mr. Satow,
who brought back most valuable information as to the state of parties
and was able to give the government, new to all diplomatic procedure,
excellent advice as to their dealings with foreigners—especially in the
matter of the Bizen attack. They must have been the first foreigners to
set foot in the sacred city since the days of the Christian troubles
nearly three hundred years ago, for the occasional passing of the Dutch
merchants of Deshima could hardly be taken into account.

Dr. Willis and I lost no time; we started at eight o’clock in the evening
having, to use a Japanese expression, “broken our bones” in getting
ready; we could have started earlier had it not been for the delay caused
by the very officer who, with such urgent instructions, had been sent to
give us all facilities, and who had done absolutely nothing! However,
after endless wanderings through Ōsaka in search of this trusty guide,
we were finally deposited with a brazier and a lacquer box full of rice
and fish—enough for a dozen men—in a Teaboat, one of the small craft in
which the good citizens take their pleasure merrily on the river during
the summer nights, and so we slept and feasted our way up the river to
Fushimi, eight miles from Kiōto.

Here we found but little to see of the deadly battle of the end of
January. To be sure much of the town had been destroyed by fire, but
in this land, where the houses are built of wood and paper and whole
districts are burnt down by the peaceful upsetting of a brasero on a
windy day, the charred remains of a great conflagration excite little
astonishment and still less suggest the horrors of war. The burning
of the bridge at Yōdo was more significant. Yōdo was a stronghold of
the Tycoon which his general, dazzled as the clansmen said by the
appearance of the Mikado’s standard, the golden sun on a scarlet ground,
treacherously gave up to the enemy.

At Fushimi we were met by a perfect nightmare in the shape of a guard
of Tosa men—wild-looking fellows, clad in armour with their faces
hideously masked and long elf locks of black or white horsehair hanging
down from their helmets over their shoulders. With this weird escort of
pantomimic demons we marched into Kiōto along a road which was really one
long, continuous village full of shops doing a brisk trade in gods and
dolls—fairings to be taken home by pious pilgrims to the shrines of the
sacred city. The road was in a very bad state, having been much cut up
by the passing of artillery.

_Cosas d’España!_ When we reached our destination we found that we need
have been in no such violent hurry. Nothing had been prepared for our
reception, and we were kept waiting for several hours in a very shabby
outlying building, apparently a sort of guard-room for soldiers. At
last, when our patience was almost exhausted, we were conducted in
all solemnity to the Prince’s residence, one of those long, rambling,
bungalow-like buildings, or rather groups of buildings, surrounded by a
wall, and containing quarters for a whole army of retainers and soldiers.
Very white wood without a knot or flaw in it, vast roomy apartments
without a decoration or ornament of any kind, except one picture hung by
silken strings in the Tokonoma, the raised dais at one end of the room,
composed the magnificent simplicity of a great noble’s dwelling in the
days of the old Japan.

Furniture there was none save a sword rack; the fair white mats served as
bed, tables and chairs; such cupboards as were needful were let into the
wall; paper sliding screens, open at the tops, divided the rooms; there
was no privacy, and if a confidential talk was needed the profane had to
be sent away out of ear-shot, which, luckily, implied no offence. The
palace occupied by the Prince had been, until the revolution, occupied by
the Prince of Aidzu. It was spoil of war.

When we had been shown to our apartments, which were the state guest
suite of the house, the ex-Prince sent to beg that, as he was too ill to
welcome us otherwise, we would go to see him. Such a ramble through an
interminable maze of passages all alike! Even our guides were sometimes
puzzled, for they, of course, were hardly yet posted in the topography
of this recent acquisition. At last we came to the outside of the great
man’s rooms, where his retainers, all of them, no matter how high their
rank might be, laid aside their dirks (_wakizashi_), for no man must
enter his lord’s presence armed. The sword (_katana_) must always be
taken out of the girdle on entering a house.

Prince Yōdo, the Inkiyō of Tosa, was a very remarkable man,—remarkable
even among the many notable personalities of those stirring times. A
Daimio when he resigned his position in favour of his heir and became
Inkiyō might divest himself of the pomp and circumstance of princely
rank, but he rarely gave up the actual power. Such men as Shimadzu
Saburō, of Satsuma, Daté of Uwajima, and Yōdo, all Inkiyō, remained the
real governing force in their several clans. The greatest of these was
Yōdo, whom we were presently to see. He was a far-seeing man of the
highest intelligence, and took a much more statesmanlike view of affairs
than the other Daimios.

When these were pressing, as I have stated above, for the surrender by
the Tokugawa clan of property bringing in two million kokus of rice
he saw that such a confiscation would be futile and absurd as the
nucleus of a national revenue. He it was who proposed that all the
Daimios should surrender their almost regal estates, retaining only a
percentage sufficient to maintain a suitable position; he foresaw that
the sacrifice would be rather apparent than real, and that, if the
Empire were consolidated, they would be more than compensated by being
relieved of the necessity of maintaining a whole machinery of government,
with military and, in some cases, naval forces. Satsuma and some other
Princes jibbed at this in the first instance; they had not Yōdo’s grasp
of affairs, and were wedded to what he recognized as a worn-out feudal
system. In the end they had to yield and Yōdo’s wisdom won the day.

Yōdo, like some of our own statesmen of a generation little more than
fifty years before his time, had been a very free liver. In his youth he
had a seal engraved with the device, “The drunken Daimio of the Southern
Seas.” His excesses had been notorious, and he was now paying his shot.

We found the old _viveur_—old not in years—lying on the mats in the midst
of a pile of quilts and coverlets decked with beautiful purple crape,
a cloud of strong colour contrasting sharply with the waxen mask and
hands of the sick man. At his head was his wife, an elderly lady with
her eyebrows shaven and her teeth lacquered black,[6] ministering to his
wants, and behind him sat his last and favourite young lady, a pretty
little girl hardly more than a child, with her hands under a corner of
the quilt, for the poor little soul was very cold. She had her teeth and
eyebrows left as nature had given them to her, with no disfigurement
inflicted by the tyranny of fashion. She seemed at first to be very shy
and abashed at the presence of the inauspicious and monstrous foreigners.
The ex-Prince had the most exquisite manners, all the courtesy which to a
Japanese gentleman of high rank is second nature.

He was, moreover, obviously gifted with that magnetic attraction which
is so rare even amongst the greatest men and which fully accounted for
his influence among his peers. He received us warmly and expressed great
thanks to us for arriving so quickly. I did not prolong my visit, for he
appeared to be very tired and sick—as it seemed to my non-professional
eye, sick unto death. Dr. Willis, moreover, was eager to begin his
examination. So I took my leave, wondering that a man of only forty-seven
should look so old. He seemed to have used up his life. Dr. Willis, I may
add here, soon patched him up, and he lived for several years, rendering
good service to the State, though holding no office; but he could not
shake off his old habits, and in the end they triumphed and killed him.

On the following morning I breakfasted with Gotō Shōjirō and Katsura, who
were now important officials in the Foreign Office under the Mikado’s
Government, at the house of the former, who it will be remembered
belonged to the Tosa clan and was Prince Yōdo’s chief adviser. In the
midst of our talk there arrived a dispatch which caused them great
apprehension, though as yet they had no details. When the full news
arrived it was bad enough. The story has been told before, but it needs
to be repeated here, however briefly. The most complete account is that
by Herr von Brandt, from which I have borrowed freely, refreshing my own
memory.

On the 8th of March the two French ships _Vénus_ and _Dupleix_ were in
the bay of Ōsaka, where they had been engaged in taking soundings, and
with a view of continuing this work, Captain du Petit Thouars had sent
his steam launch with a gig to Sakai, a small port provisionally open to
foreign trade, where such authorities as there were had been informed of
the operations on which these boats were engaged.

At about five o’clock in the afternoon, two of the launch’s crew asked
leave to go on shore, the people up to that time having shown every
sign of friendship, and other Europeans having previously landed there.
Hardly had they gone a few steps from the launch when they were joined
by a Samurai who made signs to them to go to the other side of the quay.
Here they were surrounded by about twenty armed men, who seized them
and tried to bind them. One of the two men tore himself away, and the
other jumped into the water, when the soldiery fired into the launch
until they believed that all the crew were dead. As soon as the officer
in the gig, whose men were unarmed—and indeed, those in the launch
had only revolvers, which had been stowed away in lockers for fear of
accidents—heard the firing, he hurried to the rescue of the launch and
was met with a hot fire of musketry. One of his men was wounded, and as
he thought that all in the launch were killed, he steered for his ship
and made his report. The massacre had been terrible; those who were not
shot were beaten to death with poles armed with iron hooks.

Captain du Petit Thouars manned his boats and at once went off to Sakai;
on the way he met the launch. Out of a crew of one midshipman and fifteen
men, only two were dead; six were severely wounded, one unwounded,
and seven missing, including the midshipman. Their bodies, cruelly
mutilated, were afterwards given up. The machinery was riddled with
bullets, but the sound man with the help of one or two of the less badly
wounded men managed to rig up a sail and so escaped. The batteries on
shore were manned and the foreign representatives were all in Ōsaka, and
open to attack. The captain of the _Vénus_ and the French Consul were,
moreover, supposed to be on their way from Ōsaka to Sakai, so Captain du
Petit Thouars wisely refrained from taking any immediate action, which
might have led to terrible reprisals.

When the news reached Ōsaka in the dead of the night, the representatives
were roused from their beds and a conference was at once held. They
determined to make common cause with their French colleague, to strike
their flags, and leave Ōsaka, until the demands of M. Roches, who had not
yet left, should be satisfied. Those demands were:

    1. The execution of the two officers in command at Sakai and
    all those who had taken part in the crime.

    2. An indemnity of 150,000 dollars for the families of the
    victims.

    3. That the Prime Minister should pay a visit to the _Vénus_ to
    express regret and apologize on behalf of the Government.

    4. That the Prince of Tosa, to whose clan the murderers
    belonged, should do the same.

    5. That men of the Tosa clan should be excluded from the
    foreign ports.

Bad news for Willis and me; it was the very clan in whose hands we were.
We felt that we were in a hornets’ nest. Our hosts, who should at least
have remembered that we were there to save the life of their Prince whom
they loved, were maddened by the news, frantic at the idea that clansmen,
perhaps near relations of some of them, were to be executed for a crime
in which they themselves would gladly have had a hand.

When I got back to the _yashiki_ I was met by scowling looks and fierce
mutterings. The more important men of the clan showed clearly that they,
at any rate, had no sympathy with the murderers. Prince Yōdo himself and
Gotō Shōjirō we knew would act loyally and do all in their power to
insure our safety. But it is a near thing, and an uncomfortable pass to
come to, when you can almost hear two or three hundred wild men debating
the propriety of wreaking vengeance upon you, and that moreover in a
country where at that time _kataki-uchi_, the vendetta, was a debt of
honour. However, there was nothing to be done but to put a good face upon
it, so our dear old medicine-man went on with his healing, and I took
advantage of being in a city so famous and still so new to us Westerns to
explore its many beauties, now long since unveiled and familiar to every
tourist.

At Gion, a quarter of the city where the Japanese dandies go to divert
themselves, I was bidden by two or three gentlemen to an entertainment
in a famous tea-house. In these sophisticated days I doubt whether such
a feast could be given. There was a company of the most fashionable
_geikos_—who in other parts, and indeed everywhere now, are called
_geisha_. In song and in story the _geiko_ of old Kiōto is celebrated as
an artist and for the willow-like beauty of her thighs—in this there is
no impropriety, for there are no femoral revelations, and the expression
simply means gracefulness. In singing and in dancing they excel all
others.

When these young ladies sat down between the guests I saw plainly that
I was an object of terror—none wished to come near me—the strange beast
frightened them; but at last the prettiest of them took to herself heart
of brass and squatted down beside me; shy and wild she was at first, but
after a while she became quite tame, like a little gazelle that feeds out
of your hand, and indeed her eyes had much the look of those of a pet
deer; if only her pretty lips had not been gilt!

In the middle of the feast the landlady, black-toothed and shaven-browed,
came in armed with a murderous-looking chopper in one hand, and in the
other a small stand upon which was placed a bean-curd cake, the dish for
which the house was famous. The cutting up of the bean-curd cake was a
science and a ceremony, always taking place in the presence of guests.
With a great assumption of dignity the old lady lifted her chopper,
and bringing it down with a great crack upon the wooden stand, from
the rebound of the blow gave a dozen or so little raps that sounded
almost like the roll of a drum, with which, as quick as thought, she
had sliced the bean-curd cake into as many little parts of almost
mathematically equal size, which were carried off to be roasted on
slender bamboo skewers. It was really a very pretty trick and received
with a loud tribute of applause, which the dear lady accepted with all
the consciousness of merit of a prima donna after the execution of a
brilliant _cavatina_.

As in duty bound, I ate my skewerful of bean-curds, but I confess that
I did not relish them. Then came dancing—all of it full of intention to
the elect—to me the mere poetry of motion into which I, the barbarian,
could not read the significance and the story. The palm was borne away
by two pretty little mites of about eleven years, precocious pets into
whom the Terpsichore of the Far East had breathed all her spirit, all
her grace. When the dancing was over, the _geikos_ went away to doff
their stage dresses, and appeared again as little _bourgeoises_, and the
two tiny creatures became very inquisitive about me, and insisted upon
taking off my socks (the shoes had been left _more Japonico_ at the door)
and examining my feet. Had they been Europeans I should have thought
that they were seeking for the cloven hoof. It was near midnight when I
reached the Tosa Yashiki after seven hours of real good fun. I went back
to an anxious night.

Not the least interesting part of the day had been a visit to the great
temple of Kiyomidzu, a lovely shrine hidden away in a sanctuary as
beautiful as the graces of hill, and trees and water could make it.
How cleverly the monks in all countries chose the places of their holy
retreat from the world! But what filled me with wonder—a wonder hardly
to be understood now—was the fact that I was gazing upon a panoramic
view of the sacred city, to be found in which three short months before
would have meant the shortest of shrifts. There above all was the Kinri
(literally “forbidden place”), the august but severely simple dwelling of
the Son of Heaven, itself a mystery, of which the nine gates were each
guarded by a great Daimio.

To-day all these nebulous secrets have become the common property of the
guide-books and the traveller, who without a care looks down from the
beautiful hills upon what now, shorn of its glamour, is but a dull, grey
city—if the truth must be told, rather shabby; for the grand shrines
which are the glory of its sanctity are hidden away, screened from the
profane eyes in those lovely groves which were the first temples of the
gods.

The following morning brought me a letter from Sir Harry Parkes, giving
me the details of the Sakai tragedy, in consequence of which the
ministers had left Ōsaka, and ordering me to return at once, inasmuch
as if the French demands were not complied with hostilities would break
out immediately. The Japanese officials also came to me with an account
tallying in all particulars with my Minister’s letter; but they added
that as every reparation was to be made and M. Roches’ demands were to
be complied with, there need be no alarm of war. As for my position, the
consternation in the Tosa Yashiki may be imagined. Prince Yōdo sent me a
message begging me to stay until the next day, and as I thought that I
might effect some good by doing so, that my leaving might be attributed
to fear, and that to remain certainly would tell well amongst the members
of the new Government, I determined to disobey my orders and comply with
the Prince’s request. The Japanese Government greatly appreciated the
confidence to which I thus gave expression.

Almost the whole of that day was passed in conference with high
officials, and it was not until late in the afternoon that I was able
to sally forth into a driving storm of rain for more sightseeing. I was
rewarded by seeing one _grande dame_ with her eyebrows shaven off and
artificial ones painted in high up on the forehead, as one sees the
fashions of the Mikado’s Court represented in old pictures. It was my
one and only experience of the mode so far as ladies were concerned. In
the case of the Mikado I was to see it afterwards on a more memorable
occasion.

I was roused the next morning by a message from Prince Yōdo begging me to
go and see him. I found him evidently already much the better for Willis’
ministrations, in spite of the terrible shock of the Sakai massacre. I
remained with him for two hours, discussing politics and especially the
affair about which he spoke with deep feeling and unfeigned emotion.
Had the murdered Frenchmen been his own countrymen he could not have
shown greater sympathy, nor could any man have expressed it with greater
dignity. I am bound to say that he inspired me with the utmost admiration.

He declared that the act of the murderers was one which he, in common
with every true Samurai—every man animated by the true _Yamato Damashii_,
the spirit of Old Japan, must look upon with detestation and horror.
He said that this deed, far from representing the feeling of the
Samurai, was a disgrace to Japan, and the ruffians who perpetrated it
should be rooted out from the country. He then begged me to be the
bearer of the following message to the French Minister and to the other
representatives. I took it down from his own lips, and repeat it here as
a noble and patriotic utterance.

    “Although I am without precise information, I am aware that the
    affair of Sakai was criminal and unjustifiable. It is a matter
    of which I certainly had not the slightest cognizance. My one
    wish has been to entertain friendly relations with foreigners.
    The act of violence which my retainers have committed has
    caused me to be deeply ashamed. I am aware that foreign nations
    must feel grievously incensed. It hurts me to think that my
    people should have interfered with the Mikado in his projects
    for civilizing the country. I pray that Tosa alone, and not
    the whole of Japan, may be rendered responsible for this
    deed. I have been prevented by illness from going to Ōsaka to
    punish the offenders myself, but I have sent two of my _karō_
    (principal advisers, literally “elders of the family”) with
    three officers of rank to represent me, taking with them one
    hundred and sixty men, with orders to deliver up to justice
    the guilty men. I beg you to communicate the expression of my
    sentiments to the French Minister in particular, and to the
    foreign representatives in general. Although this is a matter
    for the Government of the country to deal with, I am anxious
    that the thoughts of my heart should be made known to the
    French Minister and to the foreign representatives.”

Every word that Prince Yōdo spoke was uttered with the most convincing
air of truth. I took my leave of him with great regret. My talk with
him on general subjects and the political situation had been most
interesting. He left upon me the impression that he was possessed of wide
views and great sagacity; he was a man who had notoriously done much for
his country and who, but for the poison instilled by that education in
self-indulgence which played such mischief with men of his caste, would
have been capable of very great things.

I returned to Ōsaka that evening and lost no time in delivering Prince
Yōdo’s message at Hiōgo to M. Roches, who was greatly pleased with it. My
presence in Kiōto during this affair, though it could not be otherwise
than a somewhat anxious adventure, was therefore of advantage as having
given the Prince the opportunity of making his own position clear. Sir
Harry Parkes fully approved of my having disobeyed his instructions.

On the 15th of March Prince Daté (Inkiyō of Uwajima) arrived at Hiōgo and
went on board the French ship _Vénus_ to carry the official acceptance of
the conditions laid down by M. Roches.

The 16th of March was fixed for the execution by _Hara-kiri_ of the
twenty men guilty of the murders. It was originally fixed to take place
on the quay at Sakai, where the crime was committed, but the place was
changed to a temple about a mile inland. Captain du Petit Thouars and a
company of some twenty Frenchmen were to witness the horror.

When the first condemned man came out he plunged the dirk into his
stomach with such force that his entrails protruded; he held them up
in his hand and began singing verses of hatred and revenge against the
detested foreigners who were polluting the sacred soil of the Land of
the Gods till death stopped his ghastly song. Those who came after him
followed his example, and the whole spectacle was so gruesome that when
eleven men had died—this being the number of the murdered victims—the
Frenchmen could hold out no longer, and Captain du Petit Thouars prayed
that the remaining nine men might be spared. His account of the scene
to me was blood-curdling. Brave man as he was—one of the bravest—it
nearly made him sick only to think of it, and his voice faltered as with
difficulty he told the tale.




CHAPTER XXIII

JAPAN. THE MIKADO


On the 18th Yamashina no Miya, first cousin once removed of the Mikado,
who had arrived at Hiōgo the previous day to invite the Foreign Ministers
to an audience of the Emperor at Kiōto, called upon Sir Harry. The Prince
was robed in the old court dress of a purple colour with the curious cap
(_yéboshi_) of wrinkled black paper. His teeth were blackened, but as
that process has to be renewed every two, or at most three, days, and as
they were at that moment in a transition stage, they did not look their
best. When we saw him again a few days later they had been newly polished
up, and shone like patent leather.

We reached Kiōto on the 21st and were lodged in the magnificent temple
called Chi-on-in, lying in a grove at the foot of the beautiful
Higashiyama, “the eastern hill.” Everything had been done to insure our
comfort, and the temple was guarded by troops of the Awa, Higo and Owari
clans. Our rooms were really of royal magnificence, and we were treated
to a feast of innumerable dainties set out with an elaborate etiquette
that would have satisfied the great Yoshimasa,[7] the Lucullus of Japan,
himself.

It would be difficult to forget the lovely temple with its avenues of
huge cherry trees, its vast halls, its art treasures, and its great
solemn bell rolling out deep, musical waves of sound far away over the
city; but I saw it again in 1906, quite unchanged, quite untouched by
political upheavals, and had the chance to talk over the story of forty
years gone by with the stately and venerable abbot, who remembered the
cruel days when the great State apartments were turned for the nonce into
hospital wards.

The day of the 22nd was spent in paying official visits, the chief
interest of which lay in the fact that we were entering into relations
with men who had never set eyes upon foreigners before, nobles who, like
their fathers for many centuries before them, had lived in a cloistered
seclusion hardly less strict than that of the Emperor himself, and upon
whom the light of the last weeks, even of the last days, had burst like
a flash of electricity in a cave of Stygian darkness. One great man told
us quite frankly that he, like the rest of the Court, had been bitterly
opposed to any intercourse with foreigners—now all was changed, and he
was glad of it. He afterwards apologized, saying that he was afraid that
he had spoken too freely, and that, at any rate, he felt grateful to the
English for having been the first to recognize the true position of the
Mikado.

A little later in the day Prince Daté and Gotō Shōjirō came to discuss
the ceremonial for the audience on the morrow. They seemed very anxious
as to how the boy-Emperor would play his part. It was all so new to him.
It must be remembered that only a very few of the highest nobles were
privileged to see their Sovereign face to face. Even the Shōgun did not
see him, but only knelt in front of the red lattice-curtain behind which
he heard the Son of Heaven issuing his commands. For the last ten days
the rigid etiquette had been so far broken that certain Daimios had been
allowed to see him. I could not help sympathizing with the poor young
Mikado in this prospective ordeal.

It was arranged that he should learn his speech by heart and try to
repeat it, the copy being then handed to Yamashina no Miya, who would
read it out and hand it in turn to Ito to be translated, the document
itself ultimately remaining with Sir Harry, who would reply directly to
the Mikado. As for me, I was to be presented by Yamashina no Miya to his
Majesty, who would greet me with the formula “Kuro” (“I am glad to see
you”).

The reception of M. Roches on the 22nd was the last of his Japanese
experiences. As will have been gathered, I was no great admirer of his
policy or of his proceedings, but I am bound to say that his final act
was marked by all the courtesy of his chivalrous nation. The fifth of
the demands made by him in regard to the Sakai massacre was that all
Tosa Samurai should be excluded from the foreign settlements. In answer
to Prince Yōdo, who desired to be informed how long this was to hold
good, M. Roches very graciously replied that he would leave that to the
Prince, who was far more capable than himself of being the judge in such
a matter. It was the answer of a gentleman.

The audience of the English Minister was fixed for the 23rd, and at one
o’clock we left the temple in pomp and state which it is needful that
I should describe in order that what followed may be understood. First
came the Legation mounted escort, headed by their inspector, Mr. Peacock.
These were picked men sent out from the Metropolitan Police, a gallant
little troop armed with lances, making a brave show. Then came Sir Harry
Parkes on horseback, with Satow and two high officials, Gotō Shōjirō and
Nakai Kōzō; after them a guard of the 9th Regiment under Lieutenants
Bradshaw and Bruce (afterwards Marquess of Ailesbury). My mare had
unfortunately gone dead lame, so I followed in a palanquin. After me
came a guard of some fifteen hundred or two thousand Japanese soldiers.
As good luck would have it, Dr. Willis and some naval officers whom Sir
Harry had invited, among whom were two surgeons, accompanied us.

Without let or hindrance our procession passed along a straight street
almost facing the gates of the temple, but as the leading men turned
the corner of the Shimbashi Street—a street where there are not a few
wine-shops and houses inhabited by geishas (quite respectable), two
Rōnin armed with naked swords sprang out and began slashing and hacking
in the maddest fury. The street was so narrow that our men’s lances
were hindered by the projecting eaves of the houses, and were useless.
Nakai Kōzō jumped off his horse and drawing his sword engaged one of
them, but catching his foot in his long trousers, stumbled and received
a severe cut on the head from a blow the full and deadly force of which
he contrived to parry. At this moment Gotō Shōjirō, who, with Sir Harry,
had not yet turned the corner, perceiving from the backing of the horses
and the scuffle in front that there was mischief ahead, dismounted and,
dashing forward, rushed to the rescue of Nakai. Between them, fighting
like fury, they killed the ruffian, and Nakai, jumping up, hacked off his
head. The other man rushed at Sir Harry, cutting and slashing as he went,
but fortunately missing the Minister. Satow had a narrow escape, for his
horse was wounded close to his rider’s knee, and part of the poor beast’s
nose was sliced off.

On the villain went, now cutting at the men of the 9th. I heard pistol
shots and the clatter of swords and cries of, “We are attacked!” “Kill
him!” “Shoot him!” and the like. I jumped out of my palanquin more
quickly than I ever in my life jumped out of anything, and rushed
forward. There were pools of blood in the street, and I saw the murderer
coming at me, by this time himself wounded, but not seriously, and full
of fight. His sword was dripping and his face bleeding. I knew enough of
Japanese swordsmanship to be aware that it was no use to try and avoid
his blow, so I rushed in underneath his guard and wrenched the bleeding
sword out of his grip. I handed him over to the men of the 9th, but
he managed to wriggle away from them and bolted down a passage into a
courtyard. I ran on to see whether Parkes was safe. To my great relief
he was sitting on his horse, quite unmoved, with Satow, whose pony was
bleeding, also mercifully unhurt. As I came up with them I stumbled over
something; it was a man’s head. The street was like a shambles; nine of
the escort and one man of the 9th and four horses had been wounded, some
of them lying in pools of their own blood. Sir Harry’s groom was also
bleeding. Our gallant little friend Nakai was badly hurt, but quite gay,
as usual.

Seeing that the affray was over and that there was nothing that I could
do, I ran back to make sure of the other Rōnin who had run down the
courtyard. I found that he had been shot in the face by Lieutenant
Bradshaw, but the weapon was but a toy pistol and the bullet had glanced
off the jaw-bone. When I reached the bottom of the yard, I saw my man,
a repulsive object smeared with mud and blood so that his features were
hardly human, trying to escape over a wall. I hung on to him and pulled
him down. I shall never forget the horror in his eyes as he glared
at me, evidently thinking that I should kill him. Of course he looked
upon me as a man might look upon his murderer. But my object, on the
contrary, was to save him. I wanted him, for through him I hoped to get
at the bottom of the plot. So I handed him over to the guard with strict
injunctions that he was not to be hurt.

As for the fifteen hundred Japanese soldiers, they decamped, and only
came back having in the distance fired what was something uncommonly like
a _feu de joie_. It was perhaps too much to expect of them, new as they
were to relations with foreigners, that they should show the same courage
and loyalty which had been exhibited by Gotō and Nakai.

Of course, going on to the Court was out of the question for that day.
Some time was lost in getting coolies to carry our poor fellows, at
least as many of them as were fainting from loss of blood. The others,
badly wounded though they were, insisted on sticking to their horses.
They behaved splendidly and in all that pain and trouble there was not a
single complaint to be heard.

My especial care was for my prisoner; his evidence was too important for
me to leave him to chance. Such coolies as we could muster were wanted
for our men, so in despair I pressed two honest citizens, shopkeepers,
into my service, and with dire threats made them carry him in my
_norimono_ (palanquin), for he was far too weak and exhausted to be able
to walk. The two shopkeepers were intensely disgusted, and their protests
that they were respectable burghers and ought not to be made to do the
work of _etas_ (pariahs) were almost comic; but our blood was up and they
had to do it.

It was a melancholy procession home. As I walked by the side of Sir
Harry’s horse he turned to me and said, “Sensation diplomacy this,
Mitford.” It certainly was. When we reached home our beautiful temple
was turned into a hospital. Our wounded men, bleeding as if their life
must ebb out, lay patiently in the verandah, waiting their turn for the
assistance of the surgeons, who, stripped to their shirts, seemed almost
to multiply themselves, so swift and skilful were they. Shirts and sheets
were being torn up into bandages, buckets of bloody water were being
emptied and filled again. Everything one touched was sickening, wet, and
red. It was a nightmare. Presently the head of the man whom Nakai had
killed was brought in—a terrible sight. One awful triangular wound had
laid bare part of the brain, and there was a gash from a sword on the
right jaw.

As soon as the prisoner’s wounds were dressed, Satow and I with a
retainer of Sanjo Dainagon examined the prisoner. He was a beetle-browed,
truculent-looking fellow with rolling black eyes, and his appearance was
not improved by bloodstained rags, and a large head with a shock crop of
wiry hair which, having abandoned the priesthood, he had just begun to
let grow. He said:

“My name is Ishikawa Samurō. I am a priest from a temple called Jōrenji,
near Ōsaka. I left the Castle this morning determined to kill all the
foreigners that I might meet. I came to Kiōto on the second day of this
month to join the Mikado’s bodyguard, and I lodged at the temple called
Hommanji in the Temple Street. I left it the day before yesterday and
went to the Castle. I was in the first regiment at the Castle, but could
not agree with my mates, so determined to regulate my conduct according
to my own ideas. I set out to kill foreigners; I had no accomplice. I
pray to be examined, and, if found guilty, to be executed and my crime
made known throughout the Empire.”

At a second questioning, he said: “I had an accomplice, one Hayashida,
I forget his other name.[8] He is the son of a village doctor, not
belonging to the Samurai class, from Katsura Mura, a village near Kiōto.
He is a Rōnin. He belonged to the first regiment of Guards. I heard last
night from the servants that foreigners were going to Court. I waited
to see them pass. I did not know to what nation they belonged. It was
the first time that I had seen foreigners. I repent of my crime. It was
a sudden thought on the part of both of us. I had no previous hatred to
foreigners.”

On being shown the head of the man who had been decapitated in the
street, of whose death up to this time he was unaware, he added:

“This is the head of Hayashida. Since he is dead I wish to live no
longer. Please cut off my head as soon as possible. We had been drinking
together at a wine-shop. I forget the name of the shop.”

To this second statement the wounded man adhered through a strict
cross-examination, and he solemnly stated that there was no other person
in league with him.

Naturally enough this outrage excited the greatest consternation at
the Court of the Mikado, and in the evening his Majesty sent Tokudaiji
Dainagon, and several of his highest officers of State, dressed in their
court robes, to present his condolences and the expression of his deep
regret at what had occurred. They inquired with great sympathy as to the
state of the wounded men.

This, taken in conjunction with the gallant behaviour of Gotō and Nakai,
and with the prompt punishment meted out for recent attacks, could leave
no doubt as to the sincerity of the horror which was expressed. Nearly
forty years later—in 1906—when I was sent with Prince Arthur on the
Garter Mission, it fell to my lot to take the Grand Cross of the Royal
Victorian Order to the Marquis Tokudaiji, Lord Great Chamberlain as he
then was, and he reminded me of the ghastly circumstances of our first
meeting on that memorable evening in Kiōto.

Our people, savage at the treatment which their comrades had received,
were none too keen to minister to the wants of the prisoner. I could not
but feel some compassion for the poor wretch, and so I took him tea and
rice and soup, and filled his pipe with tobacco; after a while he became
quite tame and confidential. It is a curious sensation that of talking
with one’s would-be murderer. The poor fellow was very grateful and said
over and over again that if he had known what kind folk the foreigners
were, he never would have embarked upon an enterprise which he now deeply
regretted. He said that he felt ashamed when he thought of the care and
attention which he was receiving. Now, since Hayashida was dead, his only
wish was to die too. He had heard of the fame of Satow as a scholar, but
did not know to what nation he belonged. As for me, I was beginning to
feel towards him as one might towards a dangerous wild beast beginning to
show signs of willingness to feed out of one’s hand.

This morning (the 24th) he had to undergo another examination by a
Japanese official, who furnished us with an example of the criminal
procedure of Japan in those days. This gentleman was an inspector of the
bodyguard, who, by representing himself as belonging to the Jō-i, or
anti-foreign party, and applauding the prisoner’s deed, gradually wormed
himself into his confidence, and got a good deal of fresh information out
of him, especially a statement that there were three other accomplices,
also belonging to the first regiment of Guards, who had been waiting
in a house further down the street ready to spring out and follow up
the action of himself and Hayashida should they fail, or only partially
succeed, in their attempt. The prisoner stated that he was twenty-nine
years of age—Hayashida, the dead man, was a lad of eighteen. He repeated
his thanks for the kindness which he had received at my hands and at
those of Doctor Willis. Once more he begged to be executed quickly.
Hayashida was dead and he had no care to live. The three men whom he
denounced were of course arrested, and equally of course, denied their
guilt.

In the afternoon we had a second visit from the ministers of the Mikado.
They brought with them a despatch conveying in writing the apologies
which they had delivered orally the evening before; they offered the
fullest reparation, expressing their willingness to indemnify the wounded
men, and to make provision for their families should they unfortunately
die. Nothing could be more dignified or more satisfactory in every way
than the language which they held—a notable contrast to our experiences
of Bakufu days. Sir Harry Parkes had made no complaint and demanded
no reparation. The action of the Government was as spontaneous as it
was noble: what a blessing it was to be quit of the old wrangling and
bullying which alone bore fruit a few months before.

The envoys begged that Sir Harry would not allow the madly wicked act
of a few ruffians to stand between the Mikado and friendship with
Foreign Powers. It would have been churlish not to meet them halfway and
accordingly the visit which had been so cruelly interrupted was fixed to
take place on the day after the morrow.

Looking back at the whole affair calmly, it seems miraculous, first that
two men should have risked certain death in attacking a party of some
seventy Englishmen armed with all the newest weapons (though, as I have
said, our escort were badly hampered in the use of their lances which
after this episode we discarded), and secondly that they should have been
able to work such havoc before they were stopped. It only shows how much
mischief a man may do if he does not try to save his own skin—that is
the whole essence of success in running amok. If he is faint-hearted and
looks to his own safety, he cannot do much harm. Another wonder was that
Sir Harry, conspicuous in his gold-embroidered coat, should have escaped
scatheless. Obviously it was a blind fury. The attack was irrational
and to us unintelligible; but the Jō-i were animated by the spirit of
a priest of Isé, who lived a century earlier, and wrote a patriotic
pamphlet, proving that the children of Japan are the offspring of the
gods—the rest of the world the issue of dogs and cats. Was it meet and
proper that the descendants of cats and dogs should defile the city,
the court, and even the sacred presence of the Son of Heaven? Among the
papers of our prisoner was found a document setting forth his political
creed; he admitted belonging to the Jō-i—the anti-foreign party; he
thought it right that the Mikado should govern; he had heard that a
barbarian doctor had polluted the holy city (this alluding to Willis’ two
visits with Satow and myself; so a mission of charity was turned into
an excuse for murder!). Three days later he was deprived of his rank as
Samurai, and put to death by the common headsman.

The Mikado’s Government announced that they were prepared to strike
at the root of all this fanaticism. They declared that the murder or
insulting of foreigners, hitherto regarded by the fanatics as acts of
heroism, was an infamous and wicked crime, and they were prepared to
publish a decree enacting that those guilty of such acts should be
deprived of their swords, their names struck off the roll of Samurai,
that they should be executed as felons without the privilege of
_Hara-kiri_, and that after death their heads should be exposed on the
execution ground. We were bound to confess that such a decree as this
would indeed be a drastic measure, meaning far more to a Samurai than the
Western man would generally realize.

I should add here that the Queen presented swords of honour to Gotō
Shōjirō and Nakai in recognition of the gallantry with which they
protected her minister.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was the 26th of March, the third day of the third moon; an auspicious
day in the omens of which the most punctilious of soothsayers could find
no fault or foreboding of evil. The tragically postponed audience of the
Mikado was now to take place. The Government were naturally very anxious
after the events of two days before, and extraordinary precautions were
taken to prevent the recurrence of any such misadventure. From early dawn
the many-acred courts of the temple were crowded with men-at-arms arrayed
in all the panoply of ancient armour, with helmets and mustachioed
vizors. The picturesque figures of these warriors, framed in the setting
of the heavy-eaved architecture of the sacred buildings, were striking
even to us who by this time were tolerably well used to such startling
sights.

How would it have struck an Englishman transported on the carpet of
some Afrit or Jinn of the “Arabian Nights” out of the everyday moil and
toil of Fleet Street into the midst of all this medieval glamour? Were
we back in the middle of the eleventh century, in the days of the wars
when the white flag of the Minamoto was borne out to battle against the
red standard of the Taira?—days when gods and fairies took sides in the
struggle, as in the old fights before Troy? Two great Daimios, Prince
Daté, the Inkiyō of Uwajima, and the Prince of Hizen, had been told off
to conduct us in person to the Palace; their retainers, more numerous
than the tail of a Highland chieftain, armed with tasselled spears and
other weapons of the olden time, made a brave show.

Our own retinue was sadly reduced. Our mounted escort could only muster
two men, who with drawn swords rode on either side of Sir Harry. Satow
and I rode immediately behind him. The drawn swords, I should mention,
were very significant, and would have a startling effect in the streets
of Kiōto, for in Japan the blade was never bared save for bloodshed,
and the sight of them would have a meaning which my readers can hardly
realize. However, there was no need for their use this time. The streets
were admirably kept, and although huge crowds had gathered together to
see our procession, they were quite orderly, and there was no sign of
any disturbance—which would have been almost impossible—nor was there an
ugly word uttered. We had a longish way to go, and reached the Gosho, the
Imperial Palace, at about one o’clock.

The Palace of the Son of Heaven, unlike the dwellings of most Oriental
potentates, who delight in show and magnificence (indeed has not
“oriental splendour” become a proverbial expression?), was chiefly marked
by a noble simplicity; it was not even fortified, but was surrounded by
plain whitewashed walls topped with grey tiles, of which the nine gates,
as I have already said, were each committed to the charge of the troops
of one of the great Daimios. Still, in spite of its studied plainness,
the Gosho was not without a certain grandeur of its own. There was none
of that economy of space which always makes a mean effect; the courtyards
were vast and kept scrupulously clean with fresh white sand; the
buildings, of which there were many, although entirely without ornament,
were large and roomy, bearing a great stamp of dignity.

At the inner gate of ceremony, the gate used by princes of the blood,
we dismounted and were led by the great officers of State through a
succession of courtyards to a waiting-room, where we were received by
Yamashina no Miya, a cousin of the Emperor. Here we were plied with
sweetmeats, sponge cake,[9] tea and talk, waiting until the Mikado, who
was eating his mid-day meal, should be ready to hold his Court.

It was interesting to see in the flesh, if I may use the expression,
a scene such as we are familiar with in the paintings on ancient gilt
screens and kakémonos. The court dress had a peculiar _cachet_, a
“flavour” as the Chinese would put it, of its own. The black cap
(_yéboshi_) tied under the chin had something of the effect of the
huge piles of hair worn by women, which one sees caricatured about the
thirties of the nineteenth century. The coat was of dark silk, hanging
loose, with long, wide sleeves, and the sword was slung instead of being
thrust into the girdle, sticking out behind like a tail. The trousers
were baggy and clumsy in make, of lighter-coloured stuff than the coat.

But the strangest part to our eyes of the whole get-up were the
shoes—huge black lacquer sabots worn in crossing the courtyards, but of
course doffed on entering a room, so constructed that the wearer had to
shuffle along in the most uncertain fashion, the very parody of walking.
The costume altogether might appear grotesque to a new-comer, but we had
so long learned to associate it with the dignity of old tradition that
its oddness had ceased to raise our wonder.

On a sudden, as we were waiting in the ante-room, there arose the wild
and picturesque strains of flute, mouth-organ, lute, drums and other
instruments of string, wood and percussion, belonging to his Majesty’s
private band,—a curious wailing music. Here again we had something with
a flavour entirely its own, though one of the Japanese gentlemen who had
been in England said that it reminded him of the Italian opera. The power
of the imagination could hardly go further.

Is there anything so utterly odious as waiting? The three of us, Parkes,
Satow and myself, had worked and waited many months, not altogether in
safety, for this consummation of a policy which we, loving Japan, and
at the same time penetrated with a sense of its importance for England,
indeed for the world, knew to be right. But now this last half-hour of
sponge cake and compliments seemed interminable.

At last! At last (I pray forgiveness if I dwell upon our impatience) we
were ushered into the Presence. Only Sir Harry Parkes and myself were
to be presented—Satow, by far the most important man of the three, not
having at that time been presented at our own Court, could not, according
to etiquette, be presented to a foreign sovereign. Unfortunately the
rain, which had been threatening all the morning, had begun to fall in
torrents, so we had to splash through the various courtyards, ankle-deep
in wet sand. Guards of honour were stationed at intervals—an unknown
sight in the precincts of the Gosho, into the inner enclosure of which no
soldiers had up to that time been admitted. We were introduced into the
Audience Hall by the Prince of Hizen.

Passing up a double flight of steps we entered the audience chamber, a
long hall forming one side of a courtyard of which the remaining three
sides were a verandah open only on the inside. In this verandah sat the
band, clothed in red, blue and gaudy colours, with lacquer caps upon
their heads. The Presence Chamber itself was a long room, very simple
and plain. In the centre was a canopy supported by four slender pillars
of black lacquer draped with white silk, into which was woven a pattern
in red and black; the drapery was caught up and festooned with black and
red ribbons. On the inside of each of the two front pillars stood a lion,
curiously carved in wood, the one black, the other gilt, about two feet
high. Like our own Lion and Unicorn they had some mystic meaning, some
hidden connection with the Kingly order.

Under the canopy was the young Mikado, seated in, or rather, leaning
against, a high chair. Behind him knelt two Princes of the blood, ready
to prompt him, if need should be, in the playing of his part. Outside the
canopy and in front of His Majesty knelt two other Princes of the blood.
On a raised floor decked with costly green silk, close to the canopy,
stood Sir Harry and myself, our conductor, the Prince of Hizen, kneeling
beside us. On one side Ito Shunské, Governor of Hiōgo, who was to act as
interpreter, was also kneeling. On either side of the canopy in a double
or treble row, extending to the end of the Hall, stood the great Princes
of the Empire, men such as Satsuma, Chōshiu, Uwajima, Kaga, and other
great nobles—to us, up to that time, no more than names, but now realized
in the flesh. It certainly was a very imposing sight; perhaps it is
difficult to convey an idea of all that it meant to us, who had worked so
hard to this end.

As we entered the room the Son of Heaven rose and acknowledged our bows.
He was at that time a tall youth with a bright eye and clear complexion;
his demeanour was very dignified, well becoming the heir of a dynasty
many centuries older than any other sovereignty on the face of the globe.
He was dressed in a white coat with long padded trousers of crimson silk
trailing like a lady’s court-train. His head-dress was the same as that
of his courtiers, though as a rule it was surmounted by a long, stiff,
flat plume of black gauze. I call it a plume for want of a better word,
but there was nothing feathery about it. His eyebrows were shaved off
and painted in high up on the forehead; his cheeks were rouged and his
lips painted with red and gold. His teeth were blackened. It was no small
feat to look dignified under such a travesty of nature; but the _sangre
Azul_ would not be denied. It was not long, I may add, before the young
sovereign cast adrift all these worn-out fashions and trammels of past
ages, together with much else that was out of date.

When we had taken our places the Mikado addressed Sir Harry Parkes as
follows:

“I hope that your Sovereign enjoys good health. I trust that the
intercourse between our respective countries will become more and
more friendly and be permanently established. I regret deeply that an
unfortunate affair which took place as you were on your way to the Palace
on the 23rd delayed this ceremony. It gives me great pleasure, therefore,
to see you here to-day.”

Now this speech, regarded as an oratorical or literary effort, was not
very remarkable. And yet, if we consider the circumstances, we cannot but
admit that there was in it much upon which we might fairly congratulate
ourselves. We were standing in the presence of a sovereign whose
ancestors for centuries had been to their people demigods—to foreigners
almost a myth. The sanctity of their seclusion had been inviolate, they
had held no intercourse with a world of which they knew nothing. Now,
suddenly, the veil of the temple had been rent and the Boy-God, in
defence of whose Divinity myriads of his subjects were ready gladly to
lay down their lives, had descended from the clouds to take his place
among the children of men, and not only that, but he had actually allowed
his sacred face to be seen by, and had held communion with, “The Beasts
from Without.” That is how the mere fact would present itself to the
minds of the Japanese.

Then as to the matter of the speech there was none of the old, haughty
arrogance of the heaven-born. The Queen was spoken of with due
respect,[10] in itself a new departure, and the apology for the outrage
which had taken place two days before was couched in becoming language,
nor had there been anything in the whole ceremonial which could wound the
susceptibilities of the most exacting foreigner. The barrier of centuries
had been broken down, and Japan was ready to enter into the comity of
nations on equal terms.

As might be expected from his extreme youth and the novelty of the
situation to one who had only recently left the women’s apartments, the
Mikado showed some symptoms of shyness. He hardly spoke above a whisper,
so the words were repeated aloud by the Prince of the Blood on his right
side and translated by Ito Shunské. When Sir Harry had made a suitable
reply we were conducted out of the Presence Chamber by the Prince of
Hizen. The whole ceremony did not last much more than a quarter of an
hour.

So ended a ceremony which had been most imposing not only on account of
its inner meaning, but also by reason of the halo of simplicity, instinct
with solemn dignity. Tradition and the atmosphere of sanctity were more
striking than all the gold and silver and jewels of an aurungzebe on his
peacock throne.

On the 27th we left Kiōto. It was no easy matter to convey our poor
wounded men, who had ridden into the holy city a few days before, looking
so smart and handsome; however, we procured eight huge litters and
managed to get them by easy stages to the boats. I may say here that none
of them died, though several underwent great suffering, and two were
crippled for life and had to be invalided home.

On the 29th Sir Harry and the rest of the Legation went back to Yokohama
to look after the interests of trade, in a neighbourhood where there was
still much sporadic fighting and where the British community were not
unnaturally anxious, and I was left behind at Ōsaka to keep up relations
with the new government which was to make its headquarters there.




CHAPTER XXIV

JAPAN. SENSATION DIPLOMACY


So I was left on my lonely job, which lasted from the last days of March
till the beginning of August. I was the only European in the great city
(for the Consulate, under Mr. Russell Robertson, was far away down the
river); there were no foreign residents, and I was often for a week
at a time without seeing a European face, or hearing any language but
Japanese. I managed to secure a lodging not far from the office where
Prince Daté and Higashi Kuzé were conducting foreign affairs and I lived
in Japanese fashion on rice and fish, with which I was served from a
neighbouring cook-shop.

It was the hardest-worked time of my life. Parkes, at the request of
the Japanese, had chosen me for the task because he was in that way
able to dispense with depriving himself of one of his interpreters; my
orders were to communicate not only with him, but also directly with the
Foreign Office at home, whenever an opportunity should offer by a passing
man-of-war. I had therefore to copy every one of my drafts in duplicate,
and my communications with the Japanese Ministers in triplicate, as
according to treaty I was obliged to send my despatches in English as
well as in Japanese, and of course the translation into Japanese was an
immense addition to my labours. There was, moreover, rarely a day when
the Ministers did not expect to have an interview, often very lengthy,
upon some subject or other, and visitors from the various clans often
came to discuss politics and air their views. In this way I was at work
from early dawn till night, and kept two Japanese secretaries constantly
employed. Neither of them knew a word of English, so they were only of
use as amanuenses for their own language. I may say here in passing that
when the Foreign Office asked the Treasury to reimburse me the money
that I had paid for their salaries the answer was that I seemed to have
made good use of my opportunities, and if I had earned any reward I must
seek for it in my own profession. That is the return which I got for
work which was no part of my business as secretary, and which actually
cost me money. In addition to my written work I had to have interminable
interviews with Prince Daté and Higashi Kuzé at the Foreign Office, or
to receive them and many of the leading Japanese in my own house. Often
I worked from twelve to fourteen hours. “Bob” Lowe, afterwards Lord
Sherbrooke, was Chancellor of the Exchequer when the Foreign Office sent
in the claim on my behalf. He was always a very good friend to me, and
told me that he refused because he thought he would be doing me a good
turn, which, he said, I thoroughly deserved. So between two friendly
stools I fell to the ground!

Captain du Petit Thouars in the _Dupleix_ was left to watch over French
interests. He was one of the most charming of men, an ornament to the
French Navy. He died in 1890 (?) as Vice-Admiral at Brest, having
rendered brilliant service on shore during the war of 1870. As soon as
our respective ministers’ backs were turned I went to him and pointed
out how absurd and harmful were the jealousies and intrigues which had
gone on between the two Legations. I told him that I would keep him
accurately informed as to anything that might happen on shore, and hoped
that he, being in the roadstead on board his ship, would let me know of
any maritime movement that might take place. I said that we still had
to deal with a crisis which was far from settled, and that I could not
conceive that our interests should not be identical. He quite agreed, and
so we determined to work together in the common cause. He was as loyal as
his own sword, and we became fast friends. During those critical months
neither of us could often leave his post, so we seldom met; when we did
it was a privilege to be the friend of such a man.

It was, as I have said, a solitary life that I led—the life of a recluse.
How my London friends would have stared at my surroundings! I rigged
up a table at which to write, and a chair—those were indispensable;
otherwise my long, narrow room was innocent of furniture other than
two handsome screens, still in my possession, which shut off my bedless
sleeping-place, where I lay like a Japanese gentleman on a quilt, and
slept the sleep of the man that is mentally and physically tired out. My
verandah opened on to a slip of garden not much larger than a good-sized
dining-table—a little gem in its way, with a miniature Mount Fuji, a
shrine to Inari sama, a forest, a waterfall plashing into a lake, in
which were several fan-tailed gold-fish.

I hardly expect to be believed when I write that one day, as I was
sitting at work, I saw a huge otter come sneaking into my little
paradise. I cocked my Spencer rifle—the friend that I always kept at
hand, for there were plenty of scowling Jō-i about—but the enemy heard
the click and bolted before I could get a shot at him. It was a strange
invasion in a city of some half million of souls!

Apart from the ordinary work of our relations with the Foreign Office
there were two matters which Sir Harry had specially entrusted to me. The
one was to insist upon the publication, without delay, of the new law
with regard to attacks upon foreigners, and the second was to watch over
the case of the Urakami Christians. Neither of these was an easy matter
to deal with.

It will be seen from my translation of the law that it was an edict which
must have needed great courage on the part of the new Government to draw
up and still greater courage to publish, as they had promised to do,
throughout the Empire. It said:

    “Now that the Imperial Government has been newly established,
    in obedience to the principles of the Court it has been
    commanded that friendly relations shall exist with foreign
    countries, and that all matters should be treated directly by
    the Imperial Court. The treaties will be observed according
    to international law, and the people of the whole country,
    receiving with gratitude the expression of the Imperial Will,
    are hereby ordered to rest assured upon this point. From
    henceforth those persons who by violently slaying foreigners
    or otherwise insulting them would rebel against the Imperial
    commands and brew trouble in the country, and all other
    persons whatsoever, are hereby ordered to behave in a friendly
    manner. Those who do not uphold the majesty and good faith of
    their country in the eyes of the world, being guilty of most
    audacious crime, will, in accordance with the heinousness of
    their offence, even should they belong to the Samurai class,
    be stripped of their rank and will meet with a suitable
    punishment. Let all men receive these Imperial commands by
    which riotous conduct, however slight, is strictly forbidden.

                            “Published at Kiōto, March 28th (1868).”

This decree naturally aroused great susceptibilities. To strip a Samurai
of his rank deprived him of the right of execution by _hara-kiri_; he
would have to die by the sword of the common executioner, his head would
be exposed on the pillory, and his property would be forfeited; he
would be reduced to the level of the lowest scum of the earth, and his
family would be ruined and wiped out. Only think of what that must mean
to these proud and chivalrous heirs of the centuries! The privilege of
self-immolation was one of the dearest and most precious rights of the
very class which had brought about the revolution, the class, indeed, to
which the members of the Government themselves belonged. However anxious
the Government might be to issue such an edict all over the country—and
it was impossible to doubt their sincerity in the matter—they were in
great difficulties. They were obviously wishful to do everything that
they could to conciliate foreign Powers and to enable their country to
take an honourable place among the nations; their own interests were at
stake, as well as ours, and this they felt.

They tried hard to persuade me to let them defer the publication of
the edict until it could be incorporated in a new code of laws which,
they said, was about to be drawn up. To this I had resolutely to refuse
assent. At the same time I could not but see that they had to consider
old prejudices, old jealousies, old hatreds; “rust cannot be cleared off
an old blade with one rubbing;” they had to go forward warily. However,
to cut short a long story and the record of many an hour of debate,
every minute of which increased my respect for Prince Daté and Higashi
Kuzé, I succeeded in getting the government to post the famous edict in
every town, village and hamlet throughout the land. My chief was greatly
pleased. It was a triumph for which he received great kudos.

The case of the Urakami Christians furnished me with a still more
difficult task.

“Think not that I am come to send peace on earth; I came not to send
peace, but a sword.” In no country did these words, with the terrible
forecasts that follow them, prove more true than in Japan. When St.
Francis Xavier, under the guidance of a gentleman of the Satsuma clan,
reached the land of Sunrise, the great missionary met with many troubles,
but was rewarded by great successes.

I do not propose to tell the story of the first efforts to Christianize
Japan—suffice it to say here, that all went well until the heavy-footed,
clumsy Franciscans in Japan, as in China, trampled to death the seed
of religion which had been sown and diligently watered by the more
delicate Jesuits. Interference with the laws and internal affairs of the
country were meat and drink to the Franciscans, so that the great Kido
was historically justified when, on one occasion, he said: “It seems to
me that missionaries are men who are sent here to teach the people to
disobey the laws of their country.” Those who are curious in such matters
will find the history of the persecutions—sometimes, it must be admitted,
retaliations—admirably told in Mr. Longford’s “Story of Old Japan.”[11]

The persecutions of Hidéyoshi and Iyéyasu failed entirely to outroot
Christianity; it simply disappeared out of sight. There were in many
parts of the country small scattered colonies of Christians, faithful
men who, without the teaching of a priest or the ministrations of a
pastor, clung to the creed for which more than two centuries before
their forefathers had been tortured and perished. It must have been a
very simple form of faith without much dogma about it, but they believed
in God and worshipped the Saviour who had died for their sins, and
that was enough. One such colony existed at Urakami, a village not far
from Nagasaki, the chief scene of the old persecutions, a community
entirely composed of Christians, numbering some four thousand souls. The
reactionaries at the Court of Kiōto had determined that these people must
be put to the sword and extirpated.

It is perhaps not surprising that the resumption of power by the Mikado
should have led to a revival of Shintō, the religion of the Gods, from
whom he claimed descent. The more bigoted of the men by whom the Emperor
was surrounded, new to government and little suspecting the troubles
which, in the altered condition of things, religious intolerance could
not fail to bring upon their country, were fired by zeal for the old
worship, and they demanded the extirpation of the religion in which they
saw its chief enemies. Urakami was a prominent and notorious centre of
that faith, and its people must be the first victims.

If we put ourselves for a moment in the place of the new ministers, it
is not difficult to realize the anxious thought which this movement,
even more than the question of the new edict mentioned above, must have
caused them. Bigotry and fanaticism are terrible foes to fight, and, in
this particular instance, the trouble must have been increased by the
knowledge that any disinclination to proceed to extremities would be set
down as something akin to disloyalty to the Emperor and a denial of his
divine rights. The ministers with whom I had to deal were large-minded
men with liberal views, but they, on their side, had to reckon with
important personages, who, after being immured, as their forbears had
been for centuries, in the mystic darkness of a prehistoric cloister,
were no more fit to face the sunlight of the nineteenth century than
those perhaps fabulous batrachians which have whitened for aeons untold,
encased in the crevices of the limestone rock. In a little time they were
to face it, and they did so gloriously; but the day had not come yet, and
they were still purblind.

The sudden awakening of a sovereign and his court from the sleep of eight
centuries was a wonder which still, after some fifty years, reads like
a fairy tale even to those who witnessed it. Among the men who composed
it there was no great wealth, no ostentation to dazzle the eye—and yet
everything to fascinate the imagination. These men, dwelling in simple
houses, living frugally—even poorly—were surrounded by a halo before
which the territorial magnates, lords of great castles, with all their
pomp and splendour and martial glitter, had to humble themselves. The
Kugé believed, and they could make others believe, that for all their
apparent poverty and humility they were in some mysterious way trustees
for the glory of the Gods, from whom, like their divine Emperor, they
claimed descent.

Naturally enough, amongst men who had lived in the mystery of ancestral
seclusion, unbroken by any sign or sound from without, there must be
a majority among whom it would be idle to expect an immediate flow of
liberal ideas; they thought as their fathers thought, as their forbears
had thought in the eleventh century, when the veil was drawn over the
holy city and all light shut out till now. Some there were who amazed us
by the way in which they met the new situation. Physically, inbreeding
had done its work. Many of the nobles were puny, pale and anæmic ghosts,
in whom Dr. Willis, a sound observer, found many signs of hereditary
degeneration. Others again, equally bearing the stamp of aristocratic
descent, were strong and well nurtured. Side by side with Daté, the burly
Inkiyō of Uwajima, Higashi Kuzé, the Court noble was not imposing in
stature, but his mind was clear and nimble, and indeed, it was wonderful
to watch the success with which many of these recluses, whose lives had
been spent in the iteration of dull and mentally exhausting ceremonies,
threw themselves into the whirlpool of affairs.

Iwakura, for instance, who afterwards went as Ambassador to Europe,
was one of the most pliant of the new statesmen with whom we came into
contact. The three brothers Saionji, and some others, were born men
of the world. But these men of more advanced views were few and far
between, and amongst the others there can be no doubt that our friends
in preaching toleration had an even more difficult task than that which
lay before Disraeli when he started upon educating his party. Had the
Emperor been a little older his generous spirit would have lightened
their burden. But he was a mere boy, not yet able to make his personal
influence felt. It was not long in coming; for among the heroes of the
days of the restoration none deserve more admiration and respect than
the Emperor Mutsu Hito. Hardly was he freed from the luxurious care
and tender coddling of the women’s quarters than he was forced to take
up his august inheritance at a moment of storm and stress for which the
history of his country—perhaps we might say, of the world—furnishes no
parallel. He faced the ordeal manfully from the very first, and he seems
at once to have recognized the importance of the fact that the days of
Japan’s isolation had come to an end, and that, if the Land of the Gods
was to preserve its dignity, it must be by casting off the old slough of
tradition and prejudice.

Before many years had elapsed he made himself a real, and not a nominal,
power. The full measure of his personal weight will perhaps never be
known. What we do know is that he was a most generous monarch, an
indefatigable worker, and that he had the art of surrounding himself with
the best and wisest advisers. Had he been opposed to a forward policy
the prestige which attached to the Son of Heaven would have enabled him
to stay the hands of the clock; his power of obstruction would have been
almost unlimited. As a matter of fact his action was always in favour of
progress, and in nothing did he show this more conspicuously than in the
attitude which, from the first, he took up towards foreigners. Doubtless,
in the earlier days he, like his ministers, had to be careful not to run
too violently against tradition and prejudice.

In order to understand the policy of the new government, in regard to
the native Christians, it is essential that these very real difficulties
which they had to encounter should be understood. In dealing with them,
Daté and Higashi Kuzé evidently knew that they had to conciliate a number
of their more retrograde peers who might easily wreck the ship. Their
hand was not an easy one to play; they held but one trump card—national
ambition, which could not but be frustrated by disregarding the public
opinion of the world, and even that card they must persuade others to
take at trump value; a little too great precipitancy, a little lack of
caution, and they might raise a storm of fanaticism which it would be
hard to quell and which might ruin their game. In our discussions I had
to minimize dangers which I knew to be no sham, and to lay stress upon
advantages of which the government were probably as well aware as I was.

One difficulty with which I had to contend was the danger of appearing to
interfere in the internal affairs of the country. No foreigner’s safety
or welfare was at stake. There was not a single missionary concerned. The
foreign legations then could not do more than offer friendly advice and
that, too, in the most discreet fashion. Day after day and week after
week we carried on our weary debates; but at any rate I was at last
able to obtain the assurance that there would be no massacre, no such
persecution, no such wholesale cruelty, as had stained the early days of
the seventeenth century. So far it was a triumph, well worth the pains it
cost, but I was certain that there must be some temporary sacrifice to
the old-world prejudices of the Court, which were still too strong to be
altogether ignored. That sacrifice would take the shape of deportation.
When in the month of August I returned to Yokohama I found Sir Harry
Parkes just about to start for a conference with the colleagues. “What
am I to tell them?” he asked. I answered that he might assure them that
there was no danger, such as had at one time been dreaded, there would
be no executions—no torture—that the utmost that would be done would be
a breaking up of the community at Urakami, that the families would be
distributed among various clans, and that I did not believe that even
that measure of intolerance would be of long duration. Sir Harry was
delighted with the result of my negotiations and went off in great glee
to reassure the colleagues. It was really a great victory. My forecast
was correct; though, in 1870, there was a fresh outburst of fanatical
zeal and many families were exiled, in 1872, with the new and generous
order of things, the exiles were restored to their homes; missionaries
are now free all over the country, and who will may be baptized.

In spite of the pleasure of having independent and responsible work to do
I confess that I was not sorry when my exile at Ōsaka came to an end. It
had been a lonely time in the midst of an obviously hostile community.
The heat had been intense—the work very laborious, no rest from morning
till night, food none too plentiful, though, indeed, there was little
temptation to eat. I was, moreover, run down and out of health. So I was
delighted when my good friend du Petit Thouars sent to say that he was
leaving for Yokohama and would give me a berth, as he heard that I, too,
was to rejoin my chief.

Those were halcyon days on board the _Dupleix_. The too often storm-vexed
Inland Sea was a dream of beauty, its countless smiles rippling under a
cloudless sky. The ship was the perfection of comfort, the cook a genius,
and my host—one of the most agreeable companions, a man whose goodness of
heart was equalled by his wit and the catholicity of his reading. His men
adored him, and no wonder!

I was quickly back in my fairy-tale quarters in the little temple of
Monriuin, overlooking the Bay of Yedo—soon to become Tōkiō, in order that
the last vestige of the power of the Tokugawa family might be swept away.
My little temple home was not much bigger than a doll’s house, but it was
very pretty and snug and to a tired and overworked man it was a delight
to slip on a bath-gown in the early morning and drink in the refreshing
breezes which came blowing into the garden from over the sea.

I had plenty to amuse me, and leisure to go on plodding at my “Tales
of Old Japan,” which were growing in bulk. The stories themselves were
not such hard work; but the notes and appendices involved much labour
in looking up authorities and gathering together odds and ends of
information. Parkes used to say that, if ever the book was published,
they would be the best part of it.

The civil war was now practically at an end. The Shōgun, shorn of his
rank, was easing his scholarly mind in the composition of Chinese poetry
in his romantic castle of Shidzuoka, the favourite castle of his great
ancestor Iyéyasu, where, leading the life of a country gentleman, he for
some forty years devoted himself to agricultural pursuits, especially to
improving the cultivation of tea. In this way he found good employment
for the vast number of retainers whom he was unable to support as in
old days, but whom he would not turn adrift. He was a kind and generous
master.

There was still fighting in the north, and the Prince of Aidzu did
not capitulate until towards the end of the year. Enomoto, who was in
command of the ships of the Tokugawa, had taken his fleet to Hakodaté in
the island of Yesso, where he was joined by Captain Brunet and another
officer of the _mission militaire_, and by one or two French midshipmen
from the _Minerve_. Enomoto’s attempt to proclaim a republic in Yesso
was an utter failure; by the month of June, 1869, he was hopelessly
defeated; the French officers, who had surrendered to their own naval
commander, were shipped off on board the _Coetlogon_ to Yokohama, where
M. Outrey, who had succeeded M. Léon Roches as French Minister, would
not even allow them to land, but ingloriously packed them off in the
_Dupleix_ to Saigon. The departure of these troublesome French gentlemen
with their tails between their legs, was a source of infinite joy to Sir
Harry Parkes, and of great relief to M. Outrey, who had been much annoyed
by their conduct. Enomoto himself, the arch-rebel, was forgiven, and was
afterwards Japanese Minister in Peking.

All these things, however, took place months after my arrival in Yedo.
The great city through which the furies had been raging so violently,
burning temples, setting fire to _yashikis_, fighting, murdering,
crucifying,[12] the streets ringing with the fierce war-songs of the
clansmen, was now at peace. The days floated by uneventfully in a dull
monotone which was a new and, to tell the truth, delicious sensation; it
was long since I had enjoyed such a feeling of peace and security. Now
and then some visitor would come, eager to be shown the historic beauties
of the famous place; now and then I had to ride to Yokohama on Legation
business; otherwise the silence of Monriuin was unbroken.

It was a blessed calm after the storm. Still, it would not have been
wise as yet to lay aside revolver and sword, for so long as the Samurai
were allowed to wear sword and dirk there was always the danger lest
some fanatic swashbuckler, perhaps in his cups, might empty his scabbard
in our honour. A blow would soon be given, and we had had experience
enough of what Captain du Petit Thouars called “le marteau rasoir”—a
good definition of the heavily-weighted, keen-edged _katana_. The law
depriving the Samurai of the right to carry the _dai-sho_, sword and
dirk, was one of the wisest enactments of the new _régime_, but that was
not to come for many a long month.




CHAPTER XXV

BETWIXT OLD AND NEW JAPAN


The period upon which we were now entering was of singular interest and
historical importance. It was the connecting link between the old Japan
and the new, a transition-time in which the ancient feudalism still spoke
(indeed, one may ask whether its voice is even now, in 1915, quite hushed
to silence?) when many schemes were fought out, some still-born, some
doomed to a swift death, others, embryonic at first, but fated to grow
into greatness.

Of these none was more significant, none more pregnant with consequences
than the remission by the Daimios into the hands of the Mikado of the
great fiefs which they had held from time immemorial. This, as I have
shown, sprang out of the proposal of the Daimios that the Tokugawa family
should be made to give up lands bringing in a revenue of two millions
_kokus_ of rice; and it was to that remarkable man, my friend Prince
Yōdo, the Inkiyō of Tosa, that the credit belongs of seeing that, having
once started on a forward policy, they must be prepared to go on with
it, and that the consolidation of the Empire must of necessity involve
the creation of an Imperial revenue, together with the abolition of
provincial home rule. At the same time no little praise is due to the
other territorial magnates for the ease and rapidity with which they
assimilated what to them must have seemed profoundly distasteful and
revolutionary ideas.

[Illustration: OLD JAPAN.

_From a water-colour drawing by C. Wirgman._]

I translated the first memorial announcing the laying at the foot
of the throne the vast ancestral territories, signed by Mori Saisho
Chinjo (Chōshiu), Shimadzu Shosho (Satsuma), Nabeshima Shosho (Hizen),
Yamanouchi Shosho (Tosa). It was published in the _Kiōto Gazette_ of the
5th of March, 1869, and is worth giving in full, for it was a document
which made history.

    “In the opinion of certain ministers (the writers) the Great
    Body must not lose a single day, the Great Strength must not
    delegate its power for one day. Since the heavenly ancestors
    established the foundations of the country the Imperial line
    has lasted without a break for ten thousand ages. The Heaven
    and the Earth belong to the Emperor; there is no man who is
    not his servant. This constitutes the Great Body. The Emperor
    governs his people, conferring rank and property. It is his to
    give and his to take away; of our own selves we cannot hold a
    foot of land, we cannot take a single man. This constitutes the
    Great Strength.

    “In the days of old the Emperor governed the sea-girt land,
    and trusting to the Great Body and to the Great Strength, the
    Imperial wisdom ruled over all; thus truth and righteousness
    being upheld, there was prosperity under Heaven. In the Middle
    Ages the ropes of the net were loosened, so that men playing
    with the Great Strength and striving for the power crowded
    upon the Emperor, and half the world tried to enslave the
    people and to steal the land. Beating and gnawing, theft and
    rapine, ruled in the land. When the Great Body that should
    have been preserved, and the Great Strength that should have
    been maintained, were gone, no means were left for repressing
    these evils. Traitors encouraged traitors and the strong preyed
    upon and devoured the weak. The greater traitors seized tens
    of provinces, the lesser traitors maintained retainers by the
    thousand. Then arose the Bakufu, which also parcelled out
    territories and men as might seem good to it, among private
    individuals, thus planting and stablishing its own power. So it
    came about that the Emperor wore a vain and empty rank, and,
    the order of things being reversed, looked up to the Bakufu as
    the dispenser of joy and sorrow. For six hundred years and more
    the waters turned from their course have flooded the land and
    reached to Heaven.

    “During this time the Bakufu borrowed the name and authority
    of the Emperor to hide the traces of thefts of lands and men,
    being forced to use the Imperial name as a screen, since the
    relations and duties of the vassal to his lord cannot be laid
    aside after ten thousand years. Now the Great Government has
    been newly restored, and the Emperor in person undertakes the
    direction of affairs. This is indeed a rare and mighty event.
    We have the name of an Imperial Government: we must also have
    the fact. Our first duty is to illustrate our faithfulness
    and to prove our loyalty. When the line of Tokugawa arose it
    divided the country among its kinsfolk, and there were many who
    thus founded the fortunes of their families. They waited not
    to ask whether the lands and men that they received were the
    gift of the Emperor. For ages until this day, they continued to
    inherit these lands. Others said that their possessions were
    the prize of their spears and bows, as if they had broken into
    store-houses and stolen the treasures that they contained,
    boasting to the soldiers round them that they had done this
    regardless of their lives. Those who break into store-houses
    are known by all men to be thieves, but those who rob lands and
    steal men are not looked upon with suspicion. How are loyalty
    and faith confused and destroyed! Now that men are looking
    for an entirely new Government, the Great Body and the Great
    Strength must neither be lent nor borrowed.

    “Our dwelling-place is the Emperor’s land: the food which we
    eat is grown by the Emperor’s men. How can we call it our own?
    We now reverently offer up the list of our possessions and men,
    with the prayer that the Emperor will take good measures for
    rewarding those to whom reward is due and for mulcting those
    to whom punishment is due. Let the Imperial commands be issued
    for altering and remodelling the territories of the various
    clans. Let the civil and criminal codes, the military laws down
    to the rules for uniform and the construction of engines of
    war, all proceed from the Emperor; let all the affairs of the
    Empire, great and small, be referred to him. After this, when
    the internal relations shall be upon a true footing, the Empire
    will be able to take its place side by side with the other
    countries of the world. This is now the most urgent duty of the
    Emperor, as it is that of his servants and children. Hence it
    is that we, in spite of our own folly and vileness, daring to
    offer up our humble expression of loyalty upon which we pray
    that the brilliance of the heavenly Sun may shine, with fear
    and reverence bow the head and do homage, ready to lay down our
    lives in proof of our faith.”

A truly memorable document, to which, on the following day, the Emperor
made answer, saying that “His Majesty is filled with admiration of the
loyalty” of the four Daimios.

Other Daimios followed suit, the Prince of Echizen, however, raising the
suggestion that there should be a public debate as to whether the present
was a proper and fitting opportunity for the movement.

One Daimio, following the example of the four leaders, “has the honour
humbly to make a statement”—and a very characteristic statement it is.
“The Emperor, having taken upon himself the task of ruling, the owls
have changed their cry,[13] the grass and the trees have bent to the
wind. This has been one day in ten thousand years which it has been
our privilege to witness. The land girdled by the sea has beheld and
wondered. Deeply should I fear to retain for my own the territory which
my poor clan has received from the Emperor; therefore it is my desire to
offer up my lands and my people. I humbly implore the Imperial decision.

                                                  “Sd. TODA UNÉMÉ NO SHO.”

                  (_Kiōto Gazette_ of March 10th, 1869.)

I feel inclined to add extracts from a similar memorial by the Prince of
Unshiu, taken from the _Kiōto Gazette_ of March 12th, 1869:

    “Your servant Sadayasu in his folly and worthlessness, ignorant
    of the laws of decorum, dares to lift up his voice in defiance
    of all propriety. To discuss the affairs of the Government
    of the Empire is a crime deserving ten thousand deaths....
    Truly we may say that after an interval of seven hundred
    years the foundation has been laid of a reformation which
    shall last for ten thousand generations. The Emperor issues
    his illustrious commands and the millions of the people are
    purified in the reformation. Hence it is that your servant
    Sadayasu, disregarding the heinousness of the crime which he
    is committing, dares to offer up his humble opinion. The
    affairs of the Empire may be said to have their seasons ... it
    is to these seasons that we must direct our minds. The present
    restoration is such a season.

    “The first consideration is that the root of the tree should be
    firmly planted. The root is the sovereign power; to restore the
    sovereign power to the Emperor is to plant the root firmly....
    In the Middle Ages the military class curtailed the possessions
    of the Emperor.... In their mutual struggle the great swallowed
    up the small, the strong took possession of the weak.... The
    feudal Princes presented the picture of a land divided into
    petty kingdoms maintained by force ... so that the people of
    the remote districts knew not that above all there was One who
    was Lord of the myriads and of the millions. How can such a
    grief be endured? But now that the tangled machinery of the
    State has been renewed, the myriads and the millions, purified
    in the overflowing dews of the deep benevolence, will at once
    reverently recognize their Emperor, and the roots of the tree
    will be firmly planted. The roots being firmly planted, the
    branches and leaves will flourish luxuriantly. How much the
    more, now that friendly relations exist with foreign countries,
    should we place our divine country under the sovereign rule,
    and setting up our Emperor as the Head of the Universe, and
    restoring the singleness of the supreme power, illustrate its
    virtue and strength to the four seas.

    “Your servant Sadayasu acknowledges gratefully that, degenerate
    as he is, he is yet the chief of the least of all the clans.
    At a moment so auspicious as the present, how can he refrain
    from expressing his humble opinion? Cheerfully braving the
    punishment of the headsman’s axe, he dares to lift up his
    voice. If perchance your servant who offers up the lists of
    his lands and men to the Emperor should find favour, and his
    petition be graciously accepted, what happiness could equal
    this? He prays that the All-wise and Illustrious will take his
    poor request into consideration. Your servant Sadayasu, in fear
    and awe, bows the head once and again. Fainting and dying, he
    lifts his voice.”

The _Kiōto Gazette_, which gave to the world these memorials, cast much
in the same shape as that hoary old journalistic curiosity the _Peking
Gazette_, was one of the first-fruits of the new order of things. It
was a most interesting publication, full of odds and ends of quaint
information, and for some months, when our withers were unwrung by any
rousing excitement, I used to amuse myself by picking plums out of it and
translating them for the benefit of the Legation. The memorials by the
great nobles surrendering their fiefs, of which I have given specimens
above, were published in the _Gazette_. I suspect that many of the
announcements would excite as much curiosity among the Japanese of to-day
as they did in 1869 among us.

       *       *       *       *       *

(1.) On the first day of the New Year [February the 11th, 1869] the
Emperor worships the Gods of the Four Points of the Compass, and on this
occasion His Majesty in the Court of the Hall called Seiriyo Den does
homage before the Gods of Heaven and Earth and prays for a prosperous
year and long life. He also in the same place prays to the tombs of his
ancestors. The Court performs _Go Sekkai_ (similar acts of worship).
A proclamation announces to the Princes assembled at Kiōto that these
acts of worship will take place, and on the second day will take place
the ceremony of the worship of Haku Ba[14] (“the white horse”) by the
Court. On the third day dancing and singing by the officers of the Court.
The Princes may be present on these four days at their convenience. On
the second the Mikado partakes of the food called _Ō-yukago Gozen_. On
the second cups of wine are presented to the Ministers of State and on
the third to various officials, and on the latter day the whole of the
Daimios present at Kiōto receive fans from the Emperor.

(2.) On the fourth day the Ministers of State assemble on the middle and
second stages of the Ko-gosho (small hall of audience), and the Hoshō
(Prime Minister) reads out the imperial address—a patriotic document.

(3.) On the twelfth day there will be Kagura dances in honour of the
_Kami_ (gods of the country), and on the thirteenth day there will be
Kagura in honour of the Imperial change of residence to Yedo. Together
with these dances there will be Shintō services from the night of the
tenth day until the morning of the fourteenth. Persons in mourning,
Buddhist priests and nuns will not attend on these occasions.

Regulations for the presentation of wedding gifts of a sword and box of
dried fish to the Emperor from the various Princes; the Empress Mother
and the Empress receiving only dried fish.

(4.) 5th day. The dance called Senshiu Banzai—“a thousand autumns and ten
thousand years.”

The murder of the Minister of State, Yokoi Heishirō, on his return from
Court. The Emperor addresses him a letter of inquiry. (He had been killed
on the spot and his head carried off by the murderers, so it was a
post-mortem compliment.)

(5.) 7th day. The ceremonies of Haku Ba, “the white horse.” This is a
ceremony in honour of spring. Although the Chinese characters for “white
horse” are used, “Hakuba” should be pronounced “Aoma”—“the black horse.”
In the book “Kuji Kongen,” the following explanation is given: “If on
the 7th day of the 1st month, a person should see a black horse it is
said that pestilential vapours will not affect him during that year.” The
Emperor Nimmei or Nimmiyo (A.D. 834-850) is said to have seen a black
horse on that day in the part of the palace called Horaku Den, “the hall
of abundance and happiness.”

In the book called “Yo No Kotozawa Mondō,” a collection of saws and
proverbs, the Li Chi is cited, where it is written that persons leading
seven black horses should go out to welcome the coming spring on an
eastern moor. _Aoi_, light green, is the colour of spring and _aoi_ is
also used for the colour of a black horse. The ceremony is therefore the
hailing of spring.

Various appointments and reliefs from duty.

(6.) On the 17th it is announced that on the 19th the Emperor will
witness dancing. Officials from the fourth rank down to the Hanji and
Shiji may be spectators; they will take their places in the corridor, and
money will be given to them wherewith they may purchase crane’s flesh and
wine.

NOTE.—These curious religious dances, which remind one of the dances
of the choristers at Easter in the Cathedral of Seville, are of great
antiquity. It is written in the Nihon-ki, the history of Japan, that
when the Emperor Inkiyō died in the forty-second year of his reign
(A.D. 453) the King of Corea, being shocked and grieved at the news,
sent eighty boat-loads of presents with musicians and eighty musical
instruments, but the court of Japan was ignorant of their use. In the
twentieth year of the Emperor Suiki (A.D. 612) Uimashi, Kichiuto and
Katai came to Japan from Hiyakusai in Corea, announcing that having
studied in China, they had learned various accomplishments together
with the art of dancing, and specially the dances called Mai, a kind of
minuet which the Chinese call Wu, danced to the accompaniment of musical
instruments. These three men were sent to a place called Sakurai Mura,
and persons of tender age were gathered together to be taught by them.

Two years later (A.D. 614) in the twenty-second year of the same reign,
one Inugami Mitasuki was sent to the Court of China to be instructed in
various accomplishments and returned in the following year. In the reign
of the Emperor Nimmei (A.D. 834-850) Fujiwara no Sadatoshi went to China
for the same purpose and in A.D. 847 was appointed Uta no Kami, “the Lord
of Song,” as the chief instructor in the arts of singing and dancing. In
the reign of the same Emperor Nimmei it is recorded that an old man named
Hamamushi of the province of Owari, who at eighty-three years of age was
as active as a boy, was summoned to dance before the Emperor. He it was
who invented the dance called Choju-gaku, the dance of long life. (The
legend taken from the first eclipse of the sun, when the sun-goddess hid
in a cave and was tempted out by the dancing of her turbulent brother, is
too well known to be more than referred to here. But it is the foundation
of the mystic dances of the Shintō.)

(7.) 18th day. Matsudaira Idzumi no Kami is reproved on account of riots
which have taken place in his district.

On the same day is issued a proclamation summoning the nobles of high and
lower degree to Yedo. It goes on to say, “The Emperor is grateful for the
fatigues and expenses of various natures which men have endured since
last spring for their country’s sake. But the summoning of this assembly
is connected with matters of the highest importance to the country.
Therefore let every man receive the Imperial will and obey it with as
little pomp and useless expense as possible.”

Rules for the division of duties.

Rules for the offices of the Council and Government—(an excerpt or two
from these may be of interest). Office hours are from 10 a.m. till 2 p.m.
except when stress of work delays the closing hour.... In all discussions
the office of the Jingi (Gods of Heaven and Earth—Shintō) will take
precedence. Other departments will follow in due order and without
confusion ... at twelve o’clock officers will retire for their midday
meal. Private conversation and gossiping is forbidden.

High prices having been paid for condemned and worthless vessels, a
regulation is issued forbidding the purchase of ships and men-of-war
directly from foreigners without previous survey and permission of
authorities of the open ports.

(8.) 19th day. Dancing before the Emperor.

(9.) 20th day. Priests and officials of the Shintō shrines summoned to
court to congratulate the Emperor and pay their respects.

Arrangements for lectures to be delivered before the Emperor on Japanese
and Chinese subjects.

Announcement of conclusion of treaties with Sweden and Norway, two
countries ruled by one king, and Spain.

(10.) 22nd day. The Empress Mother will take up her abode in a new
residence on the 11th of next month at ten in the morning.

Sentences on the men connected with the murder of the two sailors of
H.M.S. _Icarus_.

(11.) Proclamation to various clans dealing with requests for permission
to become Inkiyō, and petitions affecting the succession to estates and
the adoption of children.

NOTE.—Adoption is considered as in all respects the same as right of
birth. A gentleman once told me that he had an unbroken pedigree of a
thousand years—“With adoption at various times?” I asked. “Certainly,”
was the answer. He was amazed when I told him that in my country there
were such pedigrees without adoption.

Memorial of Chōshiu, Satsuma, Hizen and Tosa resigning their fiefs
(translation given above).

(12.) 25th day. List of persons to whom the oath of allegiance has been
administered.

Order for visit of congratulation to the Emperor, Empress and Empress
Mother on the occasion of her removal to her new Palace. Persons in
mourning to attend for the purpose on the following day.

30th day. The Prince of Chōshiu has heard that the Emperor is about
to send an envoy to his country and begs to decline the honour.
Answer.—“This petition has been taken cognizance of by the Emperor, who
has urgent reasons for issuing the orders in question, which will not be
revoked.”

(13.) 2nd day, 2nd month. Proclamation forbidding the Princes and Nobles
to have excessive retinues—also forbidding their retainers to cry out to
the people to prostrate themselves as they pass.

3rd day. Canonization of an ancestor of the Prince of Chōshiu who lived
in the sixteenth century. To the Mori Saisho—father and son:

“Whereas your ancestor Oyé Motonari, who received posthumous honours of
the third rank during a period when the three duties of Prince, Father
and Husband, and the five virtues of Benevolence, Justice, Decorum,
Knowledge and Truth, were thrown into confusion, was the only man who set
a brilliant example of loyalty and virtue; whereas he slew and expelled
the wicked and the rebel, and whereas he over and over again offered up
tribute to relieve the Emperor in his need; such patriotism and loyalty
at this distance of time excites deep admiration in the Emperor, who
directs that he be canonized as a _Kami_ (Shintō god) and orders that his
worship shall endure for all generations.

“The Emperor commands that his shrine be called the Shrine of Toyosaka.”

Order for the circulation of a book of religious instruction called
“Kiōto Fu Koku Yu Dai I.” As Sir Harry Parkes in forwarding my
translation to the Foreign Office said, “An interesting instance is thus
furnished of the endeavours of the Mikado’s Government to educate the
mind of the nation on the political questions of the day. The intimate
connection of religion with politics in a country in which the Emperor
is regarded as the Vicegerent of Heaven upon earth is, of course,
obvious.” A paper translated by Mr. von Siebold contains the following
expressions: “The Government and religion of a country are closely
united.... The law of the Mikado and the religion were in ancient days
called _the wings of a bird or the wheels of a cart_. This old saying is
very correct.”

The treatise is so curious and so instructive as a human document that I
add my translation of it in an appendix.

Although the printing of pirated editions of other books is strictly
forbidden an exception is made in the matter of the reproduction of this
pamphlet.

Order that taxes be paid in bank notes (_kinsatsu_) at the rate of 120
riyos paper for every 100 riyos specie.

Other orders relating to paper money.

Order for the establishment of a mint and new coinage.

(14.) 9th day. Appointment of a lady-in-waiting[15] and a _naishi_
(waiting-woman of lesser rank).

(15.) 12th day. Five villages in the province of Echizen are to
manufacture paper for bank notes. The paper is called Hoshō Gami.

(16.) 13th day. A loan of half a million riyos is asked for by the Prince
of Kubota, who, being the only noble in Ōshiu and Dewa who remained
faithful to the Emperor during the war, suffered grievous losses. A loan
of 200,000 riyos authorized, the Government being sorely straitened for
money.

(17.) The various districts and cities are ordered to send in returns
of their average revenues for the last five years—also returns of the
incomes of petty nobles and principal officials, and of the Shintō
shrines and Buddhist temples within their jurisdiction. The petty nobles
and officers are warned to send in returns to facilitate the above.
Similar orders are sent in to the clans in respect of taxes and customs
levied in their territories during the last five years, and also in
respect of revenues of shrines and temples.

(18.) 17th day. Two gentlemen, Kuabari Taifu and Funabashi Jijiu Sammi,
are reproved for not studying, and by their idleness disgracing their
ancestors.

Two gentlemen are ordered to proceed to Kiōto in order to practise
vaccination.

The Imperial journey from Kiōto to Yedo is fixed for the 7th of next
month. Stern orders are issued to prevent any harsh treatment of the
people by members of the suite or their servants. In the latter case the
masters will be held responsible.

NOTE.—The issue of this order shows that there was great truth in the
stories we used to hear of bullying and terrorizing by the retinues of
Daimios and nobles on their journeys to and from Yedo.

The priest Embun of the Temple Niakuōji has been ordered to unfrock
himself and enter the army as a cadet of the family of Namashina. Having
thus been created a noble of the Court (_Kugé_) he will receive an income
of forty-eight _kokus_ (about £100 at the then price of rice).

When the Emperor goes to worship at Isé (where are the shrines of the God
Ancestors) members of the retinue will stop at the post town of Seki and
rejoin the procession at the post town of Isu, after the acts of worship
shall have been accomplished.

Distribution of troops of the various clans. The Prince of Kaga to send
his contribution of rice for the army to the War Office at Yedo.

An edict forbidding the _rusui_, or agents in charge of Daimios’
_yashikis_, to continue the practice of spending money on theatrical
entertainments, singing parties, exhibitions of wrestlers and debauchery.

An edict which says that whereas the various clans have been in the
habit of negotiating loans directly with foreigners in violation of all
propriety, it is now ordered that henceforth clans wishing to borrow
money from foreigners shall address a petition to the Foreign Office,
which will grant or refuse its consent.

An edict regulating the opening of mines, for testing the purity of gold,
silver and copper, and for preventing the robbery of the peasants who
work the mines by evilly-disposed persons.

Regulations for the employment of foreigners only with the consent of the
Foreign Office.

(19.) 25th day. To the Princes of the Blood, _Kugés_ and Princes.
“The first day of next month having been fixed for the ceremony of
shaving off the eyebrows of the Empress, you are ordered to offer your
congratulations at the palace of the Empress Dowager and of the Empress.
It is not necessary to present offerings. Persons in mourning will attend
on the following day.”

Similar orders are issued to officers of the fifth rank and upwards.
Rules prescribed as to dresses of ceremony (_Ikan_ and _Shitataré_).

Orders as to the Emperor’s journey. Visits of congratulation to be paid
by Princes of the Blood, etc., at the palaces of the Empress Dowager and
Empress. “During the fifteen days following the Imperial departure each
of you will proceed once to the Palace to inquire after the Emperor’s
health.”

The 28th instant having been fixed for the revival of the ancient
ceremony of praying for a prosperous year, the Emperor will be engaged in
prayer, and religious exercises will be continued from the evening of the
26th until the morning of the 29th. Persons in deep or slight mourning,
Buddhist priests and nuns should avoid going to Court on those days.

Appointments of Boards of Trade at open ports; new purchases and orders
not to be entered upon until old obligations shall have been settled.

(20.) 24th day. Regulation of prices of horses and coolies during the
congestion of traffic caused by removal of the Court to Yedo.

(21.) 25th day. An order for framing rules and regulations for the House
of Parliament, for which accommodation will be found in the Castle.

Despatch of a mission to Koyasan.

NOTE.—A mountain in Kishiu where there is a temple founded by Kōbō
Daishi, and other temples. Koyasan is the home of the Koya Maki
(_Sciadopitys verticillata_.)

       *       *       *       *       *

These few extracts from the earliest numbers of the _Kiōto Gazette_ seem
to me to have a certain interest as showing the great variety of affairs
with which the newly-established Government had to busy itself. Some were
small, others important: the _Dai-jōkwan_ (the new Government) had to
imitate the elephant’s trunk—pick up a pin or uproot a tree.


THE “GI-JI-IN,” OR PARLIAMENT

It is generally agreed that the British House of Commons is the mother of
parliaments. The new House of Representatives at Yedo was its youngest
babe. Like those of all other babes, its first footsteps were somewhat
tottery and uncertain. It had to learn to walk before it could run. The
first debates did not reveal much oratorical power or even promise of
power; oratory was, as I think I have said before, not one of the natural
gifts of the nation; but the subjects of discussion were interesting and
the arguments used by the speakers very instructive to all students of
the country’s idiosyncrasies.

The Imperial Parliament was opened on the 18th of April, 1869, under
the Presidency of Prince Akidzuki. The Emperor’s message to the House—a
maiden effort—was as follows:

“Being on the point of visiting our eastern capital, we have convened the
nobles of our Court, and the various Princes, in order to consult them
upon the means of establishing the foundations of peaceful government.
Laws and institutions are the basis of government. The petitions of the
people at large cannot be lightly decided. It has been reported to us
that brief rules and regulations have been fixed upon for the Parliament,
and it seems good to us that the House should be opened at once.

“We expect you to respect the laws of the House, to lay aside all private
and selfish considerations, to conduct your debates with minuteness
and firmness; above all things, to take the laws of our ancestors as a
basis. Adapt yourselves to the feelings of men and to the spirit of the
times. Distinguish clearly between those matters which are of immediate
importance and those which may be delayed; between things which are less
urgent and those which are pressing. In your several capacities argue
with careful attention. When the results of your debates are communicated
to us it shall be our duty to confirm them.”

It will be seen that this Imperial message contains, especially in
the last sentence, something more than a promise of constitutional
government, while reference to the spirit of the times is all the more
remarkable considering the source from which it comes.

The first subject of debate was upon the position of the cadet branches
of the great princely houses. It was proposed that in the event of the
heads of such cadet branches being attainted of treason or crime, their
properties should return to the elder branch and the guilty person alone
be rendered responsible. If the property of an attainted cadet branch
were held of the Crown, and not of the elder branch, then the property
should revert to the Crown.

The institution of the Parliament was followed by the production of
a newspaper called the _Kogishō Nisshi_ or “Journal of Parliament.”
It shows that, however crude and elementary the debates might be, the
institution gave opportunities such as had never existed before of
ventilating important subjects and publishing the discussions for the
instruction of the people. It also gave the Government the chance of
issuing from time to time papers of questions, the object of which was
the political education of the members themselves. One of these papers
was so remarkable that I have no hesitation in giving my translation of
it here _in extenso_.

(Blue Book, Japan, No. 3. 1870.)

    (Translation.) Seventeen subjects of inquiry as to the means
    of washing away the Shame of Our Country in regard to foreign
    relations.

    MEMORANDUM ON THE FOREIGN RELATIONS OF JAPAN, DRAWN UP BY THE
    FOREIGN OFFICE.

    (1.) From ancient times till the present day the question of
    opening or closing the country has been a frequent theme of
    debate. Are the barbarians birds or beasts with whom we ought
    not to associate?—or, seeing that our country is not really
    rich and strong, should we take of their surplus to supply our
    deficiencies and then sweep them away? Or shall we change our
    teaching altogether to the Western fashion, opening schools
    for the acquisition of Western accomplishments and mastering
    the arts of gunnery and of shipbuilding, and when we have done
    this, drive them utterly from the country? Or shall we cut the
    barbarians down? All sorts of schemes of this nature have been
    debated down to the present day. If Japan is to be opened,
    shall we keep our foreign relations as they at present exist,
    or shall we place them upon a new and different footing?

    (2.) If it be determined that Japan should be closed, ought the
    foreigners to be expelled with decision, or shall we cut down
    and slay the foreigners who are living here? And when they come
    to fight us (in revenge for this) what will be the proper way
    for us to meet them?

    (3.) If, when the foreigners come with their armies to invade
    us we having no soldiers ready to oppose them, our people and
    the Emperor’s house fall together to rise no more, what then?

    (4.) If, when the time comes for us to struggle with the
    foreigners, there should be persons to raise the extraordinary
    argument that we ought not to pit our soldiers and our strength
    against them, how shall we be justified in holding such
    language?

    (5.) If it be decided to close the ports, when the time
    comes for us to fight, in what province shall we place our
    illustrious Imperial House in safety, and how shall we protect
    it? What will be the result of our precautions?

    (6.) If at the present time there are men who violently
    murder innocent foreigners, or who coin base money, or who
    borrow excessive sums of money, yearly and monthly piling up
    iniquity upon iniquity, when the foreigners shall have taken
    counsel together, and set their forces in motion to attack
    our Government and demand reparation, they will appropriate
    the open ports, stop our shipping upon the seas, and take
    possession of our islands, and then how shall we ward them off;
    what device shall we invent to suppress them?

    (7.) It appears that at the present moment the party in favour
    of opening the ports are the advocates of Western civilization,
    while the party in favour of closing the ports advocate the
    Japanese and Chinese civilization. If one or the other policy
    is to be adopted once for all, which of these two will it be
    fitting that we should determine and fix upon?

    (8.) At a juncture like the present how will it answer in the
    end to make our Shintō religion the religion practised in truth
    and in fact by the whole people of Japan?

    (9.) When the policy to be pursued is adopted, will that of
    opening or that of closing the country be best adapted to the
    spirit of the times, and on which side will the advantage or
    disadvantage, the gain or loss, show themselves in the end?

    (10.) The object of the treaties between Japan and other
    countries was to promote friendship and commerce between our
    people and foreigners. For the last few years foreign countries
    have vied with one another in sending their fleets and soldiers
    to reside in Japan for the protection of their people. Should
    any trouble arise, they will send out their troops in a
    moment to protect the different places at which they reside.
    At the present moment there are some three thousand British
    troops here. The next in numbers to these are the French. The
    Americans and other countries have only their fleets. As yet
    our illustrious and divine country has not been brought into
    contempt before the foreigner; the present danger is lest we
    should call upon ourselves that contempt. What is the proper
    line of conduct for us at present to adopt in order to clear
    away that danger?

    (11.) Reflecting upon this introduction of troops in accordance
    with the principles of international law, it is unheard of that
    soldiers should be stationed in any other places than colonies
    of the mother-country. During the last few years several
    tens of foreign merchants have been murdered, and for every
    man so murdered the foreign Governments have increased their
    forces until they have reached their present large numbers.
    As these murders increase they will, in the same proportion,
    add to their troops and fortify themselves more and more. What
    measures shall we adopt to put a stop to this?

    (12.) If, as the years and months roll on, foreigners continue
    to be murdered, and in this way foreign forces are augmented
    until all the ports are filled by them, this will be the
    greatest pollution and disgrace that could befall our divine
    country. As it is, we bear an evil name before the nations of
    the world. Animated by the patriotic spirit of Samurais of
    Japan, how shall we wipe out the blot of these misdeeds in
    sight of the world?

    (13.) The presence of these foreign troops points to the
    impotence of our Government to preserve peace and to protect
    native and foreigner. It is proclaimed that, until the power
    of life and death, of giving and of taking away, belongs to
    the Government,[16] the troops cannot be sent back to their
    respective countries. This power of life and death, of giving
    and of taking away, is the prerogative of the Government.
    The preservation of peace and the protection of native and
    foreigner is the very essence of that which is right and
    proper. The principle of mutual relief and assistance is that
    upon which treaties of amity should be observed. At the present
    moment we have come to such a point that we are tutored by
    foreign countries as to our own internal policy. What good
    scheme shall we adopt to blot out this shame?

    (14.) In the days of the Shōgun’s government the power of life
    and of death, the power of dismissal from and nomination to
    office was in the hands of low persons.[17] This caused the
    restoration of the government to the Emperor. How shall we
    guide our chariot clear of the rut in which that which preceded
    it was overturned?

    (15.) The representatives of foreign Powers when they go
    through the streets or in the country are preceded and followed
    by soldiers; what means shall we adopt to put an end to this
    irregularity? or shall we take no steps to put a stop to it?

    (16.) It has happened that when the officers or soldiers of the
    cities, clans and district towns fall in with foreigners on
    the high road, disturbances have occurred; what means shall be
    adopted to punish such offences? or, indeed, has the Government
    the power to punish them?[18] When foreigners ask these
    questions how can we give them a true and faithful answer?

    (17.) If it be desired to decide clearly between peace and
    war, an earnest and determined effort is necessary in either
    case. If our energies are relaxed for one single step we shall
    suddenly be precipitated into the misfortunes consequent upon
    our want of decision, and the power of the Government will fall
    into the hands of unprincipled persons. Therefore, is it not
    desirable that the question of peace or war should be decided
    once for all?

    The above questions are of all importance at the present
    moment. They must be treated with honesty and sincerity, and
    we earnestly beg you to settle these subjects, conducting your
    deliberations in accordance with the spirit of the times.

                                            (Signed) FOREIGN OFFICE.

I translated several of the debates of the young Parliament; they were on
various subjects. Here are one or two of the headings:

(1.) The confiscated estates of cadet branches of noble families
attainted of treason—shall they be forfeit to the crown or shall they be
given to the elder branch?

(2.) In cases of urgent necessity it has hitherto been the custom to
extort large levies of money from farmers and rich merchants. One Ono
Seigorō proposes to substitute for this method of raising money, which
he stigmatizes as little better than robbery, a national debt on the
European model; and that the Government should borrow money from the
people on the security of bonds bearing interest at the rate of 3 or 3½
per cent.

The voting upon this measure was as follows:

    Ayes                                    123
    Noes                                     30
    For the abolition of levies,
      but against the National Debt          32
    Against the abolition of levies,
      but for the National Debt               2
                                            ---
                                            187

(3.) On reckoning distances, temple lands and villages occupied by Etas
(the pariah class) have not been taken into account, because these have
not been required to furnish coolie labour to the Government. This has
led to confusion—and it is proposed to rectify the error.

    Ayes              172
    Noes                7
    Indifferent        13
                      ---
                      192

(4.) A proposal to abolish the practice of bearing familiar names. Also
that titles be abolished, and great and small known only by their proper
personal names. Question not decided.

(5.) A motion for introducing into the public service competitive
examinations upon the Chinese principle.

The sixth debate was upon the question of establishing partnerships
between Japanese and foreigners; and here the new institution was upon
dangerous ground—the more so in that some of the honourable members spoke
of “foreign barbarians.” The foreign representatives felt bound to warn
the Government that whatever the House might please to say the treaties
must be respected and foreigners spoken of with courtesy. The Government
were not slow in apologizing.

Two of the debates were extremely interesting; they were translated by
Mr. Aston; the subject of the one being prohibition of _seppuku_ (the
classical word for _hara-kiri_) and the other a motion that it should
be optional for the Samurai to wear sword and dirk. As may be imagined,
these proposals met with scant favour. _Seppuku_, it must be remembered,
was a punishment, the highly prized privilege of the Samurai, the
armiger, or gentleman, of Japan. It saved him from the disgrace of dying
by the sword of the executioner, and it preserved his property, which
would otherwise have been forfeited, for the benefit of his family. As a
voluntary act it is not yet extinct. The death of my friend the heroic
General Nogi, the hero of Port Arthur, bears testimony to that. Some of
the arguments used by the speakers were full of character; one member
defined _seppuku_ as “the very shrine of the Yamato Damashii, the spirit
of old Japan, and the embodiment in practice of devotion to principle.”

Another said: “To prohibit it would be to remove one of the pillars of
the Constitution.” One patriot declared that “It is an ornament to our
country, and is one reason of its superiority over the countries beyond
the seas.” “We ought to maintain a custom which fosters a sense of shame
in the military caste and in the existence of which doubtless consists
the superiority of Japan over other countries.” “Why should this custom
be prohibited in imitation of the effeminacy of foreign nations?” “In
this Country of the Gods it is not necessary to discuss such a law.”
Again, “The _seppuku_ has its origin in the vital energy of this divine
country and is the shrine of the Yamato Damashii. Its practice should be
extended.” “The reason why _seppuku_ is practised in this Empire and not
in foreign countries is because this Empire is an Empire.” It would be
tedious to multiply instances of utterances of this class. They show the
still prevalent belief in the divine superiority of the speakers’ country
and the deeply-rooted veneration for what in their eyes was an act of
heroism when voluntary, of privilege when enforced. When the question was
put to the vote only three men voted for abolition; two hundred against;
no vote, six. Of what were looked upon as the recreant three, one man was
said—with what truth I know not, but it was widely believed—to have been
murdered shortly afterwards as the reward of his vote.

In the debate on the question of making it optional to wear two swords
there was even less discussion. The proposal was negatived unanimously.
Here, again, some of the speeches were instructive.

One gentleman, Sonoda Tamatsu, said: “It is a good maxim for the soldier
in peace time never to forget war. What shall we say of a measure that
asks us, even in the midst of civil disorder, to forget the existence of
civil disorder? What, I ask, is the character of the times in which we
live? The object of the soldier caste wearing two swords is that they may
suppress war by war; but as the chief glory of the sword consists in its
resting quietly in its sheath, it follows that a natural stimulus is
given to letters,” etc.

So the motion was lost, but a year or two later the Government, finding
it impossible to check the old broils and troubles which became so
dangerous when hot-headed men were armed with deadly weapons, passed
a law making the wearing of swords illegal. The famous old saying of
Iyéyasu, “The girded sword is the living soul of the Samurai,” has become
a dead letter. The sword is laid upon the sword-rack on the _tokonoma_
(raised dais), an heirloom and object of reverence, but the Japanese
gentleman goes forth unarmed, and there is peace in the land.




CHAPTER XXVI

JAPAN. THE RECEPTION OF THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH


There was a great stir in Japan in the summer of 1869, when it was known
that the Duke of Edinburgh was coming in the _Galatea_. The Japanese
Government were wildly excited, for it was the first time that a Royal
Prince had paid a visit to the Mikado, and they were determined to give
his Royal Highness a reception at Yedo worthy of his rank and of the
Monarch who was to entertain him. Hama-go-ten, a beautiful garden by the
sea, was determined upon as his residence; and the preparations were
made in the most generous fashion. Furniture and all the equipments
necessary to European ideas of comfort were procured from Hong Kong; but
the decorations were carried out entirely in the native fashion, and most
beautiful and artistic they were.

In order that nothing might be wanting the Japanese asked Sir Harry
to allow me to help them, for in those times they were not so well
acquainted with Western habits as they are now; so a couple of rooms were
made ready for me in Hama-go-ten so that I might be on the spot, and
there I remained for about a month. I was also to serve as interpreter to
the Duke, and as I should have to act on the occasion of his interview
with the Son of Heaven, I had to be coached in the language of “the
people above the clouds” (royalties and courtiers), for there are matters
of etiquette and proper phraseology at this as at all courts in which it
would be very easy to make some awkward mistake.

It was a pity that the Japanese did not have the inspiration to lodge
the Duke in one of their own charming pavilions; but they were bent upon
preparing a European house for him, and so a rather ugly, ramshackle
wooden house with green shutters was run up in a hurry. The ugliness of
the outside, however, was made up for by the decorations within. The
walls were a perfect riot of colour and gold, which in less deft hands
would have been glaring and violent, but the artists had the secret of
so mastering and intermarrying the most hostile colours that the whole
effect was delightful and a succession of surprises. The discordant note
was struck by the furniture dealers of Hong Kong; their wares, with a
strong flavour of Tottenham Court Road in them, jarred piteously with the
imaginative poetry of the Japanese artists.

The Duke arrived in the harbour of Yokohama on the 31st of August, and,
after the usual salutes, levées, addresses and all the other wearinesses
of which loyalty is capable, drove up to Yedo, along the picturesque
Tokaido, in one of the Emperor’s carriages. Mr. Eliot Yorke, Captain
Haig, Mr. Ramsay (afterwards Lord Dalhousie) and Lord Charles Beresford
were those who accompanied him from the _Galatea_. I was specially
attached to him during his stay, and of course Sir Harry Parkes went
with him. All along the road he was received with the same honours
that would be paid to the Mikado himself. The shutters of the upstairs
rooms in the houses by the wayside were hermetically sealed with bits
of paper stuck across them so that no Peeping Tom should look down upon
the august person—a custom long since passed away in these days, when
the Emperor shows himself as freely as any European sovereign. As the
Duke’s carriage went by, the people who thronged the road and streets
fell prostrate, touching the earth with their foreheads. A most elaborate
programme had been drawn up for his Royal Highness’ arrival. I extract
from my translation of it one or two items which savour of the old-world
ceremonial of the court, now quite forgotten. The rest deal with salutes,
refreshments, etc.

“Previous to his Royal Highness’ arrival in Japan, prayers will be
offered up to Kanjin for his prosperous voyage.” Kanjin, literally the
God of China. This is the revival of an extremely ancient ceremonial
which dates from a time when there was no intercourse with abroad,
excepting with China through Corea. Kanjin is therefore the patron saint
of foreigners, who are all united under his protection under the generic
name of Tōjin, or “men of the Tang” dynasty of China.

“On the day before his Royal Highness’ departure for his residence at
Yedo, the roads will be cleaned and repaired; and prayers for his safe
journey will be offered up to the God of Roads.”

“On the day on which his Royal Highness may be expected to arrive in
Yedo, religious ceremonies will take place at Shinagawa [the suburb
through which he would pass] to exorcize all evil spirits. On his Royal
Highness’ arrival, a Prince of the Blood will visit him, to inquire after
his health.”

“When his Royal Highness is about to enter the gate of the castle the
ceremony called Nusa will take place.”

Nusa is a sweeping away of evil influences with a sort of flapper with a
hempen tassel.

The prayers and pious orisons of the Shintō priests were heard; the
Duke arrived and departed in unbroken health and spirits; all evil
influences, all malignant _oni_ and _bakémono_ (devils and ghosts) had
been successfully exorcized. When I read my old notes of all these things
I seem to be looking across a long vista of forgotten centuries into the
gloom of prehistoric times; I am transported back into the days when the
God Hachiman decided the fates of battles, when Inari Sama and his foxes
ruled the harvest, and Benten was the supreme Queen Goddess of beauty.

Playgoing in the old days, before the restoration in 1868, was entirely
confined to the lower classes; no gentleman could afford to be seen
in a public theatre; in private, it is true that famous actors would
occasionally be hired to give a representation at the _yashiki_ of
some rich noble, to whom the ordinary performance would be forbidden.
There were, however, certain classical dances and plays which were
specially performed in theatres attached to the palaces. The _bugaku_,
for instance, were dances or pantomime plays the performance of which
was confined to the Emperor’s palace, so that very few Japanese, and
those only of the highest rank, ever witnessed them.[19] The Nō, on the
other hand, were a kind of classical opera performed on stages called
_nō butai_, which were attached to the _yashiki_ of some of the great
nobles. These operas—I know no better name for them—are of the greatest
antiquity. They are supposed to recall the performances by which the
Sun Goddess was lured out of the cave in which she had hidden in order
to escape from the persecutions of her turbulent brother—a legend which
is supposed to have been the poetic explanation of the first eclipse.
They had, moreover, a religious intention in the first instance, having
been arranged at the Emperor’s command by one Hada Rawakatsu in the
last decade of the sixth century. A special performance of Nō was given
in honour of the Duke of Edinburgh in the _yashiki_ of the Prince of
Kishiu—which had the reputation of being, after the Castle, the most
luxurious palace in Yedo.

This was the first time that such a performance was witnessed by
foreigners. Opposite the principal reception room, where his Royal
Highness sat, and separated from it by a narrow courtyard, was a covered
stage, approached from the green-room by a long gallery at an angle of
forty-five degrees. Half a dozen musicians, robed in dresses of ceremony,
marched slowly down the gallery—something like the entrance of the
actors in _Sumurun_, as arranged by Reinhardt—and having squatted down
on the stage, gravely made obeisance. The performances then began. There
was no scenery, no stage appliances; the descriptions of the chorus or
the actors took their place. The dialogue and choruses were given in a
nasal recitative, accompanied by the mouth-organ, flute, drum and other
classical instruments. The ancient poetry of these pieces is full of the
most delicate fancies obscured by archaic puns and plays upon words; so
it was with no little difficulty that, with the assistance of a man of
letters, I prepared the arguments of the plays.

I published these long years ago,[20] so there is no need to repeat them
here.

During the Duke’s stay there were entertainments of all sorts, for the
Japanese were determined that he should carry away the happiest memories
of his visit. The most famous of the fat wrestlers of Japan, monstrous
mountains of adipose tissue, gave a show and there were dancers,
musicians, conjurors; Chō-chō San[21] came specially for the butterfly
trick, which has never been so well described as by Sherard Osborn in
that long-since-forgotten little gem, “A Cruise in Japanese Waters.”

All these were shown in a setting the beauty of which it would be hard
to exaggerate. The garden of Hama-go-ten was a masterpiece of Japanese
horticulture. I believe that it no longer exists, the land having been
sold for commercial purposes. When the first part was sold I had the luck
to be able to buy two of the great bronze lanterns which decorated it.
How little I thought when I used to wander through the lovely grounds
during the weeks which I spent there making ready for the Duke that one
day many years later two of the precious ornaments which I admired so
much would find their way to my own home in far-away Gloucestershire!

The most interesting episode of the visit was, of course, the reception
by the Emperor at the Castle. The official reception took place in the
audience chamber; his Royal Highness, Sir Harry Parkes, Sir Henry Keppel
and the officers in attendance on the Duke were shown into the room where
the Mikado stood on a raised dais with two of his personal attendants
and the Prime Minister behind him. The Duke and I took our places on the
dais opposite to the Mikado. It was rather nervous work for me, for it is
so easy to bungle into some absurd mistake where foreign etiquette and a
very stately phraseology have to be observed; however, it all went off
well, there were the usual commonplaces exchanged, and then his Majesty
invited his Royal Highness to meet him more privately in the garden.

After a short delay, during which the Princes and dignitaries of the
Court came to pay their respects, the Duke was shown into the delicious
little Maple Tea-house in the Castle gardens, where tea and all manner of
delicacies were served. Then came a summons to the Waterfall Pavilion,
where the Emperor was waiting; only Sir Harry, the Admiral, and myself
went in with the Duke. Dull is the office of the Court newsman! Difficult
it is to become artistically enthusiastic over the presentation of
diamond-mounted snuff-boxes! But this particular Court ceremony was
certainly something out of the common. It can never occur again. East and
West were sharply defined. There were no cocked hats or gold-laced coats
among the Japanese of those days. The Emperor and all his Court were
living pictures out of the dark centuries.

The next time that I saw the Mikado was on the occasion of my second
visit to Japan, in 1873. He was sitting back in a barouche, surrounded
by an escort of lancers, dressed, like himself, in European uniform. A
modern of the moderns.

When I went for the third time, in 1906, with Prince Arthur of Connaught,
his Majesty reminded me of that visit in 1869, when I acted as
interpreter—but he was now surrounded by a Court in which the men were
all the counterparts of European ministers, their breasts covered with
stars and decorations from potentates great and small, and the ladies
all wore tiaras and dresses from Paquin’s! Alas for the vanishing of the
Picturesque!

The Japanese Government were very grateful for the trouble which I had
taken to make the Royal visit a success, and when the Duke left the
Foreign Ministers sent me a very pretty letter of thanks, with a lacquer
box, which the English Foreign Office allowed me to accept.


AN AUSTRIAN MISSION

Towards the end of 1869 there came an Austrian Mission to conclude a
treaty with Japan. As usual we pulled the chestnuts out of the fire
for them. The Mission was commended to our good offices and we had to
dry-nurse them, put them up to the ropes, and furnish them with an
interpreter. The head of the Mission was Admiral Petz, the hero of Lissa,
a most interesting personality; the second in command, charged with the
negotiation of the commercial details of the affair, was Baron Calice,
who afterwards made a sort of name for himself as Austro-Hungarian
Ambassador at Constantinople.

With the Admiral I made great friends. One day as we were sitting
together watching the picturesque junks sailing to and fro in front of a
great warship in the Bay of Yedo, he gave me an account of the battle
of Lissa in which he had played so great a part three years before. The
island of Lissa, practically an Austrian fortress plunged in the Adriatic
sea, was attacked on the 18th of July, 1866, by the Italian fleet under
Admiral Persano. The Austrian Admiral Tegethoff went out to relieve the
besieged stronghold, and on the 20th the great sea-fight took place.
Admiral Petz’s story of the battle was most exciting. Although ironclads
had been in existence for some years, Lissa must have been the first
action in which they played their part. The Italian fleet, with eleven
armoured ships and a powerful ram, was by far the stronger; the Austrians
had only seven. The wooden ships on the two sides were about even in
number.

Admiral Petz, then Commodore, was in command of the _Kaiser_, an
old-fashioned wooden battleship. There was a moment when he was engaged
at close quarters with three Italian ironclads, the four ships blazing
away for dear life or death. He was on the bridge, half choked and
blinded by the thick, poisonous smoke and flames belched out by his own
and the enemy’s guns, his ears deafened by the roar of the cannon. It
was like hell-fire let loose upon the waters. All of a sudden a puff
of wind cleared the air, and to his dismay he saw the huge bulk of the
dreaded _Ré d’Italia_, supposed to be the most powerful armoured vessel
afloat, bearing down upon him. Iron attacking oak; an unequal fight. It
was a horror: if she rammed him it was certain death for all. A sudden
inspiration struck him; he had just time to make a despairing dash at the
monster before she could reach him. He gave the necessary order, full
steam ahead, charged and drove his bows into her, striking her amidships.
To his amazement the blow crashed into her, boring a huge hole in her
iron sides as easily as if they had been made of paper, and the great
terror sank into the sea with all her crew.

The Austrians had had the best of it all through the fight, another
ironclad, the _Palestro_, had been blown up, the other three, with which
Petz had been engaged, were badly hurt, and now this last disaster broke
the Italians and sent them in full flight to Ancona. The battle was won!
Admiral Tegethoff summoned his captains to the flagship, and when they
were all drawn up on the quarterdeck, he went up to Petz, kissed him on
both cheeks, and said: “This is your victory!”

The _Kaiser_ was naturally very much mauled, but the wooden ship had
scored; she had practically disabled two other ironclads and battered
a third before sinking the _Ré d’Italia_, and could carry her wounds
bravely into port.

Long years afterwards at luncheon at the Travellers’ Club, I was telling
the story as I had it from Admiral Petz himself. My dear old friend, Lord
Alcester, the famous admiral, who was nothing if not stiff in opinions,
stoutly denied the possibility of a wooden ship in any circumstances
sinking an ironclad; but

    “Facts are chiels that winna ding
    And downa be disputed,”

the _Ré d’Italia_ with her crew of six hundred lies at the bottom of the
Adriatic, the _Kaiser_ came away a cripple covered with glory, and her
gallant Commodore received the Maria-Teresien order—a distinction even
more rarely bestowed than the V.C. To earn it three conditions must be
fulfilled—the feat must have been performed at risk of life; it must have
been spontaneous, without any superior command, and it must be successful.

It was good to hear the brave sailor tell his tale, simply and without
any suspicion of vainglory. He would not admit that he had done anything
wonderful. He saw death before him as he stood on the bridge—a sudden
idea flashed across his brain—Impossible? Why not try? That was all.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 1st of January, 1870, I left Japan. The work of the last two years
had told upon me. I was out of health, and had almost to be carried on
board ship by our good Doctor Willis. I went to Singapore, and there
awaited the arrival of the Messageries ship _Hoogly_, which was to
bring my friend and colleague, Gustave de Montebello, who afterwards,
as Ambassador at St. Petersburg, initiated the _entente_ between France
and Russia, which was destined to bear fruits which now, in 1915, are
ripening to their full value. A month of the _dolce far niente_ at
Singapore, a life of lotus-eating, resting in a luxurious rattan chair,
breathing in a balmy, spice-laden atmosphere on a verandah broad enough
to protect me from any insidious attacks of the sun, set me quite on
my legs again, and by the time my friend arrived, I was as lively as a
thrush, and ready to enjoy the delights of a voyage with one of the most
agreeable of companions, both of us hungry for home, and yet full of the
memories of our past experiences.

Montebello was not well treated by his Government. I met him in
Switzerland not long before his death; he had been superseded, and his
political foresight had not been recognized as it should have been; but
he was too great a gentleman to express any resentment, even to me. He
died as he had lived, a noble Frenchman, chivalrous to the last. But that
he felt acutely I well knew.

Our voyage had an element of excitement in it. At Singapore we were told
that we were to go through the Suez Canal. If so, we should be the first
ship to go through as a matter of business, apart from the vessels that
had taken part in the gala proceedings at the opening. At Point de Galle
we heard that it was impossible. At Aden there was a fresh contradiction,
and when we reached Suez, through we went! We stuck in the middle
and smashed one flange of our screw, but in spite of that we reached
Marseilles all right, and were immediately put in quarantine, because a
poor fellow had died of consumption on board, and been buried at sea in
the Red Sea. Montebello used his official position to get himself and me
landed in spite of all objections, we being bearers of despatches—for I
took good care never to travel without a Foreign Office bag—and so with
all expedition we reached Paris.


_APPENDIX_

GOVERNMENT TREATISE ON POLITICS AND RELIGION, PUBLISHED TO THE PEOPLE

(_Translation_)

“JIM MIN KOKU YU DAI I”


INTRODUCTION TO PART I

This treatise, the “Koku Yu Dai I,” is published with the object of
making known the institutions of the Country of the Gods, and of
declaring the intentions of the Imperial Government, and to this end five
copies will be distributed to every Kori or parochial sub-division of
every province throughout the country. The officials, and not only they,
but all well-disposed men, will give their earnest attention to this
object, and will exert themselves to instruct all persons, down to the
women and children, in the principles of this treatise.

The privilege of publishing this treatise has been granted to the
Imperial Library of Kiōto, kept by Murakami Kambei, and all persons may
freely purchase it.

The above will be made known throughout all the sub-divisions of the
Province of Yamashiro.

                                           (_Signed_) GOVERNMENT OF KIŌTO.


“KOKU YU DAI I”

Man is the sublime essence of all things. Between heaven and earth there
is no more honourable thing than man. Our country is specially called
the Country of the Gods, and of all the countries in the world there is
none the institutions of which excel those of our country. Is it not
a disgrace past speaking of that the privileged being called man, who
dwells in the excellent Country of the Gods, should pass his life in
heedless vanity? Man differs from the birds and from the beasts in that
he can discern the laws of reason, and in that he has a heart capable of
gratitude and virtue. Loyalty and filial piety are also the essence of
the heart of man. He who in ever so slight a degree is wanting in this
heart has the face of a man but the soul of a beast, and though he be
shaped as a man, yet is he even less than the birds and the beasts.

If, then, a man wishes to fulfil his duties as a man, and having been
born in the Country of the Gods desires not to turn his back upon the
spirits of that country, let him above all things bear in mind the
privilege of being born a Japanese, and set his heart upon repaying the
debt of gratitude which he owes to his country.

We have said that the institutions of the Country of the Gods excel
those of other countries. Of old the heavenly ancestors of the Emperor
created this country, and established the duties of men in their mutual
relations. Since that time the line of Emperors has never been changed.
Generation has succeeded generation in the rule of this country, and
the Imperial heart has ever been penetrated by a tender love for the
people. In their turn the people have reverenced and served generation
after generation of Emperors. In foreign countries the lines of Princes
have been frequently changed; the people owe their Sovereign a debt of
gratitude which extends over two or three generations; the relations of
Sovereign and subject last for a hundred or two hundred years; the Prince
of yesterday is the foe of to-day; the minister of yesterday is the rebel
of to-morrow.

In our country we have no such folly. Since the creation of the world we
have remained unmoved; since the creation of the world the Imperial line
has been unchanged and the relations of Sovereign and subject have been
undisturbed; hence it is that the spirit of gratitude has intensified and
grown deeper and deeper. The especial point in which the institutions
of our country excel those of the rest of the world is the creed which
has been established by the heavenly ancestors of the Emperor, and which
comprises the mutual duties between lord and servant.

Even in foreign countries, where lords and servants have over and over
again changed places, these mutual duties are handed down as a matter of
weighty importance. How much the more does it behove us to pay a debt of
deep and inexhaustible gratitude which extends over the ages.

Is there any man who thinks that he has never received a penny from the
Emperor? Is there any man who thinks that he is not beholden to the
Emperor for one tittle of help in his need? Is there any man who believes
that it is of his own merit that he passes through the world, and who
feels not the favours which he has received from his country? If there be
such a man, great is his mistake. He is like the man in the proverb who
is grateful for the light borrowed from his lamp, but is heedless of the
thanks which he owes to the moon and to the sun.

The favours which a man receives from his country are so vast as to be
without bounds. Reflect carefully upon this. Since it is by the heavenly
ancestors of the Emperor that this country was created, there is no
single thing existing in the land which is not the Emperor’s. At our
birth the water in which we are washed is the Emperor’s. At our death
the ground in which we are buried is the Emperor’s. The rice which we
eat, the clothes which we wear, the cap which we put on, the staff which
supports us, are all the produce of the Emperor’s land.

Again, the money which enables us to pass through life easily is coined
by the will of the Emperor; so that whether we hoard our wealth or give
out our coin to meet our daily wants, it is by the help of the Emperor
that we are able to transact our business.

Further, lest wicked men should hinder us, offices and guard-houses are
established in different places. Ruffians and thieves are punished;
children may be trusted to walk abroad with money, and no man will rob
them; old men and women may be left to watch the house, and lawless men
will not break in. You plant your fields with rice and your gardens with
green things. You set out goods for sale and clothes to dry in your shops
and wayside stalls, and no man comes to steal them; here is no small
cause of gratitude. If perchance any evil deed should be done, no means
are left untried to discover the guilty man, and the Imperial orders are
issued to punish him according to his crime.

If there were no such Imperial authority to exercise justice, each man
would have to trust to his own strength. The weak would be slain by the
strong; the old would be pushed over by the young; rice and money would
be seized by force. But since this exercise of justice exists, although a
single or double hedge may be easily broken through, there is no need to
set guards, for there are none to force an entrance, and so we pass our
lives in peace and safety.

There are yet further ways in which the generations of Emperors have
cared for the sorrow of their people. Remember with reverence that there
was once an Emperor who in the cold winter night stripped his clothes
that he might know by his own feelings the sufferings of the poor.[22]
When he looked at the rice before him he reflected that the grain was
planted by the sweat of the farmers, and acknowledged their labours. We
must be truly grateful that morning and night the Emperor’s prayers have
been offered up that his people might be spared from storm and from rain;
from famine, plague, and cholera. Nor is it for ourselves alone, nor for
our generation only, that our gratitude is due. Since the creation of
the world generation after generation of our ancestors have passed their
lives under the shadow of their Emperors. How many endless generations
of our children’s children shall be nurtured under the same gracious
protection?

During the last three hundred years, the land being at peace, the power
of the Emperor was gradually relaxed. Although the Emperor existed, it
was as though he were no more. The consideration and love of the Emperor
for his people did not reach them; it was arrested on its way. Bribery
and corruption flourished; even good men fell into evil ways, and bad men
prospered. The Emperor was greatly afflicted; he neither ate nor rested
in peace. Still, however great might be the afflictions which he had
to undergo himself, they were as nothing to those which he suffered on
account of his people’s grief.

Now at last the Imperial Government has been restored to its ancient
form; the affairs of the country are placed upon a brilliant basis; the
hearts of great and small are united; the desires of all men have been
accomplished, and men may more than ever pass their lives in peaceful
tranquillity. Preserving those institutions in which the Emperor’s
country excels all other countries, we will illustrate the power of our
Emperor to the world. Reverently receiving the Imperial will, we will
humbly obey his commands; we will set our hearts upon serving him for
his sake. Bent upon requiting every particle or hair’s breadth of favour
received during generations after generations, we will not turn our backs
upon our duty as the people of the Country of the Gods.

First year of Meiji (1868).

(Printed officially by the Imperial Printers. Published at Kiōto by
Murakami Kambei and Inouyé Jihei; at Yedo, by Mohei at the Suwaraya; and
Ichibei, at the Idzumiya.)


INTRODUCTION TO PART II

On a former occasion in the first part of this treatise, we set forth
the institutions of the Country of the Gods, and made known the will of
the Imperial Government; in continuation of this we now publish a second
part, in which we shall treat of the form and power of the countries of
the world, and shall show how the best interests of our divine country
may be served. Officials and all well-disposed men will give their
earnest attention to this object, and will exert themselves to instruct
all persons, down to the women and children, in the principles of this
treatise.

The privilege of publishing this treatise has been granted to the
Imperial Library at Kiōto, kept by Murakami Kambei, and all persons may
freely purchase it.


PART II

On the occasion of the Imperial journey to Yedo last year, his Majesty
took upon himself the direction of the machinery of the State. Up to that
time the precepts of the Emperor had not reached the Eastern Provinces
of the country. While the accumulated masses of business were only
half-accomplished, the days and nights had sped swiftly, and the period
for the celebration of rites on the third anniversary of the death of the
late Emperor had come round.

His Majesty accordingly in the first place returned to Kiōto, and having
concluded the funeral rites and his own marriage ceremony, he gave orders
for his second visit to Yedo. Thus does he again subject his sacred
person to fatigue, and although it may be said that this is owing to
the spirit of the time, yet it is in truth a matter to be grateful for,
and the people, perceiving the Emperor’s intentions, should deeply and
carefully lay them to heart.

Now the spirit of the present differs from the spirit of the past. The
countries of the world have joined themselves in a relationship of peace
and friendship. Steamers are sent round the world, heedless of stormy
waves or of foul winds. The communication between lands distant ten
thousand miles from one another is as that between neighbours; country
competes with country in producing rifles and guns and machinery, and
each revolves plans for its own advantage and profit. Each vies with
the other in devising schemes to obtain the mastery, each exerts itself
to keep up the strength of its armies, each and everyone strives to
invent warlike contrivances. But in spite of all this, there is a great
principle existing over all the world which prevents civilized countries
from being lightly and lawlessly attacked.

This principle is called international law. How much the more, then,
would our divine country, the institutions of which excel those of all
other countries, be turning her back upon the sacred precepts established
by the heavenly ancestors of the Emperor should she be guilty of violent
and lawless acts. Such a thing would be the greatest shame and disgrace
to the Country of the Gods. Hence it is that the Emperor has extended a
faithful alliance to those foreigners who come here lawfully and rightly,
and they are allowed free and uninterrupted access to this country.
Following this example set by the Emperor, his subjects when they receive
no insult from the foreigner should observe the same principle and
refrain from blows and fighting. If by any chance we should be put to
shame before the foreigner it is hard to say what consequences may ensue.

It is our especial duty to publish to the world beyond the seas the
ancient spirit of the Country of the Gods and the excellent institutions
established by the heavenly ancestors of the Emperor, that the countries
of the world may admire and envy the power of our Sovereign. To this
end it is above all things needful that the whole of Japan should be
penetrated by the Imperial precepts, and that the strength of the country
should be united in one whole. Without this it will be hard for the
spirit of the country to stand, without this, on the contrary, we shall
have to endure the scorn of foreign nations.

Should so much as a hair’s end of shame attach to the Country of the
Gods, what excuse can we offer to the long line of Emperors who succeeded
their heavenly ancestors. To be the cause of grief to the Emperor is
worse than irreverence.

The country districts of the Eastern Provinces are far removed from the
capital, and there are persons who, not awed by the will of the Emperor,
subject the people, as it were, to torture by fire and torture by water.
Terrible as the conduct of such men is, the great mercy and pity of the
Emperor’s heart acknowledges that their fault is to be laid to the fact
that his precepts have not reached them; we see with reverent gratitude
that he takes their sins upon himself and that his generous rule spares
them. Further, that by the spreading of his precepts all ignorance may
cease, he undertakes a long journey, braving the heat and the cold, and
exposing his precious person to fatigue.

As far as the extreme limits of the islands of Yesso and of Liukiu
the Emperor treats all men who are born on Japanese soil as his own
children. He makes no distinctions between men—caressing the one and
repelling the other. He looks upon all alike, his mercy extends to all.
His compassionate love for his people knows no rest by day or by night.
After a while he will be pleased to visit all his dominions. The present
capital, Kiōto, has been the Imperial residence for more than a thousand
years, and in its sacred earth are buried the ancestors of the Emperor.

It follows that of all places that is the place which the Emperor reveres
the most. You, whose special privilege it is to dwell near this spot,
bathed in the dew of the Emperor’s deep mercy, reverently acknowledge
his will, and penetrated by the sense of this feeling, in all matters
humbly obey his commands. Loyalty and filial piety arouse you to observe
our upright and excellent institutions. Let each man zealously perform
his special duties, that he may relieve the mind of the Emperor of its
troubles, and let each man, so far as in him lies, set his heart upon the
sacred cause of our divine country.

Second year of Meiji (1869).

(Printed officially by the Imperial Printers, Yedo. Published by Mohei at
the Suwaraya, in the first ward of the Nihonbashi Street, and by Ichibei
at the Idzumiya in the Mishima at Shiba.)


INCLOSURE 2 IN NO. 12

EXTRACT FROM THE GOVERNMENT “GAZETTE” OF MARCH 15th, 1869

(_Translation_)

The book called “Kiōto Fu Koku Yu Dai I” (or Imperial Precepts published
to the people by the Government of Kiōto) will be circulated throughout
the cities, clans, and districts for the instruction of the people in
matters of politics and religion. Although the publication of pirated
editions of other books is strictly forbidden, an exception is made in
favour of this book.




CHAPTER XXVII

1870

HOME AGAIN


When I reached France it seemed as if at every corner I was to meet
old friends—all of them in difficulties—the result of an epidemic of
plunging on the Turf—very catching. At Marseilles I happened upon an old
Christ Church friend, whom I had left five years before in London, the
smartest of the smart. He was staying in the same hotel, and as I arrived
luggageless and in great discomfort, he very kindly supplied me with all
that I wanted, amongst other things with quite the most luxurious night
apparel that ever I slept in. We had a very pleasant evening together,
talking over old times, and the next morning he came to see me off at the
station. As the train was just moving, he put his head in at the window
and said, “By the bye, old fellow, when you get to London, please don’t
say you’ve seen me!”

At Paris, where I was to stay two days, my first visit was to my
colleagues at the Embassy. I asked who was in Paris. “Oh!” said they,
“—— is staying here,” and they gave me the address of a wretched little
_hôtel borgne_ in a side street off the Boulevard. I went off to see
him; it was the shabbiest house even in that shabbiest offshoot of a
brilliant neighbourhood—one of those violent contrasts which are the
essence of Paris. I rang at the bell and was looked over from head to
foot; obviously a suspicious character. However, I sent up my card, was
admitted, and joyously welcomed by my friend, who was lying in bed.
It was three o’clock in the afternoon—half an hour later than my Lord
Tomnoddy’s time for getting up. I asked the reason. His clothes were all
in pawn! I wanted to wash my hands and asked for a towel. “I’m so sorry!
I can’t lend you one; the people of the house won’t let me have any
linen for fear of my pawning it, but there is a dirty flannel shirt in
the corner—you can dry your hands on that!” I left him, carrying off his
pawn-tickets, and went off to see whether I could make up a purse among
some of our friends.

In an hour I was back with his garments liberated and a small sum of
money to go on with—twenty pounds, I remember. He was soon dressed,
as spick and span a dandy as you could meet in Bond Street, or on the
Boulevard, handsome as a picture and as gay as if he had not a care in
the world.

We went out to see another friend (not in difficulties) and I wanted to
turn down the Rue Laffitte. Impossible!—there was a bootmaker there who
would pounce upon him and make a scandal. So it was with several streets
and several trades. At last we reached the flower-market outside the
Madeleine. That was worst of all, for there was “an infernal old woman
there whose fortune he had made by inventing a button-hole, and she would
scratch his eyes out if he did not settle her wicked bill.” We parted in
the Champs Elysées.

That night poor Greville Sartoris and I were going to see Pasca, the
actress who was all the rage at the moment, and we dined first at the
Café Anglais. When we got there whom should we see but my impecunious
friend, beautifully got up, with a rosebud in his buttonhole, finishing
a delicate little dinner with a _salade d’ananas_ and a pint of Perrier
Jouet. When Georges, the waiter, came up with his bill, he said, “Tenez,
Georges, il y a longtemps que je ne vous ai rien donné,” and gave
him five napoleons, telling him to keep the change. I could not help
exclaiming at this. “Ah! my dear fellow,” said he, “you don’t begin to
know how to live on nothing at all. Those five napoleons will enable me
to lunch and dine here for a month on credit!” And with that he opened
his crush hat and went off to dazzle somebody else besides Georges and us.

My friend’s career had been remarkable. He was very handsome, very
clever, and was successful in his profession; but he threw it up and
preferred following the fortunes of the King of the Plungers. There was
a short period of success, on the strength of which he mounted a little
house in a very expensive street, engaged a first-rate cook, and gave
choice dinners. That did not last long—there came a crisis, a crash, and
an escape into that dingy disreputable hostelry off the Boulevard.

The King of the Plungers was Harry Hastings—the last Marquis—who was my
fag at Eton. He was an attractive little boy, and I think that everybody
liked him; but his ideas when he grew up were on too large a scale. He
had no health, and by burning the candle at both ends, and in the middle,
sealed his own fate.

Old Lord Wilton told me that when Hastings was Master of Hounds once the
hounds came to a check and some of them were straying; he called out to
him: “Blow your horn, Harry, blow your horn!” “That’s all very well, Lord
Wilton,” he replied, “but if I blow my horn I shall be sick!” That did
not suit the grand old horseman, one of the finest riders I ever saw, who
once at Melton, when the field was stopped by a gate, came up behind,
calling out: “I’ve got the key, gentlemen!” They all made a lane for him,
and “the wicked Earl” as he was affectionately called, cantered up and
flew over the gate like a bird.

Harry Hastings was not without a certain cleverness, and the ring knew
it. Steel, the famous bookmaker of those days, was once heard to grumble
as Hastings left him, after some transaction at the rails at Ascot: “Ah!
my lord, Heaven’s been very gracious to you, for you look a fool and you
ain’t one!”

       *       *       *       *       *

The next day I was in London. I wonder whether other men feel the same
shyness about coming home that I have always done, especially after
having been a long time away in some remote country where everything is
strange and topsy-turvy, as different from England as is the tinkling
of a _samishen_ or _koto_ from the sonorous art of Bach or Beethoven.
Then again, even an attaché is in his small way a person of some
little consideration abroad, but Ambassadors, Governors, Ministers
Plenipotentiary themselves, as soon as they reach London, are whirled
like straws in the maelstrom, and count as little. Lord Dufferin gave
the best and wittiest expression to this shrinkage of greatness when he
said: “Twenty-five minutes of Pall Mall are enough to take the conceit
even out of a Viceroy of India!”

Then think of the poor little attaché whose sleigh at a place like St.
Petersburg (Petrograd from henceforth) has taken precedence of those of
all the magnates in the land, and forgive him if for a moment he thought
himself Somebody—pity him when he awakes from his dream and realizes that
he is Nobody!

But the strangest feeling of all was the wonder as to how I should be
received by those whose welcome had been looked to with such loving
anticipation, and such timorous anxiety. I felt like a sort of pale and
faded version of the prodigal son. I need have been under no fear. My
father’s old servant, the faithful friend of a quarter of a century,
met me at the station. The tears were in his good, old, kind eyes. My
father was waiting for me at Hobart Place, and in half an hour my dear
old cousin, Lord Redesdale, in spite of a sharp attack of gout, came in
to shake me by the hand. It did not take long to make me feel as if I had
never strayed away from home. Peking, Mongolia, Japan, the revolution,
faded like shadows of dreamland. There were more grey hairs in my
father’s head, a few coming in my own—otherwise little change. The Great
Reaper had been merciful, for of those nearest and dearest to me the
scythe of death had spared almost all.

I lost no time in reporting myself at the Foreign Office, where I found
very few changes. Mr. Hammond was as kind as ever, and said many pleasant
things to me about the work that I had done in the East, for he was
always generous in his appreciation of any endeavour on the part of his
subordinates. What pleased me very much was that I was to have a year’s
leave. I had been a good deal knocked up by the strenuous life of the
last two years in Japan, and my old friend, Dr. Quain, had commanded a
rest, so the idea of a long holiday was very welcome—the more so as I was
getting ready my “Tales of Old Japan” for the press, a formidable first
plunge into the world of letters. Lord Clarendon, who was then Secretary
of State for Foreign Affairs, hearing that I was in the office, sent for
me and kept me with him for some time, talking over the intricacies
of the Japanese revolution, and bade me go and see him in Grosvenor
Crescent. My own colleagues were to the full as gracious as the big men,
so I had no reason to complain of my first visit to the Foreign Office.

Altogether I felt that I had come back to a kind and generous world, and
when I went into certain drawing-rooms with the same arm-chairs, the same
curtains, and the same Sèvres vases on the chimney-pieces as of yore, I
hardly needed the cordial greeting to assure me that I was as much at
home there as I had been five long years ago.

By no one was I made more welcome than by Mrs. Sartoris (Adelaide
Kemble). She was a very old friend of ours, and I had known her from
my boyhood. Her house was a gathering-place for all that was most
distinguished in Letters and Art. Her dinners were perfection—never more
than eight or ten—for her dining-room was small, and she knew better
than to crowd her guests. She was now no longer young, but so witty, so
full of pleasant memories, and one of the best leaders of talk that I
ever knew. Of an evening she would be surrounded by such men as Charles
Dickens, Matthew Arnold, Leighton, while Sir Charles Hallé would sit down
at her piano and accompany Joachim or Madame Norman Neruda, the great
artists playing just for the love of music and of her. The society was
very catholic, for she was equally beloved of the stately dames who were
the law-givers of the great world. She herself would sometimes sing some
song of Gounod or Alary; her voice had grown rather thin, but the way in
which she told the story of her song was exquisite.

I used to go most afternoons to tea in Park Place, just for the pleasure
of hearing her talk. She had little patience with the affectations of
the modern æsthetes then just coming into vogue. I remember once at
the Monday Popular Concerts one of those young men coming up to her
and saying: “Oh! Mrs. Sartoris, did you notice that divine diminished
seventh?” “My dear boy,” was the answer, “don’t talk nonsense—a
diminished seventh is mere grammar. You might as well rave about the
divinity of an ablative absolute in a poem.”

She told us one day that as she had been hunting, as was her wont in the
old shops in Wardour Street, a man, obviously a foreigner, followed her
rather offensively. At last she turned round upon him and lifting her
veil, said: “Il paraît que monsieur est amateur d’antiquités.” The man
fled before the grand severe face. She had the beautiful features and
the solemn expression of the Kemble family, reminding one of the great
portrait of her aunt, Mrs. Siddons. When she was in a serious mood it
was the countenance of a sibyl. It was a loss indeed when she, smitten
by the unbearable grief of her son’s tragic death, thrown by his horse
larking over a hurdle, sought refuge in solitude and silence. People even
now delight in her “Week in a French Country House”—a description of life
in the château of the Marquis de L’Aigle, who married Mrs. Sartoris’
sister-in-law. It was a dainty book illustrated by Leighton, but for
myself I even preferred her “Past Hours.” Those who never knew her may
there see the reflection of her brilliant talk; but nothing can give the
effect of her words as she uttered them, her eager face lighted up by the
fire of her fine imagination.

She had the greatest horror of evil-speaking and slandering. I was
present once when somebody told an ugly story about a young married
couple. She turned upon the speaker with withering scorn, and her eyes
flashed as she said: “Why can’t you leave them alone? If you must abuse
somebody abuse us old people. Don’t help to destroy any chance that the
young ones may have of being happy. Besides, how do you know that you are
not lending a hand in spreading a lie?” And so she crushed the pedlar of
scandal, who had to carry his pack elsewhere.

I cannot remember whether her description of the violoncellist—a sly hit
at her friend, the famous Piatti—who “bore his cross meekly in a world
too much peopled with amateurs,” has ever been printed; even so it is
worth repeating. One evening there was a discussion as to the relative
advantages of married and unmarried life. She remained silent until a
great friend of hers—an old bachelor—stuck up stoutly for the freedom
of the unmarried. Then very softly she said: “Poor fellow! with nothing
better to go home to than a flat candlestick!”

One night towards the end of May I was at the theatre with Charles
Dickens and old Lady Molesworth. Just we three in a private box. Between
the acts we had great fun. Dickens was in high spirits, brim-full of
the _joie de vivre_. His talk had all the sparkle of champagne, and he
himself kept laughing at the majesty of his own absurdities, as one droll
thought followed another. He was not always in such a vein, for if he
thought he was being lionized he would sit mumchance; but he really liked
the old lady and of course I did not count; so he was at his ease and at
his very best, so bright, so merry and—like his books—so human.

During the evening Lady Molesworth insisted on his naming a night to
go and dine with her. The date was fixed and on the following day the
invitations came out for a day in June. Alas! That dinner never came off,
for on the 9th of June, two or three days before the night agreed upon,
the whole English-speaking world was stricken with grief. Dickens was
lying dead at his beloved Gad’s Hill. It seemed impossible. He had been
so brilliant that night. He was only fifty-eight years of age, twenty
years younger than I am at this time of writing, and though we knew that
he suffered terribly from exhaustion after his readings, which seemed
to sap all his energy, undermined as it had been by the strain of many
troubles, added to hard and incessant work, he was at times still so
young and almost boyish in his gaiety that it was an unspeakable shock.

Those murderous readings which killed him were enthralling. Never shall I
forget the effect produced by his reading of the death of Steerforth; it
was tragedy itself, and when he closed the book and his voice ceased the
audience for a moment seemed paralysed, and one could almost hear a sigh
of relief.

Had he, as he was once minded to do, taken up acting as a profession he
would have been as famous as Garrick. Would the gaiety of nations have
been as darkly eclipsed as it was when he died and “Edwin Drood” remained
a mystery?

Lady Molesworth was a great figure-head in London society. At her house
were to be met all the prominent personages in the great world, from the
Prince of Wales downwards, and there was always a goodly leaven of Art
and Literature. She had herself been a singer in early life, and was very
kind to young and struggling professional musicians. When she married Sir
William Molesworth she was the widow of Mr. Temple West, and it was her
influence which converted Sir William, a mathematician, philosopher, and
as much a recluse as a Parliamentarian and Secretary of State could be,
into a man of the world. Their dinners under her auspices became famous,
and when he died his last injunction to her was said upon her authority
to have been “Keep up the little dinners.” He left his place in Cornwall,
Pencarrow, to her for her lifetime, and in her hospitality there and
in Eaton Place she liberally and loyally carried out his behests. The
“little dinners” did more to keep the dead philosopher’s memory green
than his great edition of “Hobbes” in sixteen volumes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here I may say a word about the early days of the Marlborough Club.

The Prince of Wales was above all things a man of the most social habits;
the companionship of congenial friends was a necessity to him; he was
essentially what Dr. Johnson called a clubable man, and so there came
a moment when he felt the need of a club where he might go and play a
rubber and smoke a cigar with his intimates without formality, as the
spirit moved him. He made inquiries as to what club would best suit
his purpose. White’s, then the smartest club in London, was suggested.
Would he be free to smoke where he pleased? The old curled dandies of
the terrible bay window, to walk below which was a terror to the young
and innocent, said No!—there must be no smoking except in the appointed
place. To them tobacco was as great an abomination as Ashtaroth to the
Sidonians. That sealed the fate of White’s.

There was a freehold plot of land opposite Marlborough House. The site
was bought, the house was built, and the Prince founded the club, himself
becoming President. I was not an original member, for I was in the Far
East when it was opened in the late autumn of 1869, but I was elected in
the following May, immediately on my return home. Lord Tweeddale, then
Lord Walden, was Chairman of the Committee, of which I became a member
in 1871. At Lord Tweeddale’s death in 1878 Lord Colville of Culross was
elected chairman, and when he died in 1902 I received the following
letter from the secretary of the club.

                                                   “July 16th, 1902.

    “MY LORD,

    “I have the honour to inform you that at a special meeting of
    the General Committee held this afternoon your lordship was
    unanimously elected chairman of the committee for the ensuing
    year, and that you were proposed for the office by His Majesty
    the King, seconded by His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales.

                             “I have, etc.,

                                               (Signed) C. H. STONE,
                                               “Secretary.”

I may be perhaps forgiven for recording an honour which is unique in club
life. From that year to the present (1915) I have been re-elected every
year.

From 1869 until the time when, after his accession, His Majesty removed
to Buckingham Palace the Marlborough Club was King Edward’s favourite
haunt. It was so convenient. He was able to cross over from Marlborough
House with his gentleman-in-waiting, or, on his return from the opera
or the play, to send away his carriage and walk home. When he took
possession of the Palace it was less handy for him; he had to keep a
carriage and servants which made a difficulty, and so the club saw
less of him. But he continued—as, indeed, does King George—to take the
greatest interest in its welfare, nothing being done without its being
submitted to him, and once a year to the end, on his return from abroad,
he did me the honour of dining with me there.

The hours in the old days of the club were very late. The Prince never
seemed to know what fatigue meant. He would sit playing whist or writing
letters—he was a most punctual and voluminous correspondent—till any
hour. Often a party of us would stream into St. James’s Street in the
grey dawn, to be distributed by hansom cabs in various directions, and
sleep out the morning, cross if any mischance should awaken us. He, on
the contrary, would often be off by the first train, radiant with health
and strength and good humour, to attend some distant function, where he
would shine as if he had spent the whole night in bed; for with him
pleasure was never allowed to interfere with duty. After about 1880 he
became more prudent and more conscious of the necessity of sparing a
certain amount of time for sleep. Even then he did much work late at
night.

American bowls were much the fashion in those days and the ground floor
of the club was turned into a bowling alley, which has now been parcelled
off into two billiard rooms. A good many of us regretted the noisy old
alley which was a meeting-place for the happy little crowd that laughed
there every night, none gayer, none more bright, none more instinct with
the joy of life than the brilliant young Prince himself. Such was the
Marlborough Club in the seventies. Downstairs skittles, fun and frolic;
upstairs whist and the seriousness of the catacombs. Hartington, James
Clay, Batchelor, St. Albans, Owen Williams and others, all as solemn as
schoolmasters; the Prince himself leading the gravity up above as he had
been leading the gaiety below, and playing a capital rubber. There are
very few of the old set left and as one of the survivors wrote to me the
other day, upon the death of another, “the leaves are falling fast.”

One afternoon—it was 1872, but I prefer to tell the story here—I was all
alone in the club when Sleeman, the then steward of the club, came into
the room surcharged with importance and told me that the Emperor of the
French, who was a member, was down below, and asked permission to bring
in the Duc de Bassano, who was his Lord Chamberlain. It was his first
visit and I ran down to receive him, took him upstairs, and established
him in an arm-chair with the evening paper. After a while he called me
up and began questioning me as to my profession and the various posts at
which I had been. We had a long talk, for he had to kill time waiting for
his train.

Louis Napoléon, whose faculty of silence is a matter of history, was,
when he chose, a very agreeable talker, and his conversation was pointed
by a certain dry, sardonic humour accentuated by his rather saturnine
appearance. He was looking miserably ill, his face ashen grey, and his
lack-lustre eyes significant of the pain by which, for years, he had been
tortured; his figure was bowed and aged—obviously a man waging an unequal
war with disease. He talked a good deal about the missionary question
in China and Corea, upon which he was thoroughly well posted, and he
also spoke with a great deal of feeling about the murder of his men, the
sailors of the _Dupleix_, in 1868. After half an hour’s talk with him I
understood the charm which he exercised over men and women when he chose
to do so. I also understood that when Kinglake fired all the arrows of
bitterness at him there could be but one cause—a woman.

       *       *       *       *       *

To go back to the year 1870. There was a great performance of the
_Barbiere_ with Mario as Almaviva. I happened to be in the stage-box;
Mario saw me, gave me a little friendly sign of greeting and welcome
home. To my surprise who should come into the box between the acts but
the Prince of Wales. He began talking in his old friendly way, very
anxious to hear all about the Duke of Edinburgh’s reception in Japan,
and bade me to dinner, _en petit comité_, on the following Sunday. It
was a delightful little party of about ten people in the small upstairs
dining-room—quite without ceremony.

The season of 1870 was brilliant. London was at its gayest. But London
might dine, flock to the play or the opera, and dance to the strains of
Strauss’s famous waltz, “An der schönen blauen Donau,” then a novelty;
but trouble was brewing, the dogs of war were straining at their leashes,
though men knew it not; and at the very moment when there was the most
need for his services the pilot was torn from the helm—Lord Clarendon
died.




CHAPTER XXVIII

LORD CLARENDON AND LORD GRANVILLE


The generation of the Villiers family to which Lord Clarendon belonged
were people singularly gifted with charm and ability. I did not know the
Bishop, nor did I know Mr. Edward Villiers, but Lady Theresa Lewis was a
most attractive personality. She must have been very pretty in her youth,
and when I knew her as the mother of grown-up children she was a most
fascinating hostess, clever, agreeable, accomplished, doing the honours
of Kent House with all the grace of a finished _grande dame_.

Mr. Charles Villiers was first returned for Wolverhampton in January,
1835. He retained the seat for sixty-four years and died in January,
1898, aged ninety-six. The last time that he voted in the House of
Commons was in 1894 against Gladstone’s Home Rule Bill. I had the honour
of giving him my arm to walk through the lobbies. He was bent, infirm,
and very tottery, but his mind was as full of fire as ever, and his wit
nimble and good to listen to. That was the last time that I saw him and
had speech of him.

Charles Villiers was universally admitted to be the best of good company;
he was a wonderful talker and he was ever ready in repartee, his ripostes
being the perfection of fencing; but his sallies were sometimes, like
those of Bernal Osborne, a little apt to be biting. He had not the
sparkling, happy nature of his great brother, Lord Clarendon, whose
ringing laugh would put a whole roomful of guests in a good humour. I do
not think that I ever came across a man who, in spite of the gout, seemed
so instinct with the joy of life as Lord Clarendon. In his youth he was
accused of being rather boisterous, and Lord Granville once told me that
his mother, old Lady Granville, the witty Ambassadress at Paris, said of
him rather slily: “Yes, George Villiers, with a slight headache, is the
most agreeable young man in London.”

His gaiety was infectious, and few more lovable men have ever enriched
the happiness of those to whom he extended that generous sympathy—the
secret of the affection in which he was held by all with whom he came in
contact, from Queen to Peer and Peasant. The gracious manner, the happy
turn of an epigrammatic sentence, the droll humour, the gift of being a
listener as well as a talker—who shall say that these are not valuable
assets even in a statesman’s wallet?

I first made his acquaintance about the year 1858 and used constantly
to be invited to the Grove, which surely was the merriest and brightest
country house in all England. And there were two or three other homes
hard by, also filled with young people ready for fun of all sorts—the
Rokebys, Eburys and the Mill, where Mrs. Edward Villiers lived—all
furnishing their quota of dancing dogs and pretty girls, so that
there was a perfect succession of balls, theatricals and music; but
I doubt whether any of us young people took more delight in all the
entertainments than the great statesman and diplomatist whose gaiety was
so infectious. He was strikingly handsome and had that air of distinction
which means so much more than mere beauty; when the two are combined
their possessor ranks with the demigods.

As a host he had the rare gift of drawing out every one of his friends to
the best advantage, so that after a dinner-party of sixteen or eighteen
people in Grosvenor Crescent every guest was sent home on the best of
possible terms with himself, feeling that he, too, had played his little
part not altogether in vain.

To younger men his kindness knew no bounds. When I came back from Russia
in 1864 he was not Secretary of State, but he sent for me and told me
that he had had a very flattering letter about me from my chief, Lord
Napier, which made him wish to have a quiet talk about Russian policy and
the great men in St. Petersburg, where he had himself been in his youth
as attaché. Lord Napier, it seemed, had told him that I had had rather
special opportunities of becoming acquainted with some of the various
Russian statesmen and influential persons, and had, from time to time,
been able to supplement his own information. Lord Clarendon kept me with
him for an hour or more, and when I took leave of him he said: “I shall
tell Palmerston that he must see you, so do not go out of town till you
hear from him.” Two days afterwards I received a summons to Cambridge
House and had another long talk with Lord Palmerston, who was as genial
and kind as he always had been, cross-examined me at length, and sent me
on to see Lord Halifax at the India Office.

The difference between the three interviews was curious. The two great
men were not above seeing whether the young man could tell them anything
worth hearing—Lord Halifax was kindness itself, but he only wished to
talk. As for wanting to hear what I might be able to say he had no care
for that.

The last time that I saw Lord Clarendon was, as I have already intimated,
in the early summer of 1870. During the time that I was in the Far East
he used to make my father send him the letters which I wrote home, and
when I reached London his welcome to me was of the warmest. He at once
invited me to dinner, and after dinner kept me in talk for some time. He
asked me about the book I was writing, giving me great encouragement and
some advice, which, unlike most advice, was followed. Two or three weeks
later he was gone. On the 27th of April he died in harness, in the heat
of the work which he loved so well, and busy with the craft of which he
was a past master.

Was Bismarck right in saying that if he had lived the war of 1870 would
not have taken place? I doubt it. I think that when Bismarck made his
famous speech to Lady Ampthill, telling her that nothing had ever given
him so much pleasure as her father’s death, because it meant that his
schemes would not be foiled, that was his rough, _burschikos_ way of
paying her a compliment on Lord Clarendon’s power, sagacity and skill
as a diplomatist. There is no doubt that he had immense influence both
with Louis Napoléon and with the Empress, whom he had known as a child in
the intimacy of her mother’s house when he was Minister at Madrid; but
there were silent intrigues of which the English Foreign Office and our
Ambassadors abroad knew nothing, as was shown when Mr. Hammond told Lord
Granville on his taking over Lord Clarendon’s succession that there never
had been a time when there was such a perfectly peaceful outlook. In a
fortnight the Paris mob was shouting “_A Berlin!_”

In recent works Mr. Hammond has been greatly and most unjustly blamed for
his want of prescience. Nothing could be more unfair. Mr. Hammond was
guided by the reports, and, more important still, by the private letters,
of the Ambassadors at Paris, Berlin, and other Courts. That no one—not
even Bismarck himself—knew how near war was is amply proved by Bismarck’s
own memoirs. The thing fell like a thunder-clap—the result of the Ems
episode—and Bismarck was as much staggered as the rest of the world by
the opportunity which arose for him.

Things had gone too far for any hope of successful official interference.
Had Lord Clarendon been out of office, able to go to Paris, and discuss
matters face to face with the Emperor, who loved him, his winning ways
and sound sense might, at an earlier moment, a few weeks sooner, have had
some effect. But chained to a desk in Downing Street, only able to speak,
as it were, through an interpreter, and only informed by agents who
could not report a secret which was well kept because it did not exist,
his power was largely discounted—the personal element was, of course,
entirely wanting. Moreover, it was too late; the threat and the execution
were simultaneous. Both sides were bent on war, and both were working in
a deadly secrecy which has perhaps never been surpassed. The most astute
diplomatists, the most practised politicians, were not prepared for the
storm that was about to burst; the barometer had given no indication.

France was upon the brink of a volcano. Deep below the surface there were
underground mutterings and growls which sent shivers of fear through
those who knew, and yet, like London, Paris went on laughing with
Offenbach, Schneider, Dupuis & Co., and the _cafés chantants_ were never
fuller, the _premières_ at the theatres never more a matter of serious
importance.

The fatal year 1870 had opened prosperously enough in France. The new
liberal and quasi-constitutional Government under Emile Ollivier was
apparently sailing in smooth waters. All of a sudden a storm burst which
went far towards wrecking the ship. On the 10th of January Prince Pierre
Bonaparte was sitting quietly in his library at Auteuil when Messieurs
Fonvielle and Victor Noir were announced;—two gentlemen who were editors
or sub-editors of Rochefort’s republican newspaper, the _Marseillaise_.
They came to call the Prince to account for an article which had appeared
in a Corsican newspaper. The Prince, taken by surprise, pulled out a
pistol and shot Victor Noir, while Fonvielle made his escape.

It is easy to imagine the cry that would be raised among the republicans
by the death of one of their prophets at the hands of a member of the
hated family. It is not so easy to describe the concentrated rage with
which Rochefort, that master of vituperation, lashed the Emperor and the
Government. The Empress told Lord Lyons that matters would have been
worse “under the old _régime_”; that, however, is hard to believe. What
is strange is that an event which so profoundly stirred all France,
which was so pregnant with results, should be so little noticed by the
publicists of to-day. Pierre Bonaparte was acquitted and left France, but
he had sown the seed of an ineradicable canker.

France was in a state of internal fever; the German was waiting for an
opportunity to spring at her throat; the fates were indeed busy with
the thread of the Empire’s life. No man felt this more profoundly than
Louis Napoléon—no man was less fitted at that time to deal with such
a situation. Older than his years, he was only sixty-two, racked by a
torturing disease, it seemed easier to him to embark upon a foreign
war than to face the horrors and the risks of a second _coup d’état_.
That this latter alternative was inevitable unless the attention of the
Belleville mob could be turned by a cry of patriotism, was manifest. The
whole influence of the Emperor’s surroundings—including the Empress—was
cast into the balance for war.

In the summer of 1871, after the Commune, the Duc de Persigny, with whom,
when he was French Ambassador in London, I had been on intimate terms,
came to England. I saw him several times at the St. James’s Club, and we
had much conversation, always about the war and the events that led to
it. Although he was not in office during Emile Ollivier’s premiership,
he, as one of the Emperor’s oldest and most familiar friends, always had
access to His Majesty.

He told me that, one day, in the late spring of 1870, he went to the
Tuileries to pay his respects. He found the Emperor looking ill and
careworn, and it was not long before His Majesty began to pour out
his anxieties and fears, asking counsel of his tried and faithful
servant. The Emperor said that nothing was open to him but one of two
alternatives—a foreign war or stern measures of repression at home.
Persigny implored him not to think of a foreign war. The Emperor answered
that it was easy enough to say that, but what ministry would take office
with the understanding to “balayer Belleville”—would Persigny himself
form a government with such a programme? The Duke asked for forty-eight
hours in which to consult his friends. The Emperor dismissed him in the
kindest way, apparently much cheered by the hope of avoiding a war, and
bade the Duke come back in forty-eight hours. Persigny did not tell me
who were the friends with whom he conferred, but he said that he had
no difficulty in obtaining promises of assistance from men who, in his
judgment, would have formed a very strong administration pledged to
throttle disaffection and all revolutionary conspiracies.

At the appointed time he went back to the Tuileries; to his amazement he
was kept in a waiting room for half an hour—he who was always admitted at
once and never had to _faire antichambre_. When at last he was shown into
the Emperor’s study he found his Majesty closeted with General Lebœuf.
Seeing this he said: “Sire, I presume that it is useless for me again
to address Your Majesty upon the subject of our conversation of the day
before yesterday.” “Effectivement, mon cher, nous avons un peu changé
d’avis,” replied the Emperor, who shook him warmly by the hand, and sent
him away, resuming his conversation with Lebœuf. I have often wondered
whether that was the famous interview when Lebœuf assured the Emperor
that “il n’y a pas un bouton qui manque!”

Persigny was of course furious; ordinary language was not strong enough
to express his indignation against the people by whom the Emperor was
surrounded—more especially did he fall foul of the female influence to
which he ascribed all the misfortunes of France, culminating in the fall
of the dynasty. I felt very sorry for him; the emotion with which he
spoke was obviously sincere. He loved the Emperor dearly, he was as true
as daylight, and one of the few straight men in that rather pinchbeck
Court.

If Persigny has not left behind him a great reputation as statesman and
diplomatist he was, at any rate, a scrupulously honest man—very different
from the crew of Stock Exchange gamblers by whom, to his undoing, Louis
Napoléon was surrounded.

France, then, was determined to go to war, and with Germany. Bismarck
was of opinion that the French Government thought that the Hohenzollern
candidature for the throne of Spain was politically a rare opportunity
for them. They did not believe that in such a cause the rest of Germany
would stand by Prussia. Such States as Bavaria, Baden, Saxony and others
would look upon the affair as a simple family concern, affecting only
the reigning House of Prussia. Why should they spend blood and money to
serve the ambition of a Prince of Hohenzollern? If such were indeed, as
Bismarck thought, the prophecies of the French political soothsayers
their forecasts did them but little credit. Attack Prussia, and the
_Wacht am Rhein_ was the answer.

So much for France. And Prussia? What of her?

On the 13th of July, 1870, three men sat round a dinner table at Berlin.
Three notable men; Bismarck, the host, Von Roon, the War Minister, and
the silent Moltke. All three were profoundly dejected. They could not
eat, and their wine was distasteful to them. Bismarck had arrived the
day before, from Varzin on his way to Ems to urge the King to summon
Parliament for the purpose of mobilizing the army. For war was in the
air. Indeed, as he drove in his open carriage through Wussow, he saw his
old friend, Pastor Mulert, and answered his kindly greeting with a thrust
of his hand in quart and tierce. The old clergyman took the hint. As he
was about to leave his carriage to enter his house a sheaf of telegrams
was put into his hands, informing him of the repeated audiences which
Benedetti, the French Ambassador, had had of the King upon the subject
of the Spanish monarchy. Bismarck was up in arms. He considered that
Benedetti had no justification for thrusting himself upon the King and
ignoring the King’s ministers, nor was he pleased that the King should
have so far lowered himself as to treat directly with Benedetti, and even
listen to threats. He should have referred him to the Foreign Office.

But there was worse to come; Bismarck was discussing with the two
soldiers the propriety of resigning office when a further telegram
arrived from the Embassy at Paris, announcing that, in the interests of
peace, the Prince of Hohenzollern had abandoned his candidature. Such a
_kō tou_ to the arrogance of France was more than could be tolerated! To
haul down the flag in such a fashion would be a shameful thing! While the
three men were chewing the cud of their misery there arrived the famous
telegram from Ems, signed by Abeken, who was in attendance upon the King.
It ran as follows:

“His Majesty writes to me: ‘Count Benedetti stopped me on the promenade
in order to urge me, in what became a very peremptory fashion, to
authorize him at once to telegraph that I bound myself for all time never
again to give my consent if the Hohenzollerns should return to their
candidature. I pointed out to him rather sternly that to give such an
undertaking _à tout jamais_ was what no man ought to or could do. Of
course, I told him that I had received no news and that, inasmuch as
he had been informed from Madrid and Paris sooner than myself, he must
see that my Government was taking no hand in the game.’ Since then His
Majesty has received a letter from the Prince.

“Inasmuch as His Majesty had told Count Benedetti that he was awaiting
news from the Prince, the King, in view of the presumption referred to
above, acting upon the advice of Count Eulenburg and myself, determined
not to receive Count Benedetti again but only to inform him through
an aide-de-camp that His Majesty had now received from the Prince the
confirmation of the news which Benedetti had received from Paris, and
that he had nothing further to say to the Ambassador. His Majesty
leaves it to Your Excellency to determine whether this new demand of
Benedetti’s and its rejection should be at once communicated to our
Envoys abroad, as well as to the public press.”

On the receipt of this dispatch the three men were astounded. The insult
was flagrant. Bismarck, however, read it again and saw his way clear. He
asked Moltke whether it would be for the advantage of Germany that war
should take place at once, or be delayed for a while. Moltke’s answer
was that any delay would be all for the benefit of France. If war there
must be let it be at once, and he gave his reasons for what he said.
Bismarck craftily took advantage of the royal permission to publish the
contents of the telegram, and in the presence of his two guests he drew
up the communication in the exact terms of Abeken’s telegram with certain
erasures but “without adding or altering a single word.” As edited by
Bismarck it ran as follows:

“Since the news of the renunciation of the hereditary Prince of
Hohenzollern has been officially communicated by the Spanish Government
to the Imperial French Government the French Ambassador at Ems has
further demanded of His Majesty the King that he should authorize him
to telegraph to Paris that His Majesty the King bound himself for all
time never again to give his consent if the Hohenzollerns should ever
return to their candidature. Upon this His Majesty the King refused to
receive the French Ambassador again, and caused him to be informed by the
aide-de-camp in waiting that His Majesty had no further communication to
make to the Ambassador.”

Bismarck read the _communiqué_ through to his two guests. Moltke,
the silent, remarked: “That has quite another ring. It sounded like
a _chamade_ (a parley). Now it’s like a trumpet call in answer to a
challenge.” Bismarck said: “If I send this Text, which contains no
alteration in or addition to the telegram, at once, in pursuance of the
royal command, not only to the newspapers but also by telegraph to all
our representatives abroad, it will be known in Paris before midnight
and will be as a red rag to the French bull, not only on account of its
contents, but also of the manner of its publication. We must strike,
unless we are prepared to accept the part of having been beaten without a
struggle.

“Success depends essentially upon the impressions which the origin of
the war creates at home and abroad; it is important that it should be
we who are attacked, and that is what we shall achieve by the arrogance
and irritability of the French, if we, so far as is possible without the
speaking trumpet of Parliament, publish to all Europe that we are ready
without fear to meet the open threats of France.”

Bismarck’s description of the effect which these words had upon the two
generals is striking. All dejection and melancholy had disappeared and
given place to such high spirits that he himself was astonished. Their
appetite returned—they began to eat and drink merrily. Roon said: “The
God of our fathers is still alive and will not allow us to fall into
disgrace.” Moltke departed so far from his usual indifferent passivity
that, looking up to the ceiling and for once eschewing his usual measured
language, he struck himself on the breast and said: “If I may still live
to lead our host in such a war, then let the Devil fetch away this old
carcase as soon as he pleases.”

This is the story of the famous telegram from Ems, as Bismarck himself
tells it in his “Gedanken und Erinnerungen,” Vol. II., pp. 104-113.
Popular Edition, 1913. But how characteristically German is von Roon’s
recognition of the hand of God in the cooking of a telegram!

A little reflection upon the temper prevailing both in France and in
Russia should, I think, suffice to show that no patching up of the
differences between them was possible. The Emperor threatened by anarchy,
trembling for his dynasty, a drowning man clutching at a straw—and such
a straw! Prussia flushed by the successes of 1864 and 1866, ill prepared
to submit to the haughty pin-pricks of the French, and eager to win fresh
laurels. Who could hope to mediate between them? That is what makes me
think that Bismarck’s speech about Lord Clarendon was no more than the
expression of an honest admiration for a statesman whom he held, as is
well known, in the highest respect. If a little tactless in manner it was
at any rate as noble a tribute as one great statesman ever paid to the
memory of another.

It would be difficult to find two men in greater contrast to one another
than Prince Bismarck and Lord Clarendon—the one rough and uncouth, caring
little for outward observances; the other courtly, polished, dignified,
the pattern of a high-bred gentleman—yet there was one quality which they
had in common; both were absolutely frank and honest in discussion; both
scorned those tricks and subterfuges which have given diplomacy a bad
name. Clarendon’s love of truth—even where he had to risk giving offence
in high quarters—was proverbial; so it was that no English minister was
more highly esteemed at home, better respected abroad. Of the various
positions which he held, of the exalted offices and dignities which he
refused, his biographer has recorded the sum for the benefit of future
historians.

So Lord Clarendon died loved and deeply regretted by all those whose good
fortune had brought them into contact with him—held in honour by every
sovereign and statesman in Europe. At the Foreign Office Lord Granville
ruled in his place. No minister ever had to face greater difficulties.
The Franco-German war at once ravelled all the threads of diplomacy into
a tangle of which the intricate confusion was without a parallel, and
the position became more and more complicated month by month. Prince
Gortchakoff who, as I have shown in my account of what took place at St.
Petersburg six years earlier, had made up his mind that he need no longer
take the opposition of England into account, saw in the discomfiture of
France his opportunity for flinging in our faces the Black Sea treaty,
and, in defiance of all engagements, pushing forward into Central Asia,
until Russia had advanced perilously near to our Indian frontier with
only Afghanistan as a buffer state.

Men have most unjustly blamed Lord Granville for this; but what could
he do? To threaten when action is impossible is contemptible. England’s
arm was not long enough to reach into Central Asia, and where could
Russia be attacked by any puny force that England alone could at that
time bring to bear upon her? Lord Russell had given England away in
1864. Lord Granville could now do no more than protest, and protest he
did; but in diplomacy, as in other phases of life, hard words break no
bones. Treaties are good until the strong man armed comes and tears them
to tatters with his mailed fist. Prince Gortchakoff chuckled over the
misfortunes of France, and felt more than ever convinced that England was
a negligible quantity. When eight years later he went to the Congress of
Berlin he had to sing another and a sadder tune.

       *       *       *       *       *

One evening Lord Granville and I were dining together early at the
Travellers’, as we sometimes did when he was in London alone for a night,
in order to go to the French play; all of a sudden, in the middle of
dinner, he turned round to me in a little abrupt way that was peculiarly
his own and said, “Bertie, it must be a great bore for you to be a
Conservative.” I laughed and asked why? “Well, because you always seem
to me to live much more with all of us than with the members of your own
party.”

It was quite true—with few exceptions besides Lord Beaconsfield,
Lord George Hamilton and Mr. W. H. Smith, I hardly knew any of the
Conservative leaders at all intimately. I had a slight acquaintance
with them, but Lord Derby, Lord Stanley, Lord Malmesbury, and the other
potentates of the party were to me little more than _magna nomina_. On
the other hand, Lord Palmerston, Lord Granville, Lord Clarendon, Mr.
Charles Villiers and many more Liberals were most kind friends to me, and
I was much with them both in town and country. No great Conservative lady
of my time had succeeded in having a _salon_. Lady Derby’s parties were
of a dullness as depressing as a London fog; whereas the evenings at Lady
Palmerston’s, Lady Clarendon’s, Lady Granville’s, were gatherings where
whatever was most brilliant in politics, art, science, literature met
together to be gay and merry. There would be repeated a new witticism of
Alfred Montgomery, the last audacious sally of Quin or Bernal Osborne,
the gossip of the Lobby, a happy Latin quotation by Bob Lowe, perhaps
even some wicked little story from “behind the curtain.”

I do not suppose that Lord Granville ever made a speech that could be
called famous. He was not a master of oratory. But as a leader in the
House of Lords he was gifted with a delightful manner, and a genius for
conciliation which made him supremely popular with both friends and
foes, and which gave him a very real power. In debate he was almost
matchless. His playful cleverness of fence made him a foeman worthy
of the nimblest steel that could be brought against him. I was not a
member of the House of Lords in his time, but I used often to attend the
debates, and I was always lost in admiration of his clever tactics, and
of the masterly skill with which he could disarm an opponent without for
one moment condescending to any departure from the strictest rules of the
_salle d’armes_. His delicate sword-play was often more effective than
the heavy artillery of such a born orator as the Duke of Argyll.

As an after-dinner speaker, Lord Granville was quite admirable; no man
could turn a compliment with a more persuasive grace, and the points of
his speeches, garnished with anecdotes gathered in intimate converse
with notable men both at home and abroad, were always telling. Once, as
he told me, he happened to ask Charles Dickens whom he considered to
be the best after-dinner speaker of the day. Dickens answered: “Well,
there are many great orators in England,” and he cited Gladstone, the
Duke of Argyll, Disraeli, John Bright, and others; “but if you want a
really bright, witty, genial speech for a banquet, commend me to Bishop
Wilberforce.” A few days later Lord Granville met the Bishop, and
suddenly the spirit of fun moved him to put to his right reverend friend
the same question that he had addressed to Dickens. “Oh,” answered the
Bishop, using almost the same words as the great novelist, “Gladstone,
the Duke of Argyll, Disraeli, John Bright and some others are great
speakers. But for a charming after-dinner speech give me Charles
Dickens.” I should have added the questioner himself.

Lord Granville told me that when Leighton was made President of the Royal
Academy he consulted him as to the speeches which he should make at the
annual dinner. Lord Granville advised him, since he must have so many
toasts to propose, to concentrate himself upon one speech and let the
others be merely formal. Above all, not to be too long. “He did not take
my advice,” said Lord Granville slyly.

Leighton was nevertheless a very effective speaker, though his speeches
were too much laboured. He once told me that he was obliged to write
them all out and learn them by heart, as the power of “thinking upon
his legs” had been denied to him. One evening after the banquet, John
Bright went up to him and complimented him on his speeches. Leighton in
thanking him asked for the criticism of so great a master, and drove the
question home rather persistently. “Well, Sir Frederic, since you ask
me,” said Bright, “don’t you think there is rather much confectionery in
your oratory—rather sugary, eh?” It was a true criticism; with a little
less ornament Leighton’s speeches would have been well-nigh perfect. What
made Lord Granville’s short speeches so charming was their freedom from
anything like fulsome adulation; he knew how to pay a compliment without
rendering it valueless by exaggeration.

The task of an after-dinner speaker is seldom to be argumentative, always
to give pleasure, and in that Lord Granville succeeded to perfection;
never having had the luck to hear either Dickens or Bishop Wilberforce
make such a speech, I look upon him as the greatest master of that
peculiar art that I ever listened to. He was so neat and polished, and
his points went home with such consummate skill, with never a word too
much, that the regret was general when he left off, rubbing his hands
together—a favourite trick of his when speaking—and sat down. Like
Oliver, we wanted more. As a _raconteur_ he was matchless. His store
of anecdotes—never a bad one among them—was as inexhaustible as the
conjuror’s bottle, and in his skilful hands they ran no risk of becoming,
as he warned his children, “a fearful instrument of torture to mankind.”

Another feature in his character which endeared him to Englishmen was his
honest love of sport. Throwing off for the moment the cares of State, he
would ride straight to hounds, stalk a stag, bring down a rocketer, drive
four in hand—at one time, if my memory serves me right, he even kept
a pack of harriers at Walmer. But his crown of laurels as a sportsman
was won in 1874, as is recorded in his life by Lord Edmund Fitzmaurice,
when the Liberal retiring Cabinet having been taunted by certain people
for their want of sportsmanlike or athletic prowess, in fact as being
“a pack of muffs,” he threw down the glove. “I am prepared,” he said,
“to challenge the present Ministry to pick their best men and pit them
against a like number of the defunct Liberal Government for a ride across
country.” As Lord Edmund shows, he had some good men to choose from in
Lord Spencer, Lord Halifax and Lord Hartington, all first-rate men to
hounds, besides himself, and we know that he, the old Master of the Royal
Buckhounds, would not have been unworthy of his colleagues. The challenge
led to an amusing correspondence with the gigantic Ward Hunt, a noted
“bruiser” with the Pytchley—“Bright,” wrote Lord Granville to Ward Hunt,
“is no use, he cannot pronounce the name of your hunt.”

A memorable dinner in Carlton House Terrace celebrated the first Cabinet
meeting of the new Government, in the Spring of 1880. There was an
evening party afterwards to which I, who had been staying at Walmer
during the crisis, was invited. The tail was quite a small non-political
gathering, but Count Károlyi, the Austro-Hungarian Ambassador, was
among the guests. As soon as he came in, Lord Granville took him up to
introduce him to Mr. Gladstone. It was rather an awkward moment, and one
which it needed all the host’s consummate tact to manage.

On March 17th, during the Midlothian campaign, Mr. Gladstone had said,
“Austria has ever been the unflinching foe of freedom in every country of
Europe. Austria trampled Italy under foot, Austria resisted the unity of
Germany.... Austria has never been the friend even of Slavonic freedom.
Austria did all she could to prevent the creation of Belgium. Austria
never lifted a finger for the regeneration and constitution of Greece.
There is not an instance—there is not a spot upon the whole map where
you can lay your finger and say—there Austria did good.” Such words as
these had stung and irritated beyond endurance the proud Hungarian noble.
The only excuse offered was that the speech had been rendered necessary
for election purposes, but Count Károlyi was not the man to allow the
honour of his Sovereign and his country to be used as a counter in the
electioneering game. He was furious, and had declared more than once
that if he met Mr. Gladstone he should turn his back upon him; he also
threatened that he would resign his post. Lord Granville smoothed matters
over.

Mr. Gladstone that evening apologized to Count Károlyi, and a day or two
later wrote him a letter which the Emperor Francis Joseph characterized
as “the letter of an English gentleman.” At home the letter was bitterly
criticized. Mr. Gladstone was taunted with having humiliated himself and
his country also. There were not a few Liberal politicians who joined in
the strictures passed by Lord George Hamilton and Lord Salisbury.[23]

The conversation between Count Károlyi and Mr. Gladstone lasted some
minutes; it was evident that the apology was politely but coldly
received. As it was a fine night the Ambassador, with whom I was very
intimate, asked me to walk home with him; he talked of nothing but Mr.
Gladstone and Lord Granville. For the latter Count Károlyi professed
great friendship, and even affection, but from what he said to me then,
and on other occasions, I know that he had been too deeply wounded to
share the Emperor’s admiration for “the letter of an English gentleman,”
or its author.

But it was not only in smoothing the asperities that Mr. Gladstone could,
perhaps, hardly help raising with Foreign Powers that Lord Granville had
to exercise his diplomatic skill. There were not a few rifts within the
Liberal lute which it needed all those gentle and purring ways, that
in his youth had earned for him the name of “Pussie,” to hinder from
widening. He was by nature essentially the peace-maker, the reconciler.
Cabinets do not always, like “birds in their little nests, agree.”

They come together upon some one great question, some dominant national
cry—such as Home Rule, Tariff Reform, the upheaval of the Constitution,
and the like. For a while all goes well; but by degrees it becomes
manifest that here one, there another, Minister has a special axe to
grind, while there are with no less certainty dearly-beloved colleagues
who are determined that the edge of that axe shall not be sharpened—nay,
more, that as many notches shall be beaten into it as possible. The
Cabinet of 1880 was no exception to this rule; but what an asset Lord
Granville’s tact and powers of conciliation must have been in the rather
distracted Downing Street of that time!

The late Duke of Devonshire told me that when Lord Edmond Fitzmaurice—now
Lord Fitzmaurice—asked him to lend his correspondence with Lord Granville
for the purpose of his biography, there was much which he had to hold
back because it was mainly concerned with keeping the peace between
himself (the Duke) and a colleague who was then still alive. For such
revelations the time had not yet come.

When the final crash arrived, when the Liberal camp was divided over the
vexed question of Home Rule, Lord Granville had to sacrifice personal
feelings and the most affectionate ties of family to the interests of
party and of political principles which, with him, stood above every
other consideration. The parting of the ways which led him and the Duke
of Devonshire into opposite camps must have been a deep sorrow to him.
“Lord Hartington and I,” he wrote to the Queen in 1880, “have acted in
perfect harmony for the last ten years.” The cleft was bitter to both.

There were many other friendships and intimacies which Mr. Gladstone’s
change of front in regard to Home Rule broke up; none more conspicuous
than the old alliance which existed between him and his near neighbour
and devoted follower, the Duke of Westminster, and his brother, Lord
Richard Grosvenor, the chief Liberal Whip. On one occasion when I was
staying with the Duke at Eaton he took me into Bend Or’s stable. The Duke
looked at the beautiful animal, the hero of the Derby of 1880, and turned
round to me, saying: “He is as superior to every other horse as Gladstone
is to every other statesman.” Within a few months he sold Gladstone’s
portrait by Millais; it irked him to look upon it.

Perhaps no man had more temptations to break with Mr. Gladstone than
Lord Granville. He would have slept more softly could he have found it
in his conscience to cast his lot in with the Duke of Devonshire, the
Duke of Argyll, the Duke of Westminster and others, all near and dear
kinsmen, who had fought side by side with him in many a tough fight over
a long period of years. In a letter dated July 9th, 1895, the Duke of
Argyll taunted him with the overwhelming value he set on party fidelity.
“I have sometimes asked myself, ‘Is there any conceivable measure that
Granville would _not_ accept rather than split the party?’ and I have
never been able to answer this question to my own satisfaction.” Lord
Granville’s answer was characteristic. “I could, if I chose, give you
instances of when I have disagreed with Gladstone, and upon which I may
disagree with him again; but I am convinced that as long as he remains a
political leader he is a _conservative_ power which will not be replaced
by Salisbury, Churchill, or some of the best Whigs.”[24]

So Lord Granville and his brother, Mr. Frederick Leveson Gower, remained
faithful to Mr. Gladstone. We may not all of us agree with the political
creed which they thus endorsed, and to which they lent all the weight of
their great name; but one thing is certain: no two nobler gentlemen ever
trod the pavement of Westminster Hall.

Personally and socially it would be difficult to imagine two men more
widely apart than Lord Granville and Mr. Gladstone. The one a scholar, a
mathematician and a theologian; the very highest expression of an Oxford
common room, who, in spite of Eton and Christ Church, never seemed quite
at home in what is commonly called the great world. The other a sportsman
and highly-cultured patrician who would have shone as brilliantly at the
Court of the _Grand Monarque_ as he did at that of Queen Victoria: a man
who had acquired all the pliancy which long usage of diplomacy confers,
and who yet, being a man of contrasts, was as firm as adamant where
conscience and political conviction were at stake. From what he conceived
to be his duty he was immovable.

To be invited to spend a week-end or three or four days at Walmer, a
pleasure which I so often enjoyed, was to see Lord Granville at his
best—and what a best it was! When, in 1865, he became Lord Warden of
the Cinque Ports, that ancient dignity of which my own ancestor on
my mother’s side, Bertram Ashburnham, was the second holder in King
Harold’s time, the old castle was but a poor dwelling-place. Lord
Granville determined to live there, and so, with the help of Mr. Devey,
a famous architect of that time, he added to the accommodation, made
many improvements, and turned it into a most delightful and picturesque
sea-side home.

Not the least of its attractions was the garden, upon which he lavished
consummate taste and care. The old place was full of traditions of the
mighty past, full of memories of the great Duke who died there. Even
when Lord Granville had added to it, there was but a very small amount
of accommodation. But what of that? It was all the more intimate and
friendly. I never remember more than two or three guests, except upon
one occasion, when the Duke and Duchess of Teck were staying there. Even
then we only sat down eight at dinner. It was wonderful to see the host
working away with his red boxes and papers at a little writing-table
in the one small drawing-room which served him as office and study.
Surrounded by his beautiful wife and children—and one would have thought
distracted by the general conversation—he would toil from morning till
night, looking up now and then to give utterance to some bright idea,
always smiling with such a radiantly happy face, even when affairs must
have been pressing upon him the most heavily, for in office or out of
office, the leadership of his party in the House of Lords was no trifle.
His power of abstraction and detachment was wonderful. I look back upon
those old days at Walmer with a feeling of affectionate regret and
gratitude.

Though Lord Granville was heart and soul a Liberal, socially he was the
most fastidious of men. How could it be otherwise with his exquisite
taste and upbringing, in the midst of all that was the most refined? His
dinners were delightful. His cook, Béguinot, who was at one time with Mr.
Frederick Leveson Gower, was a pearl of great price, and the talk was
always most exceptionally good.

It has been the fashion to say that conversation died with Sydney Smith,
Luttrell, Rogers and the men of that generation. Those who remember Lord
Granville’s dinners must deny that. At his smaller parties there was
no room for those political Tadpoles and Tapers who contrive to climb
into Governments, and even, sometimes, into Cabinets, on the shoulders
of bigger men. Talent there was in plenty, but it must be of the best.
Till his death in 1865 Charles Greville, the Clerk of the Council and
diarist—and his brother Henry, who, also, was the author of most amusing
journals—were pretty frequent guests. Charles Greville indeed—“the
Gruncher,” or, as Lord Granville used to call him, “the Lodger”—had rooms
on the ground floor of Lord Granville’s house in Bruton Street. He was a
cynic, but a most sagacious man, a patrician to his finger-tips, whose
political knowledge was matchless, and there were few difficulties,
whether social or public, in which he was not consulted. Indeed, his
position as Clerk of the Council brought him into the most intimate
relations with politicians of all shades of thought, and he often had to
act as _amicus curiæ_ between opponents. For instance when changes of
government took place he it was who was employed as go-between to carry
on such negotiations as might be necessary for the conduct of public
business. That he did not pass through this ordeal without making enemies
is certain. Witness Lord Rosslyn’s lines upon his memoirs:

    “For forty years he listened at the door,
    He heard some secrets and invented more;
    These he wrote down, and Statesmen, Queens and Kings
    Were all degraded into common things.
    Many are gone, but others still remain
    To whom these memoirs give a needless pain.
    And though they laugh and say, ‘It’s only Greville,’
    They wish his memoirs with him at the Devil.”

Both Charles and Henry Greville were old friends of ours, and they
were very kind to me. I, at least, never had any reason to be alarmed
at either of them as so many men were, for they were both great social
potentates.

How brilliant was the talk of the band of men over whom Lord Granville
held the conductor’s baton! Quin, the famous homeopathic doctor and
wit, was one of the favoured guests; his life had been varied. In 1821,
when a mere lad of twenty-two, he had been appointed to go out to St.
Helena as private physician to Napoleon, but the Emperor died before he
could start, so he set up in his profession at Naples. Afterwards he was
attached to King Leopold. He was, I believe, Hahnemann’s first disciple
in England and was very much the fashion, though more as a man of the
world than as a doctor. His wit and fun were rather boisterous, but there
was a deep stratum of wisdom underneath, and he was a valued friend of
great men, even among those who laughed at his globules. He it was whom
Disraeli in 1868 persuaded to sound Lord Granville as to the possibility
of their uniting forces. Naturally Lord Granville declined in a very
pretty note, but at the same time he paid Quin the compliment of saying
that no better emissary could have been chosen. If Quin’s chaff was
rather of the sledge-hammer order, that of Alfred Montgomery, enhanced
by a slight stammer, was always delicate and as fine as the edge of a
razor. Not that it was ever cutting or cruel, though he could rebuke
impertinence on occasions. His famous answer to Mr. Poole, the tailor,
was a case in point. Mr. Poole had been sent for to Bradgate to measure
Lord Stamford; for reasons which it is needless to revive, Bradgate was
not quite well looked upon. Alfred happened to go into Poole’s shop when
he came back and asked him who had been staying at Bradgate. “Oh! a very
mixed lot, sir, a very mixed lot.” “Confound it, Mr. Poole,” was the
answer, with his captivating stammer, “you could not expect them to be
all t-t-tailors!” “The only thing which I cannot resist is temptation,”
was shamelessly cribbed by Oscar Wilde.

A saying of Alfred’s at Somerset House reminds one of Charles Lamb in the
same building. One day he arrived at the office (he was a Commissioner
of Inland Revenue), and said plaintively “I think I must take a little
holiday; I have not had one this year!” His colleagues, who knew their
Alfred’s ways, looked at him in amazement, until one of them remembered
that it was the 1st of January! Alfred Montgomery had been a great friend
of Lord Brougham, d’Orsay, Lady Blessington and the Kensington Gore
set, and he it was who took the news of Brougham’s death to a party at
Lady Blessington’s: a sly trick of the ex-Chancellor to find out what
the newspapers would say of him. Clever as he was, Alfred fell into the
trap when he received a letter informing him of the sad event! Alfred’s
own little dinners in his tiny house in Chesterfield Street were of the
choicest—the best of food, the best of wine, the best of welcomes. The
setting—a picture for a _dilettante_. I wonder whether there is to-day in
London a drawing-room of equal size so dainty and so choice. It would
need the pen of an expert from Christie and Manson’s to describe it.
To the end of his life he kept his good looks. His features, as finely
cut as those in a classic gem, never changed. I went to see him a day
or two before his death. He could hardly speak, but he was, as always,
beautifully groomed. As he himself once said to someone who chaffed him
on his smart appearance, “I can’t help growing old, but there is no
reason why I should be dirty.” His bed, his dressing-table and all his
belongings were as smart as a bride’s, and as he lay dying, very tired
and feeble, his humour was as droll and merry as ever—full of fun to the
last. How few men when they go leave a gap in the great world: in their
own families some are perhaps missed for a while; but outside their own
little surroundings it is only the rarest and choicest who are remembered
and lamented. Alfred was one of these.

One day Lord Granville, Alfred and I were walking together by the sea
at Walmer. Lord Granville stopped short and said, “Now, Alfred, there’s
nobody here but Bertie and I—do tell us how old you are.” “Don’t ask
me, my dear G-G-G-Granville; I am that most horrible thing, a well
p-p-p-preserved man.” As he had been private secretary to Lord Wellesley
when he was Viceroy of Ireland, he must then have been pretty well
stricken in years. Well preserved he certainly was—he did not look more
than sixty.

Mr. Henry Reeve, the editor of the _Edinburgh Review_, was another of
those agreeable diners-out whom Lord Granville made welcome. As a talker
he had not the light playfulness of those whom I have mentioned, but
like Delane he had a marvellous memory—a great asset as a corrective in
conversation. Perhaps his greatest claim to fame lies in the editing of
the memoirs of Charles Greville, who made him his literary executor.

Many thought that he ought to have allowed more time to pass before
publishing diaries which affected so many people who were still living.
It must be borne in mind that he was already an old man of sixty-two or
sixty-three when the first volumes appeared, and he might well think that
as the precious papers had been committed to his charge he was bound to
see that there should be as little risk as possible of their falling
into the hands of others less discreet than himself.

It is difficult to call up these ghosts of the old happy days without
a passing mention of Henry Calcraft—a much younger man. His power of
repartee was great, and I once heard him absolutely crush Buckle, the
author of the “Civilization,” who had been rather boring a very smart
party at Baron Lionel de Rothschild’s with one of his interminable
monologues. Unfortunately it was uttered after the ladies had left the
room, and cannot be repeated here. To name all the wits and men of mark
with whom Lord Granville used to salt the somewhat ponderous utterances
of the big political guns and social magnates whom he invited, would fill
many pages. But however sparkling the talk might be, the host himself was
always the choragus.

Lord Granville never had but one mission abroad, and that was when he was
sent as special Ambassador to the Coronation of the Emperor Alexander
the Second in the month of August, 1856. It was in every way a brilliant
Embassy, Lord and Lady Stafford, she in the zenith of her young beauty,
Lord Hartington, Lord Ward, Sir Robert and Lady Emily Peel, Lord Ashley
and others. The Duke of Devonshire had caused his famous collection of
gems to be mounted for Lady Granville’s use, and had placed his plate at
Lord Granville’s disposal; the horses and carriages were superb, and so
great was the sensation created that it was still alive when I reached
St. Petersburg, seven years later. The Duc de Morny was the French
representative, and he, too, made a dazzling show. His liveries were
gorgeous, but when someone said that they quite outshone the less gaudy
Leveson Gower footmen, Tutchef said, “Oui c’est vrai—les livrées du Duc
de Morny sont plus belles, mais ce pauvre Lord Granville n’a pas comme
lui les coudées franches. Vous voyez il a eu le malheur d’avoir un père.”

As a rule, these tinsel and gewgaw complimentary missions are entrusted
to some peer of moderate, or perhaps no, attainments—that is a matter
of indifference—who is glad to undertake the job and return home with a
ribbon and star as an acknowledgment of the discretion with which he has
fulfilled his important task. These are what may be called the carpet
knights of diplomacy. A Foreign Office Clerk is told off to dry-nurse
them and to see that they are guilty of no compromising incongruities.

Lord Granville’s Embassy was of a very different character. England and
Russia were at peace after the struggle of the Crimean War; but there was
anything but a good feeling between the two governments. The leanings
of Russia were all towards France, and it was a matter of the first
importance to arrive at a better understanding. The Cabinet determined to
send out a Cabinet Minister as Ambassador, and, obviously, Lord Granville
was the man. His knowledge of French—the language chiefly spoken at the
Russian Court—his exquisite discretion, and his authority as a prominent
member of the Government, were bound to produce the best effect. It was a
happy choice.

There were moments of great difficulty which needed all Lord Granville’s
great qualities of tact and temper to tide over. His conversations with
the Emperor might easily have degenerated into discussions anything but
friendly. Not for one moment did Lord Granville allow the Tsar to imagine
that the Queen’s Ambassador could be treated with anything but the
respect due to the sovereign of whom he was the personal representative;
and yet he knew that if he were to take huff his special Embassy must
come to an end, and a ridiculous end. His own account of his interviews
with the Emperor and Prince Gortchakoff is a liberal education in
diplomatic tactics.[25]

It will be evident to any one who may have had the patience to read
this sketch, that in my judgment the public services rendered by Lord
Granville have not been recognized as they deserved. That was also
the opinion of my old friend and colleague, Sir Robert Meade, who, as
private secretary and Under Secretary of State, had been his confidential
right-hand man for more than a quarter of a century. Sir Robert Meade, a
man of singularly calm and solid judgment, absolutely repudiated the myth
which spoke of him as a pleasure-loving man, who sacrificed business to
pleasure. Never was a greater mistake. “He enjoyed amusements but never
neglected business.” (Note by Sir R. Meade quoted by Lord Fitzmaurice.)
To the truth of those words I can myself bear witness.

A remarkable feature in Lord Granville’s character was his power of
self-effacement. Of this he gave evidence on two notable occasions.
The first was in 1859, when upon the fall of Lord Derby’s Government
the Queen, tired of the rivalry between Lord Palmerston and Lord John
Russell, with neither of whom she was in sympathy, sent for him and
desired him to form a Government. He and Lord Clarendon were both of
opinion that, unless he could secure the adhesion of the two, whose
bristles were up at not having been themselves sent for, they would
sooner or later make common cause against him, and so as he put it
himself in a letter to Lord John Russell, “as soon as I found that I
was an obstacle instead of a facility towards the formation of a strong
Government, I went to the Queen to ask her to excuse me from the task
which she had so unexpectedly and so graciously imposed upon me.” It
was unlucky; for the Queen, having sent for Lord Palmerston, Lord John
insisted as the price of his co-operation upon having the seals of the
Foreign Office, and that was a national misfortune, of which we are at
this moment (1915) feeling the full effects.[26]

The second occasion occurred twenty-one years later. In 1875, Mr.
Gladstone announced his matured determination to resign the leadership of
the Liberal Party. He pleaded that he was tired and that after forty-two
years of strenuous public life he was entitled to rest from his labours.
He hinted that more serious interests must occupy the remainder of his
life. He wished Lord Granville to become the leader of the Liberal Party.
Lord Granville declined to play the part of Elisha to his Elijah, but,
after many discussions, it was agreed that he should lead the party in
the Lords, and Lord Hartington should be the chief in the Commons.

Lord Granville never for a moment believed that learned theological
polemics with cardinals, the making of his soul, or even the ordering
of the dispositions for his own funeral, would satisfy the magnificent
activities of that titanic brain. Lord Granville was right. He had gauged
the situation with unerring instinct. So had Lord Hartington. The latter
felt acutely the false position in which he was placed; Mr. Gladstone,
although no longer leader, was undoubtedly the most dominant power
among the Liberals in the House of Commons, and without a rival when
Mr. Disraeli went to the Lords; consistency had never been one of his
merits, and, as a free lance, he could not but be a thorn in his nominal
leader’s side. His support could never be looked upon as a certainty; at
any moment he might be a hindrance, indirectly in all probability for the
most part, but perhaps on occasions, as actually happened on Sir Wilfrid
Lawson’s amendment to the proposal to call out the reserves in the
Turkish crisis of 1877, an active opponent, voting against his leader.
It is true that he afterwards “trounced” that extraordinary crank, Sir
Wilfrid Lawson,[27] but the mischief was done.

Some of Mr. Gladstone’s speeches all over the country were of the nature
to create difficulties for his party—or, at least, for its leaders—Lord
Hartington was chafing under the irritation, and his correspondence with
Lord Granville showed how irksome it was to him to retain a leadership in
the Commons under conditions which were, to say the least, hampering and
galling.

Nothing but the rarest and most disinterested public spirit would have
been equal to the self-sacrifice that was demanded of him. With what zest
he must, when occasion served, have drunk in the crisp air of Newmarket
Heath, far from the madding crowd of St. Stephen’s and from those cares
of office without power which are the curse of the “cold shades of
Opposition”—darkened in his case by the incubus of danger from within.

No one who was even on the fringe of politics at that time could help
feeling the greatest respect for Lord Hartington, but that respect must
be immeasurably enhanced by the publication of the letters in Lord
Fitzmaurice’s book. By nature a sportsman, a fine rider to hounds, a
good shot, keenly interested in racing, delighting in a rubber of whist
till bridge seduced his affections from the more venerable game,—had he
chosen to lead a life of leisure, his position by birth and by the power
of wealth would have enabled him to have spent his days happily, if
unprofitably, in congenial occupations.

He found, however, very early in life that better things were expected of
him. He still indulged in sport, but only as a pastime. He soon showed
that he could force himself into great industry, conquering the dullest
details of official life. In nothing was his quality better shown than
in the way in which he mastered the intricacies of foreign politics, in
which one would hardly have expected so bull-dog an Englishman to be a
proficient, and yet in which, as his letters show, he took the broadest,
soundest and most comprehensive view. In such questions, indeed, reading
between the lines we can see that what he deemed to be for England’s good
was entirely uninfluenced by party considerations. He was above all a
patriot.

When Lord Beaconsfield dissolved Parliament in 1880 and the collapse of
the Conservative party followed, the Queen sent for Lord Granville. For
the second time in his life he was invited to become Prime Minister of
England; for the second time loyalty to principle bade him refuse. Had
it not been for Mr. Gladstone either Lord Hartington or Lord Granville
could, without doubt, have formed a strong Liberal Government; but Mr.
Gladstone blocked the way; he distinctly refused to serve under either of
them, and they knew that any Liberal Prime Minister, with the tremendous
shadow of Mr. Gladstone in the background, must ultimately see his
party shattered after himself enduring the torments of Hades. In such
circumstances, the reversion of the leadership would be indeed a heritage
of woe. So the two men who had borne the heat and burthen of six years
of Opposition effaced themselves, and Mr. Gladstone once more came into
power. Lord Granville became Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Lord
Hartington went to the India Office, and in 1882 took command at the War
Office. Lord Hartington’s acceptance of office can only be regarded as a
sublime piece of self-abnegation.

Between Lord Granville and Mr. Gladstone there was, no doubt, some
measure of affection, though I am inclined to think that even in that
case it was rather prompted by a sense of political expediency and
respect for the statesman’s powers than by personal love. But Lord
Hartington would have been more or less than human, if after those six
penitential years any spark of personal attachment had remained. Nor was
he altogether a blind admirer of Mr. Gladstone’s oratory. Mr. Forster’s
_mot_ about that is historic: “Mr. Gladstone can persuade most men of
most things, and himself of anything.” Lord Hartington’s appreciation of
his speeches was, to my mind, even better: “Mr. Gladstone could never be
made to understand that people who listen to him and admire his speeches
don’t necessarily agree with him.” That was exactly the impression
conveyed to my mind by Mr. Gladstone’s marvellous power over language. It
was my luck later in life to hear some of his most famous speeches;—to
sit on the benches opposite to him when he brought in his last Home Rule
Bill. The Niagara of words, the overpowering cataract of eloquence,
stupefied and dismayed, but it did not convince me. In private life his
conversation was amazing. Several times he did me the honour to invite me
to dinner, and I often met him at other great houses; he would attack the
most abstruse technical subjects in the presence of experts and sometimes
laid himself open to attack; but on one of those occasions, when he
had had a rather heated argument with Tyndall, who would not “take a
licking,” Mrs. Gladstone came to the rescue of her lord and sent a little
slip of paper to his fierce opponent, “We never contradict Mr. G.”




CHAPTER XXIX

1870


These digressions are, I suppose, inartistic, but the death of Lord
Clarendon led me to speak of his successor, and so I have wandered
on—carried by memories that will not be denied. Gratefully and reverently
I wish to lay my humble wreath upon Lord Granville’s tomb.

Let me hark back, then, to 1870. On the 19th of July the storm burst
and war was declared. It is not for me to deal with the story of the
tragedies by which the world was shocked. I only touch upon history where
it is necessary, in order to throw light upon my personal sketches.

Towards the end of the summer the Prince of Wales invited me to go and
stay with him at Abergeldie. We arrived there, if I remember right, on
the 11th of August, and I remained among those lovely Scottish mountains
for nearly a month. It was quite a small, intimate party, for the
picturesque castle has not much accommodation. The romantic tower by the
Deeside is just such an old Scottish stronghold as Sir Walter Scott would
have loved to describe as the home of a Baron of Bradwardine, standing in
a very old-fashioned, unsophisticated garden, bright with late flowers,
distributed in Scottish fashion among fruit trees and kitchen requisites,
that it would be a crime to attempt to bring under the rule of a modern
gardener. On a small lawn there was one old tree—a plane, if I remember
right—under which I can still see the great Queen sitting when she came
to drink tea with the Prince and Princess, and insisted on having my
Chinese servant, Lin Fu, produced for her to see.

I have spoken of the Prince’s insensibility to fatigue. One night, or
rather in the small hours of the morning, the Prince told me that he
would be starting for the hill at 8.30 and bade me be ready to go with
him. Very sleepy I was when Lin Fu came to me at seven o’clock and very
unwilling to get up. However, by 8.30 I had breakfasted and was ready.
No Prince! 9 o’clock, still no Prince! Another hour and a half’s drowsy
waiting—at last down His Royal Highness came, full of apologies. For
once nature had taken her revenge; he had overslept himself. We started
off and had a capital day, the Prince killing a small Royal. We were,
of course, belated, reaching home long after dark, and were met by a
footman, saying that the Queen had sent for their Royal Highnesses to
dine at Balmoral, and I was to accompany them. The Princess had already
left, and it was evident that we should be long behind time; however,
we dressed with lightning speed and drove off. The Queen was already at
dinner. It was rather a trying ordeal for me, but her Majesty was most
gracious and put me at my ease. It was quite a small party; only ten
in all, at a round table, and the conversation was general. Naturally,
the chief subject was the war. The Queen constantly received letters
from the Crown Prince Frederick, which she used to send over to the
Prince of Wales, and he would read them out loud after dinner. They
were wonderful: the letters of a simple, chivalrous knight, without any
of that spirit of Junkerism which has eaten into the marrow of modern
Germany. He was a hero. And what a grand specimen of humanity he was
the last time I saw him at one of the royal weddings at Windsor—a noble
figure, resplendent in his white cuirassier’s uniform, carrying in his
hand the Field-Marshal’s baton, not inherited, not given, but won on many
a stricken field of battle. With him the proud old motto: “Allweg gut
zollern” lived.

After dinner everyone in turn was taken up to the Queen for a more
special talk. With the others whom she saw daily, the interview was
brief. She kept me longer. It was soon after the massacre of Christians
at Tientsing, and she was anxious to talk about it. I was able, of
course, to tell her a good deal that was outside of what was contained in
dispatches; but her knowledge of those was marvellous.

Although the outbreak had been in the main directed against the Roman
Catholic missionaries, it was quite as much an attack upon M. Fontanier,
the French Consul, who was one of the victims. I knew him when he was
interpreter to the French Legation at Peking. Combining piety with
bullying, he was a violent Ultra montane bigot, one of those Christians
who seek to propagate their cause by methods more really anti-Christian
than those of what they call “the heathen.” My only wonder had been that
he was not murdered long before. A man who would prove his Christianity
by kicking over into the mud of Peking the humble stall of a poor old
apple-woman, because it stood between the wind and his nobility, was
hardly to be pitied—and of that I was a witness. The poor priests had
in him but a sorry protector, a weak reed to lean upon. The Queen
listened with great interest. “I am afraid,” she said, “that sometimes
the missionaries are rather injudicious.” It was a revelation to me
that in the midst of the pressure of affairs so much nearer home, and
so appallingly important, the Queen should yet have found time to make
herself mistress of the concerns of the Far East. Her memory was amazing,
and it was that most precious quality which made her such a valuable and
sure guide to her ministers in matters of precedent and detail.

I had been at Balmoral once before, some twelve years earlier, when I
was staying at Invercauld, and, as usual, the neighbouring lairds and
their guests were invited over to a ball. It was fixed in my memory by an
incident trifling in itself, and yet not without interest as showing one
side of the Queen’s character—her great dignity. It was ill attempting
anything like presumption in her presence. A country dance was going on,
in which the Queen took part. There was a certain gentleman present,
dressed in gorgeous Highland array, who, after having had his turn and
made his bow to her Majesty, cheated, and, instead of taking his proper
place, tried to win the chance of dancing up to her a second time. The
Queen saw through the trick at once, and when the ambitious dancer came
up to her, stopped dead short and very quietly drawing herself up,
pointed to his proper place, and beckoned up the gentleman whose turn
it was. What the foolish man expected to gain it would be hard to say,
but he was known as a very pushing person, and what he did gain was a
setting down in the face of the whole company, which must have made him,
as America says, “feel mean.”

I doubt whether the Prince of Wales was ever more happy than he was in
his beloved Scottish home, in all the privacy of family life. There were
no foundation stones to be laid, no buildings to be opened, no addresses
from chained mayors. He had the best of deer-stalking, the sport of all
others which he loved, and in the evening a quiet rubber and the music
of the Princess. For two months an ideal existence—broken only by an
occasional visit, an occasional shoot over less familiar moors, a stalk
in a less familiar forest.

After Abergeldie I paid a visit to my old friend and colleague, Lochiel,
at Achnacarry, in a country still full of the mystic romance of the ’45;
wild mountains which echo to the centuries-old skirl of the bagpipes;
scenes that make a man understand the glamour of the old clan feeling
which lives in Canada, in Australia, all over the world; traditions which
send the kilted men to the front where Britain calls, just as in the old
days they left home and wife and bairns, rushing to the summons of the
fiery cross when the honour of their chieftain was at stake.

From Achnacarry I went to Dunrobin, where I was again to meet the Prince
and Princess of Wales, and where I was made welcome with untold kindness
for many years. When the Dunrobin visit came to an end I went with the
Prince to Polmaize, and later on, in November, was commanded to his
birthday party at Sandringham.

The remainder of the year was spent in preparing my “Tales of Old
Japan” for the press. I did not make much by the book, for I sold it to
Messrs. Macmillan for two hundred and forty pounds, and the materials
and illustrations cost me nearly, if not quite, that sum. Still, I
cannot complain; it was as much as they could be expected to give in the
circumstances, for the subject and I were both new, and it was impossible
to say whether we should catch the fancy of the public. It was a bold
venture on the part of the publishers.

The mistake which I made was in selling the copyright out and out. For as
it turned out, the book found favour, many editions were published, and
I believe that it continues to be printed to this day, although the book
first appeared forty-four years ago.

Mr. Alexander Macmillan was at that time the head of the firm, a man for
whom I entertained the highest respect and much affection, as I believe
did all those who had dealings with him; he gave me great encouragement,
and I feel that had that kindly Scot been less brave in accepting the
work of an unknown man, I might have had some difficulty in bringing out
the book. It is a satisfaction to know that he was no loser by his gamble.

       *       *       *       *       *

After the year 1870 I did no more diplomatic work. I did not resign
definitely until 1873, but in 1871 I was appointed once more to St.
Petersburg, and knowing that I could not afford so expensive a post,
I asked to be placed _en disponibilité_, and so became a gentleman at
large. I was very sorry when the time came for cutting off my humble
connection with Downing Street after fourteen very happy years and a
fairly adventurous diplomatic career. There is—or was—in the Diplomatic
Service a certain freemasonry, the great advantage of which was the
almost confidential intimacy to which the younger members were admitted
by the veterans of the profession, who always seemed ready to help in our
education. I am grateful to their memory for much kindness.

When I entered the Foreign Office, among the Princes of Diplomacy who had
laid down their arms, none could compare as a maker of history with Lord
Stratford de Redcliffe. It sounds a little inept to talk of laying down
arms when speaking of a diplomatist, and yet in his case the metaphor
is not so very inappropriate. He had been a fighting man all his life.
He fought his own Government and made them swallow his policy whole: he
fought the great Tsar Nicholas and we know how that ended: he fought
Mentchikoff over the Holy places and beat him as the lion in the legend
did the unicorn, and the poor unicorn had to run out of the town, give
up diplomacy and take to soldiering in the Crimea, where he was beaten
again. For half a century Lord Stratford had been always in the lists,
and now he had come home, full of years and full of honour, to pass what
was left to him of life in rest and peace. A scholar and no mean poet, he
had at his command the enjoyment of a learned leisure. He was, I think,
the handsomest old man that I ever saw. He was of middle height, straight
and still active. His features were such as a Pheidias would have loved
to copy. A brow like that of the Olympian Zeus was crowned with silvery
white hair; the blue eyes flashed clear and brilliant, his complexion was
as beautiful as that of a young girl.

As a chief we used to be told that he held his attachés in awe, but as a
host he was delightful—his conversation various and full of charm, as,
indeed, how could it fail to be, since he had seen and done so much? When
his face was in repose the expression was rather stern, and men realized
the great Eltchi who could dominate feeble sultans, terrify corrupt
pashas, and defeat the machinations which were always rife in that hotbed
of intrigue where so much of his life had been spent. I do not know
whether his answer when he was asked if he had read Kinglake’s “History
of the Crimean War” when it first appeared has ever been printed.
“Yes,” he said, “I have read that romance of which it has pleased Mr.
Kinglake to make me the hero.” In what anger would that august brow have
been knitted had he been told that the two Powers which, almost at his
dictation, fought in alliance to preserve Constantinople for the Turk,
would one day be sending their fleets to the Dardanelles in order to
turn that unspeakable reprobate out of doors, and perhaps hand over his
inheritance to the great-grandson of his bitterest foe? Wonderful is the
whirligig of time! I fancy that we should now read Sir Hamilton Seymour’s
dispatches recording his conversation with the Emperor Nicholas about
“the sick man” with very different feelings from those which they excited
in 1853. The great Tsar’s diagnosis of the invalid’s condition was not
far out, though the death agony had been long protracted. As the great
Lord Salisbury put it, “We backed the wrong horse.”

Sir Hamilton Seymour retired in 1858 and came home for good. His was
a great name in the Diplomatic Service and he was in high favour with
Queen Victoria, who asked him what had led him to send in a resignation
which she greatly regretted. “Well, Madam,” was the witty answer, “your
Majesty knows that I have kept the Royal Arms for many years abroad,
and so I thought that it was time that I should come home and set up a
family hotel of my own.” Genial, witty and charming, everybody liked Sir
Hamilton Seymour, and certainly, if he was a loss to the service of which
he had been one of the chief ornaments, London was a notable winner by
the change.

Those were the two great historic envoys to whom we neophytes looked up;
with them we joined Lord Cowley, of whom I have already spoken, and who
was still in harness. What a triumvirate! Lord Stratford, the masterful
embodiment of the old Greek definition of a great gentleman, καλός κ’
ἀγαθός (beautiful and good); Sir Hamilton Seymour, the man who had calmly
to face the wrath of the Lord of all the Russias—to most men as freezing
as the blizzards of the Ladoga Lake; and Lord Cowley, wise and sagacious,
holding the balance in Paris. At that time there were only two Embassies,
Paris and Constantinople, but St. Petersburg, though still only a
Legation, was quite of equal importance.

Among the younger members of the Diplomatic Service two were _facile
principes_. Julian Fane, brilliant, handsome, accomplished, a poet and
musician who died young, and Robert Lytton, by whose poetry Sir Thomas
Wade—one of the best critics I ever knew—set great store, who had not yet
reached the high offices in which, as Viceroy of India and Ambassador, he
afterwards gained so great distinction. Those two we neophytes worshipped
as demigods—worshipped them with the adoration of lower boys for the
captain of the boats and the captain of the eleven. Is there any higher
measure of admiration? Morier, who afterwards became famous as Ambassador
in Russia, was junior to these. He was a very able man. Perhaps his
greatest claim to a niche in the Temple of Fame lay in the jealousy of
Bismarck, who recognized in him a dangerous foe, a power to be reckoned
with.

Talking recently (1915) with a very eminent foreign ambassador, we
discussed these names and others—Lord Lyons and my old chief, Lord
Napier, among them. “Yes,” he said, “in your Diplomatic Service you have
had a series of very remarkable men.” He was right. To listen to such
men was the best of schooling; and of these who shall say which was the
greatest?




CHAPTER XXX

1871

DAMASCUS AND RICHARD BURTON


It was on a lovely morning in the early spring of 1871 that I stood on a
spur of the Antilebanon, the famous “Dome of Victory,” and looked down
upon the plains of Damascus. I must have been close to the very spot
where Mahomet—then a poor camel-driver—gazing upon the too-enchanting
scene, resolutely turned his back upon it, saying: “There is but one
paradise, and that is in heaven—there may be no second upon earth.” In
these days, when men are agnostics in legend as well as in religion, it
is the fashion to assert that he never uttered such words. Why? Is it not
more likely that he, the man gifted with the seer’s burning imagination,
the prophet that was to hold the hearts, and order the faith, of
countless millions for centuries upon centuries, should have spoken thus,
than that some mean biographer should have coined so lofty and spiritual
a thought? Why attempt the impossible? Why try to prove a negative in
order to destroy a lovely legend?

Out of a fairylike lacework of apricot trees in full blossom the towers
and minarets and cupolas of that “rose-red city, half as old as time”[28]
pointed to heaven. Abana and Pharpar were threading their silvery way
among the blushing orchards, as they did when Abraham pitched the tents
of his tribe of wandering Arabs under the shade of the forest trees
fringing the river banks. Small wonder that Naaman the Syrian, when he
thought of his own sweet gardens lapped by these crystal streams, should
have shuddered at the thought of plunging into the mud of Jordan! Grim
and grey, the walls told of centuries—of tens of centuries—of sacred
history and medieval legends, stories of patriarchs, of saints Christian
and saints Mussulman, of steel-clad Crusaders and turbaned Saracen Emirs.
Above all, closing my eyes, I seemed to realize the vision of Saul,
“breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the
Lord,” when the great light “shined round about him,” and he fell to the
earth, stricken blind. Who can look upon Damascus for the first time and
remain unmoved?

We had reached this earthly paradise of Mahomet’s, as was fitting,
through Purgatory. The ride from Jerusalem northward had been disastrous.

It was raining when we struck our tents outside the Joppa Gate of the
Holy City. Day after day the rain came down pitilessly, hopelessly. When
the rain ceased, snow took its place; we were half frozen and drenched
to the skin, the water made jugs of our boots and the saddles were like
sponges. Our tents were soaked through and our camping-grounds had
been quagmires. It was everywhere the same: Gerizim, the mountain of
blessings, was no kinder than Ebal, the mountain of curses. At Nazareth,
where we lodged in the monastery, the kind Franciscan monks gave us a
pan of charcoal in the hopes that its very inadequate heat might help to
dry our clothes. Worse and worse: the fumes made us very ill, and one of
our party fell down asphyxiated, and for a while looked like death; we
carried him out into the air, and to our joy a little colour began to
come into his cheeks.

Our poor servants! The dragoman and his crew, who tended the horses and
looked after the baggage, were the picture of misery; the very horses
hung down their heads, dejected and dispirited; and so we went on until
we were about half a day’s journey from Damascus, when we met a damp
and sympathetic native, who gave us directions as to a route by which
we should save some distance, and the baggage would join us a little
later. Alas! We took his advice and the proverbial short cut. We lost
our way, the light began to fail, and we wandered on and on in darkness,
our jaded horses stumbling at every other step over what seemed to be a
barren, stony desert. There was nothing for it but to dismount and lead
them. We had no food, and the dragoman was in despair. At last, when it
was near midnight, we heard the baying of dogs in the distance. There
was a ray of hope—where there were dogs there would be men of some sort.
Worn out with fatigue and hunger, we struggled on till we came upon the
black tents of a Bedouin camp. We had heard ugly stories of the tribes
to the east of Jordan, but they must have been set about by the Father
of Lies. Nothing could have been kinder than these nomad Arabs. Even the
dogs, which sniffed about our legs a little suspiciously at first, ended
by being quite friendly. The Sheik gave us shelter in one of his tents,
and told off three or four of his young men to tend our horses, while he
fetched us milk and a sort of damper. Utterly worn out, we lay down in
our sopping clothes on a comfortable litter of dry straw, and in a moment
were fast asleep. How soon I know not, I was awakened by something warm
and soft and wet snuggling against my cheek—it was the nose of a calf,
two days old, which with its mother shared our quarters, or rather, I
should say, we shared theirs, for we, not they, were the intruders.

When daylight came we were the objects of much curiosity: from the
Sheik’s own tent there were great whisperings and peepings of his
womankind. Doubtless our dragoman, after the manner of his guild, had
spent all the wealth of Eastern hyperbole in reciting our magnitudes,
with which his audience must have felt that our sorry plight was hardly
in harmony. With much gratitude we took leave of the good Sheik, and set
out again through the pitiless rain into the wilderness. Like primitive
wanderers we travelled on, trusting to luck; for many miles we rode
through the desolation, without meeting a soul from whom we could gain
information.

It was getting dark when once more we heard the barking of dogs, and so
guided, we reached the filthiest village that it ever was my misfortune
to see—Jabat el Hashab, we were told, was its name. It consisted of
some forty or fifty mud huts, standing in a sea of indescribable dirt
and offal; and in the middle of the village there was a huge heap of
putrid carrion, carcases of sheep, horses and cattle festering in the
mud. A half-naked, ragged, sick-looking creature, who appeared to be a
sort of headman among the fever-stricken inhabitants, came out of one
of the huts and after some parleying with our dragoman assigned to us
a lodging for the night. We should have had, perhaps, better quarters
in the caves of the troglodytes. The hut into which we were shown was
a sort of apology for a stable or byre. At one end were stalled our
four horses; at the other end, on a mud platform about a foot high, we
were to lie carpetless, blanketless. Horses fed on karoub-beans are not
sweet bedfellows; they, combined with the carrion heap, which was just
outside our door, not to speak of the neighing and tramping and the
occasional barking of pariah dogs, made the night hideous. The smell was
appalling—that, with the serried battalions of creatures by which we were
attacked on all sides, murdered sleep.

The hours dragged on slowly indeed, but when at last daylight broke we
felt that our troubles were over. The sun, which we had not seen for many
days, rose gloriously, and we were cheered by the news that four or five
hours’ ride would bring us to Damascus, where we should find our baggage
and cleanliness. And so, forgetting all our very real discomfort and
misery, we set out in high spirits. The darkest hour which heralds the
dawn was past! But when we met our men, we found that one poor fellow had
died of cold and exhaustion. It had been really a terrible journey. How
often in after days did I and my two travelling companions, now alas!
both gone, laugh over the miseries of that foul night!

“Unpack the boxes swiftly, O dragoman! Let there be no delay! Carry fresh
clothes to the Turkish bath; let us too, like Naaman the Syrian, wash
and be clean.” With joy we cast off the horrible sponges which we had
worn night and day for forty-eight hours. Dirty? Yes, and very densely
colonized by undesirable aliens. We threw them off with glee, and gave
strict orders that they should be burned—those orders were probably
never obeyed; more likely were the wretched rags sold to the local
representatives of the triple-hatted traders of Whitechapel. At any rate
we saw them no more.

But I am treading upon dangerous ground. “Eothen” has been written these
seventy years, and there is no room for any other story of travel in
Syria and the Holy Land.

The British Consul at Damascus was at that time my old friend Richard
Burton, the famous traveller and linguist, one of the most notable men
of my time. We had become known to one another a dozen years before, when
I was a clerk in the African, or as it was then called, the Slave Trade,
Department of the Foreign Office. In 1861 a fight, anthropological,
zoological, and biological, was raging round Du Chaillu’s recently
published book on equatorial Africa, and especially upon the question
whether the gorilla was a reality or only a fabulous animal, like the
“men whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders.”

All the great lords of science, such as Sir Roderick Murchison and
Sir Richard Owen—who backed Du Chaillu—were in the lists, and Burton,
always eager for a fray, whether with pen or sword, was on fire to go
and ascertain the truth. He was, however, a captain in the Indian army,
and so long as he remained a soldier the thing was impossible; so he
contrived to be appointed consul at Fernando Po, severing his connection
with the authorities of the India Office, who never forgave him. Thus
it was that he had to come to the Slave Trade Department of the Foreign
Office to be coached up in the recent business of his consulate, and I
was able to be of some little use to him in supplying him with documents
and information. We became fast friends, I having the greatest admiration
for him. Indeed, he was a man possessed of a great power of awakening
enthusiasm. He did all that he could to persuade me to go with him to
Fernando Po. There was a small office vacant there, which I could easily
have obtained, but happily my father put his foot down, and I remained
in Downing Street. So far as gorillas were concerned, Burton might as
well have stayed behind also, for he found none. Du Chaillu, however, was
able to make good all that he had said, and his story was confirmed by a
French expedition in the following year.

Burton, if not a great man, was at any rate a remarkable one; his
personality was striking; as he strode through the streets with his
crisp, staccato walk no one could help noticing him. He was not very
tall, probably not more than five feet ten inches, but his frame was that
of a Titan. His broad shoulders and highly-developed chest indicated
strength beyond the common. Until quite his last years he always looked
like an athlete in the pink of training. He was the only man that I ever
knew who could fire the old-fashioned elephant-gun from the shoulder
without a rest; his powers of endurance were simply marvellous, and
he could drink brandy with a heroism that would have satisfied Dr.
Johnson.[29] He had a fine, picturesque head, dark hair, burning black
eyes and features which would have been handsome but for the lower jaw,
which was too strong for beauty, and indeed almost tigerish, with a
ferocious expression belying his really kind nature. An accomplished
traveller, ignorant of fear, and in linguistic achievement almost
rivalling Cardinal Mezzofanti, who could preach in upwards of fifty
languages and dialects.

There was an article published in _Blackwood’s Magazine_ many years ago,
in which the writer proved to his satisfaction that any man who could
speak three languages must of necessity be a fool. Burton gave the lie
to that. Cardinal Mezzofanti, on the other hand, does not seem to have
been famous for intelligence in any province save that of the polyglot.
Indeed, he was said to be conspicuously stupid, and on one occasion he
gave evidence of his rare knowledge and equally rare ignorance in the
same breath. On making acquaintance at Venice with the Lord Meath of
his day, and being told that he was an Irish nobleman, he proceeded
to address him in the Erse tongue, in the full conviction that he was
speaking to him in the language current in his family.

As an official Burton was a failure. He was impatient of any control,
had no idea of discipline, and as for all conventionalities, he simply
scattered them to the winds. Says Thomas à Kempis: “Nemo secure præest
qui non libenter subest. Nemo secure præcipit nisi qui bene obedire
didicit.” Burton would never have made a good commander at that rate, but
he had probably never read the “De Imitatione Christi.”

As consul at Damascus he was continually in hot water, and his wife
was not the woman to make diplomatic relations easier. Her manner with
the Mohammedans among whom she lived, and whom it was her business to
conciliate so far as in her lay, was detestable. On one occasion I was
with her and one or two others in a very sacred mosque; a pious Moslem
was prostrate before the tomb of a holy saint. She did not actually
strike him with her riding-whip, but she made as though she were going to
do so, and insisted on the poor man making room for her to go up to the
tomb. What the man muttered I knew not, but I doubt his orisons having
taken the shape of blessings. I left the mosque in disgust. If actuated
by no higher motive, she should have reflected upon the harm which such
conduct needs must work upon her husband, to whom, to do her justice, she
was entirely and most touchingly devoted. It is only fair to Burton’s
memory to show how heavily he was handicapped. He was not responsible
for all the trouble that led to his removal a few months later from the
romance of the Damascus that he loved, to the deadly dullness of the
Trieste which he hated.

The day after we arrived in Damascus Burton came to breakfast. He was
excellent company, as of old, full of information and good stories of
adventures and stirring scenes in which truth was so richly embroidered
as almost to become fiction. One had to know one’s Burton, for the thing
which he loved above all others was to astonish, and for the sake of
that he would not hesitate to violate the virtue of the pure maiden who
dwells in a well. Take him with a grain of salt, which was quite what he
expected, and he was the best of boon companions.

We were dining together once at the mess of the 2nd Life Guards, the
guests of their then colonel, poor Fred Marshall. The conversation turned
upon feats of swordsmanship, and I happened to tell of the wonderful
skill of the chief executioner at Yedo, whom the dandy young Samurai used
to bribe to test their heavy swords upon the bodies of dead criminals; it
was said that he could put three corpses one on the top of the other on a
trestle and cut through the three in the small of the back at one blow;
this I have heard solemnly averred. “Ah!” said Burton, “it has always
been a matter of regret to me that I never quite succeeded in cutting a
man in two. I very nearly did once. I was alone in the desert and saw
that I was being pursued by three men; my horse was tired and they were
gaining upon me. As the leading man came up with me I drew my sword and
dealt him a furious blow on the shoulder, cutting him slantwise right
down to the waist; unfortunately I did not cut through the last bit of
skin, so the horse galloped off with half the man’s body hanging over the
saddle.”

“And what became of the other two Arabs?” somebody asked.

“Oh! they made off!” And then Burton winked at me. As for the young
subalterns, it would be hard to say whether their eyes or their mouths
were the more open. Burton had dared and done more almost than any man
living; that, however, was not enough for him. He was compelled to
invent more. But his little inventions were almost childlike in their
transparent simplicity.

After breakfast Burton took me to see Lady Ellenborough. So many stories
had been told about her and her strange life as the wife of an Arab
chief, that I expected to see a grand and commanding figure living in
a sort of tawdry barbarism, something like the Lady Hester Stanhope
of “Eothen,” and Lamartine; an imposing personage, mystic, wonderful,
half queen, half sybil—Semiramis and Meg Merrilies rolled into one,
ruling by the force of the eye a horde of ignoble, ragged dependants,
trembling but voracious. No two people could be more unlike. I found
Lady Ellenborough—Mrs. Digby, as she now called herself—living in a
European house, furnished, so far, at any rate, as the rooms in which
we were received were concerned, like those of an English lady; in the
desert, with the tribe, she would be altogether Arab. Her tables were
covered with the miniatures, knick-knacks and ornaments indigenous to
Mayfair—quite out of tune with Damascus.

The owner was like her belongings; a little old-fashioned, a relic of the
palmy days of Almack’s; dressed in quite inconspicuous Paris fashion,
and very nice to look upon, for though past seventy years of age, she
had the remains of great good looks and the most beautiful and gracious
old-world manners. She had been a fair beauty, but in deference to the
Arabs’ superstitious fear of the evil eye, her hair and eyebrows were
dyed black. She was very much interested in hearing about England, and
asked many questions about friends whom she had known in old days. She
seemed to think that the world had stood still since she left it, for
she spoke of people who, if not dead, were quite old folk, as if they
were still in the heyday of blooming youth. She asked after the old Lord
Clanwilliam—grandfather of the present Earl. How was he? “Wonderful,” I
said, “cutting us all out skating at Highclere two or three months ago.”
Lady Ellenborough looked puzzled. “But why should he not?” she asked.
“Well!” I answered, “you must remember that he is past seventy years of
age.” “Dear me! is it possible? That handsome young man!” Her old friends
remained in her mind just as she had known them—Lady Palmerston, Lady
Jersey, Lady Londonderry—still reigning beauties, queens of Almack’s. It
was strange to hear a delicately-nurtured English lady talking of her
life in the desert with “her” tribe. She told us how, the summer before,
a hostile tribe had raided them and stolen some of their mares, and
how, this next summer, they must ride out to avenge the outrage and get
back the lost treasures. There would be fierce fighting, she said, and
she must be there to nurse the chief should anything happen to him. “In
fact,” she added, “we have one foot in the stirrup, for we must start for
the desert to-morrow morning.”

We had a long talk, for she was a keen questioner, and then she insisted
on taking us to an adjoining paddock to see the horses. There we were
joined by her husband, Sheik Medjwal, the brother of the head of the
clan Mizrab, a branch of the Anazel tribe. The Sheik was not an imposing
personage—indeed, anything but one’s ideal of a great lord of the desert;
as a matter of fact, he was quite an ordinary, common-looking little man.
Nevertheless she seemed very fond and proud of him, and evidently in this
wild, nomad life between the desert and Damascus she had found a happy
haven of rest after the adventures of her stormy youth. When at last
she let us go she made me promise to go back to Damascus and visit her
again. When, after many years, I did go back, poor Lady Ellenborough was
no more. As we came away, I asked Burton whether she was safe with these
people. He assured me that she was quite secure, if only for the reason
that she had a few hundreds a year of her own—perhaps £1,500—and that
was, of course, a fortune for the tribe, and a brevet of safety for her.

There was living at Damascus at that time one man whom, above all others,
I was eager to see, and that man was the great Emir Abd el Kader. Burton,
who knew him well, was able to introduce me to him. Probably to the
present generation his name is hardly known; but in my boyhood the Arab
chieftain, who from 1832 to 1847 resisted army after army of the French,
was as famous as Saladin himself. Fearless as the steel of his own
scimitar, the soul of honour, with all the glamour and mystery of the
East wedded to the chivalry of the West. What a portrait would Sir Walter
Scott have painted of him!

In the early years of the nineteenth century Algiers was a nest of
pirates, the terror of the Mediterranean. When the French remonstrated
in defence of their coral fishers, who were in continual danger of being
robbed, murdered, or sold as slaves, the Dey haughtily refused to receive
their message, and even went so far as to strike their Consul. He had to
pay the penalty. But when at last the victorious French were masters of
Algiers, their work was but half accomplished. The Dey was beaten—the
pirate-ships were taken or destroyed—yet in the interior, in the
unmeasurable desert, the wild Arab tribes were gathering to defend their
liberties and independence which they saw threatened by the presence of
the Giaour on their coast. For centuries they had been under the yoke
first of the Romans, then of the Turks. The Ottoman power was now broken,
and they would be no slaves to the hated infidel. The moment for gaining
freedom had come.

There was one man in Mascara, Sidi Muhijeddin, who by his ancient
lineage, his valour and his piety was indicated as the supreme commander.
To him the united tribes addressed themselves, praying him to raise his
standard as their leader. He, being then in his seventieth year, pleaded
old age, which would unfit him for the struggle. But he added that his
third son, a youth of twenty-five, would be the most fitting man for
the supreme command. This was Abd el Kader, who, young as he was, had
already earned a reputation for learning, sound judgment and piety, and
to his hands the tribes entrusted their cause. They could not have chosen
better, though the ultimate issue was hardly doubtful.

Abd el Kader was born in 1807 and was educated by his father, whose
position at the head of a priestly family of princely rank was of the
highest. In very early life the young man had been forced to take
refuge in Egypt from the jealousy of the Dey of Algiers, and this led
to his undertaking the pilgrimage to Mecca which gave him the prestige
of the holy title of Hadji. He was but a youngster when, on his return
to his father’s house, he was called upon to face the gigantic task of
organizing the wild children of the desert. It must have needed no small
measure of tact and firmness to compose the jealousies of the rival
chiefs over whom he had to play the king; but he had a strong grip, and
he succeeded so well that for fifteen years he led his undisciplined
hordes against army after army, General after General, that the French
Government sent out in the vain attempt to sweep them off the face of the
earth. At first Abd el Kader had but some four hundred horsemen under
his command, but by degrees his patriotism, his chivalrous valour, and
the religious fervour of the Hadji, brought recruits in hundreds to his
standard and he was soon at the head of a mighty army.

Sometimes he won, sometimes he lost; his first great reverse was in
1837, when he was defeated by Marshal Bugeaud (whose fame, so long as
there is a bugler left in France, will be trumpeted in “La Casquette du
Père Bugeaud”) at the river Taafra; but nobody knew better than Bugeaud
himself that this was no decisive defeat and so he concluded a treaty
with the Arab chief which Vallée, the Governor-General of Algiers,
promptly took occasion to violate in a specially insulting manner. Once
more Abd el Kader drew his sword and the result was continuous warfare
and harassing of the French which lasted for another ten years, until
at last in 1847 Abd el Kader, whose power had been much weakened and
who was in Morocco, where the Sultan turned against him, surrendered to
General Lamoricière, and there was comparative peace in the land, though
Pélissier and St. Arnaud were never allowed to be idle.[30]

Abd el Kader was sent to France as a prisoner of war. I never saw him
there; but I can well remember a picturesque group of his captains,
dressed in their long white burnouses, with the camel’s hair fastening
to their flowing white head-dresses, riding in haughty unconcern and
thinking the unfathomable thoughts of Orientals, in the Place de la
Concorde.

Abd el Kader was sent to France, where he lived, of course, as a
prisoner, but treated with the greatest consideration, until in 1852
Louis Napoléon very generously gave him his liberty with an allowance
of £4,000 a year. He took up his residence first at Broussa and then at
Damascus, where during the Christian massacres of 1860 he played a noble
part, doing all that was in his power to protect the wretched Maronites.
Many a night he slept on the threshold of his house door with his drawn
scimitar by his side, that he, holy Hadji as he was, might be ready to
give succour and refuge to any hunted infidel who might pass that way.

For his services in those troublous times the French Emperor sent him the
Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour; right well had he earned it.

One more trait of the generous old hero’s character. When France at the
end of 1870 was bleeding at every pore, the Arabs thought that their
opportunity had come for a rising in Algiers. It was said that Abd el
Kader’s son and his people were brewing trouble. This roused the old
man’s wrath; he sent a fierce message to his son, in which he said that
in his youth he had resisted the French with all his might for many
years. For nearly a quarter of a century now he had been at peace with
them, and they had treated him as a friend. He would disown any son
of his who might take a mean advantage of their trouble and break the
honourable peace which he had concluded.

Spurred by memories of childhood and early youth, I was keen—mad-keen—to
see that wonderful warrior, a sort of Oriental Garibaldi whose life had
been one long romance. We were admitted at rather a shabby entrance door
with nothing to distinguish it from those of the neighbouring houses—a
dark passage led us into one of those delightful courtyards which are the
chief fascination of an Eastern gentleman’s dwelling. A marble verandah,
with oleanders in huge tubs placed here and there—in the open space the
music of a plashing fountain.

In this sunlit court the great Emir received us. He was then a man of
sixty-four years. He was dressed in a white robe in the old Arab fashion,
with the cord of camel’s hair tied round his head-dress. His beard was
shaved and dyed to resemble that of a young man, his eyebrows were
blackened, and his cheeks were slightly rouged. Before him stood one of
those X-shaped book-rests inlaid with mother of pearl with which Liberty
has made us all familiar, and on it rested a scroll in the study of which
he was deeply engrossed. It was a book on MAGIC! Wonderful still are the
ways of the East.

The Emir was not a tall man, not more than five feet seven inches or five
feet eight inches, as I should judge, in height. In his youth he must
have been singularly handsome, and indeed that was his reputation. Now
in his old age, and in spite of the little sacrifices to vanity of which
I have spoken, he had that rare look of distinction and race which is
perhaps never seen so conspicuously as in the highest type of Oriental
beauty. His was the figure and expression of a king of men; such must
have been the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the judges, the kings of Bible
story. His reception of us was the very poetry of good manners.

Burton had much conversation with him, for they were good friends. As for
me, after exchanging a few commonplace civilities, Burton interpreting,
I was content to watch and think, and throw my mind back many years and
across the seas to the desert, drawing pictures of the great gathering of
its children rallying round the standard of the glorious youth who was
to lead them in their vain but noble struggle for faith, independence,
and country. Presently our host, who, as a solitary, was eager for news,
began to question me about European affairs, and more especially about
France, which at that moment was in a state of chaos more terrible than
at any other period of the great war. He spoke of his former foes with
that generous sympathy and admiration which we might have expected from
his chivalrous nature. He even talked of gratitude.

In the middle of our conversation he clapped his hands and an attendant
appeared, bearing, not as I should have expected, _chibouques_ and
coffee—but a cup of fragrant tea; such tea as is drunk in Russia and in
China—never in England.

When we took our leave he thanked us for our visit, which he courteously
said had given him great pleasure; and indeed I think it may have
done; for his questions showed a considerable grip of politics and of
the convulsion by which the world was being stirred. When he spoke of
the war, his eye blazed with the fire of battle, and I could not but
feel how dearly even then he would have loved to lead a charge of his
white-cloaked warriors against the Prussian Uhlans. He and his sword
belonged to the past, his mind was shaped in a mould which the nineteenth
century has shivered to atoms and thrown away.

I had heard much of Abd el Kader, as I have related elsewhere, from the
Duc d’Aumale, that gayest of soldiers and raconteurs, who was never weary
of speaking of him with admiration. I could now fully appreciate the
sympathy of the European conqueror for his fallen Eastern foe; the Duc
d’Aumale, who to his finger-tips felt the poetry of the bivouac fire and
the rousing crackle of the trumpet, saw in the great Emir the highest
expression of that patriotic spirit of which he himself gave so royal an
example.

Damascus, “the eye of the East,” as Julian the apostate called it, could
never have looked more beautiful than it did on that day when Burton
led me through the old city and took me to see one or two of its famous
interiors. The great trees draped and garlanded with climbing roses,
the perfumed groves of oranges and citrons and flowering shrubs, the
sparkle of the sweet waters dancing in the rays of a delicious sunshine,
banished the dreary memories of sleet and snow and biting winds. It was
indeed a garden city. We went to call upon a friend of Burton’s, one
Abdullah Bey, who lived in an ancient house which in its palmy days must
have represented all the luxury of the Oriental magnate a set scene for
a story like that of the three ladies of Bagdad. Haroun Al Raschid,
with his Vizier Giafar, and Mesrour the chief of the Eunuchs, must have
knocked at just such a door on that most famous of their nightly rounds.

I half expected to find the one-eyed calenders seated in the court-yard
with our host, recounting their strange adventures amid the orange and
citron trees heavily scented and the oleanders not yet in bloom. The
pavement was of marble, the finest Persian tiles set in mosaic decorated
the walls, rugs, any one of which would be a treasure to a museum, were
strewn under the arcade of pure white marble, and of course there was
the gentle tinkling rhythm of a fountain. It was all lovely, luxurious;
the almost too voluptuous atmosphere of Eastern magnificence—but alas!
all decaying for the lack of a little care and a few piastres’ worth of
cement! It seems to be against the nature of the Turk to repair or even
to maintain. _Kismet_ explains all—where the Turk is there is decay. The
fatalist says, “It is decreed,” and is content.

Those were delightful days that I spent with Burton in Damascus; there
never was such another cicerone. We used to wander through the city
penetrating into all sorts of nooks and hidden places unexplored by
tourists; sometimes he would take me to visit some Turkish or Arab
friend of his, giving me a glimpse of that Oriental life to which only
such men as himself, versed in all the mysteries of faith and manners,
have access. In these he, the man who had accomplished the pilgrimage to
Mecca, was of course past master, and the light that he could throw upon
matters which are riddles to most men, even to old residents among Moslem
peoples, was a revelation.

It was when talking upon such subjects that he was at his best. It was
upon his knowledge of ritual and ceremonial that he chiefly relied for
the success of his venturesome pilgrimage. There are so many nations
professing Mohammedanism that an imperfection in language or accent might
be of small account. But the slightest error in ritual would have led
to immediate detection and death. One such occasion did occur. He was
detected, but it was not he that was killed. I asked him whether the
story was true; his answer was: “Well! they do say the man died.” But
then Burton would delight in making people believe that he had committed
a murder. If the tale was true it was a case of his life or that of the
spy. So he was perhaps justified.

One morning he came to me with a roll of MSS. under his arm. “There,”
he said, “you shall have the first sight of this.” It was the first two
or three chapters of his translation of the “Arabian Nights.” He assured
me that he had shown the translation to nobody. Privately printed, it
brought him in ten thousand pounds.

During several years after he was appointed to Trieste I saw him but
seldom, and only from time to time when he came home on leave. But in
1890 I spent part of the winter in Algiers, and found myself in the same
hotel with him in Mustapha Supérieur. He was then sadly broken in health,
having had some sort of stroke which made it difficult for him to walk;
but he used to hold a kind of Court every evening in the hall of the
hotel, surrounded by a number of visitors upon whom he could lavish some
of his most amazing tales.

There were times when he and I would be alone together, and then he
talked a great deal about his future prospects and consulted me as to
sending in his resignation and taking his pension. He harped upon this
over and over again.

At last one day he brought me a sealed packet, put it into my hands and
said: “There! you were the first man to whom nineteen years ago I showed
the ‘Arabian Nights;’ now you must look at this; no one else has seen
it; keep it under lock and key till you give it back to me.” I took it
upstairs. It was the much talked of “Scented Garden” which Lady Burton
afterwards at his death destroyed. I gave it back to him the next day.
“What do you think of it?” he asked. “Well, my dear Burton, if you really
mean to print that, I should advise you to wait till you have resigned
and secured your pension.” Burton was delighted with the answer. “Yes,”
he said, with conscious pride, “I think I have shocked Mrs. Grundy this
time.”

It was the old story! Always the uncontrollable desire to startle and to
shock! There is, or used to be, a club in Paris called “Les Épatants.”
What a fitting president of such a club Burton would have made! To
_épater_ was meat and drink to him.

After that winter in Algiers I never saw Burton again. He died a few
months afterwards and was buried at Mortlake; where with my friend, Mr.
Edmund Gosse, I visited his tomb last year. He lies buried in the Roman
Catholic cemetery, and his monument is in the shape of an Arab tent
which was raised to his memory by his friends. His wife is buried beside
him.

It is difficult to give an estimate of Burton’s character; it was a
network of contradictions; even physically, with the torso of a Hercules
and the hands of a young girl, he was a contradiction. Much that he
wrote should never have been written; there is no need to specify; at
the same time I believe, having good warranty for the belief, that his
life was morally without stain; he was a model husband, and his wife
adored him; he would proclaim himself an Agnostic, and he died in the
odour of sanctity under the protection of the Roman Catholic Church,
the confession to which his wife belonged; he wished to be considered a
savage, and he was one of the most tender-hearted of men. He was kindness
itself, and to his friends loving, faithful and generous in good service;
but how angry he would have been if one of those friends had dared to
accuse him of amiability! They would have been pulling down the whole
structure which he had been at such pains to build up,—they would have
been frustrating his lifelong endeavours to prove himself beyond the
pale. Only with those who did not know him did he succeed in keeping up
the imposture.

In spite of his marvellous talents and knowledge he did not achieve a
literary success; nobody could say that Burton was not a scholar in many
tongues; yet strange to say, his books lacked the quality of scholarship
and his English was poor. His talk, on the other hand, infinitely
superior to his writing, was learned, various and good to listen to. He
was an amazing companion. Of all his many books, only the translation of
the “Arabian Nights” achieved fame and brought in money. For that there
were adequate if not altogether blameless reasons. As a human document
the book will live.

       *       *       *       *       *

Once again, more than twenty years later, I was at Damascus. But what a
change those two decades had wrought! Over the old city, which, when I
first knew it, had kept through the centuries so much of the glamour of
the Biblical and Medieval East, the Philistines had passed the levelling
steam-roller of the nineteenth century. Turbans and flowing robes had
disappeared, swept into rag and bone shops. Yellow and scarlet slippers
had been discarded in favour of infidel patent leather boots with side
springs.

No longer did the fragrant fumes of Laodicea[31] cunningly mixed with
spices and apple paste curl up out of the bubbling _narghilehs_ scenting
the air. The long-stemmed _chibouques_, with their jewelled amber
mouth-pieces, were no more seen, and the _chibouqueji’s_ occupation
was gone. As in Bond Street, so also in “the Street which is called
Straight,”[32] the cigarette ruled supreme. When the Muezzin—blind lest,
as happened to King David, his impious eyes should fall upon the unveiled
mysteries of an adjoining harem—called the faithful to prayer from his
high minaret, it was but a mean, commonplace, tatterdemalion crowd that
assembled to his cry. The prose of the Giaour had banished colour and
romance out of the true believer’s life. I gazed upon the old buildings
and upon the holy places, trying to call up once more the feelings that
they had awakened in bygone days. But it was all in vain; the charm was
broken and the spell was gone. The mystic halo which of yore hovered so
hauntingly over the ancient walls had vanished like a ghost into thin
air, and the glory of Damascus had departed.

Of those remarkable people who had given such an interest to my first
visit, not one remained. The Burtons were dead, Lady Ellenborough dead,
Abd el Kader dead, and laid with his fathers, far away in Algeria. All
dead! as dead as Abraham and Eliezer of Damascus himself. I felt inclined
to cry with Jeremiah, “Damascus is waxed feeble.... How is the city of
praise not left, the city of my joy!” (Jeremiah, xlix., 24).

Sadly I left the gates, turning the horses’ heads westward towards the
Lebanon range, hoping to spend an hour dreaming over the past among the
stately ruins of Baalbek. But there too the sacrilegious profanity of the
nineteenth century had been at work: the Temple of the Sun was strewn
with sandwich papers, empty bottles bearing the scarlet pyramid which
is the sign manual of Bass, oily sardine-tins, fragments of biscuits,
half-smoked cigarettes; all the ugly litter of Ascot Heath on the
Saturday after the race week. I am an old man now, and my travelling
days are over; but I bless my stars that most of my wanderings were
accomplished while the East was still the East. I am happy to have seen
the eternal Sphinx and the Great Pyramid—now mere trysting-places for
picnics and flirtations—when they were still wrapped in the mystery of
the Pharaohs: when men still trembled at the very mention of the Afrits
and Jins who mounted guard over the buried secrets of King Solomon; when
men by black arts sought to raise the dead and even to summon Shaitan
himself, robed in all the majesty of terror.

It is another East that “calls” now. A thick varnish of sham Western
civilization has besmirched the picture; its poetry has been wiped out,
and I am content to sit by my fireside, humbly cultivating prose, like
Monsieur Jourdain.




CHAPTER XXXI

1872

GARIBALDI


Is it possible that I, a child of the nineteenth century, grown old
in the twentieth, ever paid a visit to Ulysses in the Island of
Ithaca? Sometimes it seems to me that I did once long ago achieve this
impossibility—or was it such a dream as fairies in their wanton play send
forth from the ivory gate to mock the children of men?

It happened in this wise. In the winter of 1872 the Duke of Sutherland,
Billy Russell[33] and I were at Genoa on our way to Egypt. The Duke was
a devoted friend and admirer of Garibaldi and longing to go and take the
old hero by surprise in his island home. We heard that a small coasting
steamer, a “tramp,” was about to sail for Caprera with provisions, mails
and what-not; so we arranged to go with her, the skipper undertaking
to stop for a while at Caprera and then take us on to Naples, where we
could join our ship for Alexandria. Our tiny Genoese tramp was a wicked
little craft, dirty and foul beyond belief, and with her wheezings and
snortings, her groanings and creakings, her paddles and engines, quite
out of the Homeric poem. We ought at least to have started on our Odyssey
in a felucca with a lateen sail; but we needs must be content to tempt
the rather treacherous sea prosaically, but in comparative certainty of
reaching our destination.

It was a lovely February morning which, after a night of poisonous
smells, some oily, some pungent, all unutterable, revealed the strip of
yellow beach which fringes the storm-beaten island rocks. It did not
take long to get out a gig, and nothing loth to be quit of our rather
pestilential surroundings, we hurried ashore. The Duke, eager to shake
his friend by the hand, almost ran up the few hundred yards of rock and
scrub which led to the house. Billy and I, who did not know the General,
and who were more or less in the position of the two gentlemen at the
feast of Nasidienus “quas Mæcenas adduxerat umbras,” were discreet and
more leisurely.

When we reached the house we found the two friends radiantly happy in one
another’s company, surrounded by a motley crew of secretaries, followers
and nondescripts who had attached themselves to the great man’s service,
and apparently lived with him and upon him. They seemed to be a ragged,
happy, devil-may-care crowd, with very simple wants—a blanket or cloak on
the floor; a little polenta; a goblet of wine hardly better than coloured
water; one of those long, thin, curly cigars with a straw in it, made all
the more rank and malodorous by being let out, stuffed into a pocket or
hat-band, and lighted again as desire might prompt. These were sufficient
to make happiness so far as lodging and creature comforts were concerned;
of washing, the less said the better. Full of fun, good humour, high
spirits they were, and of a truly Italian wealth of gesticulation. The
house was humble enough. Little better than a farmhouse, with no attempt
at ornament, no vestige of luxury—the unpretentious home of a gentleman
farmer. I could not help thinking of the contrast which must have struck
Garibaldi when, after his royal progress through London, he was received
by Harriet, Duchess of Sutherland, that most regal of dames, standing in
all her glory on the staircase at Stafford House.

But his soul was utterly simple and devoid of any love of show or
ostentation; the presence of anything of the nature of pomp or
glorification excited no emotion in him, while the absence of it raised
no regret. Italy would have given him anything. He might have lived
luxuriously in a palace in Rome, Genoa or Naples. He preferred his rock,
the humble homestead which he shared with those who loved him, satisfied
with little beyond the scanty fare which his island could yield.

[Illustration: GIUSEPPE GARIBALDI.]

Garibaldi received Billy and me with the gentlest courtesy; indeed
gentleness seemed to be the keynote of his character; this wonderful man,
whom those who knew him not were wont to look upon as a revolutionary
firebrand, had all the sweet tenderness of a woman, and yet there was
nothing effeminate about him, nothing weak or puny; when you spoke
with Garibaldi you felt that you were talking with a man. It was the
combination of this sympathetic kindness with the stern determination of
the born fighter that made him so irresistible as a leader, such a king
among men. As for me, when he turned those clear, honest eyes of his upon
me, I was under the spell, like everybody else. But when I listened to
the liquid music of his voice I was his slave.

How handsome he was! I have a coloured engraved portrait of him, a cheap
thing, but very precious to me, because of the inscription signed by him,
“Al signor Mitford la mia amicizia se vuol gradirla”—a cheap thing, but
so like. Long, fair hair, with a curling wave in it, just turning grey;
the fine complexion which none of his campaigns, none of his seafaring
had been able to spoil; the clearly-cut features and the soft, almost
womanly eyes. A cheap thing, but a Velasquez could not have given a more
living picture of the man. When I saw him he was dressed in the familiar
garb—the scarlet shirt, the grey flannel trousers; a lanyard round his
neck and a black silk kerchief tied in a sailor’s knot. No star, no
decoration; nothing to mark him as something above the humble folk by
whom he was surrounded, save that inborn distinction which, had he been
in rags, would not have forsaken him.

For a while we loitered about the outside of the house, while a
copious and most hospitable breakfast was being prepared. The famous
Francesca—the Penelope of Caprera—Garibaldi’s third wife, a peasant woman
who had been nurse to his grandchild—must have been taken aback by the
advent of three hungry Englishmen, for whom the possibilities of the
tramp had meant something very like starvation for many hours; but she
rose to the occasion and no guests were ever made more welcome. Meanwhile
we took notice of the surroundings; no pleasure garden, nothing of what
are called by dealers in houses “the amenities.”

One thing I did mark—a huge dog-kennel; what would Ulysses, what would
Ithaca be, without a dog? And on the dog-kennel some wicked wag had
expressed his anti-papal convictions by painting upon it in huge white
letters “CASA DI PIO NONO.” This jest, cruel if it had not been so
babyish, was none of Garibaldi’s doing—indeed, he probably never saw it,
for, crippled as he was with rheumatism, a confirmed invalid, and very
lame from the old wound in the foot which was shot through at Aspromonte,
he moved about very little; but the fanatic hatred which his unruly
followers showed to the Pope and the whole ecclesiastical body of the
Neri was quite irrepressible. He, if the truth must be told, shared their
views, witness his book “Clelia, ovvero il Regno del Monaco,” but he
laughed at their childish ways of expressing their hatred.

After luncheon—or breakfast—we found that such luggage as we had need of
was piled up outside the house, and on the top of it lay Billy Russell’s
rifle-case. When Garibaldi saw it, he asked Billy whether he would like
to go off for an afternoon’s sport. He would find the island overrun with
wild goats, from which indeed it took its name, and if he was in luck
might get a shot at a wild donkey. Years ago some donkeys had been turned
loose and had bred and multiplied, so that ass-stalking had now become a
chief sport of the island. Billy was delighted, unpacked the case and put
together the rifle, which became the object of the most eager curiosity
on the part of the secretary and the other retainers. They petted it and
patted it and stroked it as lovers, with the unctuous pleasure that a
company of fiddlers might feel in caressing the back and belly of a rare
Cremona violin. They prayed that before he started its owner would allow
them to try it. Of course he consented, a target of some sort was quickly
rigged up, and the secretary had the first shot. He made a bull’s eye.
“Un prete!” he shouted with lusty joy—a priest! The others caught up the
cry, and when they took their turn with the rifle, each successful shot
was hailed with the same exultant applause, “Un prete! un prete! ancora
un prete!” Garibaldi, who was standing by, shrugged his shoulders, and,
turning to me with a smile, said, “Sont-ils assez enfants?” They really
were like children, rather naughty children, whose naughtiness is often
so amusing that their elders cannot help laughing with, not at, them.

So Billy went off shouldering his rifle, as keen as a boy, burning to
stalk a jackass or bring down a goat. I wonder whether anywhere else in
Europe there exists such a sport; in Caprera itself, since the Italian
Government has purchased the island, it is probably by this time a thing
of the past.

[Illustration: GARIBALDI’S INSCRIPTION FOR THE PRINT OF HIS PORTRAIT
WHICH HE PRESENTED TO THE AUTHOR]

When our sportsman had gone, Garibaldi took me by the arm and hobbled up
and down with me on the path which made a sort of quarterdeck in front of
the house. He talked a great deal about England, for which he entertained
a sincere admiration and affection. He asked many questions about the
various people whom he had known there—questions which he felt that he
could put to me more discreetly than to the Duke, for many of his friends
had been among the Duke’s nearest relations—his mother, his brothers and
sisters. Suddenly he turned round and said: “Is it true—is it possible
that it can be true—that there are actually in England people who are
desirous of abolishing the existing order of things and setting up a
republic in the place of your monarchy?” I said that there certainly were
a few people who seemed to think that to do away with the monarchy and
the aristocracy and to set up a republic was the panacea for all human
ills. “They must be fools!” he said, and then went on very earnestly:
“Why, in England you have the finest form of government in the world—a
republic of which the President rules by the will of the people, and
being hereditary depends upon no political cry of the moment. With you
by virtue of this hereditary principle there is not the continual danger
of someone saying ‘Ôte-toi de là que je m’y mette’—and so no perpetual
risk of upheavals. I only wish that I could see Italy blessed with such a
republic; then I should be quite content.”

I thought this speech, coming from the man who was pointed at as the
incarnation of rebellion and anarchy, not a little remarkable. I can
hear him uttering it now, and can see the eager, beautiful eyes looking
through and through me as he spoke. Whatever Garibaldi said struck home,
he was so obviously and entirely sincere; his voice was the voice of
truth. We were talking in this way for a couple of hours or more, and
after the lapse of more than forty years, some of his very words are yet
ringing in my ears. England and Italy were the subjects upon which he
so fondly dwelt. He spoke much of the unification of Italy, of Italia
irredenta, and very modestly, very reticently, of the part which he had
played. He said: “There are many people who will tell you that Italy as
she now is was the work of Victor Emmanuel and Cavour, others give the
credit to Louis Napoléon, some even ascribe it to me. The truth is that
no one man, no two men, can claim the merit. We all of us had a hand in
it, we did our best and we succeeded.”

Garibaldi evidently had much sympathy with and admiration for Victor
Emmanuel, the Re Galantuomo whose bluff, soldierlike, sportsman’s nature
could not but appeal to him; with the wily, albeit successful, diplomacy
of Cavour he would naturally be less in accord, nor indeed did Cavour
behave generously to him or to his devoted soldiers, whom he refused to
incorporate in the army; but against Rattazzi his case was even stronger;
led on and encouraged by that statesman’s Machiavellian wiles he was
finally betrayed and the result was Aspromonte, when to their everlasting
shame the soldiers of Italy fired upon their liberator.

Still, in speaking even of these men he uttered no complaint, gave
no sign of bearing a grudge. He was far too noble for that. That
he would fight all men knew, if there should be good cause, but to
rail at an enemy, even at that worst form of enemy, the enemy in the
camp, was not in his nature. I am often asked what it was that most
impressed me in Garibaldi. The keynote of his character seemed to be
simplicity—simplicity combined with great dignity. There was about him
nothing of the _condottiere_, none of the swagger of the free-lance.
A spice and no more of Don Quixote; but we must remember that the Don
himself was a great gentleman, brave and tender and generous as a
gentleman should be.

At dusk our sportsman came home; very tired after a long clamber over
granite rock and fell, through scrub and brush of myrtle, juniper and
sweet-smelling bushes, without having seen the horn of a goat or the ear
of a jackass. He brought back a very unseductive account of the little
island. Garibaldi’s kingdom was a Lilliput about six miles long by two
broad; the highest Alp about seven hundred feet above the sea level; not
a river or even a brook to be seen. Had there not been delicious springs
and a few puddles, life would have been impossible for man or beast. Just
a barren rocky waste, a most inhospitable wilderness. Scanty cultivation
and few hands to work, had there been work for them; a dreary home
enough; but bare as it was, Garibaldi loved it, and it said more to his
heart than the Garden of the Hesperides with its golden fruit.

As the day waned our surroundings became more and more Homeric. When the
evening meal came, supper or dinner, we were really in Ithaca—Ulysses,
we three Englishmen, the secretary and a chosen retainer or two were
gathered together in a long, narrow room, with dark wooden wainscot and a
whitewashed ceiling, much besmoked.

At one end of the room and on one side of it were wooden benches; the
table was shaped like the room, and we sat round it in chairs. Presently
a huge, smoking dish was brought in; a roasted kid, with vegetables, and
very good it was. As we sat, curious, wild-looking beings, hinds fresh
from their labours, whatever they might be, with faces so brown that
they were hardly distinguishable from the woodwork, came in one by one
and sat down in silence upon the benches against the walls to watch the
chieftain and his guests eat. There they remained, smoking and scratching
themselves, till the end of the evening, by which time the room was so
befogged that it was difficult to see anything. Penelope, who was busy
with her hospitable duties and the preparation of an excellent _risotto_,
and other cates, did not sup with us, but came in afterwards, and sat
down at the table caressingly near to her great husband. Dressed like a
simple villager, she was not beautiful, but a good, honest woman of the
peasant class, evidently worshipping the hero to the comforting of whose
fading years she had devoted her humble life.

It was a strange sensation to sit there supping under the wondering
eyes of those mute peasants, much as the Kings of France used to eat,
watched by their subjects. The interest to these good men must have been
but meagre, for the conversation was in French, of which they had not
the gift. From time to time one or another of them would march out as
silently as he had come in, unnoticing and unnoticed, but some of them
remained with us to the end, when there must have been about half a
dozen left. We sat on and on, later than we should have done had not the
skipper of the tramp sent up word to say that he begged us to leave early
in the morning, otherwise he could not guarantee landing us at Naples in
time to catch our steamer for Alexandria.

So we stayed, luring our host on to talk of old times, of his many
moving accidents by flood and field, of his ambitions—not for himself,
but for his country—of the hopes realized and the hopes wrecked. Here
again I was struck by his generosity. His dislike of Louis Napoléon was a
matter of common knowledge, but when we talked of France and her recent
misfortunes, for “greatness once fallen out with fortune” he had nothing
but sympathy; in that very unlike some of the Emperor’s own men, whose
talk was apt to press with heavy ingratitude upon the stricken Lion.

Our symposium was so agreeable that it seemed a pity to break it up; it
was good to listen to Billy Russell and Garibaldi, the former one of
the best of talkers, the latter evidently delighted once more to have a
glimpse into a larger world than that of his tiny domain. The Duke and I
were content to sit and hear, until at last we felt that the grand old
General, an invalid at best, must not be allowed to keep from his rest.

The room which I was to occupy was a long, low, narrow sort of
store-room, at one end of which was a basin and a ewer of water, and
the invalid arm-chair of green leather framed in iron, now grown rather
rickety, the present for which the ladies of England subscribed when
their idol was wounded at Aspromonte. That was to be my bed. The floor
and all the various odds and ends in the room were covered with a rich
coat of dust. It was plain that Penelope and her handmaidens, if she
had any, had been too busy in the kitchen to pay any attention to such
details as the sweeping of a makeshift bedroom. I could have written my
name in large letters anywhere upon any scrap of furniture. But when I
put out my candle, hoping to sleep, then I realized I was not alone.
The dust was literally full of fleas; they attacked me in battalions; I
slew them by the score, but their widows and orphans and brothers came
on undismayed, undefeated, to avenge their deaths. Never save once, in
the cave of the Seven Sleepers at Ephesus, where I had taken refuge from
a storm, did I see such an army of hungry cohorts. I tried to comfort
myself by thinking of Eothen’s famous chapter and Thackeray’s “White
Squall,” when,

    “All the fleas in Jewry
    Began to bite like fury”—

but it was all in vain. I prayed for the morning, which was long in
coming. When at last I did arise and once more gripped Garibaldi’s
hand, the miseries of the night were forgotten in the thought, that to
me, humble as I was, it had been given for a few short hours to be in
sympathetic touch with one of those rare beings whom God, for His own
purposes, had anointed to be above his fellows. But it was sad to think
that this all too short visit, this happy experience, must fade into the
mist of memory like a dream, but not a dream sent out of those ivory
gates of which I spoke a while ago, but a dream from out of the horn
gates, a dream true and real, a very precious dream to be treasured for
all time.




CHAPTER XXXII

1873

WESTWARD


The _Russia_ (Captain Cook), the crack ship of the Cunard line which
carried me to America in the month of March, 1873, would not find much
grace in the eyes of the rich men who brave the dangers of the sea in
what are called “the floating palaces” of this twentieth century. There
were no conservatories, no swimming-bath, no marble architecture. On
the other hand, there was a greater sense of security. I have sailed in
one of these giant modern liners many stories (not decks!) high, and
I confess to having been appalled at the thought of what must be the
confusion in a panic on board a labyrinthine ship where a silken clue
is needed, even in a calm, to find the way to the dining-saloon. Oliver
Montagu, who afterwards commanded the Blues, was my travelling companion.
We spent ten delightful days in New York, forced to leave it all too
quickly, but carrying away with us memories of lavish hospitality and
kindness, busy, eager men, dainty dames and damsels, the preciousness of
whose beauty would have adorned far less gorgeous apparel than what they
were clad in; abundance of worldly goods, fine jewels, and a profusion of
flowers thrown out as a defiance to climate.

The one thing that seemed lacking at that time was any expression of the
highest forms of art. The Pierpont Morgans, Wideners, Fricks and others
have long since filled up that gap. But of the glories of New York it is
not for me to speak here. Our business there was to have what New York
itself calls a “lovely time”; that was _our_ business, and the kindness
of other people made it _their_ pleasure. The objects of our journey lay
farther afield, and so we followed Horace Greely’s famous bit of advice,
“Go West, young man, go West!”

On board the _Russia_ we had made friends with one of our shipmates,
Tom Nickalls, a very leading member of the Stock Exchange, a first-rate
sportsman and cheery companion, and he joined us in our expedition into
the Wilds. As a child he had known Chicago, which we were anxious to see;
he had still some friends or connections there, and it did not take much
persuasion on his part to induce us to call a halt.

The resurrection of Chicago was certainly the most colossal achievement
of human endeavour that ever I witnessed. It was on the 8th of October,
1871, if the legend be true, that Biddy Maloney’s cow, whisking her tail,
upset a lamp in a wooden shed in de Koven Street and started the great
fire. A fierce wind was blowing from the west, a long, hot summer had
dried into tinder the wooden buildings and lumber yards, and in a few
minutes the flames were raging beyond the power of man to control them.
Between that Sunday night and Tuesday morning an area of nearly three
and a third square miles was reduced to a heap of ashes. The winter was
near when building would be impossible. The most that could be done was
the work of clearance. Then, from the four winds of heaven, were blown
builders, carpenters, masons, bricklayers, glaziers. The statistics of
the building that began the first day that the frost was out of the
ground, the 15th of April, 1872, and ended on the 1st of December of the
same year, are simply amazing.

Excluding Sundays and counting two hundred working days, it was computed
that for each hour of each day of eight hours there was completed one
brick, stone or iron building of twenty-five feet frontage and from four
to six stories high. Was such a thing possible? Well, we arrived in the
spring of 1873, before the new building season was in full blast, and we
saw those buildings—that miracle—the Phœnix risen from its ashes.

When we had all taken our places in the omnibus and were just moving off,
bound for St. Louis, a rough man got in, carrying a small carpet bag—all
his luggage. “Whar does this hyar conveyance connect?” he asked. “It’s
bound for the St. Louis train.” “Waal! that’s not my road, but I guess
it don’t much signify.” “Why, where are you going to?” “Waal! I guess I’m
bound to go to the end of the rope, anyways,” said the man, changing his
quid with the utmost unconcern. There you have the true pioneer spirit
of America which opens up and fertilizes the limitless wilderness. Men
such as this who started years ago, without plan or prospect, “bound to
go to the end of the rope,” are now rolling in wealth, lords of countless
herds, exporters of grain, owners of rich mines, lumber kings, what not?
Strong thews and sinews, but above all a stout heart, must these men
have. Only think of what is implied by “the end of the rope.” No house
to live in, no friend, perhaps not even a dog, to speak to; food coarse
and often scanty; exposure by day and by night to sun and rain, wind,
snow and frost; cattle straying or attacked by wild beasts; thieving,
murdering and scalping Indians; a life of peril and exhausting labour; a
cutting of all home-ties; a dearth of all home news; fever and sickness
untended and uncared for. That is “the end of the rope.” Who shall say
that the man who succeeds—the survival of the fittest—has not earned his
success? But how many are bound to go under?

There was a very pleasant American gentleman in the same carriage with
us, with whom we made good friends. I had by that time learned enough of
the American language to say, offering him a cigar, “Do you use tobacco,
sir?” “Yes, sir,” he replied, politely accepting the offer, “I do. For I
smoke and I snuff and I chew; and if it had pleased Heaven to decree that
there should be a fourth way of using tobacco, I guess I should have used
it that way also.” It is always comforting to see such respect paid to
the decrees of Heaven.

St. Louis is, as cities go in America, quite venerable. Founded by the
Louisiana Fur Company in 1764, it was just ninety-nine years old at
the time of our visit. We had to spend a day there in order to deliver
certain letters, which were to procure us facilities for hunting further
West, and a most amusing day it proved to be. Our cicerone was a local
gentleman who had been warned of our coming, and was kindness itself.
Only one thing he expected in return, and that was boundless, literally
boundless, admiration of St. Louis and all that was in it. In our
secret hearts we were not much impressed; wealth, dinginess and dust
struck as the chief features of the city; but our friend found subject
for self-gratification even in the dust. “There, sir!” he seemed to say,
“I’ll trouble you to show me such dust as this in any of your played-out
old European cities.” He offered us refreshment in the shape of a bottle
of “Imperial,” a light, sparkling wine rather like perry. “This, sir, is
some of our native prŏdūce. How do you find it compare with the vintages
of Champagne? I am told that it is greatly admired at Paris, sir.” We
vowed that no such wine had been tasted since the days of Noah.

Our friend was gratified. In America the word good is insufficient;
you must say that everything is the best; less praise is an insult and
an ignorant insult at that. One thing he admitted that St. Louis had
never been able to achieve. They could defeat Reims and Épernay, but a
champagne bottle they could not make; some element was wanting which
would enable their glass to stand the pressure. So a roaring trade was
done in secondhand bottles from Europe.

We drove through the city and into the suburbs, composed for the most
part of neat little villas, some detached, some semi-detached, standing
in tiny gardens. Standing before a clean little white house with green
shutters, and adorned at the entrance with some plaster of Paris
statuary, our cicerone said: “These are the residences of our rich
townsmen. How do they compare with the mansions of your aristocracy in
London?” I was foolish enough to say that they seemed to me a little
small. He smiled a smile of pity at the insular jealousy of the Old World.

It appears that there was living at St. Louis an English gentleman named
Shaw, who, having made a beautiful garden, offered it to the town on
condition that it should be kept up at the public expense. The City
Fathers objected to this condition. “Yes, sir, they are skinflints,” said
our friend; “what we want here is about one hundred and fifty first-class
funerals, then we should get along fine.”

In the evening he dined with us and came to see us off at the station,
where he presented each of us with a large octavo volume of three
hundred and thirteen pages entitled, “St. Louis, the Future Great City
of the World, by L. N. Reavis. Fourth edition.” The book is full of
quotations of speeches by men of more or less, chiefly less, eminence in
which the audiences of St. Louis had been flattered to the top of their
bent. “Voices,” Mr. Reavis calls them, “prophetic voices.” I cannot
resist copying a choice bit culled from Mr. Reavis’ own writing: “And if
it be true, as I hope to establish, that St. Louis is destined to be the
great city of the world, the all-directing head and central moving heart
of the accumulated civilization of the great family of man, the facts of
her history will in time be sought for, by citizens and writers, with
an eagerness and a zeal never before called out by the interests of any
other city—not even of Jerusalem nor of Rome. Henceforth St. Louis must
be viewed in the light of her future, her mightiness in the Empire of the
world, her sway in the rule of States and nations. Her destiny is fixed.
Like a new-born Empire she is moving forward to conscious greatness, and
will soon be the world’s magnet of attraction. Here will be reared great
halls for art and learning; here will congregate the great men and women
of future ages; here will be represented some Solon and Hamilton, giving
laws for the higher and better government of the people; here will be
represented some future great teachers of religion, teaching the ideal
and the spiritual development of the race, and the higher allegiance of
man to the Angel-world; here will live some future Plutarch, who will
weigh the great men of his age; here some future Mozart will thrill the
strings of a more perfect lyre; here some future Rembrandt, through his
own ideal imagination, will picture for himself more perfect panoramic
scenes of nature’s lovely landscapes,” etc., etc.

We thanked our kind friend. The engine shrieked and we rolled away from
the future great city of the world into outer darkness, illuminated at
intervals by the blaze of burning forests.

We spent a day at Kansas City, not from choice, but because there
was no connecting train to take us on to Fort Wallace, which was our
destination. Kansas City, on the Missouri river, just below the mouth
of the Kansas river, was at that time a thriving town risen five and
twenty years earlier out of a howling wilderness and already boasting a
population of forty thousand and representing a capital of some twenty
million dollars.

Mr. Reavis, the author I have just quoted, says: “Its splendid buildings,
its many railways, its increasing wealth and sleepless enterprise,
challenge the admiration of the East as well as of the West.” A shot
fired from a long bow indeed! After reading such a description it was
startling to see pigs picking up a luxurious living off the plentiful
garbage strewn in that magnificent street the Broadway. The pigs were
very real,—the splendid buildings, creations of Mr. Reavis’ fancy which
must have been stimulated by hashish, for the deepest draughts of the
rather thin “Imperial” would hardly account for such flights as this.
“In the development of the great West, with its fertility of soil and
boundless natural resources, Kansas City is bound to play a prominent
part. She will grow with the growing country, increasing every day in
wealth and power; she will wear the golden crown and royal purple, and
be hailed Queen City of the Missouri Valley.” The prophecy was delivered
forty years ago. I hope it may have come true, and that the descendants
of the pigs of those days may now be suitably housed, grunting in
comfortable sties.

There was not much to do by way of killing time, so we wandered off at
haphazard towards the wood-crowned bluffs round the town; our steps, as
luck would have it, led us to Westport, a tiny village which was the
original trading camp from which Kansas City sprang. The sun was hot, the
road deep-rutted and dusty like the roads in the North of China round
about Peking. To our joy when we reached the village we saw “Lager Bier”
posted up over a little bar-room, so we went in thirsty and rather bored.

The place was kept by the oldest inhabitant, a very aged German of whom
nothing was to be seen save only a portentously thick red nose; the rest
of him was hidden by a grey military great coat and cap, which seemed to
grow out of a great shock mass of grizzled hair and snuffy beard, that
probably no comb or brush had disturbed for years.

Below the nose was a voice coming from no visible opening, and the voice
uttered a jumble of German and English, most perplexing. The room, dirty,
shabby, squalid, was hung round with portraits of the old Emperor
Wilhelm, Fritz the Crown Prince, Bismarck—rude representations of German
triumphs, ending in the surrender of his sword by the Emperor Napoleon.
At the back was a door, opening for company’s sake into a shop next door,
kept by another old German, a gunsmith by trade, as dirty and snuffy as
his mate. When the two old gaffers found that we could speak to them in
their mother tongue, how pleased they were! Immediately their tongues
began to go like mill-clacks, telling us of the old days when they came
out as pioneers, and drove a roaring trade with the Indians. The old
gunsmith assured us that he might have retired upon a comfortable fortune
long ago, but he had stuck to Westport like a limpet to its rock. He had
become used to the rough outpost life, in which he had grown old, so he
set up his son in trade, and rubbed on as before in the days when the
young out-growth of Kansas City “noch nicht anzudenken war.”

Presently the two old fellows grew more confidential and let out what was
probably their true reason for remaining here, belief in the existence
of a hidden treasure somewhere hard by, a treasure all in gold buried by
the early traders, Mexicans and borderers, under terror of attack from
the Indians. Happy the man who should light upon that treasure! For him
there would be no more living by the sweat of his brow under the curse of
the first sin, but a restoration to a garden of Eden with trees bearing
sausages for fruit, streams flowing with Lager Bier, the air laden with
the perfume of never-extinguished canaster.

There is to me something infinitely touching in the memory of these two
old cronies, wrapped in one another, hugging their friendship, their dirt
and their superstitious belief in the hidden gold. They had well passed
the allotted span of life when I saw them—they must have been long since
gathered to their fathers. Which went first? How fared it with the other?

Kansas City was proud of its press. There were four daily papers
published in English and one in German. I cannot honestly say that,
whether regarded from the point of view of literature or as providers
of news, they could claim any merit worthy of “The Queen City of the
Missouri Valley.” Their columns were in the main stuffed with abuse
of each other and a certain amount of padding of the giant gooseberry
order. Their powers of vituperation were remarkable. The _Kansas City
Times_, speaking of a rival, says: “For a low down, contemptible and
insignificant journalism we award the palm to the _Kansas City Journal_.
Its editor’s lack of decency is only equalled by his mental poverty.” The
_Topeca Commonwealth_, speaking of a Mr. Griffin, says, “He is a dirty
liar, a malicious libeller and a large-sized and highly-scented skunk—Mr.
Griffin has not been heard from yet on this somewhat pointed argument.”

Buffalo hunting—I suppose I ought to say Bison hunting, but I keep to the
name made famous by Buffalo Bill and others—was one of the chief objects
of our expedition. The Kansas and Pacific Railway hung out most tempting
pictures of sport in the Wild West—all their stations had buffalo heads
as advertisements with prodigious pictures of railway trains charging
herds of myriads—“verra awkward for the coo.” In the afternoon, Mr.
Weston, an Englishman in the employ of the railway, came to see us.

It was early in the year for the trek northwards of the herds which had
migrated to the South before the winter. However, Mr. Weston sent a
telegram of inquiry down the line, and the happy answer came back from
Fort Wallace, “Buffalo been seen within forty miles of this place.” So to
Fort Wallace we determined to go.

We started at nightfall and ought to have reached Fort Wallace in about
twenty-four hours, but the line was obstructed by the breaking down of
a goods train, so we had to undergo some thirty-two hours of very real
discomfort, in the company of rowdy gamblers, the curse of those days
in the West, women of no doubtful character and squalling children. The
spitting of the gamblers was a fine art. During the day-time there was
no consolation of fine scenery, for we were travelling through that most
dismal wilderness the blooming prairie—of the night the less said the
better.

Travelling through the desert was something which no one will ever see
again. The march of civilization has created a revolution in the whole
aspect of the West. Cities have sprung up, farm steadings have been
built, and the vast expanse which I have seen black with the wandering
buffalo is now covered with waving crops. The buffalo has been improved
off the face of the earth, only bred here and there in artificial
reserves as a curiosity.

Forty years ago, in that dismal waste, at distances of about forty miles,
were log huts occupied by one man, where the engine pulled up to drink;
between them not a dwelling—not a tree—a few sage bushes—a sort of dwarf
cactus—hardly a blade of grass—the abomination of desolation. How in
this wilderness, this boundless desert with a round horizon, animal life
contrived to sustain itself was a mystery. Vast herds, probably millions
of buffaloes, travelled north from Mexico in summer and back again south
in the autumn. There were antelopes and coyotes (a sort of wolf), skunks,
squirrels, here and there horses that had run wild; of birds—larks,
vultures, blackbirds with glorious yellow breasts, prairie chickens, wild
ducks. Then there were the pretty little prairie dogs, the tiny owls and
the rattlesnakes—the three said to live together in amity in the same
holes. The beasts and birds had company, the lonely railway man in the
log hut had but himself and his thoughts.

Governor Lowe, who was British Minister at Peking, told me a capital
story of how the famous Senator Wade, who was Senator for Ohio,
travelling West found at one of these solitary huts an Ohio man, who at
once recognized him, shook him by the hand and said, “Why, Mr. Senator, I
am right pleased to see you!” The Senator thanked him for his welcome and
answered, “But what in the name of wonder are you doing here?” “Well, Mr.
Senator, I’m going to tell you. This is going to be one of the greatest
cities in the world.” The Senator failed to see the possibilities of that
one log hut in the wilderness. “Yes, sir! There is a river runs about
seven miles from here, and we air calculating to divert the course of
that river and bring it along here. Then we shall get a few first-class
families from East and West to come and locate here and this will become
a great town, giving the go-by to New York, San Francisco, and may be
even to London and Paris. All that is wanted here, sir, is a little water
and good society.” “Yes,” answered the witty Senator, “and the same
remark applies equally to Hell.” The “We” of the solitary eremite speaks
volumes. In it lies the keynote of American confidence and success.

It was freezing hard at 5.30 in the morning of the 25th when we left
that miserable train with its unholy crew of undesirables, having had
to pass a second night on board instead of comfortably in Mr. Ruggles’
excellent inn at Fort Wallace. He was sitting up for us, for we had
warned him of our coming; he struggled out of that yawny state of coma
which is engendered by a night of arm-chair and tobacco and showed us
to our rooms. A few pails of ice-cold water washed away the memories of
those two wretched nights, and a delicious breakfast of milk, new laid
eggs and buffalo steaks made new men of us. Mr. and Mrs. Ruggles were
really delightful people. She, poor lady! was a very different person
from the landlady whom one would imagine presiding over a prairie hotel.

What a strange life for a highly educated lady, whose mind had been
formed by travel and stored with memories of London, Paris, Venice,
Florence, Rome! That she should turn cateress for a rough crowd of
engineers, navvies, teamsters and hunters! We were truly in a land of
surprises where your tavern-keeper may be a polished gentleman and the
chief of the State an ignorant boor. After breakfast we held a council
of war, Mr. Ruggles being the chief spokesman. After some debate we
agreed by his advice to enter into negotiations with one Mr. Dodge, the
boss of an “outfit” about thirty miles off, to which he was going to
send out a team with flour for his men—in that “outfit” there was the
unique advantage of a small tent—in any other we should have to lie under
the stars; a glance at a frozen fountain which the sun’s rays had not
yet been able to melt decided us. The tent was the great lure, and we
determined to join Mr. Dodge’s outfit if he would have us. Mr. Ruggles
soon settled that for us, and at ten o’clock, having crammed a few
necessaries into a bag and put our rifles together, we started under the
convoy of Andy Phillips, teamster, hunter, and partner in some sort with
Mr. Dodge.

By this time a whole troop of idlers, hunters and navvies had crept out
of sundry very dirty blankets and buffalo robes in which they had been
huddled in back rooms and outhouses, and we had to run the gauntlet of a
volley of chaff as we sallied forth. “What will you take for your skins?”
“What’s your contract for heads?” They did not believe in us nor in our
smart-looking Rigby rifles. It is astonishing how suspicious men of a
certain class are of cleanliness; dirt alone is to them workmanlike. The
last thing I heard was: “Wal! Wal! Wal! Damn me if them fellers don’t
think they’re gwine to hunt bufflers! Wal! Wal! Wal!” The contemptuous
way in which this was said was greeted with loud applause and laughter.

Our way lay for a while eastward along the line of the railway, and then
we struck off north on to the open prairie.

Andy Phillips, our teamster, was a character. A small, wiry man, dressed
in a flannel shirt worn so long that it had become a second skin; an old
coat many sizes too big for him, tied together at the breast by a bit of
string, the sleeves being rolled up so as to give his hands a chance of
coming out; a rusty old billycock hat, much indented and of uncertain
brim. The fierce sun and wind and frost, weather and dirt, had tanned
man and clothes to one uniform neutral tint; no human being could say
what might once have been the colour of either. In conversation he did
not shine, but when directly challenged to give an opinion he had an
oracular way of delivering short, jerky sentences, prefaced by a turn of
his quid and a spit, which was very imposing. There was no temptation to
talk, though, for the cart was springless and the prairie not as smooth
as a billiard table, so we were most mercilessly jolted and pitched about
whenever the mules broke into the semblance of a trot.

Very amusing were the prairie dogs, quaint little beasts living in
townships of small mounds, arranged like ant-hills, with so much method
and regularity that one might fancy that each little colony had its
mayor, municipal officers, laws, ordinances and rules of etiquette. As we
drew near, the inhabitants—tiny yellow beasts something between squirrels
and weasels—would turn out in strength, taking their stands each on the
top of his house, with tails most impertinently cocked, barking, yapping,
scolding with absurd little voices to warn us off; but as soon as the
cart came close to the village, there was universal panic and _sauve
qui peut_; the braggarts with one consent would take headers into their
holes; not a prairie dog to be seen until we reached the next township,
where the same comedy of threats, rage and terror would be played anew.

For many miles we jolted along without seeing anything in the way of game
to shoot at, but at last we came within a few hundred yards of a couple
of antelope. Their backs were turned to us and they were feeding up wind,
so Oliver got down and tried to stalk them, but there was not covert
enough to hide a shrew-mouse, let alone a big Blue well over six feet;
one of them curled round and caught a sight of him as he was crawling up,
and they galloped away into space.

The only chance of getting near to the pretty, shy creatures would be
when the nature of the ground, where the prairie is cut up into divides
by dry water-courses (canyons), would enable the hunter to creep up to
them unseen, or bring him upon them suddenly without his having had any
previous inkling of their whereabouts. Although the eye stretched to the
bounds of a round horizon, the irregularities of the prairie sometimes
hid objects close by, or on the next divide.

In this way, later in the day, Oliver got another chance at an antelope;
it was a long and difficult shot, and though he made practice good enough
to draw a note of admiration even from the undemonstrative Andy, he was
unsuccessful. As for me, the only chance I had all day was at an old grey
wolf-coyote, who was lumbering along at that awkward, shuffling pace
which seems so slow and is so fast. He was more than two hundred yards
off and both my bullets struck the ground so close to him that he gave a
great terror-stricken jump each time;—unfortunately very near does not
count at any game. We stopped for our mid-day meal at a creek where we
found a pool of stagnant water from which we scared half a dozen mallard;
we had some bread and cold meat, and Mr. Dodge had thrown into the cart
a can or two of preserved strawberries and oysters—the former tasted of
tin and sugar, the latter of tin and salt, but friend Andy enjoyed them
mightily.

As soon as the mules had fed and rested, Andy gave the signal for a
move. “Now then, you fellers! If you’re ready I’m a-gwine to move on,
and I guess we’ll beat the sun an hour.” The further we advanced in the
prairie, the more frequent became the carcases of dead buffaloes, some
already blanched skeletons, others more recently killed, torn and mangled
by wolves and vultures. Even had economic and agricultural reasons
not determined their extermination, there would probably have been few
buffaloes left by now.

The slaughter was on a huge scale. Old bulls and young, even cows heavy
in calf were slain mercilessly, often in places where the skins could not
be removed, so that the massacre was profitless and without excuse. The
hunters seemed to be bent on killing the goose that laid the golden egg.
A good bull’s skin was worth two dollars, a cow’s skin one dollar; to-day
I am told that a bison’s head in good condition is worth a huge sum to
decorate the walls of some sporting club in the West.

Our day was not quite blank, for Oliver shot a jackass rabbit, a sort of
big hare with huge, flapping ears; the expanding bullet made mince-meat
of it, but we picked up the pieces and were thankful for them at
supper-time. Towards the end of the day Oliver’s keen eyes spied some
huge black lumps in the distance—buffalo! We were mad to go after them,
but Andy looked at the herd and then looked at the sun, which by this
time was low in the heavens, turned his quid in his mouth, and saying,
“I guess a man feels pretty bad if he’s lost on this yar prairer after
dark,” whipped up his mules and drove on. Next day, when I was being led
on for mile after mile by a herd, I knew how wise he had been. But at the
time I hated him and his prudence; I thought he lacked keenness. Andy not
keen! I soon had occasion to know better.

The day was fast waning when we reached the camp. How the same word
may mean different things! In the East the camp used to mean three or
four luxurious tents comfortably carpeted and furnished with iron beds
and arm-chairs, pitched under the shade of trees by a running stream,
a bustling dragoman ready to conjure tea, coffee, cigars, anything and
everything out of his saddlebags. Here a fire of dried buffalo dung near
a creek of muddy water full of little red worms; the air poisoned by the
smell of drying hides, out of which one, rather better seasoned than the
others, would serve as a bed. The boasted tent turned out to be nothing
more than a bit of torn canvas stretched on three poles, open to the four
winds of heaven. This was our “camp” in the West.

By and by “the boys” came in from hunting; a tatterdemalion crew, ragged,
unkempt and very, very dirty; it would be difficult to imagine a rougher,
wilder-looking lot. Throwing down their rifles on the iron-hard ground
as if they rather wished to break them, they set to work to prepare
supper, taking little or no notice of us. There was Captain Vogel, the
boss of the outfit, Prairie Bill, his partner, Mexico Bill and two minor
satellites who spoke not, and apparently had no names worth mentioning.

The dung fire was quickly made up again; one man set to work to make
damper in a skillet; another cut some lumps of buffalo flesh off a
huge carcase and threw them into a frying-pan; a third boiled some
roughly-ground coffee in the foul water of the creek—this, with the
fragments of Oliver’s jackass-rabbit, constituted our feast. No whisky
or other spirits, for the hunters only drank when they went into a
settlement to spend and gamble away their hard-earned money. Then, to use
their own expression, they would “make the place howl.”

As the pannikin of coffee went round, our hosts became more communicative
and began telling us hunting stories garnished with all that wealth of
imprecation for which the language of the Wild West is justly famous.
One story of Prairie Bill’s I jotted down in my pocket-book that night.
Prairie Bill was a tall, active fellow, as lean as a lath, all wire and
muscle, with keen, beadlike, black eyes and an impudent little snub
nose—a regular dare-devil. Looking at him I felt half tempted to believe
that his story might be true. By way of preface he swore steadily for
several seconds, and having thus relieved his mind, he spat furiously,
and was then in trim to proceed.

“If you fellers want to hear how I once killed a bloomin’ buffler,
blarm me to most etarnal smash if I don’t tell yer.” (oath). “I’d been
a-follerin’ a herd all the ruddy day without gettin’ near enough for a
shot, when all on a sudden a big bull drops astarn and looks me in the
face. Wal! I fired and hit him, and darn me if I didn’t plug him seven
times out of my Spencer rifle without killin’ him.” (Many oaths.) “When
the big brute see as I hadn’t got a shot left, darned if he didn’t put
his ruddy head down and come bang at me.” (More oaths.) “Guess I felt
considerable mean, you bet! But there warn’t no time for thinkin’, and
as he comes a tearin’ up, ready to give me Hell, I steps on one side,
and ketchin’ hold of his mane, swings myself on to the back of him.”
(Oaths of attestation.) “Wal! there I was, darn me, a-ridin’ on the ruddy
buffler across the ruddy prairer. What did I do then? Why I pulled out my
old knife and kep’ a-stickin’ of him in his ruddy neck till he dropped
down as dead as General Washin’ton. And next day darned if me and the
Captain here didn’t skin him.”

Prairie Bill ended as he had begun, with a long volley of oaths. His
mates joined in, swearing in sympathetic chorus—all except Captain Vogel,
whom I never heard utter an oath.

The night became cruelly cold; if we sat to the leeward of the fire the
smoke and dung ashes were blown into our noses and eyes; if we faced it
our backs were frozen; our legs were cramped sitting tailor fashion, and
altogether we were so uncomfortable that we soon were glad to turn in.
We lay down dressed as we were on hides stretched over the hard, frozen
ground, with our rifle-cases for pillows. The camp dogs barked, and the
men grunted, muttered and snored. Sleep was fitful; we were all rather
crusty and dismally uncomfortable, for we were huddled together under
that imposture of a tent, packed as tight as a box of figs.

There was no temptation to play the sluggard and I rose as soon as the
first streaks of daylight tinged the blackness of the east. On my way to
the camp fire I met Andy Phillips, trembling with excitement. He had been
along the creek to look after his mules, which had been so badly tied up
the night before by Mexico Bill that they had strayed. He had not found
them, but he had seen a herd of buffalo. When he saw me he hurried up
and hissed out laconically, “Bufflers t’crik!” “Do you think we can get
at them?” “Guess we kin.” I ran back for my rifle and off we started. As
we went along Andy told me that in the herd which he had seen there were
several very fine old bulls; they had come down to the creek to drink at
a point about a mile and a half off, and he did not think they would move
far away. So we got down into the winding creek, which in most places was
quite dry, the banks being high enough to hide us; so Andy felt confident
that I should get a shot. I was by no means sure of myself, though, for
I was nervous and in a fever of excitement, madly eager to get a head,
and my hands were numbed and stiff from the blistering cold iron of the
rifle.

When we reached the spot indicated by Andy I could almost hear the
beating of my own heart. Very cautiously we crawled up the bank and
peered over. Not a sign of a buffalo to be seen! I was greatly vexed, not
thinking for the moment of the inequality of the levels of the divides,
and forgetting that the whole herd, not having been disturbed, could
hardly be more than half a mile off at most. “The critturs is bound to
be close by, anyways,” whispered Andy as he marched off again up the
creek. He knew the sort of ground and stopped at a place where the bank
commanded a view of the next divide, and sure enough there the herd was,
thirty or forty great awkward, shaggy, black monsters, quietly feeding
about five hundred yards off. Luckily the creek here took a sharp turn
which enabled us to get within closer range, the wind not betraying us,
and when next we put our noses over the bank the nearest beasts were not
much more than a hundred and fifty yards from us.

As we were watching them the biggest bull, a fine old fellow with a huge
black mane and a long goat’s beard, detached himself from a bunch of
cows and stood stretching himself and cocking his tail. There he stood,
broadside on to me, a glorious chance. “Take the old chap as is a-cockin’
his tail,” Andy whispered in my ear, but there was no need of the hint;
before the words were well out of his mouth the rifle had spoken and the
dull thud that followed told that the bullet had struck home. “He has it,
by the Lord!” shouted Andy. No apathy about him now! The old bull bowed
to the shot, took a pace or two to the front, then turned to the right,
tottered for a couple of seconds, sank down, and rolled over stone dead,
shot through the heart. The rest of the herd, when they saw their chief
stricken, gathered round him for a few moments, as is their wont at the
sight of blood, and when the prairie rang with the noise of his fall, an
almost metallic sound, trotted slowly off, Andy sending a parting shot
after them in vain.

As for me, I was too much excited over my first buffalo to think of
firing a second shot. I ran up to get a close look at him. We measured
the distance; one hundred and seventy yards. Andy, highly delighted at my
success, made short work of cutting off the head, which now hangs in my
hall at Batsford. We were now pretty hungry and went back to breakfast in
great glee. How good the muddy coffee and the tough buffalo steak tasted!

When we reached the camp we found that the others had naturally
breakfasted and started. Oliver with Prairie Bill as his aide-de-camp,
Tom Nickalls under the guidance of young Mexico. It was just as well for
the latter that he was out of the way when Andy turned up, or there would
have been an explosion in the matter of those strayed mules. Captain
Vogel had stayed behind for me.

My second campaign under Captain Vogel was very different from the first.
We had to face our quarry on the open prairie, stalking was out of the
question, trickery and deceit the only means of getting near the poor,
stupid brutes. We had to play at being buffaloes. It was not a difficult
game. The two men sticking so close together as to show no daylight
between them, and hunching their backs, had to lead a horse equally close
behind them. The innocent simplicity of the bison was quite taken in
by the stratagem, and even in the springtime, when the beasts were the
most suspicious, the hunter had no difficulty in getting to within two
hundred yards of his prey, provided the wind were right. Should the herd
be puzzled, they would not move off except for a little way—slowly and
stopping from time to time. When they stopped the men must stop too. By
degrees the beasts would become more familiar, and so it was generally
easy to get a shot at from one hundred to one hundred and fifty yards. In
the late summer and autumn they would allow themselves to be approached
quite near, so that the hunters could shoot them as easily as cows in a
byre.

Captain Vogel was a small, lean man, not strongly built but toughened
by hard work and a strenuous life. Long elf-locks of fair, sun-bleached
hair fell over his shoulders; his beard was thick and tangled. He had
bright blue eyes which always seemed to be looking into the distance—a
hunter’s eyes. His features were regular and showed breeding. He was clad
in a nondescript suit of grey rags and a battered old wideawake; his
arms were a heavy three-barrelled rifle, the only one of its kind that
I ever saw—and a hunting-knife. A strange man, as gentle as a woman, a
paragon alone among the hunters of the West, for he neither swore, nor
smoked, nor chewed, nor drank spirits, nor gambled; not even when resting
during a holiday in some town. As his name implied, he was of German
origin, but he had no knowledge of his birth tongue, though he remembered
hearing his father and mother speak it when he was a child. Born in the
Eastern States he came West many years ago, a sickly youth, condemned by
the doctors, and took to hunting in search of health. He found it in the
keen air of the prairie. Now sickness and pain were strangers to him, and
fatigue had lost its power over him. His little three-year-old mare, his
solitary pet, followed him about like a dog. His one ambition was to set
up as a farmer somewhere in the Wild Country when he should have saved
money enough.

In 1873 times were not so good for the hunters as they had been. A year
ago a bull’s skin was worth three dollars and a cow’s two; now prices
had gone down. A bull’s skin only fetched two dollars and a cow’s one.
He calculated his expenses at a dollar and a half a day, and he and his
partner, Prairie Bill, could each reckon on six dollars a day profit. He
would soon have made his little pile, for he banked all his money instead
of gambling. Were his parents alive? Had he any friends left? He did
not know; it was long years since he had had a letter. He could give no
address; here to-day and there to-morrow, a wanderer on the face of the
earth. Last year he fell in with a man from his old neighbourhood, but
the man was too drunk to understand or to tell him anything, and the next
morning he had gone away nobody knew whither, vanished into space. With
such talk we went our way into the prairie to play at being buffaloes.

We had not gone very far when we spied a large herd in the distance;
they were moving towards us, evidently having been disturbed, for every
now and then they would turn to look behind them. It is the unwritten
law of the prairie that no man shall interfere with a herd that is being
followed by another hunter, so we stood still and watched. In a few
minutes we saw Oliver and Prairie Bill come over the horizon and on to
the same divide with the buffaloes; then there was a general stampede and
Oliver, leaping on to his horse, gave chase.

Captain Vogel was much excited and annoyed, for in his judgment his
partner had bungled the hunt badly. All of a sudden the hindmost beasts
of the flying herd stopped, and Oliver, jumping off as quick as thought,
dropped a cow just as she was galloping off again. It was a pretty sight,
made all the more so by the mirage which threw a mist over the distance.
It was like a vision seen in a dream; a ghostly hunter pursuing phantom
buffaloes over a desert shrouded in the dim mystery of an opalescent haze.

After the death of Oliver’s cow the herd broke into two divisions, the
one trekking off to the south, with Oliver and Prairie Bill after them,
the other moving northwards; it would have been no breach of etiquette
had we followed these, but they were a long way off—a mile or more—and
Captain Vogel preferred going forward in the hope of finding a herd that
had not been “skeered.” For some three or four miles we travelled wearily
on under a blazing sun, our feet sinking in the dry, hot dust, without
seeing anything. At last a change in the level brought us in sight of
five huge old bulls lying down about four or five hundred yards away,
and close to them, on the left, three antelopes peacefully feeding. Here
was a rare piece of luck! I would rather have one antelope than all five
bulls, so we crept slowly on towards the left, but we did not dare try to
get very near lest they should take fright and gallop off. We halted at
between two and three hundred yards from them and lay down, waiting for
one to turn his side to me.

After what seemed an age of suspense, the psychological moment came. I
drew a long breath, took a very deliberate aim, and pulled the trigger.
To my bitter disappointment the bullet just grazed the antelope high in
the shoulder. Two inches lower and I should have had my trophy. In an
instant the three pretty creatures were skimming like swallows over the
horizon. I was glad to think that my intended victim was only scratched.

Startled by the crack of the rifle the five buffaloes struggled up
in their ungainly fashion and looked uneasily about them, but seeing
nothing that they considered dangerous—for the clever little mare knew
her business too well to budge an inch, and we were acting our strange
part most convincingly—they only shuffled lazily a few paces off, we in
pursuit, slackening our pace when they turned, hurrying when they went
forward. In this way we soon came within easy shot, and I dropped the
biggest of the five, the great clumsy creature rolling over and over and
raising a cloud of dust. We both thought that he would get up again, but
having watched him for a minute or two and seeing his legs stiffen, we
accounted him dead and went on after his mates, who had pursued their
slow course, in no wise affected by his fate. Just as I was preparing for
a second shot we heard a terrific noise and there was the big bull whom
we had left for dead coming on at full gallop in the best of health, with
his head down, snorting and blowing up the dust, which looked like smoke
coming in two volumes out of his nostrils.

We knelt down and prepared to receive cavalry, thinking that he was going
to charge us; but his only thought was to rejoin his faithless friends,
and the five monsters, now thoroughly frightened, fled into the mirage
and we saw them no more. The mirage was very baffling; it was one of the
difficulties of the hunter. In the first place, for some unexplained
reason, it made all the beasts very wild, and in the second it made a
field glass useless. This, however, did not affect the native hunters;
like the Indian shikari they preferred to trust to their own eyes and
were afraid to use a glass lest they should weaken their eagle sight.

On the furthest divide that we reached we found an enormous herd; the
prairie was black with them. Captain Vogel reckoned that there must have
been over two thousand heads. Playing the same game I shot three fine
bulls without difficulty or adventure. Two others, for which we could not
stop, would be gathered next day. Vogel shot very badly, not killing a
single beast, but he said himself that he did not pride himself so much
on shooting as on getting up to game; of that craft he certainly was a
master. I could not help thinking that his wonderful old three-barrelled
shooting-iron had something to do with the missing. One old bull led us
a fine dance, making us follow mile after mile without ever giving us a
broadside chance. Further and further on we followed him until at last
we had to give him up as a bad job, for we were between ten and twelve
miles from camp and we had twisted and turned in so many windings that
Vogel declared that he did not know where we were. A terror! We were
parched with thirst and my feet were sore from walking in the hot dust.
There were, of course, no landmarks, so we had to guess at our homeward
route with the help of the sun and my pocket compass.

A long, anxious tramp brought us to a divide where Vogel recognized some
carcases which he had skinned the week before; close by he knew of a
puddle of water at which he and the mare drank luxuriously; I could not!
It was full of live insects and green vegetable matter, so I preferred to
carry the leather which had once been my tongue into camp rather than run
the risk of that poisonous draught. Four or five miles more brought us
into camp where Tom Nickalls was blazing away with his rifle at a prairie
chicken which was fool enough to stop until a lucky shot cut its head
off. Oh! the joy of a drink of almost clean water out of Tom’s flask!

Captain Vogel and I were the last to come into camp. On comparing notes
we found that our bag consisted in all of nine buffalo—not counting the
two of mine that Vogel would be sure to find and skin the next day.
Oliver had killed four, Tom Nickalls one, I four. Not a bad piece of
work, as even the hunters were obliged to confess, and they are not given
to paying compliments. Our guns were greatly praised. Prairie Bill, with
picturesque and highly ornate additions, declared that they had only one
fault, and that was that they did not belong to him.

Andy, mourning over his mules, not yet found, stopped in the midst of
a torrent of abuse addressed to young Mexico, to swear that “them guns
shoots wicked.” “You may bet your pile on that,” said Captain Vogel. The
men said, however, that our rifles were too light for their use in the
autumn time, when the big slaughter takes place. At that time they needed
weapons with plenty of weight of metal so that they should not heat
readily. That great sportsman and rifleman, Lord Elcho (the late Lord
Wemyss), once laughed at my Rigby as being too heavy. I wonder what he
would have said to Captain Vogel’s three-barrelled cannon.

After all, this buffalo hunting was tame sport; one day of it, just for
the novelty of the thing, was all very well, but neither of us would
have cared for a renewal of the experience. The vast dreariness of the
prairie offered no charm of scenery, none of the poetry of deer-stalking
celebrated by Scrope. The American bison, fierce as he looked, was not
a savage, revengeful enemy like the Indian buffalo; even when wounded
he rarely turned upon his man. Hunting the creatures on horseback, and
pistolling the master bull, which was the sport of the United States
officers garrisoning the outlying forts, must have been fine fun. But for
that we had not the necessary mounts. Had I had another day I should have
confined myself to going after antelope; that, at least, was an exciting
sport, needing great wariness and patience.

For the first time in my life I on this day saw a herd of wild
horses—perhaps I ought to say “horses run wild,” for we are told that
there is no such thing as an indigenous American horse, so these
must have been runaways, even though their savage state might have
been decades or even centuries old. They followed us cautiously at a
respectful distance, attracted, probably, by the charms of the good
little mare. Mean-looking animals they were, in the poorest of condition;
their manes and tails floating wildly in the wind; one, at least, must
have been a recent recruit escaped from some ranche, as the saddle galls
on his back proved. Horses that have once been broken in and have gone
back to savagery and liberty are, so the hunters told me, the shiest of
all.

Another sight new to me was that of the “sun-dogs”; luminous clouds with
prismatic colours hanging round the sun like beautiful satellites, a sure
sign of coming storms and foul weather.

Round the camp fire that night the battles of the day were fought over
again, but the main talk was about Indians. For the last week or two all
America had been ringing with the murder of General Canby and the Peace
Commissioners by the Modoc Indians of the lava beds on the borders of
California and Oregon; but the news, already stale even in Europe, had
not yet reached the prairie, and we were the first to tell the story to
the hunters. They were fiercely indignant, but far more so against the
Government than against the Modocs. Even the wildest men, the men like
Prairie Bill who held that “an Indian was never in his proper place till
he was six feet underground,” were bound to admit that the Government
treated them shamefully. The policy adopted at that time was, as the
march of civilization advanced, to keep driving them back further and
further on to reservations, as the parcels of land allotted to them
were called. In return for the rich territory of which they were robbed
the Government supplied them with blankets, arms, ammunition and other
necessaries, which were distributed by the “Indian Agents.”

There were few warmer berths in the gift of the ministry than that of an
Indian Agent. There were practically no limits to his powers of robbery,
and right good or bad use he made of his opportunities, charging for
first-class double blankets and supplying the poor Indian starvelings
with half blankets of the thinnest and meanest description; and so it
was with all other stores. In a few years the agent was a rich man. The
Indians knew they were being swindled, but there was no redress, and one
fine day there would come a day of reckoning such as we were discussing.
Then the soldiers must be called out to wreak vengeance which is not
consummated until many valuable lives have been lost; for what chance
have drill and discipline and regular troops against the cunning of
savages fighting on the vantage ground of such a stronghold as the lava
beds. “Why don’t they call out the hunters?” said Prairie Bill; “guess
we’re used to trackin’ varmin!”

Wherever there were gathered together ten men who live by honest labour,
whether they were merchants in New York, miners in California, farmers
or hunters on the prairie, one heard the same abuse of the Government,
the same tale of bribery, extortion and corruption. These men, with whom
we were talking, were rough and wild and uncouth, but they were not bad
fellows, as Mr. Ruggles testified, and they earned their bread hardly and
honestly by the sweat of their brows. Nay more! They had a fair right to
complain, for they were the most likely men to suffer by the policy of
a Government which provoked the savages by robbery, and then furnished
them with arms to avenge their outrages. It was the scalp of the hunter
and not that of the Minister at Washington that was in peril. The Indian
agent was surely one of the most striking products of universal suffrage.

The beautiful “sun-dogs” were true prophets; the wind got up in the night
and beat fiercely upon us as we lay under our tattered awning; towards
the dawn the rain came down and soaked us through and through. Tired
as we were after our long tramp through the dust of the desert sleep
was impossible. The break of day was a relief. No news of Andy’s mules.
He had been after them all the day before, but found no trace of them;
perhaps he had not sworn quite sufficiently at young Mexico. We were
obliged to start and there was nothing for it but to borrow Vogel and
Prairie Bill’s horses, Andy hoping that as his beasts were in the habit
of travelling backwards with skins and forwards with stores, they might
have made tracks home to their stables. By this time we had become quite
friendly with our hunters and they bade us a touching farewell. I often
thought of them afterwards. Did Vogel ever succeed in stocking a farm?
What became of that reckless but very attractive scamp, Prairie Bill? And
young Mexico, what was his fate?

When we reached Fort Wallace with two heads and having accounted for
eight other beasts, for Tom Nickalls shot one on the way home, the
hunters and loafers who had chaffed us so unmercifully on our departure
changed their tune. No praise was too high for us, we became heroes, and
our once despised rifles were passed round, handled and admired by every
idler about the place.

Mr. and Mrs. Ruggles were delighted at our success. They too had had a
little excitement during our absence, for a thief had broken into the
house and stolen all Mrs. Ruggles’ jewellery and trinkets, keepsakes
which are more valuable than ever in this dreary banishment. The man had
got in through the window of Oliver’s room and happily not noticing some
of our boxes, in which there were a few articles of more or less value,
made straight for the poor lady’s apartment. In these parts a man had to
take the law into his own hands. Ruggles soon found out who was missing
from the settlement, and starting by the next train caught the rogue at
a station down the line. Revolver in hand Ruggles offered him his choice
between disgorging and having his brains blown out. He chose the former,
so all was recovered save a dollar or two, which had been spent in drink.
The thief was a man well connected, who had gone down in the world,
wrecked by drink and debauchery, and was now a navvy on the railroad.
Towards eight o’clock in the evening the train carried us westward.

We afterwards learned from United States officers that our expedition
had been a little imprudent. The Sioux Indians, though not absolutely on
the war-path, were in an uncomfortable state of ferment. The news of the
Modoc massacre had spread among the tribes in the same mysterious manner
that tidings spread through the bazaars of India, and there was a general
feeling of uneasiness. At no time would it be pleasant, as we knew from
our hunter friends, to meet Indians on the plain; at any rate they would
try to steal, a game at which they were very successful, especially when
the booty consisted of horses or cattle belonging to white men. All’s
well that ends well. We saw no Sioux, our scalps were tight upon our
heads, and there is a certain tinge of pleasure in the idea of having
incurred an even remotely possible danger!

April 28th.—Could there be a more delightful change after the dreary
monotony of the desert than to lift one’s eyes on waking to the radiant
snows of the Rocky Mountains?

We were hardly prepared to find Denver City so pleasant a place, and,
above all, so quiet and orderly; for in the Eastern States we had been
led to believe that we should find one of those wild, lawless settlements
of the West—models from which Bret Harte painted “The Luck of Roaring
Camp” and other masterpieces, in which the six-shooter makes such a show.
Indeed, in a New York paper I read an advertisement which ran as follows:
“An hotel with bullet-proof walls has recently been erected at Denver
City, so that a gentleman can sit and listen to the shooting going on in
the next room without being incommoded by any feeling of danger.”

The East was in those days very hard upon the West, and, as I thought,
very unjustly; for there were vigilance committees everywhere, and Judge
Lynch—an obvious necessity in wild young communities—made short work of
sweeping out ruffians who misbehaved themselves. Indeed, the West might
boast that whereas the Tombs, the famous prison at New York, was full of
murderers, who might or might not be punished as politics might dictate,
in Denver or Virginia City justice marched with no lame or uncertain
foot.

We found a capital hotel, kept by one Charpiot, a Frenchman; gifted
with the genius of his race for cooking and serving things nicely, he
was known to fame as the Delmonico of the West; we had not been fed so
well since we left New York. What a pretty little town it was! Now I
suppose it has grown out of all recollection, but at the time of which I
am writing (1873) it had but twelve thousand inhabitants. However much
it may have spread it must still have its glorious view of the Rockies,
with the famous Pike’s Peak as the chief feature. The air was so pure and
clear that though the great chain was fifteen miles off the mountains
seemed quite close, as though a man might walk there under the hour.

Although the town only began to be built in 1853 it was already a
bustling, thriving little place. I wrote in my journal: “Being the centre
of a rich agricultural and mineral district it does a brisk trade, and as
the prosperity of Colorado is developing itself with giant strides Denver
City is likely to continue its rapid growth.” I fancy that I might have
worded my prophecy more strongly.

We found the town in a fever of excitement. President Grant with his wife
and daughter had arrived and there was to be a grand reception in the
evening at the house of Governor McCook, where the President was staying.
But the great attraction was the advent of a number of Indians who had
come in from their “reservation” to see the great Father. Their chief,
old George Washington, as he called himself, was a small, thick-set old
man, with a most villainous expression, heightened by dabs of blue, red,
and yellow paint, which gave quite a fiendish look to his cruel mouth
and cunning little bear’s eyes. Long, straight elf-locks of coarse black
hair parted in the middle, and the parting painted vermilion, fell over
his shoulders. He wore a chimney-pot hat, decorated with red and yellow
streamers, a short blue coat with military buttons; necklaces and other
ornaments of coloured beads; two revolvers; leather trousers with tassels
all down the sides; such was the noble savage of Fenimore Cooper, the
modern representative of Uncas and Chingachgook, as I saw him.

His crew were as ugly and evil-looking as their chief. Some carried bows
and arrows in leathern quivers slung at their backs; not one was without
a revolver. Looking at their stunted, shapeless bodies, it was hard to
say whether they were men or women—“bucks or squaws” as an American
would put it. When we came upon them in one of the chief streets they
were bartering furs. The man in the shop said they were quite harmless.
“Harmless, yes,” said a bystander; “so’s snakes when their teeth is
drawn. But I kinder guess it’s the sort of harmless you don’t want to be
too near when you ain’t got a six-shooter about you.”

       *       *       *       *       *

April 29th.—When we left Denver City President Grant, with Mrs. Grant
and the Princess Royal, as the American wags called her, was in the
train, and for glory’s sake a crowd had assembled at Cheyenne to salute
the great man, soldiers and an ear-racking band being on the platform.
The President was no doubt a man who had rendered signal service to his
country, but he was not of the quality which would find favour with the
culture of Boston or the refinement of New York. The more delicately
strung of his countrymen looked upon him as common and boorish. The
second Duke of Wellington used to tell a good story of him. The Duke
always felt it due to the name of his illustrious father, when any famous
warrior came to England, to offer him an entertainment at Apsley House.
When General Grant came to England he was accordingly invited there to
dinner. When he arrived and saw the portrait of the great Duke, he could
find nothing more appropriate to say than: “Ah! I have commanded more
Divisions than that man ever commanded Regiments, and yet what a lot of
talk there has been about him.” “Yes,” answered the Duke in his droll,
dry way, “I believe he was considered a meritorious person in his day.”

The second Duke was really a very witty man, and the fun of his
conversation was enhanced by his rather grotesque appearance, and his
humorous manner. Alfred Montgomery used to imitate him, as he well knew,
but they loved one another dearly, and the Duke cared not one whit. One
day at luncheon at Lady Dorothy Neville’s Mr. Edmund Yates was present.
Alfred being mentioned, naturally the guests began telling stories of his
wit. Yates turned round to the Duke and said: “You know, Mr. Montgomery
is very fond of mimicking your Grace.” The Duke answered: “Yes! I know
it, but let me give you a bit of advice, Mr. Yates. Don’t _you_ try to
mimic a gentleman!” The Duke was a most admirable note writer. He told
me how once Lady Dorothy Neville wrote to him saying that she was about
restoring the dear little church at Danksfee, and was asking her friends
to help; so, feeling sure that he would wish to do something for the
church in which he had so often worshipped, she had put down his name for
one hundred pounds. The answer was characteristic. He, too, was restoring
the church at Strathfieldsaye, and knowing that Lady Dorothy would wish
to contribute in memory of old days he had put down her name for one
hundred pounds. “In the circumstances no money need pass between us.”

But I am wandering and must hasten back to Cheyenne. We had some trouble
with our luggage, but when that was disposed of and we had had luncheon
we started for Ogden and Salt Lake City. It took us thirty-five hours to
reach Ogden.

The first part of the journey was dull enough, spinning through the
everlasting monotony of prairie, with glimpses of antelopes and wrathful
prairie dogs. We turned into bed rather early and next day found
ourselves in the midst of the lovely wild scenery of the Rocky Mountains,
great crags towering over the line with terrifying threats, as if the
shaking of the train must bring them down upon us. In places great falls
of snow had been tunnelled through, and the gorges were spanned by crazy
wooden bridges that rocked under the long chain of cars. The line was
high up among the snows, laid at giddy heights some eight thousand feet
above sea-level.

It was an Indian country, so there was a good deal of what Prairie Bill
would have called “poison” about. The curious-looking creatures, wrapped
in their shoddy blankets, hung about the railway stations, impassive,
unnoticing, impenetrable, as little moved as if they had been corpses by
all that was going on around them. Had they any feelings? Perhaps, but
they never showed them. At Ogden we changed into the Salt Lake train.




CHAPTER XXXIII

THE MORMONS AND BRIGHAM YOUNG


I had long wished to see the capital of the Mormons. Their story was so
utterly unlike the nineteenth century, that in spite of much that was
vulgar and contemptible it seemed to have a flavour of medieval romance.
The visions of Joe Smith, the farmer’s boy; the golden plates containing
the book of Mormon, revealed by an angel in 1823, and deciphered with the
help of the Urim and Thummim; the persecutions and tortures endured by
the Saints with the heroism of martyrs; their flights, hounded from place
to place; the murder of the Prophet and his brother, Hyrum Smith, after
an audacious bid for the Presidentship of the United States; the Nauvoo
Massacre; the crossing of the Mississippi to Council Bluffs; Brigham
Young succeeding to the mantle of the Prophet, and, like a second Moses,
leading the Saints over the trackless desert and the terrors of the Rocky
Mountains, until on the 24th of July, 1847, decimated by all the horrors
of extreme heat and cold, fatigue, hunger, thirst and disease, they
reached their Pisgah! That much of all this, and more yet to come, should
have taken place within the memory of living men was indeed strange. And
when the Mormons looked down upon the plain below the Wahsatch Mountains,
and saw the great Salt Lake gleaming like a jewel in the sun, there arose
from them a great cry recalling the “Thalatta! Thalatta!” of Xenophon’s
ten thousand, and with one voice they shouted: “The Land of Promise! The
Land of Promise, held in reserve by the hand of God for the resting-place
of His Saints!”

The city sprang into existence as if by magic. Brigham Young was
all-powerful, bearing a more undisputed mastery than king or tsar or
kaiser. He was a law unto himself, and had his _Vehmgericht_, or rather
was also a secret court unto himself. True, there was no _Folterkammer_,
no _eiserne Jungfrau_, but those old methods were out of date; the
revolver and the bowie-knife were swifter and as sure; Jordan was the
oubliette. There has been some attempt to deny the existence of the
Danites or Destroying Angels who were Brigham Young’s executioners. That
is futile, for the men, as I can testify, were as well known in Salt Lake
City as the Prophet, and the Old Man of the Mountain himself was not more
faithfully or more bloodily served by his _hashishin_ than was the Lion
of the Lord by his band of bravos. There were wholesale murders like
the Mountain Meadow Massacre, but there were also other crimes, secret
murders actuated by private spite, jealousy or lust, the stories of which
are well known to those behind the scenes in Zion. It was not healthy for
a man to incur the wrath of the Prophet or of the leading Saints. It was
not conducive to long life to love a maid or wed a wife upon whom the
eyes of one of the holy ones might have fallen.

Brigham Young was a very different man from his predecessor, Joe Smith.
Both men were needed for the building up of this strange people. Joe
Smith, as some pretend an epileptic, but in any case a fanatic, probably
in the first instance believed in the dreams that he dreamed and the
visions that he saw. To convince others a man must first convince himself.

A Mohammed has faith in himself and founds a religion professed by
countless millions. A Grand Cophta Cagliostro believes in nothing—least
of all in himself—and dies miserably in the Castle of San Leone. Joe
Smith could never have obtained the steadfast adherence of the men who
rallied round him, especially of so strong a man as Brigham Young, four
years older than himself, had he not possessed something of the faith
which moves mountains. Moreover, his disciples were ready to die, and did
die, for their religion’s sake. The man who lays down his life for his
friends cannot be altogether damned as a wilful impostor.

On the other hand there was very little of the inspired prophet about
Brigham Young. He was essentially a ruler, an organizer, a law-giver.
His preaching was contemptible, but his strength of will inflexible;
that, and not any pretence to inspiration, was the secret of the power
which he wielded. He was entirely uneducated, and rather seemed to
pride himself upon the fact, but he was an admirable worker and had a
knowledge of several crafts besides that of painter and glazier, which
was his immediate business before joining Joe Smith. This served him in
good stead on the great trek; as a carpenter he helped to build anything
that might be needed from a boat to a tabernacle, and he was of great
practical utility when the New Zion was in course of erection.

As an organizer and business man he excelled. Under his guidance
industries of all kinds sprang up in the new community; he started
co-operative stores, banks and places of business. Schools were
established, even schools of music and dancing academies, for the Lion
of the Lord was himself a great dancer, and it was said that the austere
man would even condescend to perform in a breakdown. The drama was a
passion with him, so it was not long before a theatre was built. His own
trading was carried out on excellent principles. He bought cheaply and
sold dearly, even succeeding in getting the better of the United States
Commissariat Department. The Saints used to boast with pride of the
wealth of their Prophet. He was a sound financier, deeply penetrated by
the truth of the maxim, “Les affaires sont l’argent des autres.”

Such poor thunders as the Jupiter of the United States hurled at him
passed harmlessly over his head. Often, standing at the helm of the State
which he had created, he defied the supreme power, dauntless and unmoved.
Apart from all the crimes and all the baser sides of his character it is
impossible to deny that he had many of the qualities which go to make a
statesman. If he was a destroyer he was also a constructor, and the New
Zion as I saw it in 1873 was his work, and his alone.

The sun was dipping in the western sky as we were carried past the pretty
shores of the Great Salt Lake, a glorious metallic sheet glowing with
rosy light. In the distance were the Wahsatch Mountains rich in beauty,
silver and swindles, and as we drew near there was a pink haze over the
Zion of the Saints. The houses, each standing in its own little orchard,
with the fruit trees in the full bloom of spring-time, reminded me
of some Eastern city. There was only one shrieking ugliness, the huge
tabernacle with its great oblong white roof shaped like a dish cover—a
monstrosity upon which ingenuity had spent itself in the successful
endeavour to produce something which should defy the world to show
anything equally hideous.

The Mormon homes, when we reached them, were commonplace enough, but
the general effect of one great riotous luxury of blossom seen in the
opalescent light of that lovely gloaming was a dream. Blushing behind
so fair a veil the meanest buildings became glorified. Next morning,
no doubt, we should be affronted by the newness of a city which some
twenty-five years ago had sprung out of a wilderness that could show
nothing more imposing than a sage-bush; but the glamour of this April
evening transfigured everything in a glory of rosy light.

We were lucky in having as our travelling companion Mr. McCook, the
Governor of Colorado, with whom we had struck up an alliance, and Colonel
Steinberger, who, it was said, was the bearer of a not very pleasant
message from President Grant to the Prophet, Brigham Young. Captain
Forbes, who had gone before, met us at the station, and led the way to
the Walker House Hotel, where we were comfortably lodged. The Walker
brothers were remarkable men in Zion. Hailing from Yorkshire, they had,
upon the ruin of their father, emigrated as boys to the United States
and found their way to Salt Lake City, where they joined the Mormon
community, of which they had learned something in the old country. They
were as poor as Lazarus, but by steady industry and integrity they became
wealthy merchants, prospering greatly.

There came a day when they grew disgusted with the Prophet, his
teachings, and his pretensions. They were boycotted and persecuted in
every way, but they held good, and ended by largely breaking the tyranny
of Brigham Young, hitting him hard by the _argumentum ad crumenam_, and
damaging the co-operative society which he had started in opposition
to them and to the various Gentile firms, the front of whose doors was
patrolled by Mormon police, taking note of any ill-advised Saint who
might try to do business with them.

The following morning—May the 1st—we were up betimes and went for a drive
with a Mr. Stanford, for whom I had a letter of introduction. At the foot
of the Wahsatch Mountains, on an eminence overlooking the plain, stood
Camp Douglas, where a park of United States artillery dominated the town
about two miles off—a standing threat against any violence on the part of
Brigham Young and his Latter-day Saints.

The site was chosen in 1862 by Colonel Connor at the time when incidents
arising out of the murder by the Mormons of the rival prophet Morris, a
poor, half-crazy Welshman, rendered it necessary for the United States
Government to bid the Saints behave themselves. However degrading for a
prophet it might be to have the guns of his country’s army turned upon
the windows of his harem, there the battery remained, ready at a moment’s
notice to blow the whole hierarchy of the Saints, their wives, and their
homesteads into the next world. The officers gave Oliver a soldier’s
welcome, and were most civil and courteous to us. But how they hated the
Mormons, and how one felt the delight that it would be to them to receive
orders to bombard the Eagle House, the Beehive House and the whole
detested city of lies, the “City of Confusion”!

But those orders were not likely to come, for the Government of the
United States never made up their minds to deal effectively with the
danger within their gates, and even the so-called Mormon war was but
a very half-hearted affair. Instead of boldly taking in hand what was
really high treason against the Stars and Stripes, successive Presidents
sheltered themselves behind the responsibility of the individual State
concerned, in order to shirk what was the duty of the Federation.

In the afternoon we went with Governor McCook to visit Brigham Young at
the Beehive House. We were shown into quite a modest parlour such as
you might find in a well-to-do farmhouse or humble Scottish manse. No
luxury, no sign of any artistic refinement, no pictures, no books. The
Prophet prided himself on a sublime contempt for study in any shape.
There were one or two elders in the room, waiting, like ourselves, for
an audience of the Lion of the Lord, who presently appeared. He was big
and burly, not conspicuously tall, but broad-shouldered and massive. He
was seventy-one years of age, but looked much younger, for he had plenty
of wavy fair hair turning grey, and his face was framed in what used to
be called in London slang, “a Newgate fringe.” Had it not been for a
marvellously strong lower jaw indicating the iron will which had carried
him through so many dangers and difficulties, he would have passed
unnoticed in a crowd; but the square jaw and chin, the firmly-set lips,
and a certain ominously suspicious look in the rather colourless eyes
spoke volumes.

He looked what he was—a master, and a cruel master to boot. He was
dressed in a frock coat of black broadcloth, a concession, as it was
said, to the whim of a recently wedded wife, to win whose consent he had
been compelled to plead sartorially in a way quite unusual to him, for
the lady objected to the home-spun suit which had been good enough for
him till her rule began. He was a very common man, vulgar and uneducated,
but his whole appearance indicated force, dogged determination, a
stubborn inflexibility. “I am and will be governor,” he once said in
a sermon, “and no power can hinder it, until the Lord Almighty says,
‘Brigham, you need not be Governor any longer.’”[34] Those words summed
up the whole character of the man, as it was written in his face. The
strength of a lion, the cunning of a weasel.

One of the twelve apostles who had come with us acted as master of the
ceremonies, and named Governor McCook and ourselves to the Prophet, who
was civil—for a prophet—but not genial nor making any pretence of being
pleased to see us. When the Governor addressed him as “Mr. Young” he
forgot his show of urbanity for a moment, and gave McCook a look which
in the days of miracles should have withered him up as the worm smote
Jonah’s gourd. The Prophet claimed to be called “Mr. President,” but how
could a high official of the United States give that title to any man
save one?

“You carry your years well, Mr. Young,” said the Governor. “I suppose you
attribute that to the fine, invigorating air of your mountains?”

“Say rather, sir, to a mind at peace,” and with those words, uttered
with a sanctimonious snuffle, the poisonous look disappeared, and
the holy man turned up the whites of his eyes with an air of saintly
beatitude.

I could hardly believe my ears. The audacity of it! Did the man think
that we had never heard of the Mountain Meadow Massacre, and of Heaven
knows how many other crimes with which his name was associated? If it be
true that conscience is a question of digestion his digestion must have
been perfect.

We were told that there had been a disagreeable interview that morning
with Colonel Steinberger and that the Prophet’s temper had been ruffled;
at any rate, our visit was not very pleasant and there was no temptation
to prolong it—indeed, the Lion of the Lord was evidently in a bad
humour, very much inclined to growl and show his teeth, so after a few
commonplaces we left him in his den. We had a further taste of his
quality when we went to hear him preach.

As we walked through the Garden City we were joined by several Mormon
notables, amongst others by a well-known Danite, or Destroying Angel,
who very appropriately volunteered to show us over the cemetery. It
was impossible among the graves not to notice the frequency of the
inscription, “Found dead in Jordan.” I asked the Angel how it was that
so many men had fallen into the river in a community of Rechabites where
soberness was the strict rule. He grinned a significant and ghastly grin.
“I guess they died in their boots.” Everybody who ever was in the West
in the days described by Bret Harte knows the meaning of that euphemism.
How many booted men he personally had accounted for, if any, our Danite
friend did not say.

But the words of the Prophet were law and must be obeyed; persons
inconvenient to himself or to the Church and its apostles and elders, for
whatever reason, political or domestic, must not block the way; so they
“died in their boots.” The cemetery in Zion furnished something to think
about.

We were hospitably invited into a bar-room kept by a gentile, where a
United States judge asked us to “paint”—an expression derived from the
tendency of whisky to promote high colour in the face and nose. After one
cocktail another gentleman came in and said to me: “Pleased to know you,
sir—will you paint?” I excused myself on the ground that I had just gone
through the ceremony with the Judge. “What! not just a leetle sketch?”
said my new friend, with his head persuasively on one side.

Forbes and I were very anxious to go up the Cottonwood Canyon and have a
look at the Emma and Flagstaff Silver mines, which had not long before
been thrown on the London Market, highly over-capitalized. The Emma
mine had been brought out under the ægis of General Schenk, the United
States Minister at the Court of St. James’s, the hero who also introduced
poker into London Society. The Stock Exchange was quite taken in. It was
impossible that so high a personage as the diplomatic representative of
a great Power should give his name as director to a wildcat venture. The
shares were greedily bought, inflated to 50 per cent. premium or more,
and then collapsed.

The Flagstaff was fathered by one Williams, a very plausible benefactor
of mankind, who, as was afterwards found out, had been a waiter at an
hotel in San Francisco. It was a magnificent concern—paid 30 per cent.
dividends on such shares as were first bought, and when all were sold it
was discovered that the dividend on the earlier shares had been paid out
of the money subscribed, and the shares were not worth a lock of good
Mr. Williams’ hair. He, honest man, decamped with his spoils and was no
more heard of. His gains must have been considerable, for he had also
launched another mine, with equal success to himself, equal disaster to
the shareholders.

We chartered a cart and a pair of horses and set out on a lovely drive
among the mountains. Our teamster was a very amusing fellow, who, when
he found that Forbes was a naval man, interlarded his conversation with
much sea-talk. All of a sudden, as we were slowly jaunting up the canyon,
we heard a pistol shot, and a bullet came singing its way close to our
heads. Our driver stopped short. “Ah! that’s Bill Simmonds, he’s up the
canyon looking after a claim of his. He’s fired a shot across our bows,
and maybe, if we don’t stop, the next shot will be some nearer.” So we
waited, and in a few seconds Mr. Simmonds appeared out of the scrub by
the road-side, very drunk, with a revolver in one hand and a whisky
bottle in the other. He was grinning hospitality, and all he had stopped
us for was to give us a drink. When we accepted he was delighted, swore
eternal friendship, declaring that we possessed every social and moral
virtue, and disappeared again into the bushes. We went on our way without
further let or hindrance, and were shown over the two great swindles by
the most explanatory of managers.

The talk of one of those old-time mining bosses was quite an education
in enthusiasm, and so, much edified, we wended our way back to Salt Lake
City. If we were not able to send a crumb of comfort to the victims
in London we had at any rate had a delightful expedition in glorious
scenery, drinking in an air that was almost as intoxicating as Mr.
William Simmonds’ whisky.

There was no doubt, according to the geologists and mining experts, that
the beautiful mountains of the Cottonwood Canyon were rich in silver
mines—therein lay the danger. Brought out as they were by very clever
manipulators, with abundant proof of the existence of the metal, they
took in some of the very elect in the City of London, and to the small
investors, always captivated by the prospect of big dividends, they spelt
ruin. The poor parson, the widow, and the orphan, were specially created
for the benefit of promoters, as men of the Schenk and Williams type well
knew.

On the Sunday Forbes and I went to hear the Prophet preach. In the huge,
ugly tabernacle, capable, as we were told, of holding nine thousand
people, we were shown to the gentiles’ bench, just underneath Brigham
Young, who glared at us in the most hostile way. There was some singing
accompanied by an organ, not bad in its way, for music is one of the arts
which the Saints cultivate, the children being all taught to sing in
parts.

But the portion of the service which interested us the most was, of
course, the sermon. Brigham Young was no orator, he had no sacred spark
of eloquence; his strength, as I have said before, lay in his power as
a leader and master; there he was matchless. His sermon was very poor,
consisting of the commonest platitudes interlarded with grotesquely
barbarized Old Testament phraseology. Just the sort of stuff that is
spouted by the meanest of the Hyde Park ranters. All of a sudden
he stopped the current of a discourse which to us sounded almost
blasphemous, leant over and, looking us straight in the face, burst into
a violent inflammatory tirade against England. Quite forgetting the way
in which he had once been received, when, as he said himself on a former
occasion, he landed in our island penniless and without a friend, he
lashed himself into a fury of abuse of everybody and everything that was
British.

It was miserably poor stuff, but probably good enough for the purpose of
kindling the hatred of his audience against us; it would not have been
swallowed by the lowest and most ignorant socialism in England. It was
violent, truculent, absolutely unreal; I felt all the time as if the
man were out-talking his own reason. One passage was very amusing. He
looked at me with a fixed stare—shaking his forefinger at me, and said:
“I often wish that I had the power of Queen Victoria or Mr. Gladstone for
forty-eight hours. I guess” (here he paused)—“Yes! I’m a Yankee, I am,
and therefore I guess—I would soon see whether millions upon millions of
acres should lie fallow and bare in order that a parcel of idle noblemen
may _PUR_sue pheasants with their dogs!” I know not how to express the
stress which he laid upon the _pur_ in _pursue_ save by printing it in
capital letters. When he had reviled England to his satisfaction he
turned to an exposition of the beauties of the Mormon faith. Here again
he was not happy, though his none too classical language was remarkable
as showing the truth of what has always been said of his loyal devotion
to and faith in the first Prophet and Founder of Mormonism.

He said: “I have often wondered why it was that God Almighty chose Joseph
Smith, the poor uneducated farmer’s boy, to be the means of revealing
His Will to His people. I can only suppose that it was because He wanted
a white sheet of paper to write upon.” The image was not new, and not
particularly reverent or refined; but when he spoke of Joseph Smith I
could not but feel that there was in all that he said, in the tone of his
utterance, something of faith, and more than faith, love, which, in a man
so strong and of so coarse a fibre, was infinitely touching, infinitely
pathetic. He spoke in tears, and made me forget the cant and vulgarity
of the rest of his discourse; for if Brigham Young was not eloquent he
was at any rate a master of coarse abuse.

There is a speech of his against a federal judge who had attacked
polygamy, in which he is said to have “roared” a flood of abuse before
which Billingsgate must hide its head in the shame of defeat. It winds
up with a grand peroration: “If you or anyone else is such a baby calf,
we must sugar your soap to coax you to wash yourself Saturday nights! Go
home to your mammy straight away, and the sooner the better!”[35]

Brigham Young never claimed to have received more than one revelation and
that was, as its first verse says, “the Will of the Lord concerning the
Camp of Israel in their journeyings to the West.” It was really, so far
as the first part is concerned, a military order regulating the conduct
to be observed on the march from Council Bluffs in 1847. The latter
part is worth reading as a specimen of a style which was anything but
attractive even in a considered document, but which in the pulpit became
repellent. The congregation, however, were not a critical audience.

The doctrines of the Saints were not such as would appeal to men of
education, and I can honestly say that, although I became personally
acquainted with a good many Mormons, I did not find one with whom it
would have been possible to hold an intelligent conversation on any
question outside of his own particular business or that of the Community.

I am speaking of my own experience in the early seventies; I am told
by those who have been in Utah more recently that things have not
changed. If the preachers of Mormonism are twitted with this, the answer
is naturally: “If we are poor and uneducated so were the Apostles of
Christianity”; but they forget that the Apostles founded a faith which
has been for centuries the religion of the most civilized and cultured
portion of the world, whereas the Mormons have existed for nearly a
century without making a single convert of note. And yet a century, short
as the time is in comparison to the twenty centuries of Christianity,
has in these days of rapid communication given them opportunities of
spreading, such as Christianity did not possess until many hundred years
after its birth. Mormonism is growing and is now (1915) said to number
over four hundred thousand members. But these are still confined to the
ignorant classes. No scholar could be won by the book of Mormon.

As regards material prosperity Salt Lake City was already, when I saw
it, a triumph, and in all the Community, if what men said was true, no
man was more prosperous than Brigham Young. One gentile—a very moderate
man—told us that the Prophet had entered upon speculations of every sort.
If they succeeded they belonged to him, if they failed to the Church,
an easy and profitable way of doing business. If he did not have every
comfort that his heart could desire it was his own fault. He lived in
what to him, I suppose, was a sort of luxury in the Beehive House,
his wives in the larger Eagle House—and the two were joined by a low
building in which were his offices. His Court consisted of a dentist in
ordinary—doctors he could not abide.

The last time that I saw this wonderful man, who certainly must be
reckoned as one of the most striking apparitions of his century, was at
the theatre, of which, as I have said, he was an assiduous patron—indeed
it was reported that he himself was fond in his lighter moods of taking
part in theatricals. That he lived not a few tragedies is certain, but
it is difficult to think of that grim man in sock or buskin, or even to
believe that he could have any “lighter moods.”

The grand tier was filled with the wives of the much-wedded Saints; but
where were the lovely ladies over whose charms Messrs. Cannon and Knapp
have wasted so much printer’s ink? There must have been two or three
hundred women present, all of them apparently recruited from the slums of
London and Liverpool, Scandinavia, and, as we were told in the case of a
few, from Germany. The harems of the Mormons were no temptation to the
Gentile.

The next morning we left Salt Lake City. There is in Messrs. Cannon
and Knapp’s book a photograph of the town as it is to-day. The
picturesqueness which struck me so much appears to have been largely
improved off the face of the earth. Instead of the lowly but comfortable
houses standing in their own gardens the streets are bordered by huge
many-storied buildings scraping the sky—those monstrosities of which
America is so proud. It seems a sorry thing that the old patriarchal
simplicity of the place which made its beauty should have been ruthlessly
torn down by the almighty dollar. I left Zion the richer in that I had
had a personal interview with a prophet and hobnobbed with a Destroying
Angel.


NEVADA AND CALIFORNIA

Further and further west! Forbes and I were bound to see Virginia City in
Nevada, where the colossal mining industries were turning out fortunes.
John Mackay, the Silver King, a right good fellow with whom I kept up
a friendship for many years, was the head of the firm of Mackay, Fair,
Flood and O’Brien, a group of Irishmen, and they were the kings of the
place. Forbes knew them well, so we were sure of a good reception.

At the railway station we found the famous Curly Bill, a charioteer of
great renown who drove his team of six horses at a breakneck pace up
hill and down hill, round corners where the slightest mistake would have
meant being hurled down a precipice Heaven knows how deep, for the road
hugged the face of the rock—on one side the dead wall of the mountain,
on the other eternity. He must have had nerves of steel. Curly Bill was
a good-natured giant, very full of talk. In his humorous way he spun
many yarns about the old days of camp life among the wild devils of whom
forty-one years ago there were still a good few to be found. He had much
to say about the swift and summary justice of the Vigilance Committees,
of which we gathered, though he did not admit it in so many words, that
he had been a prominent member. Judge Lynch was the only power capable of
maintaining law and order in those stormy days, for the arm of the United
States was not long enough to reach the far away camps. Besides, the
miners had little respect for the procedure of the courts; there was too
much corruption and too much delay.

I thought of “The Tombs,” the famous prison in New York, where I had seen
eighteen murderers—among them Stokes, who killed Jem Fiske, the partner
of Jay Gould—all waiting month after month to be tried, condemned, or
bought off. I remembered how Stokes told me that he had been deprived
of his daily walk in the prison yard, and when I asked the reason, he
answered, “Oh, politics; in New York everything is politics!” He had good
cause to say so, for politics saved his neck in the end. I could not but
feel that there was much to be said for the Vigilance Committees. There
must be some protection for life and property, and I believe that they
seldom, perhaps never, acted without just cause. It was a case of a quick
trial, a short shrift, and the nearest tree! The members of the Committee
as well disguised as the executioners of the Holy Office, and they worked
in secret, under oath, but I fancy they were pretty well known, all the
same.

Three or four years ago I saw the death of Curly Bill recorded with no
little regretful praise in the _Times_. He was in his way a celebrity;
everybody who knew the country round about Carson liked him and he would
be greatly missed. It was a delight to look upon his good, wholesome,
honest face, to listen to his straight talk, and watch the strong skill
of his coachmanship.

Virginia City was quite a small, scattered place, perched like an eagle’s
nest among the mountains, just big enough to hold a few hundred miners,
a bar or two, and a small hotel. The first thing that struck me was
the great number of well-dressed, well-to-do loafers hanging about the
streets, apparently with no work and no interest in life. I asked what
it meant. “Them fellows is all rich miners,” said Curly Bill, “everyone
of them has a share in the mine in which he works. It’s their time off
now—they work eight hours, sleep eight hours, and loaf eight hours—yes,
sir! presently those men will all be going on their shift, and working
naked to the waist, with nothing on but a pair of cotton drawers and
their shoes, down a couple of thousand feet or thereabouts, in a heat
which would make Hell ashamed of itself.”

Mr. Fair was the only one of the four magnificos who happened to be in
Virginia City at the time of our visit: he was the most genial of hosts,
and we dined with him that evening; he lived in the simplest fashion
in a small white house with green shutters at one end of the town. The
order of architecture was that of the cheap toy doll’s house—a door in
the middle, windows on each side—a ground floor and first floor and of
necessity a roof. There was one maid-servant, and kind, handsome Mrs.
Fair cooked the dinner, over which, after a slight change of toilette,
she presided with all the grace of a charming hostess. An excellent leg
of mutton and a rice-pudding composed the bill of fare. That was the
frugal way in which this rich gentleman, worth millions of dollars—indeed
of pounds—lived while he was at work, and that was how the great
millionaire ladies seconded their husbands; when their day came they knew
how to be magnificent. It is almost impossible for us Englishmen to think
of another lady who in all the bloom of her youth and beauty did the
washing for her husband’s camp, and later in life girded at the pettiness
of the authorities of Paris for not allowing her to buy or even to hire
the Arc de l’Étoile in order that she might more brilliantly illuminate
a great entertainment! But those were the changes and chances of the
lives of those who worked in such places as Poker Flat or Roaring Camp.
Patriarchal simplicity followed by a prodigality exceeding even what the
vats and mash-tubs of the great brewers could aspire to.

Under the auspices of Jem Fair (Slippery Jem, as he was called; why, I
know not, for he was as straight and upright as the Nelson Column, but
in the old mining days every man had a nickname, whether it fitted or
not), we were shown much that the ordinary, haphazard traveller has no
opportunity of seeing. He took us down the famous Consolidated Virginia
Mine, where, far down in the bowels of the earth, we saw men stripped
to the waist, working for dear life, hacking out wealth from the solid
rock, like the Nibelungen of the Rhine Legends. Curly Bill had given the
heat no more than its due. The half naked miners were streaming with
perspiration, and we were glad when the lift swung us up again out of the
rich gloom of Tartarus into the bright air of Heaven.

The machinery of the mine was stupendous. Fair told me that much of it
was imported from England. He said that it was only in England that they
could rely upon the truthfulness of the make. Things have changed in the
last forty years! Now we hear of steel rails being bought for England in
America; then it was only the British manufacturer who could be trusted
to produce the most important articles needed by the miners, such as
steel belts, for instance.

Jem Fair’s talk, like that of all men who have done something in the
world, was worth listening to, and he had a way of expressing the shrewd
commonsense of his opinions in short, compact sentences that were almost
epigrams. I recollect an answer of his which was very much to the point.
Someone asked him what were the prospects of a certain mine which had
just been started; he replied: “Well, sir, a miner can see no further
than the end of his pick.” It was a golden rule with him that a man
should not invest money in a concern too remote for him to have any voice
in its management. He made his millions in the mines which he controlled;
he invested them in real estate in San Francisco.

To a young Englishman who wished to follow his lead he said: “No,
sir, you’re too far off.” “But,” said the Englishman, “see how you’ve
succeeded.” “Yes, sir, but I’m here.” There was all the wisdom of
a financial Solomon in that little word “here,” and the look which
accompanied it.

I saw Jem Fair again in the autumn, when he urged me to go and see him
before returning home. I wonder why it is that one seems to know a man
better if one sees him twice with an interval than if one were to spend
the same length of days or hours with him at one spell? Anyhow, I grew
very fond of Fair, and heard from him fitfully till his death. He became
Senator for Nevada, but never took kindly to politics, and I think the
happiest days of his life were those of the old mining outfit before he
had become a great money potentate, after which wealth and sorrow and
many cares weighed upon him heavily.

When we were on the railway, bound for San Francisco, we had a little
taste of the life of the Wild West. At a roadside station a great,
burly man got into the car, very rough, very dirty, very drunk and very
quarrelsome. Things had apparently not gone smoothly with him, and he
was thirsting for the blood of an enemy, failing whom, brandishing a
revolver, he declared himself determined to slay someone in the car. His
language was savage, indecent, and blasphemous. The women began to scream
and hide their children in their petticoats; but as quick as thought
the guard, a tiny little man, went up to the big bully twice his size,
disarmed him and turned him out cowering at the next station. Not much of
an adventure, but characteristic of the place and time.

San Francisco was amazing. It is probably much more marvellous now, since
its resurrection from the ruins of the great earthquake. But to me, who
could recollect the gold fever in the forties, when I was old enough to
take interest in the pictures of the _Illustrated London News_—the only
illustrated paper out at that time—it seemed simply miraculous to see
that city of palaces risen barely twenty-five years before out of the
sand-heaps of the Pacific Coast. The greatest marvel of all were the men.

I had letters for Mr. Ralston, the manager of the Bank of California;
Mr. Gänsel, the agent of the Rothschilds, and others; and through their
good offices I made the acquaintance with most of the heroes whose toil
and industry had landed them winners in these great welter races of
prosperity. It is notorious that new communities, especially those where
there are pigeons ready for the plucking, attract the failures of the
world, the flotsam and jetsam of the sea of rascaldom. The worst case
that I ever came across was Port Said in 1870, where the griffins on
their way out to India, and older men homeward bound on furlough, who
might be accredited with having shaken such poor remnants of fruit as
might yet hang here and there on the pagoda tree, fell easy victims to
the croupiers of the hells and the sirens of the _cafés-chantants_. San
Francisco, in its salad days, was no exception to the rule. Gamblers,
professors of poker, of euchre and other games, were there by the
hundred; bullies, and swindlers, men living upon their wits, but chiefly
on the lack of wits in others; hawks ready to pounce upon any simple
miner with brains lighter than his pouch who might come under the clutch
of their talons. Evil men enough and to spare, but happily many more good
ones, rare pioneers, endowed with that grip and holdfast purpose which
have raised the United States to their proud position among the nations
under the sun.

Sitting in the luxurious hall of the Occidental Hotel, it was strange
to hear some of the older men talk of the bygone times, when they lived
in huts that were sent out to them in pieces from the Eastern States
round Cape Horn, to be delivered through the Golden Gates and put up in
the old Spanish Town; and those log cabins meant soft comfort after the
hardships of camp life, and the toil of the hunt for gold.

John Mackay was one of the first men to call upon me, and we were much
together. We used generally to have luncheon and dine at some restaurant.
For the former being a one-idea man his order was always the same, given
with a brogue, and a comic little stammer which were very amusing.
“Waiter! let us have a t-t-tenderloin steak and let it be cooked r-rare!”
In spite of Dryden’s authority, I never could get quite used to the word
_rare_ in that sense. At last one day I said to him: “Mackay, you are
an Irishman, and of course you know Moore’s ‘Irish Melodies.’ Do you
remember that lovely song which begins: ‘Rich and underdone were the gems
she wore’?” Mackay laughed, but he continued to order his steak “r-rare.”
He was one of the simplest and kindest of men, with not a particle of
purse-pride about him; just as modest and unpretentious as he was when
as a lad he owned little more than the clothes he stood in; and now,
still a comparatively young man, he had achieved riches which made him
a real power in the world. A man who, among other ventures, can start a
trans-Atlantic cable off his own bat, is something to be reckoned with.

Kind as everybody in San Francisco was to the stranger that was within
his gates, none was more hospitable than my poor friend Ralston. It was
not only that he was lavish of expenditure. That in the ’Frisco of those
days was nothing. Everybody threw money out of the window—the more the
better. He was lavish of painstaking thoughtfulness for the comfort
and pleasure of his friends; lavish of genuine and heartfelt kindness;
lavish of a welcome which I felt was a joy to himself and which therefore
could be accepted as it was offered. He organized the most delightful
expeditions for the benefit of his many guests—long drives into the
glorious mountain scenery, with three or four teams of four horses in
readiness for a change at various points, and everything that forethought
could devise for our comfort.

Among his guests whom I met almost daily was Mr. Blaine, the Speaker of
the House of Representatives, and the sworn foe of England. There was
no such Anglophobe in all the United States and though perhaps it was
not in the best of taste to show his antipathy in our presence, he lost
no opportunity of doing so. However, I was determined not to be drawn,
and so gradually he became tamer. At the last, when after a few days we
said good-bye, he said, “Well, Mr. Mitford, there are at any rate two
things in England of which you may be proud. A House of Commons in which
the courtesy and self-restraint are a model for the world, and a Press
which never is inquisitorial in men’s private affairs.” Soon after I got
back to England the editor of a “Society Paper” was put in prison for
libel, and the House of Commons had started upon its all-night sittings
under the lead of Mr. O’Donnell, Mr. Biggar, and others. I should hardly
like, as an Englishman, to write down the opinion expressed by some of my
American friends upon Mr. Speaker Blaine. It would be taking a leaf out
of his book.

One of our drives was to the country house of Mr. D. O. Mills, the
father-in-law of that most distinguished Ambassador, Mr. Whitelaw
Reid. Mr. Mills’ house and surroundings were as beautiful as might be
expected in the midst of some of the most lovely scenery in the world.
He was the President of the Bank of California, and no man was more
respected. He had a great collection of modern pictures, many of which
were old acquaintances of previous years in the Royal Academy, and
elsewhere. Kind, genial, and courteous, he made us very welcome in his
beautiful home. His daughter, at whose house I saw him again when she was
Ambassadress in London, was then a very little girl in short petticoats.

Not long after I left San Francisco came the tragedy of the Bank of
California. The old story, mismanagement, a crash, ruin. Mr. Mills, who
in the meantime had given up his position in the bank, stepped into the
breach, went heroically into harness again, and pulled round the concern.
Poor Ralston could not face the shame. He died of a broken heart, a
suicide in the foul water of the docks of San Francisco.

All California rang with the praise of Mr. Mills and admiration for
his self-sacrifice. A grateful American gentleman once said: “You see
that gentleman there—well, that’s D. O. Mills. He’s worth millions upon
millions of dollars, and there is not a dirty coin among them.” A grand
tribute!

Before sailing again westward until the furthest East should be reached,
it was a solemn duty to make a pilgrimage to the Yosemite Valley. What
lover of trees could leave California without having seen the great
Wellingtonias? The trip is probably made much easier now, but forty
years ago a great deal of red dust, as fine and all-penetrating as the
black dust of a sand storm from the desert of Gobi, at Peking, had to be
swallowed before reaching the goal.

It was a popular saying that the teamsters of California, by a natural
process, developed gizzards to enable them to digest the quantities of
grit which they had to swallow. But the beauty of the country through
which we travelled paid for all, and a bath, with a long, cool drink
of many ingredients in crushed ice, prepared by the cunning hands of
Public-spirited Smith, the famous barman of the Valley, was a drink of
the water of Lethe, killing all memory of heat and that dust which adds
so greatly to fatigue. But I was already under the spell, for as I rode
into the Yosemite Valley at nightfall the scene was striking. The huge,
eerie rocks, rising some two thousand feet sheer on either side, looked
like gigantic, black, threatening fortresses, built by the Titans in
their war against the gods.

All of a sudden a bright light began to search the gloom. I looked up,
and just above the Bridal Veil Waterfall the full moon was rising. For
a few minutes it looked as if that thin, airy veil of the most delicate
gossamer lace, waving from side to side in the gentlest of breezes, were
being poured, a silvery stream, out of the very centre of the fairy
disc, scattering diamonds and opals as it touched the ground. I stopped
my horse and watched, half hoping that I, poor mortal, might surprise
the revels of the gnomes and fairies who surely must be holding high
festival among the moonlit patches in the thickets. Soon, in full glory,
the valley was lighted up, and I rode on, listening to the music of
the water, knowing that I had seen a sight full of mystery, the most
beautiful that ever had been or ever would be vouchsafed to my eyes.

How captivating is the charm even of the idea of beautiful scenery. Poor
blind Bob Lowe, Lord Sherbrooke, used to say that the greatest enjoyment
of which he was capable was that of travelling through beautiful
scenery—beautiful scenery which he, unhappy man, never saw, but of which
the idea possessed him, dominated him as nothing else could. And what a
pity it was that he should have been so afflicted, for with his power of
words he would have brought home to us so much. There have been a few, a
very few, lords of language who have been able to describe, but even they
are baffled by the masterpieces of God’s handiwork. Of these the Yosemite
Valley is one; it is too great for mere words; the most we can do is to
fall down and worship in silence in one of God’s own cathedrals.

I had just written the above lines about Lord Sherbrooke when, on turning
over Aston’s “History of Japanese Literature” for a quite different
purpose, I happened upon a quotation culled from the _Tsuré-Dzure-Gusa_
(literally “Idle blades of grass” or “_obiter dicta_”) of Kenkō, a
Japanese priest who lived in the fourteenth century, so appropriate that
I feel inclined to quote his words. “It is not only when we look on the
moon or flowers with our eyes that they give us pleasure; but on a spring
day, though we leave not the house, on a moonlight night, though we
remain in our chamber, the mere thought of these cheers and delights.”
Many wise, and, let me add, many pious thoughts, did the old priest who
died seven hundred years ago set down in writing, and they are as good
to-day as when he wrote them.

Something of a _bon vivant_, too, in spite of his Buddhism, which ought
to be so ascetic, was this dear old Kenkō (whose name before he entered
religion was Kanéyoshi), a man with a righteous respect for a cup of good
wine and the joy of sharing it with a friend.

“Two things fill my spirit with ever new and increasing admiration and
awe the oftener and the more constantly my thoughts are occupied with
them: the star-studded heaven above me and the moral law within me.” So
wrote Kant: had he seen them, he must have added as a third the giant
trees of California. To me they were more impressive than any of the
great phenomena of Nature that I had seen. The vastness and the appalling
roar of Niagara itself did not excite in me the same awe as did these
great silent witnesses of the ages.

How old they might be I cared not. Their measurements left me
indifferent. It was a wonder to see a great hollow tree lying on the
ground, to ride in on horseback at one end and out at the other. But
that was not what moved me; you cannot measure majesty, and when I saw
these great sequoias towering above the pines[36] which would themselves
have been Brobdingnagian anywhere else, the sense of majesty was almost
oppressive.

There are few subjects upon which more nonsense has been talked and
written than there has been about the age of trees. Some years ago I
saw a letter written to the _Times_ (I think) about a catalpa tree in
Gray’s Inn Garden, which was said to have been planted by Sir Walter
Raleigh (the catalpa, by the by, was first introduced into England in the
year 1726!), and in that letter the writer alluded to the sequoias or
Wellingtonias, which he said must have been already mature trees “when
Abraham was a little boy!” I felt how pleased that gentleman was with
himself when he concocted that phrase. Sir Joseph Hooker, Mr. Carruthers
and I once took the trouble to count accurately the rings on the section
of the sequoia in the Natural History Museum. They numbered one thousand
three hundred and thirty-five. “This particular tree was sixty-two feet
in girth at eight feet from the ground; three hundred feet high, and
without branches for two hundred feet of its height.” (Veitch’s “Manual
of Conifers.”) “From these and other authentic data,” says Veitch’s
book, “it is not unsafe to infer that none of the existing Wellingtonias
antedate the Christian Era, or that with very few exceptions, the oldest
of them reach within five hundred years of that epoch, whose ages,
therefore, do not much exceed that of the oldest yews in Great Britain.”

The yew is, as is well known, the oldest tree that we have; but here
again there is great exaggeration. I was once shown a yew tree in Hayling
Island which I was solemnly assured was standing there at the time of
Julius Cæsar’s landing. That a yew tree stood there is very possible; but
that particular yew tree, no! I have seen a young tree growing out of an
old one that was a mere hollow shell, the seed having germinated within
it. Many a legend in regard to yews may have started in that way; the
old host gradually rotting away to make room for the guest. Seedlings may
rise close to the recorded tree and in the course of centuries be taken
by ignorant or careless observers for it. As regards the age of oaks,
the old homely tradition is probably founded on something like fact.
Three hundred years of growth, three hundred standing still—which is,
of course, nonsense, for in this world nothing stands still—and three
hundred years in which to decay. Dryden put it into verse.

    “The monarch oak, the patriarch of trees
    Shoots rising up, and spreads by slow degrees:
    Three centuries he grows, and three he stays
    Supreme in state: and in three more decays.

                             “PALAEMON AND ARCITE.”

That there are many ancient oaks, veterans battered by the storms
of centuries, we well know; but a Wellingtonia of Abraham’s time is
unthinkable; so are the legends of the Mount of Olives. Surely enough,
there are trees there, grey and gnarled, that are the descendants of
those under which our Lord preached. Some of them are hoary with age and
may have been a third, hardly a second, generation from those sacred
ancestors. But though standing on the holy mount I looked upon them with
all the veneration, all the awe inspired by the divine traditions of the
place, I could not persuade myself that they were the very trees among
which the Saviour had so often wandered. The oldest tree in the world
of the planting of which there is any record, is the famous Bō tree of
Anuradhapura, of which I shall tell later on.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few days later I was steaming out of the Golden Gates into the Pacific
Ocean—anything but pacific, as my experience went to show. For the first
day or two mountainous fogs that looked so solid that we almost expected
to hear the ship crash and be shattered to splinters as we charged into
them. Then a succession of gales, in one of which our starboard paddle
was smashed, and we had to steam the second half of our voyage steering
against the remaining one. Not a pleasant experience, for we were in the
month of June, and as the old rhyme in regard to typhoons goes, a risky
time.

    June, coming soon.
    July, mind your eye.
    August, must.
    September, remember.
    October, all over!

However, in time the old slowcoach of a walking-beam ship landed us in
Japan, of which I need say nothing here.

Looking back upon my sojourn in California, it is a sad thought that none
of the men with whom I spent those happy days are left—my three English
travelling companions all gone—Mackay, Fair, Ralston, D. O. Mills, Curly
Bill and the rest all dead. I believe that Mrs. Whitelaw Reid is the only
person whom I knew out in the Far West who is yet alive. But she was a
little child!

The return voyage across the Pacific was very pleasant. We had as
shipmates several very agreeable Americans, among them Governor Lowe,
the U. S. Minister at Peking, and Mr. Lothrop, a Boston man, who had
been in business in Japan and seemed to have read almost every book that
was worth reading. Governor Lowe (he had been Governor of California
before entering diplomacy, and retained the title) was one of the best
_raconteurs_ that I ever met. One day I asked him why it was that his
stories were so incomparably better than anybody else’s. His answer was
instructive. “Well, sir! I’m going to tell you. You will notice that I
never tell a story about _a man_. Nobody wants to hear anything about
that _man_. He isn’t a circumstance. No, sir, when I tell you a story I
tell it with a name and a place, and sometimes a date. If I don’t know
them I invent them. That gives the anecdote a living interest. That’s my
secret, sir, and I make you a present of it.”

He kept our small company very much alive for about three weeks, for he
had a fine dry wit of his own besides his memory. He was going back now
after having held high office to join a bank in ’Frisco. Such is America.
He and Lothrop are, alas! both gone. The sister of the latter, when he
died, sent me as a remembrance of him a book which he had loved, and
there is at this moment, ticking away in my drawing-room, a tiny clock
which he gave me when I married. The ticking of that little clock often
carries me thousands and thousands of miles away into the cloud-land of
memory.

I found Forbes at Salt Lake City, and we determined to make a shooting
excursion in the Rocky Mountains before going East. We were assured that
we should have sport to our hearts’ content and we were told of a hunter
and tracker beside whom Fenimore Cooper’s Pathfinder was a mere baby. The
intimate secrets of the lair of the grizzly were an open book to him, and
as for the lordly wapiti—well, we should see! There was no need to take
any meat with us, for game would be plentiful and our larder would be so
stocked that we should not know what to do with its contents. Encouraged
by these grand assurances we engaged waggons and teams, and set out on
our great _shikar_.

It was now October and the nights were bitterly cold. We had no tents,
but lay out in the open in our buffalo robes. We had some fine tramps
over the mountains amid the most glorious scenery. But where were the
doomed grizzly bears? Where the vast herds of antlered wapiti? Not a
spoor did we see during all the days that we were out; our famous tracker
turned out to be an utter fraud and most unscrupulous liar; in spite of
which he went on romancing, brazen and unashamed. It was impossible not
to admire his audacity, it was so perfect. The worst of it was that,
putting our faith in his promises, we took no meat with us; we had plenty
of biscuits, potatoes, coffee and a little whisky; so far, our condition
was better than that of the Mormons on the great trek, and as we lay
round the camp fire at night, we regaled ourselves in imagination with
the juicy venison steaks that ought to be frizzling in the frying-pan.

Many miles we climbed and wandered, changing our camp every day. One
evening an old sage-hen came and stood watching us about seventy or
eighty yards off. We had no scatter-guns with us, so I took a pop shot at
her with my rifle and luckily got her; we cleaned her (very important to
do that at once, otherwise the strong taste of sage becomes intolerable),
plucked her, cut her in little pieces and threw her into the stew-pot;
that impudent bird, nasty as she was, seemed like a dish from a feast of
Heliogabalus.

One night it was my turn to keep the camp-fire going, and I ought to
have remained awake till the time should have come to put on new logs; I
was very tired, having had an unusually tall climb that day, and I fell
asleep before even having cut the needful logs of dead wood. All of a
sudden I awoke, roused by the rays of the moon, which was shining through
the trees—a lovely, weird sight. To my dismay I saw that the fire was all
but out. I had neglected my duty. I jumped up, took the axe, and began
cutting down a dead birch tree which I had marked the evening before; my
fingers were numb with cold, for it was freezing hard, and the axe more
than once turned in my grip. However, at last I got together some logs,
which were soon crackling merrily above the ashes; then I thought that I
would make myself a cup of coffee to warm me.

I went to the little stream—a mere runlet of water—now frozen quite hard,
broke some ice, melted it, and put it in the kettle to boil. When my
coffee was ready I heard a voice from under one of the buffalo robes:
“Wal! Wal! Wal! Blame me if you ain’t got quite a nice cup of corfy! I
guess I’ll come and have some.” It was the voice of one of the teamsters,
who had been watching me take all the trouble without even offering to
lend a hand, and now claimed his share of what my labour had earned.
I was savage, but it was no use showing it, for these men are very
independent, and if I had been sulky, he would have been off at daylight
with his waggon and team, leaving us to get on as best we could with
those that remained.

On our last evening, as hungry and disconsolate we sat shivering by the
camp fire, we were startled by the tinkling of a bell. It was a kind old
cow who had strayed out into the wilderness and came to be milked. Was
there ever sweeter music or a more royal feast than what she brought us?
Moreover she told us that we were nearing civilization.

We had had enough of this very barren hunting, tightening our girdles day
by day, and breaking the ice night and morning; so we settled up with our
teamsters and Ananias the hunter, caught a train at the wayside station,
and steamed away to New York.




CHAPTER XXXIV

1874

THE BLACK OPAL


    “Ibam forte viâ sacrâ, sicut meus est mos,
    Nescio quid meditans nugarum, totus in illis,
    Accurrit quidam.”

                               Horace, Sat. I. 9.

One fine day at the end of April I was walking down the “sacred
street” of St. James, as usual thinking of I know not what trifles,
utterly absorbed in them, when I felt a tap upon my shoulder. I turned
round—Gloster, by all that was unexpected! Colonel Gloster, to whom I
had bidden farewell at Point de Galle nine years before! It was a happy
meeting, and we stopped to chat for a moment, but he had a business
appointment, so we agreed that he should come to dinner with me in my
rooms in Victoria Street that evening. As we parted I said: “What a pity
that Overbeck should not be in England! We could have such a delightful
talk over the days of the Lion’s Den on board the _Simla_!” I hailed a
hansom and trotted off to order dinner: on my table was Overbeck’s card!
“Only in London for two days—when and where can I see you?” I lost no
time in going to look him up; found him by great good luck, and so it
happened that we three came together again on that April day after nine
long and strenuous years, during which neither of us had met, though we
had corresponded fitfully.

Overbeck came to dinner in morning clothes, as he had parted somehow with
his heavy luggage, and I noticed that he had a curious stone, unknown to
me, mounted as a pin in his cravat. I asked what it was. “A black opal,”
was the answer. I had lately been hearing all sorts of tales about the
bad luck which opals are supposed to bring. White opals he admitted
were known to be unlucky, but the black opal, on the contrary, was the
luckiest of stones. He insisted that I must buy one, and promised to call
the next morning and go with me to hunt for one.

We spent a merry evening; in the discussion of the happenings of nine
years there was much to ask and much to tell, for we had all three led
pretty busy lives in the interval, and it was late when we separated,
wondering over the chance that had so strangely brought us together again.

The following morning Overbeck turned up, quite determined that I must
go and buy a black opal, as to which my enthusiasm had had time to wane
during the night; however, he would take no denial, and so off we went to
my old friend, Mr. Phillips, in Cockspur Street, the man who was really
the first to introduce the artistic feeling of the sixteenth century
into the modern jewellers’ craft. He was a man of the most consummate
taste and culture, qualities repeated with additional intensity in his
distinguished son, Sir Claude, the great critic, the accuracy of whose
judgment and historical knowledge in all that concerns the fine arts is
undisputed.

I knew that the best chance of finding anything a little out of the way
would be in Mr. Phillips’ hands, and so it proved to be, for he at once
showed me the gem that I wanted, mounted as a pin with tiny sparks of
diamonds round it. He told me that he had shown it to the Prince of Wales
and the Duke of Edinburgh; both admired its beauty, but neither of them
would buy it, on account of the evil reputation of the white opal.

It was a strange, weird stone, with a mysterious spark of fire in the
centre, which seemed to gleam fitfully, almost capriciously. Overbeck
looked at it for a moment, trembling with excitement, and then hissed in
my ear: “Buy it! Buy it! It surely brings you luck.” I laughed at his
eagerness, but I bought the pin for its beauty’s sake. As we left the
shop Overbeck, who was greatly excited, stopped on the threshold, and
said: “In ten days you’ll get a letter, mark my words; in ten days, more
or less.” We parted in Cockspur Street and he went abroad that evening.
I went home, delighted with my pretty new toy, and thought nothing more
about the famous letter which I was to receive, when on the evening
of the 9th of May, exactly ten days from the visit to Mr. Phillips, I
received the following note:

                       “10, Downing Street, Whitehall. May 9th, —74.

    “DEAR MR. MITFORD,

    “If you like to become Secretary to the Board of Works I shall
    have pleasure in appointing you.

                           “Faithfully yours,

                                                        B. DISRAELI.

    “Bertram Mitford, Esq.”

That letter changed the whole course of my life.

I wrote and congratulated Overbeck on his prophetic powers. His answer
was, “You will get anything you wish.”

One night at a party I told my future wife, Lady Clementine Ogilvy, the
story, and when three months later we were betrothed, I sought all over
London for a black opal for her, but there was not one to be had; the
fame of my stone had somehow or other been spread abroad and everybody
was mad to buy its fellow. When she went to Paris with her mother,
trousseau buying, I commissioned her to hunt for a black opal, which she
did, and brought home a beautiful specimen which she still has—and on the
day that she bought it I concluded the purchase of the house in Chelsea,
where we were to spend so many happy years.

We are old folk now, the ink of Dizzy’s note, which I treasure, has faded
almost into nothingness, and my poor black opal was stolen some seven
years ago by burglars—but not before it had well and truly done its
appointed work.

We were married on the 31st of December, 1874, in the little chapel of
Cortachy Castle. Had the wedding been fixed for a day later there would
have been no bridegroom, for all the trains in Scotland were held up by
a terrific blizzard, and the New Year’s hampers were looted to feed the
passengers, who were starved with cold and hunger.

At the wedding breakfast I told the story of the black opal to the
late Lord Southesk, a famous collector of gnostic gems, perhaps sharing
Bartolommeo Scala’s belief in the mystic virtues of precious stones. “Ah!
wonderful!” he said. “How little we know about the influence of gems!
Perhaps——” Someone interrupted, and to my regret he was prevented from
finishing the sentence. People said it was a very pretty wedding—and so
it must have been, in that glorious old castle with the richly-wooded
river Esk running under its walls, as it had done for seven centuries—but
a bridegroom, I take it, does not see much on his wedding-day.

There was a goodly company—chiefly neighbours from such places as Glamis,
Kinnaird, Kinnordy, Kinblethmont, Balnaboth. Many Ogilvys and Stanleys,
and an army of tenants and retainers. The host looked every inch a scion
of the old Mormaers of Scotland, and the stately châtelaine, at whose
hands the venerable home had received such loving care, proudly did the
honours, a queen among her guests. The sun shone out gaily after the
storm, the wild skirl of many bagpipes screamed in the courtyard, pibroch
followed by pibroch, as we made ready to drive through the bright, crisp
air to Airlie Castle. That was indeed a romantic setting for a honeymoon,
and never looked more beautiful than during those sharp winter days. The
river was almost entirely frozen over, and on one great ice-block was
a dead salmon, half eaten by the otter which had dragged it there; the
trees were heavily laden, snow-icicles sparkling with all the colours
of the rainbow; the red sandstone walls of the bonnie House of Airlie
glowing in the sun—winter in all its glory.


1875

The honeymoon was cut very short, for at the end of five days I was
summoned south. There was trouble at the Office of Works, and I must
perforce get back into harness with all speed. And so we bade good-bye to
Airlie Castle and the year 1874. It had been for me a bright and a joyous
year, in which there had not been an hour that was not full of hope, and
of happiness which is the child of hope.

For a few months, while our house in Chelsea was getting ready for us, we
camped in my old quarters in Victoria Street. We had a bright welcome
there, for my dear old friend, Sir Joseph Hooker, had made the rooms gay
with flowers, and the dinginess of London was left outside.

On the 3rd of July we migrated into our new home at Chelsea, a delightful
house looking over the river, carrying up and down with the tide the
brown-sailed barges and all its picturesque movement, with the famous
green copper spire of Battersea Church across the water, and the
delightful old wooden bridge, now vanished, which has been immortalized
in Whistler’s etchings and nocturnes and harmonies. At the time when
Chelsea was “a village of palaces” Lindsey House had seen better days.
It was built on part of the site occupied by Sir Thomas More’s country
place, a site full of memories of the great Chancellor and Erasmus and
Anne Roper. Here Holbein, introduced by Erasmus, lived until he had
painted the portraits of his host and hostess and the whole family, down
to Patenson the jester and the little dog.

Then came a day when Sir Thomas, prudent man, seeing that there was
nothing left to paint, began to think that a tame artist was an expensive
luxury. How to get rid of him decently? The Chancellor was a man of
resource. He gave a great garden-party which the King announced his
intention of honouring. Up the river came the royal barge, with banners
flying and trumpets braying, a brave pageant. At Chelsea the King
alighted, and was received with all due honour just outside my house that
was to be. Old Sir John Tyrrell—a famous character at the Carlton Club
some fifty years ago, used to say: “Yes! I’ll go and stay with you on two
conditions; first, that I breakfast at my own time, and secondly that I
am not taken round to see the improvements.” Sir Thomas More spared King
Henry VIII. none of the “improvements.” When with royal courtesy he had
admired the outside, His Majesty was taken within, and there, like the
great judge that he was, he was smitten by the beauty of the glorious
canvases and panels which hung everywhere. “Is such a painter yet alive,
and to be had for money?” he exclaimed, and Holbein was produced out of
a closet in which he lay hidden. The King was overjoyed. The painter’s
fortune was made and the Chancellor’s weekly bills were reduced.

Next, in Charles II.’s time, all the way from St. Martin’s Lane came Sir
Theodore Mayerne, the confidential doctor of three kings, and he too
was a patron of art, for he set up a furnace and worked at enamelling
with Petitot the Swiss miniaturist, the excellence of whose flesh tints
are said to have been due to the discoveries of the great medicine-man.
When Sir Theodore died his house was pulled down and Lord Lindsey bought
the property and built himself a home with the river in front and a
garden at the back. There is some reason, based upon internal evidence,
for supposing that Sir Christopher Wren may have been the architect.
There are still remaining some of those ogival chimney-pieces such as
he introduced into Hampton Court; and what more likely than that the
famous Court architect should have built for the hereditary Lord Great
Chamberlain? Here dwelt his descendant, the Duke of Ancaster, with his
beautiful duchess, whose portrait was painted both by Hudson and by a
famous pupil of his, one Sir Joshua Reynolds. The beautiful portrait by
Hudson, with shipping in the distance, was painted to record the mission
of the Duchess when she went to Germany to bring back Queen Charlotte.

To the Ancasters succeeded Count Zinzendorf, chief of the Herrenhuters,
whose burial-ground was at the back where the Moravian preacher’s pulpit
was not so very long ago still to be seen—indeed perhaps it may be there
yet. After that the glory of the great house departed. It was divided
into five and was known as Lindsey Row. In the first of these in 1874
lived Whistler, in the next, which had once been owned by Martin the
painter, the illustrator of Milton, dwelt a Mr. Boggett, a great grower
of chrysanthemums; then came Mr. Nassau Senior, who married the beautiful
and charming sister of Tom Hughes (“Tom Brown’s School-days”), and the
last two were empty. Those two I bought and threw into one with the help
of Mr. Devey the architect. And here we lived for many happy years.

If in London the last person with whom you are likely to make
acquaintance is the man who is living next door to you, in Chelsea it was
quite different; we were very neighbourly; the Nassau Seniors were most
friendly—she, unfortunately a great invalid, hardly leaving her sofa, but
always a ray of sunshine, brightening all the lives with which she came
in contact; as for Whistler, he was perpetually in and out of our house,
and always welcome for the spirit of fun and devilry which he brought
with him. He would come in of a morning with a whole budget of papers,
letters, of which many were afterwards published in “The Gentle Art of
Making Enemies,” which he would read out to us, exploding with laughter
over his own witticisms. It was generally at some “art patron” that he
loved to gird—the owner of the famous blue room being a favourite victim.

There was one batch of correspondence, however, which was never made
public—with eating appetite had come, and in these letters Whistler
had fed himself to bursting-point. The law of libel stopped even his
mouth, and only a very small number of friends was allowed to listen to
those masterpieces of demoniacal satire. It was an unfortunate thing
for art that during his life-time—except so far as his etchings were
concerned—Whistler’s genius was not recognized. The result was that many
of his finest paintings were destroyed. His financial difficulties were
no secret.

On one occasion, I went to see him and found him boiling over with anger
surrounded by masterpieces which he had just cut to ribbons in a storm
of mad fury lest they should fall into the hands of the bailiffs; and
all for a miserable debt of thirty pounds, which, for the moment, he was
unable to pay. There they lay in strips—portraits, nocturnes, harmonies,
symphonies, gems which now, after a lapse of from thirty to forty years,
would be worth many thousand pounds. Any one of his friends would have
lent him the money over and over again, but he was as proud as Lucifer,
the devil entered his soul, and the art tragedy was consummated. The blow
hit me cruelly, for he had just finished a beautiful portrait of my wife;
what it must have meant for Whistler himself nobody ever knew; but when
he cooled down among the ruins it must have been misery, for he was as
confident as Thucydides himself of the value of his own work. But how
lucky it was that neither the Mother nor the Carlyle were included in
that massacre of the innocents—surely two of the most reverent portraits
that genius ever produced.

Whistler’s hospitality was great—his Sunday luncheons (breakfasts he
called them) were perfect; he had an excellent cook, who, with her
husband, made up the household, and there were constant little surprise
dishes over which he would chuckle and linger till late in the afternoon;
as Amphitryon, he was the embodiment of human happiness—sitting at
the head of his table dispensing quaint cates and still quainter
sayings—barbed arrows sometimes—he was a sight for gods and men; the
talk was always good, for he had the knack of surrounding himself with
all manner of clever people—but, as was once told of Kinglake, no matter
how many good things might be said, his were sure to be the best. The
lightning flashes of his wit—his epigrams—were matchless. They were like
the sting in the tail of his emblematic butterfly, an insect unknown to
mere vulgar entomologists.

I once or twice met Oscar Wilde there, and a set-to between that big
fat man and the little gnome-like Whistler was certainly good to listen
to—but the lightweight always carried off the belt. Charles Keene, whose
black and white sketches for _Punch_ were Whistler’s admiration, was a
frequent guest. He was a tall, solemn-looking Don Quixote who used to
wander through the suburbs dressed as a _rapin_ should be in a loose
jacket and slouch hat, with a black cutty pipe always in his mouth, and a
satchel hanging from his shoulders. He had a dry, racy humour of his own,
which worked in well with the salad of wit at the table.

One day the conversation turned on health and nostrums; “Well,” said Don
Quixote, “I think that if a man is ill there is only one thing for him
to do; he must give up smoking for a fortnight.” “Yes! but supposing
he don’t smoke?” asked I. “Then I don’t know what he is to do.” Having
uttered these words with pious gravity Charles Keene retired behind his
pipe and once more became a listener.

There was another very agreeable scoundrel, the sort of man who has done
everything and been everywhere, a capital foil to the others. But one
fine day he disappeared. Whistler had found him out. There are not a
few men of that sort who contrive to make a living in some way out of
art and artists. But they seldom last long. I shall never forget that
man’s account of the recovery of Rossetti’s poems. When his wife died
the great artist in his misery had laid the MS. in her coffin as a last
loving gift—they were hers, he said, and she should keep them. Always
being urged to regain them, he in the end yielded. The needful authority
was obtained, and in the dead of night Rossetti with a friend went to the
cemetery. The coffin was exhumed and opened, the lovely hair which his
paintings had made famous rippled out in waves. The MS. all stained with
the horrors of death, lying on her bosom, was reverently secured and the
coffin fastened down again. A weird story, but the poems were saved.

There came a day when, to my great regret, Whistler made up his mind to
leave the old house in which he had lived for eleven years and to build
the “White House” in Tite Street, mainly prompted, as he told me, by
the wish to show what he could achieve in decoration. E. W. Godwin was
the architect and it was not long before they quarrelled over the work,
in commemoration of which Whistler caused a stone to be inserted in the
front of the house, engraved with the words, “Except the Lord build the
house, they labour in vain that build it—E. W. Godwin F.S.A. built this
house.” The stone has long since disappeared. Godwin died in 1886 and in
1888 Whistler married his widow. A quaint ending to an artistic feud.

Unlike the great plagiarist Oscar Wilde, Whistler was always original.
He was himself, he imitated nobody. The other man, brilliantly clever
as he undoubtedly was, never hesitated to copy. Both were startling and
audacious in their dress; but Whistler in his long coat, playing with a
slender Wanghai cane as tall as himself, his little white plume standing
up in the midst of his black, or blackened, hair, was unlike anything or
anybody else. He was delicate, playful, whimsical, a creature of fancy.

Wilde, the last time I saw him, was got up like a low-comedy caricature
of a Tom and Jerry “Corinthian.” That day he was minded to be Georgian,
and was swaggering in the King’s Road dressed in a brown frogged coat,
trimmed with cheap fur; on his head was an extravagant hat with a brim as
much curled as the roof of a Chinese pagoda; the size and flatness of his
huge splay feet were accentuated by being forced out of a pair of tight
trousers carefully strapped over a pair of aggressively varnished boots;
Whistler might be vain, but it was the vanity of Puck. The other man was
Caliban.

When Whistler made his famous answer, “Why drag in Velasquez?” he was in
his sly way laughing at himself, just as he was full of malicious fun
when on somebody praising Leighton’s versatility as musician, linguist,
orator and what not, he said, “Paints a little too sometimes, don’t he?”
How came so bright an elf, so gay, so mischievous, into the world? He
must have been a changeling brought by some wanton sprite straight from
the realm of King Oberon.

Lindsey Row, with all its traditions, soon became absorbed into Cheyne
Walk, and the very name would have been forgotten and lost had I not had
the audacity to call my two-fifths of the old building Lindsey House.

A little further to the east, past the quaint old church so full of
ancient monuments and thoughts that were sermons in themselves, was the
home of Thomas Carlyle. He and his wife had been friends of my family
and of my wife’s for many years, and when I went to live in Chelsea he
sent to bid me go and see him. Having known him from childhood I was not
afraid of him as most people were, though of Mrs. Carlyle I used to stand
in considerable awe; but she had now been dead eight years, and the old
wise man was always kind and gentle to me. So I often used to go and see
him on Sunday afternoon when he sat in his dressing-gown in the little
room at the back, smoking his long churchwarden, and he even allowed me
to light a cigar—a rare privilege, I was told—for, as a rule, in that
sanctum nobody might smoke but himself.

Sometimes he would put away his pipe, don his long brown coat and
soft wide-awake hat, grasp his cudgel and come out for a walk on the
Embankment or in Battersea Park. Sir James Fitzjames Stephen, a great
friend of Carlyle’s and afterwards his executor, was a pretty frequent
companion on these Sunday walks. During these outings Carlyle used to
cross-examine me about Japan, which greatly excited his curiosity. He
made me very proud once by saying that he had “read my ‘Tales of Old
Japan’ from Alpha to Omega.” He did not like the stories; there was too
much blood and murder in them—but that was not my fault—at any rate, I
felt that to have been read “from Alpha to Omega” by Carlyle was a bright
feather in my cap. Occasionally, if the weather was bad, Carlyle would go
for what he called his drive. This meant taking the omnibus in the King’s
Road as far as the Bank and coming back in a return bus. I only once bore
him company on one of these expeditions, but it was a memorable occasion.

It was at the time of the Bulgarian atrocities when Mr. Gladstone was
goading the country into fury with his eloquence, till Delane once said
to me, “Upon my word I verily believe that Gladstone thinks that Dizzy
himself had a hand in those outrages upon women and children.” Carlyle
was as hot upon the subject as Gladstone himself. When we got into the
omnibus the old man began lashing out. “Hoo! Sir!” he said, “there’s
that Disraeli or Beaconsfield, or whatever he chooses to call himself;
he thinks himself the wisest man on earth, and he’s just the foolishest
thing that crawls upon the face of it”—and so he went off at score,
rattling out the most fantastic invective against the Tory Government
and “the unspeakable Turk”; accusations to make one’s hair stand on end,
for he was as great an artist in adjectives as Dizzy himself—witness the
“sea-green incorruptible” and the “French Revolution” _passim_—and when
he had spent himself in his indignation, real or feigned, then would
come a loud guffaw of laughter as much as to say, “See what a sad dog I
am!” There were a few people in the omnibus who listened in open-mouthed
amazement—but the conductors all knew him, and were used to his wonderful
ways.

I call attention to those bursts of laughter. They were very
characteristic and very significant. Those who from Froude downwards have
recorded much of Carlyle’s conversation have given the impression of an
ill-natured, discontented man carping with no little spite at the rest of
mankind. That was not Carlyle. That he held violent opinions expressed in
violent language is a fact. But much of his so-called cynicism was, I am
convinced, misunderstood.

Where he suspected fraud of any kind he was pitiless—but half his
utterances were redeemed by a loud laugh, a laugh which impressed me as
being quite as much directed against himself as against his victim—and
that laugh took the sting of cruelty out of his speech. He did not suffer
fools gladly, and he could not brook being lionized, but during all
the years that I knew him—from before the year 1850 to the time of his
death—he was always kind to everybody with whom I saw him—kind and, in
his rough way, considerate.

The downright nature of the man was well shown by what he said of the
Duke of Wellington’s speeches in the House of Lords: “He was no orator,
but he was the best man there, for he had something to say and he said
it.” To the gewgaws and tinsel of oratory he paid no respect; so the
cloth were good he cared not for the embroidery. His great admiration of
the old warrior was fully shared by Mrs. Carlyle. Is it not recorded in
one of her letters or writings that on one occasion, happening to meet
the Duke at some party, she contrived to brush up against him in order
just to be able to say that she had once touched him?

Like everybody else who held Carlyle in reverent affection I was shocked
by Froude’s publications. No falser portrait of a great man was ever
handed down to posterity than that which he has painted. Would Carlyle’s
friends have loved him as they did had he been the snarling, spiteful,
inhuman monster that he represents, without one scintilla of the rare
geniality and of the power of friendship which he possessed?

That he was a good hater—such a hater as Dr. Johnson would have loved—no
man will deny; much of his hatred was political; in regard to social
life—the life of man with his kind—I have known him to melt into a
tenderness that was all the more touching coming as it did from the
rugged Scottish peasant nature. I have walked with him and sat with him
by the hour, without hearing him say an ill-natured word of man or woman.

Above all it is a pity that the veil of sanctity which should mask the
wedded life of even the humblest individual should have been lifted in
the case of two such remarkable personalities as the Carlyles. Froude has
done it, greatly to the prejudice of the friend who trusted him, but who
was careful to express the feeling that the papers which he confided to
him would need judicious editing, and that at a time when the one person
fitted to edit them would be no more. In spite of my great admiration for
Froude as a writer of English prose, I am bound to say that his treatment
of Carlyle must always remain a blot upon his reputation not only as a
man of letters but as a friend.

It is certain that the Carlyles were an ill-assorted couple. She
considered from the beginning that to marry him was an act of
condescension on her part. The daughter of a country doctor at Haddington
had descended from the skies like Diana to Endymion to marry the son of
a stone-mason! I feel inclined to say “Poor Endymion!” But he loved her
and was happy in his love. Not so she! Jealous of him she was—furiously
jealous—not as a lover, for there she knew she was safe. But she could
not bear to think that if she was famous it was as his wife, whereas she,
knowing herself to be brilliant, would fain have had him to be known as
the husband of that wonderful Mrs. Carlyle. It was his success, social
and literary, that she resented; it irked her to be in the second place,
and she could not forgive it.

That she entertained any sentimental feeling about Carlyle’s intimacy
with Lady Ashburton is an absurd supposition hardly worthy of
contradiction. Harriet Lady Ashburton was an ideal _grande dame_,
accomplished, well read, with a strong spice of Irish wit inherited from
her mother Lady Sandwich, who was a Corry, a daughter of Lord Belmore;
I knew her from my childhood up, indeed it was at the Grange that my
father and aunt made the acquaintance of the Carlyles, who met there
a whole galaxy of famous people, Thackeray, Charles Buller, Fleming,
Monckton Milnes, Dickie Doyle, Titania’s favourite painter, and a host
of others, all of whom were like the Ashburtons, hearty admirers of
Carlyle’s genius. Mrs. Carlyle was always welcome either at the Grange or
at Addiscombe, but he was the sun, she the moon—the satellite.

There was something else of which the lady was jealous, and that was the
agony of concentration which her husband’s work meant for him. At moments
her _sæva indignatio_ against “that Carlyle,” as she would somewhat
contemptuously call him, passed all bounds.

One day my aunt went to call upon her and found her in one of her
tantrums—what was the matter, she asked: “Oh! my dear, it’s just that
Carlyle! Would you believe it, I have had a headache for three days, and
he’s only just found it out. ‘I’m afraid you’re not quite well, my dear,’
he said—and all the time he has been working, working! I just threw a
tea-cup at his head.” Petruchio had a bad time of it that day.

Another time “that” Carlyle was in great disgrace and Mrs. Carlyle in
tears because the poor man had resented the presence of a dead mouse
embalmed in his porridge at breakfast.

Poor Mrs. Carlyle was much to be pitied, not for any wrong that he did
her, but because she was one of those people who make themselves wretched
and pass on their misery to those near them. My aunt was one of those
sympathetic people to whom others carry their troubles, and Mrs. Carlyle
spared her not a moan. Carlyle’s self-reproaches after her death were a
delusion, born of her own shrewish complaints, which in his sorrow he
schooled himself into believing to be well founded. That she was not
an easy woman to live with is shown by the fact that she had been just
as cantankerous with her mother at home as she was afterwards with her
husband. Her letters to him are the witnesses of that.

In society Mrs. Carlyle certainly shone. Her conversation was bright,
witty and stimulating, but when she went home to the privacy of her
journal, thanks to Froude’s indiscretion, we see another woman. She was
ready enough to accept favours and hospitality from great people; then
she would hie back to Cheyne Row and write down little petty unkindnesses
about them.

To a house where she had been received with much cordiality she was
invited with other friends to go and see the bridal trousseau of one of
the daughters; out comes the journal, and with fluent pen she gives her
friends full measure of spiteful satire because the linen is marked with
a coronet. Perhaps she would have found equal fault had the coronet been
omitted. She was in her inmost heart a discontented woman in whom the
milk of human kindness had been turned sour by praise that was not always
destined for her alone, and she had been much encouraged by her friend
Miss Jewsbury, the novelist, a very clever woman whom I sometimes met and
did not like.

Much is said in Froude’s volumes about Mrs. Carlyle’s beauty. When I knew
her she was an elderly, even an old woman, but I could see no trace of
good looks—and people who had known her when she was young laughed at
the idea. However, love is blind, and in Carlyle’s eyes she was all that
is beautiful. If it be true that in her youth she had so many suitors,
it must have been her wit, and perhaps the _beauté du diable_, that
attracted them.

When the end came in 1881 and the lovable wise old man died full of
honour, Chelsea, and yet not Chelsea alone, mourned his loss. It was sad
to think that we should never again see the lonely, pathetic figure in
his long brown coat and soft hat slouching along swiftly, stick in hand,
with his peculiar shuffling gait. His face was a picture of hale old
age with its ruddy cheeks streaked like a russet apple, and his strong
white hair and crisp beard. It was a figure that might have stepped out
of a painting by Raeburn, a thing of the past with a nobility which was
all its own—the sturdy, rugged independence of the northern peasant.
Everybody in the Village of Palaces knew him, and everybody was proud of
him.

Among the notables in Chelsea at that time was old William Bell Scott,
poet and painter—not one of the giants in either capacity, but yet a
man of some merit, for after all, to have achieved the honour of being
a crony of such men as Rossetti and Swinburne—who wrote a sonnet on his
death—means something. He was a delightful, kindly old gentleman, who was
always welcome in a society the entrance to which was difficult indeed.

Rossetti, who had a way of chastening his friends, chaffed him in one of
those sets of nonsense verses in which he delighted.

    There is an old person called Scott
    Who thinks he can paint and can NOT.
    Shall I call him a poet?
    Oh! not if I know it!
    This curious person called Scott.

Rossetti himself lived at Tudor House further east, a remnant, as it is
said, of the old house where Catherine Parr was visited by the Lord High
Admiral Seymour before their marriage was made public; for some time
George Meredith and Swinburne shared the house with him. It is a matter
of regret to me that I never knew Rossetti. He was much interested in
Japan and in Japanese art, and when I published my “Tales of Old Japan”
in 1871 he took a fancy to the book, and it was arranged that I should go
and see him with Lord Wharncliffe, who was a friend of his; but for one
reason or another the visit never came off, and when I went to live near
him chloral had done its work, and his health was no longer such as to
enable him to make new acquaintances.

Whistler’s excellently told stories of his wild eccentricities were
amazing. The tale of the pet bull kept in the little back garden and
the alarming vagaries of the beast and its master was inimitable; but
funniest of all was that of the five-barred gate. It seems that Rossetti
walking in some by-street saw a little model of a five-barred gate fixed
in the window of a humble dwelling. This for some reason caught his
fancy, and he was fired with the desire to have all the windows of his
house decorated with miniature five-barred gates. With him to have a wish
was to gratify it. In a few days the windows were fitted with their new
ornament, and Rossetti was enchanted. Life was now worth living. After a
day or two the house began to be besieged by carts bringing baskets of
dirty linen. The poet was at his wits’ end and gradually became furious.
Was he a laundryman? At last the mystery was revealed. The five-barred
gates were in the poorer suburban localities a washerwoman’s sign,
meaning, “Washing is taken in here and linen carefully attended to.”

Those were the palmy days of the Monday Popular Concerts. They were a
great weekly pleasure. Every Monday evening my wife and I found ourselves
among the crowd of real lovers of music listening to the masterpieces
of the great composers, given out by such artists as Joachim, Madame
Norman Neruda, Piatti, Lazarus, Hallé, Clara Schumann. The audiences were
always the same and in the same groups; there were even familiar figures
amongst the unreserved shilling seats that regularly occupied their own
particular places—did they come hours beforehand to secure them or was
there some such law of courtesy as governs the reservation of certain
seats in the House of Commons?

Close to us sat Mrs. Sartoris, Leighton and Robert Browning and scores
of other devotees of lesser note. It was the perfection of Chamber
Music, but it was even better heard at those delightful concerts which
Sir Frederic Leighton used to give in his studio in Holland Park. There
we had the same artists and met the pick of their admirers; but the
space was just what the music was suited to, and not the most delicate
shade, not the tenderest phrasing was lost, as it sometimes was in the
huge concert hall. And then Leighton himself was such an admirable
host, so instinct with that finest of all courtesy which springs from
kindliness of heart and the honest delight in giving pleasure. I first
made Leighton’s acquaintance in 1855, the year in which the picture which
made him famous, the procession of Cimabue’s Madonna, was exhibited. He
was then a young man of twenty-five—handsome, accomplished, a musician,
speaking French, German and Italian in great perfection, with what
probably was a unique mastery of the different Italian patois from
Venetian to Neapolitan.

One great charm that he possessed and retained to the end, save only
under the paroxysms by which his heart was being tortured, was the look
of happiness—a rare gift; whether he were painting a picture, listening
to music, or presiding in his royal way, lounging in the great armchair
at an Academy dinner, he seemed to radiate happiness. To his friends he
always gave a glad and genial welcome, to young artists a helpful hand
and sound advice. His charity was boundless, and it may rightly be said
of him that he obeyed the precept of the sermon on the mount, “When thou
doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth.”

There was one side of Leighton’s character which perhaps few people
suspected. Underneath the soft, willowy, rather effeminate manner which
he affected in general society there lay a foundation of chivalry worthy
of a Bayard. For his beloved Academy, as its chosen champion, he was
ready to do battle in the most literal sense of the word. The removal of
the Duke of Wellington’s statue from the top of Decimus Burton’s arch at
Hyde Park Corner, to which I shall refer later, led to a debate in the
House of Commons, when Sir Robert Peel the Second took the opportunity
to deliver an attack on the Royal Academy whose members he declared to
be “people of no very good taste.” He then singled out the President as
a target to be shot at in the most vicious manner, quoting Leighton’s
evidence in the famous case of Belt v. Lawes, and arguing therefrom that
the Royal Academy “was not worthy of consideration in this House;” and he
wound up with a rather risky pun, not in the best of taste, which, roared
out with a voice which was perhaps the finest—certainly the loudest—that
ever electrified the House, convulsed the faithful Commons with laughter.

The next morning Leighton came to my office in a fury—his rage at white
heat. The affront to himself was nothing, but the Academy had been
insulted and as President he must take up the glove, and he was there to
consult me as to the propriety of calling out Sir Robert, at the same
time suggesting that I, as an old friend and largely concerned in the
Hyde Park Corner scheme, should be the bearer of the message.

I succeeded in calming him, arguing that after all abuse of the kind was
nothing more than a wasteful expenditure of carbonic acid gas, which
according to the law of the diffusion of gases would be absorbed and
forgotten—nobody being the worse. Nothing came of it, and Leighton went
away only half convinced; the argument that duelling was out of fashion
carried no weight with it; on that morning he was full of fight and as
eager to go and buy a case of pistols as any fire-eating Sir Lucius
O’Trigger of the eighteenth century. I did not tell this to Sir Robert
Peel, who was a friend of mine, and he died unaware of the terrors from
which I had saved him.

The honours list of New Year’s Day, 1896, contained Leighton’s name as
a peer. His patent was signed on the 24th of January and on the 25th he
died, having been a peer for one day, without taking his seat in the
House of Lords, and without signing the roll. His funeral at St. Paul’s
Cathedral was attended by all sorts and conditions of men from the great
Lord Salisbury downwards. A notable feature in the service was the
chorale of trombones which was written by Beethoven for his own funeral
and had never been heard since. The pealing of that solemn dirge, the
great sound-waves rolling through the aisles, was soul-stirring. A nobler
requiem could not have been chosen.

Leighton did not marry. With his good looks, which had something that
belonged to an archaic type, his varied talents and the success which
always appeals to women, he might have been irresistible, yet no one ever
saw him pay more attention to any woman, however beautiful, than was
justified by the most chivalrous courtesy. He was in love, but it was
with his Art—she was his mistress and to her he was faithful to the end.

In these days when rough sketches and mere hints are extolled as works
of genius it is the fashion to decry Leighton’s work. The new men shirk
all that makes the painting of a picture difficult. Leighton boldly faced
all the great obstacles that stand in the way of the man who would fain
be the exponent of the highest art. Sometimes—indeed, often—he failed.
His flesh tints were apt to be waxy and his drawing in parts weak, though
no man ever painted flowing drapery more beautifully. Still, there are
paintings of his which will live. To name only two, the Daphnephoria
seems to me to be a most nobly imagined picture, full of dignity,
movement and life, and the portrait of Richard Burton in the National
Portrait Gallery is not only a speaking likeness but a masculine and
vigorous work. Those are not the only ones. But whatever he did showed
distinction and grace and a loftiness of aim of which he never lost sight.

When Leighton was elected to the Dilettante Club, of which I was then
a member, he whimsically enrolled himself as their sculptor, “with
permission occasionally to relapse into painting.” This was a playful
allusion to the fine piece of classical sculpture which he had produced
in 1877—the “Athlete wrestling with a Python” in the Tate Gallery—of the
first sketch of which he gave me a replica.

A constant guest at Leighton’s parties was Robert Browning who, unlike
not a few poets—Swinburne and Tennyson to wit, who had not the gift of
tune—was a fanatic lover of music and never failed to seek it where
it was at its best. So it happened that we often met him, and once he
honoured us by dining with us.

He was very pleasant and agreeable, handsome in a rather leonine way,
but his conversation lost some of its charm owing to his rasping, grating
voice. I once heard him read one of his poems, “The Ride to Ghent,” at
the house of Lady Stanley of Alderley. There were only about a dozen
people present; it was not a pleasing performance; the effect of the
poetry was marred by that hoarse croak, like that of Edgar Allan Poe’s
raven, and though he read with intense emotion he failed to touch. Had he
possessed the attraction of a musical speaking voice he would have been
irresistible.

The friendship between Leighton and Joachim was close and real, and no
wonder; the two personalities so artistic, so refined, were eminently
suited to one another. Both were above all, quite apart from their art,
charming companions. They were of about the same age; Joachim, who
survived Leighton by nine years, was one year younger. At dinner at our
house one day Joachim told us how it was that he became an artist. When
he was a tiny boy of about four years his father, who lived at Kittsee
near Pressburg, went one day into the town to attend a fair and brought
home as a fairing for the child a little sixpenny toy fiddle. Little
Joseph seized upon it eagerly, it became his constant companion, he
contrived to coax a tune out of it, and his destiny was fixed.

There can be no doubt that as an exponent of the highest masterpieces
of classical music he was the greatest violinist that ever lived. There
have been other artists full of technical accomplishments, fired by the
most intense musical passion—but for the power of throwing himself, as
it were, into the very inmost soul of the great masters and reverently
realizing their intentions he never had an equal. That he had all the
fire of his rivals, all their passion, he could show upon occasion, as,
for instance, in his wild, corybantic rendering of the Hungarian dances
which he and Brahms adapted; but when he was dealing with the more
serious school of music he proved that he had something more. There,
tender and true as a lover should be, he exercised the most supreme
self-effacement, and became the very voice of the tone poet at whose
shrine he was at the time officiating as high priest. So great was his
sympathy for his composer that when he played it was not Joachim who was
speaking to you but Bach, Beethoven, Mozart, Brahms.

He was one of the most amiable of men, and would often carry his violin
with him to the house of a friend, never weary of giving pleasure.
In that he was unlike some artists who resent, as I must say I think
they are justified in doing, any attempt at making use of them. Arthur
Sullivan once told me how at an evening party the hostess went up to him
and said: “Oh! Sir Arthur, it would be so sweet of you if you would play
us something.” The answer was characteristic. “My dear lady, there is
John Millais. If he will sit down and make a sketch for you, I will play.
He has been painting all day, I have been working at music all day, so we
are both in the same boat.”

The highly-strung nature of artists is accountable for many
misunderstandings, few more unintelligible than that which arose between
the large-hearted Joachim and Brahms, the friend whom he admired and
to whose fame he did so much to contribute. It all arose out of the
performance or non-performance of a work of Brahms in 1873. It was a
trifling matter which might probably have been set right with ease. It
must have embittered the long years of life which remained to both, each
conscious of the worth of the other. Brahms died in 1897; Joachim ten
years later. The separation from his wife, whom he adored, and the loss
of his friend, were cruel blows. There are other men besides Job who
might well say, “I have lived too long!”




CHAPTER XXXV

1874

LORD BEACONSFIELD


Lord Beaconsfield was always singularly kind to me. One evening, soon
after I went into the Foreign Office, I sat next to Mrs. Disraeli at a
dinner at the house of Lord Combermere, the old Peninsular hero. All of a
sudden she turned round to me and said, “Dizzy has got his eye upon you.”
And so it proved to be, for many years after, when the kind old lady
whom Queen Victoria created Viscountess Beaconsfield was dead, he, still
Mr. Disraeli, gave me the first important appointment which fell to his
gift as Prime Minister in 1874. He was then seventy years of age, but he
looked older in spite of his carefully dyed and curled hair and a certain
dandiness of dress, a relic of the D’Orsay days, which remained with him
to the end.

I used sometimes to fancy that when he walked in the streets leaning
on the arm of his faithful “mastiff,” as he playfully called Lord
Abergavenny, or Monty Corry, there was a slight purposeful exaggeration
of the old-man stoop; certainly when he stood upright to make a speech,
fired with excitement, there was no indication of any failing of
strength, though his eyes latterly lost their brilliancy. Those eyes
were the despair of Von Angeli when he painted his portrait for the
Queen. “Das Auge ist tot,” he said. The _Vanity Fair_ picture of him in
his long, pale brown coat, walking with Monty Corry, handsome, smart,
carefully groomed, and obviously so proud of his charge, was admirable.
Certainly no politician ever had a more devoted shadow than my dear old
friend Monty was to him. The affection between them was most touching.
Indeed Disraeli’s was one of those natures which compel affection by
their own generous power of giving it. He loved his friends and they
loved him.

One man, whom he had made, betrayed him; I knew that man well and was
acquainted with the whole story; but Disraeli had the magnanimity of
a noble character; no one ever heard him utter a word against the
confidential subordinate who had used him so ill. This may, perhaps,
be contrasted with the bitterness of his early attacks upon Peel. But
at the time of which I am writing he was no longer a disappointed man
struggling, as the French say, to “arrive.” He had “arrived,” and in his
proud position took no heed of the malice and venom of lesser men.

His conversation was always delightful; but nowhere did he shine more
than at the Sunday dinners of Baron Lionel de Rothschild. Those dinners
were indeed brilliant—Dizzy, Charles Villiers, the famous free-trade
member for Wolverhampton, and Bernal Osborne were almost always there;
John Delane, the Jupiter of the _Times_, another frequent guest.[37]
To listen to those wonderful wits, talking not for the gallery, but
throwing the ball to and fro for their own pleasure, was something worth
remembering. Those were conversational fireworks.

There were always one or two of the smartest and most beautiful women
present, and one or two young men—often Henry Calcraft and myself. Baron
Lionel himself was one of the wisest, kindest and noblest men that I ever
knew, and the Baroness, who must have been so beautiful in her youth,
was as a matron the picture of grace and dignity. In a Jewish house
Disraeli was always happy. He retained (witness “Coningsby”) the greatest
admiration for the people from whom it was his pride to have sprung. One
day I went to call upon Baron Lionel in Piccadilly.

“Your friend has just left me,” said the Baron.

“Whom do you mean?” I asked.

“Why, Dizzy, to be sure—he is your friend, isn’t he?”

I asked at haphazard what they had been talking about.

“Oh!” said the Baron, “as usual, the Race.”

The great fascination of Lord Beaconsfield’s talk lay in the grotesque
turn which he could give to the most ordinary subjects. His epithets
were sometimes quite startling, even in his Parliamentary speeches. A
friend of mine (I cannot remember who it was) once put this to me very
wittily and very sadly. The House of Commons had been sitting all night.
I went down to the House—to which my office gave me access—and saw the
green benches, not crowded, but occupied by a number of members looking
hideously debauched and being addressed by an Irishman, wild, unkempt,
unshorn. As I entered the lobby my friend came out. “This is a pretty
state of things,” he said, “and there is no one in authority. Hartington
has gone to Goodwood, Dizzy has gone to the Lords, and Gladstone is
reading Homer at Hawarden! If only Dizzy had been here he would have
crushed these men with an adjective!” It was so true!

One amusing instance of Dizzy’s adjectival powers is worth recording. Sir
William Harcourt had attacked him in one of his most telling speeches,
with which he had evidently shown great self-satisfaction, as, indeed,
was his right, though it was a little imprudent to do so, seeing with
whom he had to deal. When Sir William sat down Dizzy got up to reply, and
in his quiet, imperturbable way chaffed the honourable member about his
“Herodian oratory.” This puzzled all the newspapers, who made many futile
guesses at what the Prime Minister had meant. At last one paper—I think
it was the _Pall Mall Gazette_—said that the word which Mr. Disraeli had
used was Rhodian, not Herodian, the orators of Rhodes being in old times
famous for their eloquence! The next day there was a luncheon party at
Sir Stafford Northcote’s in Downing Street, and the conversation turned
upon the speech and the much-discussed adjective. Lady Northcote asked
Dizzy, who was present, what he really had said, and what he really had
meant. “My dear lady,” was the very solemn answer, “are we not told that
Herod made an oration and that he gave not God the glory?” There was a
roar of laughter, in which we all joined.

There was much sympathy between Sir William Harcourt and Disraeli.
Indeed, so close was the affection which the two bore to one another
that there was a moment when people imagined that they might join hands
politically. But that could not be. Sir William, for all his blue blood,
and his royal extraction, was too convinced a Radical to be able to
palter with the Carlton Club. He was a delightful companion, witty,
accomplished; it was a pleasure to the two heroes to fence socially,
sharpening their blades when the buttons were on the foils; but
politically, when the buttons were off, the tierce and quart were furious
enough.

Between Gladstone and Disraeli there was no love lost; the two rivals
were utterly opposite and cordially disliked one another. Disraeli
almost always spoke of Gladstone with a spice of contempt. Once he told
us how the Emperor of Brazil had sent him and Mr. Gladstone the grand
cordon of some order. “I wrote him a letter of warmest thanks which
could make the dear man believe that he had satisfied the one ambition
of my life; Gladstone sent his star back, with an expression of regret
that his Sovereign did not permit him to accept foreign decorations.
Clumsy fellow! Could he not have put it away in a drawer, as I did?”
I remember well the gusto with which he accentuated the words “Clumsy
fellow!” The truth is that there was in Gladstone a lack of that
man-of-the-worldliness which Dizzy admired so much in Lord Granville.

The patronage of the Captaincy of Deal Castle belongs to the Lord Warden
of the Cinque Ports. When Lord Clanwilliam died Lord Granville, who was
Lord Warden, appointed Lord Sydney in his place; at the same time, lest
there should be any misconception, Lord Granville, with that courtesy of
which he was such a master, wrote and told Lord Beaconsfield what he had
done. The answer was short and characteristic:

                               “Hughenden Manor, October 21st, 1879.

    “MY DEAR LORD,

    “Happy Sydney to be your neighbour!

                           “Yours sincerely,

                                                     “BEACONSFIELD.”

His notes were always charming. When he was living in Whitehall he wrote
to Count Pierre Schuvaloff, the Russian Ambassador, inviting him to
a little informal dinner, saying, “You will make six ladies happy and
five men jealous.” “Mon cher ami,” Schuvaloff said, when he showed me
the note, “elles étaient toutes grandmères!” He had, by the by, a very
high opinion of Schuvaloff’s ability. When he came back from Berlin
he was talking to me one day about the Congress, and the different
statesmen and diplomatists who had taken part in it, with several of
whom I was acquainted. Prince Gortchakoff and Schuvaloff were the two
Russian representatives, but Prince Gortchakoff was a very different man
from the Gortchakoff whom I had known some fifteen years before at St.
Petersburg. He had grown old and feeble, and, as Lord Beaconsfield put
it, lachrymose. Schuvaloff had to fight his battle alone, and, said Lord
Beaconsfield, “I was amazed at the way in which he held his own against
us all.” With all his dandified, rather frivolous ways, Schuvaloff struck
him as a very strong foeman.

That Bismarck shared this view of Count Schuvaloff is evident from his
“Gedanken und Erinnerungen.” Between Bismarck and Prince Gortchakoff
there had long been a sort of silent feud. Gortchakoff rather posed as
if he had been something like a Mentor to Bismarck, who latterly grew to
look upon him with ill-disguised contempt. He laughed at his vanity, his
boastfulness, and even at his readiness to accept a diplomatic snuffbox
mounted in diamonds, provided that they were “de bonnes grosses pierres”
(“Gedanken,” etc., Vol. II., p. 125). For Schuvaloff, on the contrary,
Bismarck had a great liking, and, indeed, the correspondence between the
two statesmen bears witness to an exceptional degree of respect and even
affection on both sides (II., 249-252).

Bismarck says in so many words that it was against the wish of the
Emperor of Russia that Gortchakoff took part in the Congress of Berlin,
and that although, as Chancellor of the Empire, he nominally had
precedence, it was Schuvaloff, officially his subordinate, who was
the real and only plenipotentiary for Russia, but Bismarck’s opinion
of him, formed during his embassy at St. Petersburg, is evident from
the following passage in the “Gedanken.” “Peter Schuvaloff, the most
far-seeing brain with which I came into contact there, a man who only
needed industry to play a leading part” (Vol, II., p. 244).

It is disappointing to find Lord Beaconsfield hardly mentioned in
Bismarck’s reminiscences. He had found his match and there was, perhaps,
a slight unwillingness (great men are not always above small vanities),
to allude to the man who, far more than himself, was master of the
situation during the Congress; but Berlin has not yet forgotten the
historic words with which he summed up his impressions of that famous
meeting: “Der alte Jude ist der Mann”—“The old Jew is the man.” It was
a great, if involuntary, tribute! The ordering of the special train,
which brought Bismarck post-haste to “the old Jew’s” quarters and forced
England’s views upon the panic-stricken Congress, was a volcanic triumph
such as has rarely, if ever, been equalled in diplomacy. That is how
peace with honour was carried back to England, to be proclaimed to the
eager crowd from a window in Downing Street.

There was one amusing incident in connection with the Berlin Congress:
one day it was announced that on the morrow Lord Beaconsfield was to
address the assembled statesmen and that he would speak in French. Lord
Odo Russell, who was a master of tongues, heard this with no little
alarm, for it was well known that Lord Beaconsfield’s French was very
much of the Stratford-atte-Bowe type. Lord Odo, always clever, went to
him and adroitly turned the conversation on to the next day’s conference.
Lord Beaconsfield announced his intention of speaking. “In what language
do you propose to speak?” asked Lord Odo. “In French,” was the answer. “I
am afraid that will be a very great disappointment to the colleagues,”
said Lord Odo. “You see, they know that they have here in you the
greatest living master of English oratory, and of course they are longing
to hear you.” The great man smiled his pleasure, and the speech was
delivered in English. Lord Odo was wont to declare that he never knew
whether he took the hint or accepted the compliment.

Poschinger, in his “Conversations with Prince Bismarck,” records the
following appreciation by the latter of Lord Beaconsfield during the
Berlin Congress: “I frequently had him to spend the evening with us; as
he was unwell he only came on the condition of being alone, and I thus
had many an opportunity of getting to know him well. I must say that, in
spite of his fantastic novel writing, he is a capable statesman, far
above Gortchakoff and many others. It was easy to transact business with
him; in a quarter of an hour you knew exactly how you stood with him;
the limits to which he was prepared to go were clearly defined, and a
rapid summary soon precised matters. Beaconsfield speaks magnificent and
melodious English, and has a good voice; he spoke nothing but English
at the Congress. The Crown Princess asked me about this time whether
Beaconsfield did not speak French very beautifully. I answered that I
had not heard anything of it up till then. ‘But in the Congress?’ she
inquired further. ‘He only speaks English,’ said I; ‘and here she dropped
the conversation,’ added the Chancellor in English, with a significant
gesture of his hand.”[38]

As regards what Bismarck called his “fantastic novel writing,” there may
be a word to be said. Perhaps of all his writings the one to which the
epithet “fantastic” might the most righteously be applied was “Lothair,”
and yet even in that book, of which superficial readers spoke with
some contempt, persons of more penetrating philosophical and political
judgment perceived depths which were unsuspected by the vulgar herd of
circulating-library subscribers. Lord Russell, for instance—no friend to
the author—expressed his amazement that people should fail to see what
deep significance underlay the gaudy trappings. In his view it was the
book of a political seer; and he was right. Did it not forewarn us of the
dangers of the Commune? The fiction of the novel-writer was in his hands
a vehicle for impressing the truths of the politician as they appeared to
him.

“Born in a library,” as he said of himself, he had amassed a rich store
of out-of-the-way book-lore, and would often puzzle the reporters with
some quotation that was quite new to them. I remember a speech to the
point (not that Horace could be called an out-of-the-way book), in which
he said that if anybody should disagree with him “naviget Anticyras.”[39]
This plunged the newspapers into the blackest of fogs. I met him the
next day and we laughed a good deal over their bewilderment and their
struggles to get out of the gloom. “Let this be a lesson to you, my dear
boy, never to use a quotation with which the reporters are not familiar.”

One day when he was in the House of Lords he was attacked by the Duke
of Argyll upon an Indian question, as to which he was only partially
instructed, and in his reply he made some hideous blunder which
fortunately nobody detected. Monty Corry, who had been listening on
tenterhooks, was waiting for him outside, and they walked away together,
as usual. “How could you make such a mistake?” asked Monty, “it was
uncommonly lucky that nobody found you out.” Lord Beaconsfield stopped
dead short, reflected for a second or two, and then said gravely and
solemnly: “My dear Monty, God is great! And upon my word I think He grows
greater and greater every day!”

I don’t think that he had much love for the Duke of Argyll. When Lord
Grey de Wilton (I think it was) spoke upon the address to the Queen at
an opening of Parliament he alluded to the Prime Minister as the “man at
the helm not to be spoken to.” The Duke presently got up and delivered
one of his slashing party speeches, in which his noble voice rang out
like a trumpet: “The noble lord has spoken of the man at the helm. My
Lords, there is _no_ man at the helm.” Lord Beaconsfield sat sphinx-like,
immovable, unreadable—but I do not think he liked it.

When it was expected that he would make a great speech in the House of
Lords the red benches were crowded. I once was present at the bar of the
House when an Indian question was raised by the Duke of Argyll in a very
powerful oration. Dizzy got up and answered the Duke, saying that the
papers would shortly be laid, and that he hoped the Duke would read them
“with pleasure and profit.” That was all—there was no speech, and great
disappointment. That time I don’t think the Duke liked it.

[Illustration: LORD BEACONSFIELD AND LORD ROWTON.

_From the “Vanity Fair” cartoon by Leslie Ward (“Spy”), by permission of
the Editor._]

One evening—it must have been in 1880, or very early in 1881—I met Lord
Beaconsfield at a dinner-party at Lady Airlie’s. He was in high good
humour, and when he had greeted the hostess came up to me and said, “We
have been having great fun in the House of Lords—a first-rate set-to
between the Duke of Argyll and Lytton.” I asked who got the best of
it. “Lytton! He gave the Duke two black eyes and a bloody nose.” Then
Matthew Arnold came up, and he changed the subject. I wondered if he
was thinking of the day when he acted as bottleholder to James Clay[40]
in his great fight with the skipper at Constantinople. He was very
proud of “Bob” Lytton, the son of his old friend—the man whom he made
Governor-General of India—recognizing in him a certain Oriental colouring
and poetic mysticism in which there was a kinship to his own genius.

Biography has so far scarcely done justice to Lord Beaconsfield’s memory.
Monypenny’s scholarly book is a wonderful example of the infinite
capacity for taking pains, but it altogether lacks that personal note
which is so attractive in the best biographies—Boswell’s “Johnson,”
Trevelyan’s “Macaulay,” Morley’s “Gladstone,” “The Life of Lord Randolph
Churchill,” are delightful, not only as history, but also and mainly
because of the long, intimate and personal connection in each case
between the writer and his subject.

It is difficult to say who could have given us a perfectly satisfactory
life of Disraeli, handing down to posterity a living picture of the man.
Lord Rowton had all the materials, but he suffered from acute laziness,
and there is nothing to show that he had the gift of penmanship. Henry
Calcraft, had he lived, might have done it. He knew Lord Beaconsfield as
intimately as it would be possible for a younger man to know one so much
his elder. He was very much behind the scenes in politics, and he could
write. I know no one else who could have had so much chance of success.

Monypenny’s book is like a posthumous portrait painted from photographs
in memory of a great man, by one who never knew him—it is wanting in
the life spark which only sittings could give. The study is excellent
history, but how one longs for those deft touches which belong to what
Goethe called “the world of the eye.” Mr. Buckle, on the other hand, in
his continuation has been more successful. He has contrived to breathe
soul into the cold marble statue of the first two volumes, and makes his
reader regret that he did not undertake the work from the beginning.

Disraeli’s veneration for his father, his love for his sister and
correspondent, Sarah, the tender reverence and gratitude in which he
embalmed the memory of his wife, his faithful, unswerving allegiance
to his friends, dead and alive, all these are traits in his character,
which could hardly be told with living force save by those who heard his
familiar talk, and listened to the music of a far-off sorrow which would
sometimes come into that noble voice. Happily he himself in his “Letters
Home,” and indirectly in his novels, has told us much of all this.

One morning, when he was living in Downing Street, I went to see him. It
happened to be the Queen’s birthday, and after we had sat talking for a
little while he made me give him my arm to walk across to the Foreign
Office and see the preparations for his official dinner. We stood looking
at the table, the flowers and all the glittering furniture of a great
state banquet, when all of a sudden he turned round, his eyes were dim,
and his voice husky, as he said: “Ah! my dear fellow, you are happy, you
have a wife.” He was thinking of that devoted lady who could literally
endure torture for his sake, and whose help he sorely missed to the end
of his days.

The story of her heroic devotion on a memorable occasion is so old that
it may be almost new. He was Chancellor of the Exchequer and was to make
a great speech. Mrs. Disraeli drove with him to the House, where she was
to leave him. In shutting the carriage the footman jammed her hand in the
door; the agony was excruciating, but she sat like grim death and uttered
never a word lest she should distract him at a moment when he needed all
his wits; when he left the carriage she fell back in a dead faint! All
her thoughts, all her heart, were centred in her husband and his fame;
he knew it, and was deeply grateful. She was older than he was, but had
been pretty, and as the widow of his colleague in the representation
of Maidstone she brought him a comfortable little private gentleman’s
fortune; but the expenses of public life were great, and I doubt whether,
even in spite of the legacy which he received from Mrs. Brydges Williams,
he was ever financially quite at his ease.

Of art for the sake of the beauty that is in it I do not think that he
had any very great appreciation—sculpture galleries, the glories of
Holbein, Raphael, Van Dyck, Sir Joshua, Gainsborough and the great
masters seemed to appeal to him chiefly as the fitting appanage of
powerful nobles and stately palaces. Just as Kant saw in pictures no
more than the vanity of the man who hung them up, so to Disraeli they
were sacred rather as representing pedigree and tradition than as the
inspiration of genius in the artist and a source of æsthetic pleasure to
the possessor.

On music I have heard him descant with but slight discrimination; but
success always appealed to him, and so he would be moved by the fame
of a great musician, or a great painter, whose art might perhaps fail
to stir his pulses. If he was as callous in these matters as I imagine
him to have been, it is curious that the only time when I saw him show
any excitement—for he was past master in the art of concealing what he
felt—should have been about a matter connected with art.

Sir Francis Grant died in 1878, and there was to be an election to the
honour of President of the Royal Academy. On the evening of the election
my wife and I dined at a very small party at Kensington Palace. I sat
next to Lord Beaconsfield. Before dinner was announced he asked me
whether I had heard anything as to the chances of the election. I told
him that I knew that Horsley was a rival candidate, but that he could not
have much prospect of beating Leighton. “Surely they will never be so
foolish as to elect anybody else. He is the very man for the place.” More
than once during dinner he returned eagerly to the subject, in which he
took no pains to hide his interest. “Ah! well!” I remember his saying at
last, looking at the clock, “it’s all over by now.”

I have spoken of his familiarity with rather out-of-the-way books. Upon
one occasion we were talking of Schliemann’s discoveries at Troy and of
Lowe’s refusal, when he was Chancellor of the Exchequer, to purchase
the contents of King Priam’s treasure house—a decision which I greatly
regretted. I mentioned that Lowe snuffed out the suggestion with a
quotation: “Etiam periere ruinæ” was all that he said. “Ah!” said Lord
Beaconsfield, “from Lucan’s ‘Pharsalia,’ a fine poem.” The quotation is
of course well known, but as Lucan is not one of the authors whom the
head masters have taken under their wing, I much doubt whether there
were two men in the two Houses of Parliament who could have said offhand
whence it came, or have given an opinion as to the merits of the poem.

Deeply read as he was, I never heard him talk of modern literature. The
only comparatively modern book that I knew him to praise was “Walpole’s
Letters.” Of those he spoke with enthusiasm: “No man need be dull who
possesses ‘Walpole’s Letters.’” Indeed, although he was himself a man of
letters, and had the deepest veneration for his father as a literary man,
he had but little knowledge of the writers of his own day. Probably he
was too much absorbed by politics to care for the society of the literary
brotherhood. On one occasion he asked me whether there was any man whom
he could invite to his official dinner on the Queen’s birthday as the
representative of letters.

His answer to a fine lady who at one of the Foreign Office parties asked
him “whether he wanted a really good novel?” raised much laughter. “My
dear, when I want a good novel I write it.”

Lord Beaconsfield as an actor was inimitable. He was a master of stage
effect, and he never gave a better example of his histrionic powers
than when, in 1877, he was attacked upon his appointment of Mr. Pigott
to the Controllership of the Stationery Office, which a committee of
the House of Commons had declared ought to be filled by a professional
stationer and printer. Ignoring this for wise and practical reasons,
when the office became vacant he appointed to the post, which was worth
£1,500 a year, Mr. Pigott, a clerk in the War Office. The truffle dogs
of the House of Commons scented a job, and yapped all the more fiercely
when they found out that Mr. Pigott was the son of the former rector
of Hughenden. The Conservative Whips somehow mismanaged the affair,
and a vote of censure was passed in the lower House by a majority of
four votes. There was a great commotion in the country and the _Times_
condemned the appointment as “too splendidly audacious.”

I went to the House of Lords to hear the great man’s answer to all this
hubbub. Never shall I forget the air of dejection, the hangdog look,
with which he entered the House. His head was bent, his gait uncertain,
and he sat down wearily beside the Duke of Richmond. When the clerk of
the Parliaments called upon him he rose slowly and proceeded to explain
the motives which had led him to the selection of Mr. Pigott. Then came
the personal note. “My Lords, it has been said in an assembly almost as
classical as that which I am addressing, that this appointment was a
job—that the father of Mr. Pigott was the parson of my parish, that I
had relations of long and intimate friendship with him, that he busied
himself in county elections, and that in my earlier contests in the
county with which I am connected I was indebted to his exertions. My
Lords, this is really a romance.”

Here his face began to brighten. “Thirty years ago there was a vicar of
my parish of the name of Pigott, and he certainly was father to this
gentleman. He did not owe his preferment to me, nor was he ever under
any obligation to me. Shortly after I succeeded to the property Mr.
Pigott gave up his living and retired to a distant county. I have never
had any relations with him. With regard to our intimate friendship and
his electioneering assistance, all I know of his interference in county
elections is”—here he drew himself up to his full height and looked round
the House with his hands in his favourite attitude, one on each hip with
the thumbs turned outwards—“is that before he departed from the County of
Buckingham he registered his vote against me.” The effect was electric;
the House of Lords for once was galvanized into something like life, and
as he sat down radiant and triumphant amid the cheers and laughter of the
good peers, I felt that I never had seen, and never again should see, so
fine a piece of acting. The Lord Beaconsfield who walked out of the House
that evening with a firm step was twenty years younger than the poor old
man, borne down with care, and the weight of years who had shuffled into
it so feebly an hour earlier.

The House of Commons apologized. Is this unique?

In June, 1879, London was stirred by the news of the death of the Prince
Imperial in the Zulu war. That afternoon Sir Coutts and Lady Lindsay had
invited a few people to see the pictures at the Grosvenor Gallery. As
I was going away I met Lord Beaconsfield on the stairs. He stopped me.
“This is terrible news,” he said. “Yes,” I answered, “and I am afraid
that the French will accuse our people of having deserted him and left
him to his fate.” “I am not so sure that they will be wrong,” he said,
and then after a pause, he added, “Well! my conscience is clear. I did
all that I could to stop his going. But what can you do when you have
to deal with two obstinate women?” With that he went on up the stairs,
leaving me under the impression that he wished what he had said to be
repeated.

The Empress overpersuaded the Queen, and the Prince went out. It was
a wild-cat scheme, for he was sent out with no status in the army and
therefore with no object, but the Empress thought that being a Buonaparte
fighting would give him and the dynasty prestige with his people—and so
an important life which could not but have weighed in the history of
Europe was sacrificed. He was a gallant lad, with good abilities, and a
great favourite with his contemporaries at our military college of whom
my brother-in-law was one and a great friend of his. I only met him once,
but was much struck by his charm of manner.

The weaknesses of great men should be recorded, otherwise anything in the
shape of a memoir, or even sketch, becomes what a German critic would
call a mere _Ja und Amen Buch_. Lord Beaconsfield’s weakness consisted in
occasionally, perhaps unconsciously, borrowing a good saying or epigram
which had struck his imagination and serving it up as his own. In the
famous case of his speech on the death of the Duke of Wellington he went
a step further and translated verbatim a speech or essay by Thiers on the
qualities which go to make up a great Captain.

Of course this was duly shown up[41] and was the subject of much ridicule
at the time—but he lived it down as he did all his other mistakes;
all men, great and small, make mistakes, but whereas the small men are
drowned, the great men rise up again; that is one true sign of greatness.

Almost his last speech, certainly his last great speech, was delivered
on March the 4th, 1881, upon the subject of the proposed evacuation of
Candahar, against which he fought stoutly and eloquently. In that speech
he used these words which have been preserved as a classical utterance:
“But, my Lords, the key of India is not Herat or Candahar. The key of
India is London.”

Prince Lobanoff was at that time Russian ambassador, and three years
later, when he was Chancellor of the Empire, we met at Contrexéville,
and used to breakfast, drive out, and dine together every day. He
talked a great deal of his London days and of his admiration for Lord
Beaconsfield. But he told me that the day before the delivery of the
Candahar speech he called in Curzon Street and had a long talk with
Lord Beaconsfield on the Indian question—the Russian question, as it
was called in England at that time. Lord Beaconsfield said: “We cannot
evacuate Candahar, for it is the key of India.” Prince Lobanoff answered:
“No! London is the key of India.” “Le lendemain il a reproduit mon mot
dans son fameux discours!”

Prince Lobanoff, by the by, was a great wit and a very accomplished
man. His collection of books, papers, pasquinades and MSS. concerning
the great French Revolution was unique. His sudden and tragic death
at Schepetowka when travelling in the suite of the Tsar on the return
journey from Vienna to Kiew on the 30th of August, 1896, meant a great
loss not only to Russia, but to his foreign friends. For a Russian
statesman and diplomatist he was singularly outspoken. We were talking
once about Russian politics. In answer to an observation of mine as to
the personal power of the Tsar he remarked: “Yes! so long as he is in
accord with the policy of his ministers. Lorsqu’un Empereur de Russie a
voulu s’opposer à la volonté de ses ministres, on a toujours trouvé moyen
de s’en débarrasser.” I was amazed!

Seldom has the month of March been more cruel, even in England, than it
was in 1881. The weather was bitter, and the blighting east wind seemed
to reduce men’s skin to powder. About the middle of the month we heard
that Lord Beaconsfield was ailing. The old story, a slight chill. At
first there was no anxiety, but when men were told after some days that
he was still in bed, they began to shake their heads. That sick bed in a
dull Curzon Street house (No. 19) was watched by some half dozen faithful
friends, Rowton, Barrington and two or three others, who prayed, and
prayed in vain, that the east wind might cease, for the doctors had said
that all depended upon a change from the west bringing a little warm
moisture into the air. It was hoping against hope; day after day the
blasts, charged with all the filth of the great city, blew fiercely and
yet more fiercely, bringing poison to those parched lungs. On the 19th of
April he died, choked by London.

The mourning was universal all over the country; never, except in the
case of King Edward’s death, have I seen so much feeling shown; he had
won his way into the hearts of the people, who knew that in him England
had lost not only a great statesman but a true lover. A mighty man had
fallen. Even his political enemies admitted that he left a void which
could not be filled.

There was no public funeral—no gorgeous ceremony in Westminster Abbey
or St. Paul’s Cathedral. He had willed it otherwise. He was buried as
he wished to be, by the side of his dearly loved wife, almost under the
shadow of those trees which had been so much to him and which gave their
name to the county[42] with which he was so long bound up. “You may tire
of mountains and rivers, you may tire of the sea, but you can never tire
of trees,” was a favourite saying of his. And so we laid him in his
grave, simply, reverently. There was none of the paid panoply of woe, but
great grief and true mourning. Men of all ranks were there, colleagues
and foes.

As I stood by the open grave I happened to be next to Sir William
Harcourt. In all that concourse there was no sadder face than that of
the man who had been his enemy and his friend for so many years. No one
mourned him more sincerely than the Queen, whose faithful servant he
had been, and who rewarded him with an affectionate gratitude which was
characteristic of her. She visited his grave and laid upon it an offering
of primroses, with the inscription in her own hand, “His favourite
flower.” Alive she had loaded him with honours; when he was dead she paid
that last simple tribute of respect to his memory.

The “his” in the Queen’s inscription referred to the Prince Consort,
whose favourite flower the primrose was. Borthwick, Drummond Wolf and
others took it to refer to Lord Beaconsfield, and upon that mistake the
Primrose League was founded! Lord Beaconsfield loved all trees and all
flowers except the chrysanthemum—“the only vulgar flower”—he once said to
me; but chrysanthemums have been wonderfully improved since his day. The
Queen had been in the habit of talking much to Lord Beaconsfield about
the Prince Consort, and his sympathy never failed her. He would have
understood the Queen’s meaning when she spoke of “his” favourite flower.
It was a tender and a gracious thought to lay upon that grave a nosegay
of the humble flower which was dear to her because it had been dear to
the husband whom she had lost and whom she had never ceased to mourn.

In the month of June I had to go and see Dean Stanley in order to settle
with him the place in Westminster Abbey for Lord Beaconsfield’s statue—a
last sad duty in connection with the dead Chief. The Dean suggested the
position where the statue now stands—I concurred—“and,” said he, “I
shall put Gladstone there, facing him.” Very shortly afterwards I had
to go abroad, and at St. Moritz I received the news of the dear Dean’s
death. Mr. Gladstone, whom he intended to “place there,” survived him by
seventeen years.

That was the last time that I saw Dean Stanley, with whom I often had
official relations, rendered the pleasanter in that he was a connection
of my wife’s and the much loved friend of her family. As we were leaving
the Abbey, I made some remark about the vandals who carve and write their
names in the most sacred places. “Yes,” he said, “but even in these
outrages there are sometimes compensations,” and he led me to a place
where, scratched on the wall, were the letters I. W., saying, “Isaac
Walton, I truly believe.”

Dean Stanley was a little man, insignificant in stature, rather shabbily
dressed, with a sharply cut nose and chin, a keen, penetrating look.
His lustrous eyes would sometimes blaze up as if lighted by some hidden
flame. He was not exactly eloquent, nor great in conversation. But when
he was excited his enthusiasm was arresting and infectious. His great
charm was universally acknowledged even by his bitterest theological
opponents, and personally, everybody loved him, from the Queen downwards.
He and his wife were among her trustiest friends. His attitude to the
dogmas of the Churches was that of St. Paul to “Jewish fables.” His
Christianity was the teaching of Christ. I have often thought that,
unless the haziest of traditions be absolutely worthless, the small,
eager, dark man that was St. Paul must have been very like Dean Stanley.
Both zealots, both fierce fighters, both so lovable.

One last word about Lord Beaconsfield. The abuse that has been showered
upon him would fill volumes. No less has been written in his defence. He
has been accused of being an adventurer, a pretentious fop, an impostor,
a self-seeking charlatan, who by some uncanny means contrived to cajole
the Tory party, and to become master of the landed gentry of England.
Nothing could be more untrue. Had he been what his detractors described
him, he never could have won the confidence of perhaps the most exclusive
caste in the whole world.

Benjamin Disraeli was an aristocrat to his fingers’ tips. He belonged
by descent to the Sephardim, that proud race of Jews who, “in the time
of Cicero, had been settled immemorially in Spain.”[43] Theirs was a
nobility which dated back by tradition to Abraham, that Arab chieftain
whose wanderings from the fringe of the desert to Damascus and Padan-Aram
are recorded in the Book of Genesis. “That,” says a great writer who is
no friend to the Jews, “is nobility in the fullest sense of the word,
genuine nobility of race! Beautiful forms, noble heads, dignity in speech
and deportment ... that out of such men prophets and psalmists should go
forth, that I understood at the first glance.” Those words might stand
for a portrait of Disraeli.

The aristocracy to which he belonged sprang from another continent,
another world from ours; but alien though it might be, it brought
him into close sympathy with the bluest blood in England, and that,
I take it, is why he was able to gain an intimate personal influence
in the inner sanctuaries of politics and of society which had never
been achieved by men springing from the middle class, not even by Sir
Robert Peel. “When I was a young and struggling man,” he is reported
to have said shortly before his death, “they taunted me with being an
adventurer. Now that I have succeeded they still bring the same reproach
against me. Me! whose ancestors may have had personal relations with the
Queen of Sheba!” It was a jest expressing a conviction, for, like the
poet Heine—also a Jew by birth, a Christian by confession, in whom the
Philhellenic attraction of years paled before the romance of the Old
Testament—as he grew older he became more and more imbued with a sacred
sense of ancestry.

No mere vulgar adventurer could have welded into shape the Young England
party—his first great political achievement. Lord John Manners, Baillie
Cochrane (Lord Lamington), George Smythe, afterwards Lord Strangford,
were men of family, high culture, and distinction. Not for one moment
would they have admitted to their intimacy, and fallen under the sway
of, a man whom they did not deem their equal. But Benjamin Disraeli,
the descendant of the Princes of the Desert, possessed a magnetic spark
of the mysterious sacred fire which made him as welcome to those great
Dames who ruled Almack’s with a rod of iron as to Kensington Gore,
where D’Orsay was King and Lady Blessington Queen of a society half
aristocratic, half Bohemian, wholly delightful. This it was which finally
enabled him to win over and mould to his purpose the haughty magnates of
the Carlton Club.

Almost all his associations, almost all his friends, were among those
whose forbears had made history. He was fascinated by the power of race,
though sometimes he could not help remembering that even the descendants
of Crusaders were but the mushroom aristocracy of a single night by the
side of those of the courtiers of King Solomon. “Don’t talk to me of
dukes! Dukes can be made!” he said impatiently on a memorable occasion
when a great public dinner was kept waiting for a duke who was to take
the chair. But those were mere passing whims. To the end the ladies
whose society he courted were those who had been foremost queens of
fashion in his boyish days. The Russian Ambassador might sneer at them as
being “toutes grand’mères,”—for Dizzy, their race endowed them with the
charm of eternal youth; he enwrapped them in a poetical halo which had
the magic power of the Fontaine de Jouvence. Chief among them were the
three beautiful Forester sisters—Lady Chesterfield, Mrs. Anson and Lady
Bradford. Mrs. Anson died comparatively young, but the other two sisters
reigned as goddesses in his Olympus so long as he lived. Tithonus grows
old; Aurora never.

Among his male friends there was none of whom he spoke with such
affectionate admiration as he did of Count D’Orsay. Dandy, wit and
artist, recognized as the handsomest man of his day, the grandson of
a King, the spoilt child of society in Paris and London—the brilliant
Frenchman appealed to an Oriental imagination which, as is well known,
was always dazzled by splendour and colour. I never saw Count D’Orsay,
for he died when I was but fifteen years old, and he had left England for
a year or two before that; but according to the testimony of such various
men as my father, Lord Beaconsfield, Jem Macdonald, Alfred Montgomery,
and others he must have been a striking personality, exceptionally gifted
and attractive. Even the great Duke of Wellington could not resist his
fascination.

I have already mentioned some of the men to whom Dizzy was attached, but
there was one for whom he entertained an especial liking and respect,
though in him, as his estimate of him quoted by Monypenny shows, he was
sensible of some shortcomings. Apart from ancient lineage, which he
lacked, Lord Lyndhurst possessed many of the beauties, both of mind and
form, in which Lord Beaconsfield recognized the hero. When I knew him the
ex-Chancellor was a very old man, for he died at the age of ninety-one
in 1863. Aged as he was, his mind was as active and bright as ever, and
though he wore a wig, he retained to the end something more than traces
of the splendid masculine beauty for which he had once been famous. I
have heard men say that when he delivered one of his great speeches he
was as good to look upon as he was to hear. He was at one time threatened
with blindness, but mercifully his eyes were saved. It was a green old
age, noble and beautiful, tended by the love of wife and daughter.

His memory was prodigious. I remember one remarkable instance of it. I
was dining one night at his house in George Street, Hanover Square, when
there were two or three racing grandees present—among them Baron Meyer de
Rothschild (Lady Rosebery’s father), Sir Robert Peel, and Lord Coventry.
Baron Meyer had at that time a mare called Tomyris about which there was
some excitement among Turfites. “Baron, what made you call that mare of
yours Tomȳris?” asked Sir Robert, with a strong accent on the second
syllable. “I’m sure I don’t know,” answered the Baron, “I suppose because
she’s by King Tom.” But the old Lord had caught Sir Robert’s false
quantity. “Tomȳris! who said Tomȳris?” he asked. “Don’t you remember the
story of Tomȳris the Queen of the Massagetæ who conquered and killed
Cyrus?” and then he went off at score telling the gruesome legend of
how, to avenge the death of her son, she caused the dead King’s head to
be cut off and put into a skin filled with human blood, saying: “You
wanted to drink blood, now drink your fill of it!” And then the old Lord
added: “You will find the whole story at the end of the first book of
Herodotus.” When I got home I looked up the passage. Surely a marvellous
example of memory.

Immersed as he had been in law and politics for seventy years—a
life-time—how many years must have passed since he could have had leisure
to read Herodotus? Outside his own house I never met him but once. There
was a great ball at Apsley House, and the grand old Chancellor had
himself carried upstairs and wheeled into the ballroom to see the young
folk dance. I was standing by his chair when the Duke of Wellington came
up to bid him welcome. There was a touch of pathos in the handsome old
man’s voice as he said, “Ah! time was when I used to skip up those stairs
gaily enough, when I came to see your dear father.” The great Duke was
but three years older than Lord Lyndhurst, but he had already been dead
some ten years. The two had not only been political allies when Lord
Lyndhurst was Chancellor in the Duke’s Administration, but they were firm
friends, and the affection lived in the survivor when the friendship had
ceased to be aught but a happy memory.

To us who loved him, Lord Beaconsfield remains a brilliant and an
inspiring memory; of those who did not love him I believe that none would
now even listen to the malignity with which he was once assailed. Though
they disapprove of his principles, they admit that he was actuated by no
selfish motives and that under his rule England was governed in a spirit
of true patriotism. That verdict would have been the realization of all
his ambition.




CHAPTER XXXVI

THE OFFICE OF WORKS


Lord Henry Lennox was First Commissioner of Works when I was appointed
Secretary. He was not at all in a frame of mind to be in love with the
business of the department. In fact he was a disappointed man, deeply
hurt at not being in the Cabinet and not a little angry at seeing a
rival, Mr. Ward Hunt, made First Lord of the Admiralty, an office to
which he conceived himself to have a just claim. This put an end to the
old affectionate friendship which Mr. Buckle has recorded as existing
between him and the Chief. He never forgave the indignity which he
considered had been put upon him. As he once said of himself, he had
inherited something of the character of his French ancestress, Louise de
Kéroualle.

Mr. Disraeli was a much abused man, but I doubt whether in all England
he was spoken of with such venomous acerbity as he was by Lord Henry;
and although after he had left the Ministry, and when Lord Beaconsfield
returned from Berlin in 1878, he took upon himself more or less to
organize the reception at Charing Cross, that was done for peculiar and
personal reasons; the poison never ceased to rankle. Lord Henry took very
little interest in the business of the office, and it was not an easy
matter to get him even to pay attention to the Estimates which it was his
duty to defend in the House of Commons.

On one occasion, after vain endeavours on my part to coach him up in
the details of the various votes, he gathered up his papers at the last
moment, and saying: “Impudence befriend me!” put on his hat and hurried
away. Impudence did befriend him, for when the vote for the Royal Parks
came on some member who “wanted to know,” asked “What is the Longford
River?” (as a matter of fact the Longford River is an aqueduct made in
Charles the First’s time for the supply of water to Hampton Court Palace;
for some mysterious reason best known to themselves the Treasury included
the estimate for its maintenance in the Parks vote). Lord Henry, who had
not the remotest idea of what the Longford River was, looked sternly
with an air of rebuke at the too inquisitive member, and answered, “The
Longford River, sir, is one of the Royal Parks.” I, sitting under the
Gallery, was in an agony, but the House did not so much as smile. Had the
Longford River been included in the vote for Royal Palaces—which is where
it ought to have been—he probably would have told the House that it was
one of the Royal Palaces.

Those were halcyon days for ministers, who were seldom or never worried
over their Estimates by inquisitorial members; days when the numberless
complicated votes of the Office of Works were run through in a sitting
almost without a question. The heckling of ministers was an instrument of
torture invented a few years later by that brilliant brotherhood known
as the Fourth Party, under the lead of Lord Randolph Churchill, and
afterwards carried on with much self-satisfaction and unction by such
men as Sir George Campbell, an old Indian official, Mr. Peter Rylands,
the “Good old Peter gone wrong,” over whose defection upon the Home Rule
question Mr. Gladstone shed oratorical tears, and others. Under their
united attacks the defence of Estimates became a ministerial nightmare.

One day I met Lord Randolph in the Park; it was the morning after a
series of awkward moments which my chief, the Liberal Government being
then in power, had been undergoing—I suffering vicariously, a dumb dog
under the Gallery. We walked together, and at last I said: “My dear
Randolph, for goodness sake leave my unhappy Estimates alone!” “Very
sorry for you, my dear fellow,” was the answer, “but we must harass the
Government.”

And harass them he did, for that was an art in which, even in those early
days of a Parliamentary career which became so famous, he was already
an adept. He held stoutly to the creed that it was the duty of Her
Majesty’s Opposition (who invented that phrase?) to oppose, and he acted
up to his belief with all the great strength that was in him.

Randolph, as I first knew him, was the most delightful of boys, bubbling
over with fun and the sweetest devilry, devoted to his father, idolizing
his mother, that great Lady whom those whom she admitted to her intimacy
were fain to worship; ready to sacrifice himself and incur for his
brother’s sake what to most men would have been akin to social torture.

When he had reached young-manhood and was already giving to a budding
moustache the hoist made famous by John Tenniel and the caricaturists, he
was always ready to give up any pleasure of his own if he could be of any
use to one of those dear to him. His patience as a chaperon was saintly.
Who could help loving him? Not I, for one—I treasure the memory of his
friendship as one of the most precious recollections of a long life.

By his desire I was one of the pall-bearers at the funeral of his
brother; him too I had known from a boy, a youth of great promise marred
by fate, shining in many branches of human endeavour, clever, capable of
great industry, and within measurable distance of reaching conspicuous
success in science, mathematics and mechanics, when his early death
snapped the thread of what might have been a brilliant career, had not
the gods willed it otherwise.

Lord Randolph Churchill’s memory has been crystallized by his brilliant
son in one of the three best biographies in the English language, and
he has, moreover, been celebrated in a sketch written by his friend and
schoolfellow, Lord Rosebery. What more is there to say?

The sad story of his resignation of the Chancellorship of the Exchequer
has been often told. A few days later he and his old crony and mine,
Sir George Wombwell, now, alas! no more, but then one of the very few
surviving officers of the charge of the Light Brigade at Balaclava,
were staying with me at Batsford. With the intimacy of old friends we
talked of the bolt which he had hurled out of the blue. I can see him
now leaning against the chimney-piece in the library when he said, “I
never thought of that damned fellow Goschen.” He believed, and he was
very nearly right, that he held all the trump cards in his hand, and that
he could dictate his own terms as to that reduction of expenditure upon
which he was bent. He did not suspect that Goschen was ready to take his
place. Almost in the same breath, in answer to a question of mine about
Lord Salisbury’s attitude, he exclaimed: “That man is an angel!” and then
went on to express regret, I am bound to say in no measured terms, as to
the female influence by which the great Marquis had allowed himself to
be dominated. Over and over again he insisted upon his affection for his
chief, and dwelt with strong expressions of gratitude upon the kindness
which he had received from him. It was a touching tribute, coming from
the heart; a noble heart, which at that moment must have been feeling
bruised and sore, but was incapable of nurturing an ungenerous animosity.

Not long after my first appearance in the House of Commons, the fatal
illness to which he fell a victim began to assert itself. We who
loved him watched his gradually failing utterances in great sorrow.
He struggled bravely, but it was in vain. The House, a just and even
generous assembly, remembered the lightning flashes by which it had been
electrified but a short time back—the bold and vigorous attacks when the
young Ivanhoe tilted at the shield of the veteran Templar—the scathing
criticism of foes—the magnanimous defence of friends. Members from the
front benches downwards listened with respect; but it was manifestly the
end: the highly-strung, passionate nature had broken down, and there was
no hope. But all this belongs to later years: I am writing here of a time
when Randolph Churchill was still a merry, devil-may-care youth just
entering upon the first phase of his Parliamentary life as the spoilt
child of politics.

The mention of such a name as his calls up memories, and when I begin
remembering my humble chronology is scattered to the winds, and, as
usual, I wander. I ought to have kept the few lines which I feel
compelled to write in loving memory of him for any notes which I could
make of my days in the House of Commons; but I can only tell my story in
my own untidy way.

Lord Henry Lennox was succeeded in 1876 by Mr. Gerard Noel, who had been
the chief Parliamentary Whip of the Tory party. He was a most delightful
personality, whom everybody liked and respected, and it was a real
happiness to work under him. Much of the business of the office was very
congenial to him and he took the greatest interest in everything that
concerned the Royal Parks. What a joy it must be to have the tact and the
power of pleasing that he had!—to feel that every man is glad to see you
and welcome you, every man sorry when the time comes to say farewell! And
Mr. Adam, who succeeded him, for the Office of Works seemed to be the
heritage of First Whips, was just such another.

If some good fairy were to ask me to choose a gift with which to enter
the world, I should ask for tact, and I should wish it to be just such
tact as was possessed by Mr. Noel and Mr. Adam. The reign of the latter
lasted but a short time, for at the end of 1880 he was appointed to go as
Governor to Madras, and then he paid me the handsomest compliment that
one man could offer to another. Though civil servants, of course, put
their politics in their pockets so long as they are in office, he knew
quite well that I belonged to the opposite camp, but in spite of that
he asked me to go with him to India as secretary. I could not accept,
for the appointment was one which would cease with his governorship. In
spite of that, had I been unmarried, I think I should have gone with him,
for he was one of those men whom it is a joy to serve. In less than six
months he died in India, so I should have been stranded.

Mr. Shaw Lefevre followed Mr. Adam as First Commissioner. By one of
those wonderful inconsistencies, which, thanks to the ability and
devotion of the permanent civil servants of the Crown, England, in
some incomprehensible way, manages to survive, Mr. Shaw Lefevre, who
had devoted his whole life and energies to the solution of problems
connected with the land, had been sent to the sea, and made Secretary to
the Admiralty. But being a man of ability and industry, he was obviously
marked for promotion. He had a great power of mastering detail and was a
most valuable exponent in Parliament of the very complicated Estimates
of his department which, in addition to all the services which it now
controls, had at that time to deal with the Ordnance Survey, Kew Gardens
and those parks (Victoria, Kennington and Battersea) which are now
managed by the County Council. Mr. Shaw Lefevre, moreover, though as
First Commissioner he did not have a seat in the Cabinet, had the knack
of bringing great influence to bear upon the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
and was thus able to push through more than one useful scheme, some of
which had been periodically shelved.

The last two months of 1882 were a busy time for the Office of Works.
On the 18th of November the Queen reviewed the troops that had come
back from Egypt on the Horse Guards Parade in St. James’ Park. The
arrangements for the review, erection of stands, issue of tickets and
other details fell upon us. It was a difficult undertaking on account of
the smallness of the space; however, we got through it without a hitch.
Lord Wolseley was delighted; and came up to me in the evening, saying,
“To-day was your triumph.”

Lord Wolseley was always very friendly to me. I used to meet him
very often at Eastwell during the tenancy of the Duke and Duchess of
Edinburgh, with whom he was intimate, and we often had long and very
interesting talks. Like most successful men—and he was very successful—he
had his enemies; but also, like most men who have rendered good services
and done really great work in the world, I always found him as singularly
modest about his own achievements as he was firm in his opinions,
especially as regarded administration. Naturally the _noli me tangere_
school dreaded and disliked him.

A very serious matter, which gave rise to no little anxiety, was the
opening of the Law Courts by Queen Victoria on the 4th of December.
The Government were seriously alarmed lest there should be any attempt
upon Her Majesty’s life by Fenians, who had been giving a great deal
of trouble. In Ireland there had been many murders, the chief and most
tragic of which was that of Lord Frederick Cavendish and Mr. Burke, on
the 7th of May, and it was known that plots had been hatched for the
blowing up of public buildings and monuments in England.

A marked man among the conspirators, who had hitherto eluded all
endeavours to arrest him, was one Tynan, known among the fraternity as
“Number One,” a rebel who, it was believed, would hesitate at no crime.
It was a time of anxiety which, as after events, such as the attempts to
blow up the Tower, London Bridge and the House of Commons, proved was not
without justification, and I was in daily communication with Sir Edmund
Henderson, the Chief Commissioner of Police. He was a delightful man to
do business with, so wise, so cool and imperturbable—a man who inspired
confidence. He had, moreover, a rare sense of fun and humour.

In spite of Fenian activities the opening of the new Law Courts was held
to be a national and historic occasion of such importance that it was
fitting that the opening ceremony should be performed by the Queen. Her
Majesty, who might well have felt a little nervous, was not the sort
of person to shirk a duty on account of danger. She had the gift of
indomitable courage and did not hesitate for a moment.

Naturally every precaution was taken. On the evening before the opening I
was sent, with a strong force of police, the clerk of the works and two
or three trusty workmen to go over the whole building and see that there
was no person and nothing dangerous concealed anywhere. We searched the
place from cellar to roof, leaving a policeman at every door; immediately
under the spot where the Queen was to stand we found a mysterious and
most suspicious box: there was some alarm and there were some blank
faces, but the clerk of the works came up and the guilty-looking box
was able to prove its innocence; it contained nothing but a few broken
ornamental tiles which the workmen had forgotten to take away.

After the examination of the building my orders were to go to the
_Times_ office and draw up a memorandum stating what had been done, the
Government knowing that there was much uneasiness which it would be well
to allay.

It was a splendid ceremonial and the whole affair passed off
prosperously, though I may say in passing that there was one feeling of
deep regret among all who knew him, that Mr. Street, the architect, a man
of perfect distinction, had died the previous year. Had he lived he would
undoubtedly have received the honour of knighthood in the great hall
which his genius had designed.

The Queen’s presence on the occasion bore good fruit. Not only did it
give an immense amount of pleasure to her people, but politically it was
of great avail in calming anxiety.

And now comes the curious part of the story. The guard of honour outside
the Courts was furnished by the Queen’s Westminster Volunteers. The
next day, in Whitehall Place, I met Colonel Bushby, who commanded them.
He was in a state of great agitation. He told me that he had just
discovered, to his horror, that the centre file of the guard of honour
was no other than Tynan, the famous Number One! It seems that the man
had enlisted, bringing unexceptionable letters of recommendation, and
had been an excellent recruit, nobody suspecting anything wrong. When
it was known that the regiment was to furnish the guard of honour, he
went to the orderly room where the Colonel and Adjutant were, and begged
to be allowed to serve on it. They refused on the ground that he was
not tall enough; however, he prayed so earnestly, saying that he was
leaving England for good at once, and it would be such a pride to him in
after days to think of this honour, that they were touched by the man’s
enthusiasm and Colonel Bushby said, “Well, if we make you the centre file
it won’t so much matter, so we will let you serve.”

How the discovery was made I do not remember, but poor Bushby was on
his way to Sir Edmund Henderson to make a clean breast of it. Meanwhile
the man had disappeared, and I believe was not heard of again. It made
me shudder to think what might easily have happened in spite of all
precautions, had the man meant to do the evil thing of which he was
supposed to be capable. Evidently the Devil was not so black as his
portrait. Needless to say, the Queen was never told all this.

On my arrival at the office that morning I found a charming little note
from Mr. Gladstone—always so gracious—telling me that he had recommended
me to the Queen for the honour of C.B.; also a note from Sir Henry
Ponsonby, saying, “I think you deserve to be congratulated on yesterday’s
proceedings. They were most successful and the Queen highly pleased.”

When I went to Windsor to be invested, the Queen sent afterwards to
desire me to write my name in her private book. I mention this because,
by a curious coincidence, the name preceding mine was that of my old
chief, Sir Harry Parkes.

Here is one amusing story in connection with the Fenian scare which,
after all these years, it can do no harm to tell. The police had received
intelligence that a certain rich Irish-American was starting from New
York with the intention of blowing up the Albert Memorial in Kensington
Gardens. Sir Edmund Henderson came to see me and told me all about it,
and the steps which he considered ought to be taken. The man arrived
at Liverpool and, I need hardly say, was met by his shadow. Reaching
London, he drove to Long’s Hotel in Bond Street, and within an hour or
two, drove straight to the Memorial, where he found a number of quiet,
inoffensive-looking people absorbed in the contemplation of the various
sculptures. This happened two or three days in succession, after which
he changed his hotel. He had plenty of money and spent his evenings in
amusing himself at theatres and music halls. But in the day-time the
attraction of the Albert Memorial was irresistible. It was unfortunate
for his schemes that so many other people should all of a sudden be
equally fascinated by its charms.

The whole thing came to an end in an unexpected way. One night, after
the play, the would-be iconoclast was driving to St. John’s Wood with a
lady, when the driver of his hansom cab became aware that another cab was
following them. The driver of the hansom was a good-natured fellow, and,
thinking that his fare was being watched for divorce proceedings, told
him what he had seen. The game was up, and it was a case of stalemate.
The Irishman knew that he was found out, and the police had nothing
tangible upon which they could act. So there was disappointment for
the one player, and a rapid return to America for the other. When the
good-natured cabman, being questioned, told the detective how he had let
the cat out of the bag and spoilt sport, he was perhaps the sorest of the
three.

In the month of November, 1883, I had a very interesting experience.
There was a scheme on foot for uniting the north and south of western
London by an underground railway, which would have been carried under a
part of Hyde Park. It was essential that the Queen’s pleasure should be
taken upon the subject, and I was instructed to go to Balmoral in order
to explain to Her Majesty exactly what had been proposed.

There was an idea abroad that to tunnel under the Park would drain the
soil of all natural moisture, and even that the roots of the trees would
be affected. Whatever reasons there might be against the project, I felt
sure that this danger was exaggerated. Looking at the plane trees and the
catalpas by the Houses of Parliament, it was evident that the underground
railway had done them no harm. I went to Kew in order to consult Sir
Joseph Hooker as to the maximum depth to which the roots of trees reach.
He told me that very little was understood upon the subject, and he knew
of no authoritative writer to whom he could refer me. However, after
some search he unearthed a French pamphlet which was full of interest.
From this it appeared that in proportion to its height wheat is probably
the plant which sends down the deepest roots; this would account for
the prosperity of the plant in dry seasons when other crops fail. Of
trees the vine was said to be the deepest; as a denizen of the limestone
rocks its roots have to travel far, piercing through chinks and crannies
in order to seek water. This was interesting, because it showed that
possibly the old story that the great vine at Hampton Court sends its
roots out all the way to the Thames may be true. Since that time a tree
closely allied to the laburnum was discovered in India, which sent its
roots so deep that they broke off in a deep well long before their ends
were found. In any case it was clear that the roots of the trees in Hyde
Park, all of which are very shallow, would not be affected. But this is a
mere parenthesis.

I arrived at Ballater in the afternoon of the 12th of November, prepared
to take a room at the inn and go on to Balmoral after a bath. However,
at the station I found a carriage and a footman with a note saying that
I was to go on and sleep at Balmoral. It was bitterly cold and snowing
heavily, but when I reached the Castle a second note from Sir Henry
Ponsonby was awaiting me. “Please go to your room, order tea and make
yourself comfortable. We are off to a picnic.”

It was real Queen’s weather, for she loved the cold, as I well knew,
for whenever we had to prepare for any ceremony at which she was to be
present, we had to watch the thermometer jealously. As for me, I sat
huddled up, dozing over the fire, thinking that if I were a polar bear
I might possibly enjoy such weather, when, after a couple of hours, Sir
Henry Ponsonby came in looking frozen. We had a little talk while he
thawed and then he left me. Presently there came a knock at the door and
a page announced, “Mr. Mitford is to dine with the Queen this evening.”

At dinner—quite a small party—I sat next to Princess Beatrice, who was
on the Queen’s right, and Her Majesty talked a great deal to me across
the Princess. She was in great spirits, and her conversation, as always,
was most interesting. She had such a fund of knowledge and her memory
was so rich that it was a delight to listen to her. Without for a moment
sacrificing one jot of that dignity for which she was famous the Queen
had a great sense of humour. Perhaps it was her appreciation of wit that
was one of the secrets of the favour in which Sir Henry Ponsonby was so
long held at Court, for he was a man of a most delicate wit, and without
compare the best note-writer that I ever came across.

The talk at the Queen’s table, when the numbers were so small as to
make it more or less intimate, was gay, lively, and, when Her Majesty
drew upon her own recollections, illuminating. After dinner in the
drawing-room each guest had his little audience. When it came to be
my turn to be sent for I supposed that the Queen would allude to the
business which had brought me, but upon that she was studiously silent,
talking upon every conceivable subject with all the conversational talent
of a consummately informed woman of the world.

The next day the snow had come to an end, the weather was glorious,
the air crisp and sharp, and I had a long walk with my old friend, Sir
Walter Campbell, who was groom-in-waiting. But there was still no word
of business. In the evening I was again summoned to dine with the Queen,
and after dinner had my audience, at which, as before, Her Majesty very
delightfully avoided any mention of business, treating me in all respects
as if I had been an invited guest instead of a mere official on duty.

Immediately after breakfast on the following morning there came a knock
at my door. It was the Duchess of Roxburghe bringing me from the Queen a
copy of the large illustrated edition of her “Journal in the Highlands”
with her autograph. She also told me the hour at which the Queen would
see me to discuss my business. Her Majesty went very carefully into the
whole scheme, examining the plans and criticizing them minutely; she
ended by saying, rather sadly: “But I so seldom go to London now that
I hardly feel as if I had the right to express an opinion.” My answer
was: “I only wish, Madam, that we at the Office of Works oftener had the
opportunity of profiting by Your Majesty’s advice.”

The Queen dismissed me with great kindness and I left the Castle that
afternoon.

The congestion of the traffic at Hyde Park Corner caused by the
increasing railway business at Victoria Station had long been a
difficulty confronting the Office of Works. Decimus Burton’s arch,
standing flush with Piccadilly, was then the entrance to the Green Park.
On it, to the lasting sorrow of the architect, stood the colossal statue
of the Duke of Wellington on horseback, by Matthew Wyatt. A work of art
which provoked from a French general the grateful cry, “Enfin nous sommes
vengés.”

Various schemes were brought forward to solve the difficulty; none was
satisfactory. It was obvious that a wider approach to Grosvenor Place was
essential to success. There were many obstacles in the way, the chief of
which was the difference in levels. Old people will remember that the
approach to the Green Park from Grosvenor Place was by a narrow passage,
a steep slope at the north-west end of Buckingham Palace garden. Had we
been dealing with a bare piece of virgin ground without limitations no
doubt a better scheme might have been possible; but to carry out such
a plan would have involved taking a large slice off the Green Park and
another off the end of the Palace garden—neither was practicable.

An infinitesimal piece of the park was conceded, but there still remained
the difficulty of the arch, which would have remained in an absurd
island, perched up on a hillock above the surrounding roads. I proposed
that it should be removed and placed where it now stands, at the end of
Constitution Hill. I showed the plan, which was prepared accordingly by
Mr.—afterwards Sir—John Taylor, to Mr. Gerard Noel, who was then First
Commissioner of Works. He took it to Lord Beaconsfield. The Government
did not wish to spend any money—a chronic condition of things—and the
Prime Minister crushed the scheme with a _bon mot_. “Do away with the
congestion of traffic at Hyde Park Corner? Why, my dear fellow, you
would be destroying one of the sights of London!” And so for the time
the plan was laughed out of court and pigeon-holed. In 1884 Mr. Shaw
Lefevre persuaded the Government to take in hand a matter which was daily
becoming more urgent. The scheme was carried out.

Naturally, in order to remove the arch, the statue must come down, and
then came the great question, Was it to go back again? This was just the
sort of problem which would provoke violent differences of opinion. I
had a great deal of talk about it with the Prince of Wales, who took the
liveliest interest in it, and finally appointed a committee of advice,
which met at Marlborough House and at which he took the chair.[44] The
two protagonists for replacing the statue and against so doing were the
Dukes of Rutland and Wellington. Filial piety prompted the former to
stand up stoutly for a statue erected by a committee of which his father
had been chairman; filial piety caused the Duke of Wellington to raise
his voice against replacing what he considered to be an insult to his
father’s memory. The duel became very comic. The Duke of Rutland wound up
by saying that it would be a monstrous thing to banish a statue for which
the great Duke had sat to the sculptor in the very clothes which he wore
at Waterloo. This the Duke felt to be unanswerable, and he looked round
at us in triumph. “Nothing of the kind,” said the Duke of Wellington.
“My father only sent his valet to the sculptor’s studio with a bag of
clothes.”

In spite of further objections raised by Sir Stafford Northcote and Lord
John Manners, the last of whom had been one of the speakers in the debate
in the House of Commons in 1846 which resulted in the erection of the
monster, the Duke of Wellington’s bag of clothes, so far as the committee
was concerned, clinched the historic part of the discussion, and the
æsthetic side was not long in doubt. But there was still Parliament to
be faced. In the meantime the Prince went abroad, first to Darmstadt
and then to Royat in Auvergne. In the House of Commons our proposals
were carried by a majority of one hundred and eleven, a result which I
communicated to His Royal Highness, who wrote from Darmstadt on May 4th:
“I rejoice with you at the majority of one hundred and eleven obtained
in the House of Commons on the important matter which we have so much at
heart.... Both you and your chief will, I am sure, agree with me that I
was right, when I saw you this day week, in insisting on being firm and
risking the result of the division. I have at any rate had my reward.”
The Prince wrote to me again from Royat in some anxiety upon the subject,
which was to be brought forward in the Upper House by Lords de Ros and
Stratheden.

However, all went well—for that time then present—but when I survey the
group which now surmounts that unhappy arch, I feel as if we had escaped
from the frying-pan into the fire. A motherly female of vast proportions
stands in a car which might have served her baby’s doll. In one hand she
carries a palm branch, in the other a fragment of some mystic vegetable,
possibly intended for an olive branch. The arms are placed in the
position adopted by the American barman when he performs his great feat
of pouring a cocktail from one goblet into another. Her car is drawn by
four Iceland ponies, guided by a charioteer, apparently modelled from
one of the pygmies of the Aruwhimi forest, so skilfully concealed in the
carefully muddled group that only from one or two points on the further
side of Piccadilly is the onlooker aware of his puny existence. And this
must remain for future ages as the last word of British sculpture at the
beginning of the twentieth century!

As regards the place itself, which has been severely criticized, and no
doubt with some show of reason, the difficulties have been forgotten, but
I still think that the best was done that could have been effected in the
circumstances, and I would remind the cavillers of the lines written in
defence of General Wade’s roads in Scotland.

    “If you’d known these roads before they were made
    You’d see good cause to bless General Wade.”

A few weeks later the Prince of Wales took me with him to Aldershot to
select a site for the old statue—and there it now stands.

The year 1884 was fraught with many emotions for Mr. Gladstone’s
Government, and there was further trouble ahead. Egypt was the
chief anxiety. On the 6th of November Henry Fawcett, the blind
Postmaster-General, who, with superhuman courage, had defied fate and
raised himself to the front rank among men, died. An opportunity occurred
for adding much needed strength to the Cabinet of which Mr. Fawcett, no
doubt on account of his infirmity, had not been a member. Lord Rosebery,
who had two years earlier resigned the Under-secretaryship of State for
Home Affairs—an office which, I am not singular in thinking, ought never
to have been offered to a man of his worth—rejoined the Government as
First Commissioner of Works, with a seat in the Cabinet. In order to
balance the numbers of Peers and Commoners in that mysterious body which
rules England without being known to the Constitution, Mr. Shaw Lefevre
was appointed Postmaster-General and raised to Cabinet rank.

I shall not easily forget the pleasure with which I received a note
from Lord Rosebery, whom I had known for many years, announcing his
appointment and asking me to meet him at Euston Square and talk over
matters during the drive to Whitehall. Equally difficult is it to record
the many acts of kindness and consideration which I received during the
few months that I served under him.

Lord Rosebery’s reign at the Office of Works was short, but long enough
to make me wish that I might have kept so good a master longer. To say
more of a man so eminent would be presumptuous, to say less ungrateful.
The Government was moribund when he accepted office, and even he could
not galvanize it into new life. The tragedy of Khartoum in January,
1885, had made Ministers very unpopular, and in the summer they fell.
Lord Salisbury’s first flash-in-the-pan administration lasted only a few
months, but when Mr. Gladstone returned to power Lord Rosebery was called
to higher functions.

When Lord Salisbury’s government was formed in 1885 Mr. Plunket
became First Commissioner. Like Lord Rosebery’s, his rule was short
but delightful, for in the following January Mr. Jesse Collings’
three-acres-and-a-cow amendment to the address turned out the Government
and Mr. Gladstone was once more Prime Minister. In the shuffling of the
cards Lord Morley, afterwards Chairman of Committees in the House of
Lords, became our Lord Paramount. But here again the fates interfered
with what promised to be a most valuable administration. The Home Rule
split came. Mr. Gladstone had thrown himself into the arms of the Irish
Nationalists and many of his followers were estranged from him.

In the month of April Lord Morley, who was an old friend of mine, told me
confidentially that he had resigned. He was the first Minister to do so.
Mr. Gladstone knew the value of the force of example and did all in his
power to induce Lord Morley to reconsider his decision. He might as well
have tried to move the rock of Gibraltar. Lord Morley stuck to his guns
and Lord Elgin was named in his place. He was the last chief under whom
I served at the Office of Works, for in the month of May my cousin, Lord
Redesdale, died, and I found myself faced by so much private business
that I resigned.

I received many very flattering letters: I am prompted by vanity to copy
three of them. Sir Henry Ponsonby wrote:

    “MY DEAR MITFORD,

    “I did not answer your letter till I had seen the Queen on her
    return from Scotland.

    “She desired me to assure you that she heard of your
    resignation with sincere regret, as Her Majesty considers you
    have done your duty at your Office not only to her entire
    satisfaction, but also in a manner which has proved to be of
    great benefit to the public.

    “Her Majesty feels very anxious as to who may be your successor
    and commands me to ask if you have any suggestion to make.

                           “Yours very truly,

                                     (_Signed_) “HENRY F. PONSONBY.”

From Mr. Gladstone I received the following holograph letter:

                                                   “June 24th, 1886.

    “MY DEAR MR. MITFORD,

    “I received with very great regret the announcement of your
    resignation, which at the same time I admit to be no desertion
    on your part, but to be reasonable and just.

    “But it will, I fear, be very difficult to fill your place with
    a person possessed in the same degree with yourself of the
    varied and high qualifications which it requires.

    “Believe me,

                        “Most faithfully yours,

                                       (_Signed_) “W. E. GLADSTONE.”

I had several letters on the subject from the Duke of Cambridge; some
of them are of too confidential a character to be published, but I may
reproduce part, at any rate, of one letter which he wrote me.

    “June 23rd, 1886. It is with the _deepest_ regret that I find
    from your letter that you have handed in your resignation.
    You will be a very great loss to the office and to myself
    personally as Ranger of the Royal Parks, for you have, by your
    tact and judgment, been enabled to assist me in meeting so many
    little difficulties, which in these times arise constantly in
    connection with these parks.... Though our official connection
    will, unfortunately, cease, I hope our personal one will be
    continued as heretofore, and I shall at all times be only too
    happy to talk over many little matters with you in which we
    both take an interest.

    “I remain,

                         “Yours most sincerely,

                                                (_Signed_) “GEORGE.”

Few men, whether princes, peers or peasants, have been so generally
popular as the late Duke of Cambridge. Indeed, he had everything in his
favour. Tall, burly and athletic in his youth, and when I first knew
him, in the fifties, he was strikingly handsome, the perfect type of
an Englishman. Gifted with a singularly frank and genial manner his
soldier-like bearing could not fail to arrest attention. In later years
he grew stout, but his goodly height enabled him to carry off the more
ample figure, and he remained vigorous and active, a keen sportsman at an
age when most men no longer care to face the buffets of wind and weather.
His varied experience made him a most agreeable companion; he had seen
active service, and had had a horse shot under him in the Crimea; he had
travelled much and had had familiar intercourse with all the sovereigns
and statesmen in Europe.

He was a capital after-dinner speaker; his downright, honest periods,
given out with that sonorous and beautiful voice for which the
descendants of George the Third are famous, went straight home to the
hearts of his audience. Probably nine out of ten of his speeches were
in response to the toast of the Army, and right fitting it was that
they should be so, for he was, above all things, a soldier, devoted to
the Army, watchful over its interests, and, indeed, over those of every
individual member of it who came under his ken. The Duke’s mastery of
the working of the whole complex machinery of the Army was phenomenal.
Still more extraordinary was his knowledge of its officers. This was
due to the fact that during the whole time of his tenure of office no
promotion to any rank above that of captain was made without his personal
investigation and sanction. In this way, being gifted with a singularly
retentive memory, he had an intimate acquaintance with the careers and
capabilities of all the senior officers. He was no admirer of change for
change’s sake, and yet ready to accept it when he thought that opposition
would be against the interests of the Crown and of the service which
he loved. To that service he conscientiously gave up his life, being
as convinced as was the great Duke of Wellington of the importance of
maintaining the closest bond between the Sovereign and the Army. It will
be remembered that on this ground the Duke of Wellington in 1850 went
so far as to urge the acceptance by the Prince Consort of the office of
Commander-in-Chief. The Duke of Cambridge looked upon that principle as a
family, as well as a national, tradition.

There were many alterations introduced into the Army by various
Secretaries of State which were certainly not to his taste, but he
was wise enough to see that the real alteration was in the spirit
of the times, and he was enough of a patriot to yield where a
stubborn opposition would have been useless, and in his judgment
dangerous. Even so, he drew a firm line between the administrative
and executive functions of the War Office. Whilst willing always
to accept the Secretary of State as the administrative power, he
brooked no interference with his own executive duties. He was the
Commander-in-Chief, and there he insisted upon being master. The Duke
was always very outspoken upon these matters, perhaps more so with me
than with most people, from the fact that I had no direct interest in the
Army, no military axe to grind; and so I knew how entirely, upon more
than one occasion, he laid self on one side, content to work solely for
the public good.

The Duke’s life was very full, for until the Prince of Wales reached
manhood it was upon him that many of the functions that the Royal Family
have to perform devolved; the Queen and Prince Albert only appearing on
rare and special occasions. Charity dinners, the laying of foundation
stones, hospital meetings and the hundred and one other duties which
he undertook in addition to the laborious work of Commander-in-Chief,
work which he never scamped and of which no detail escaped him, gave him
little leisure. Half a dozen days’ shooting, to which he often did me the
honour to invite me, a country visit or two, and a rare trip abroad, were
all the holidays that he allowed himself, and even when he travelled his
work followed him.

The abolition in 1895 of the office of Commander-in-Chief, an office
which he had held for thirty-nine years, was a cruel blow to the Duke. It
was no consolation to him that in announcing his so-called resignation
to the House of Commons on the 21st of June Mr. Campbell Bannerman
(afterwards Sir Henry) should have plastered him with eulogy and shed
crocodile tears over his loss, and it must have been bitter to the Queen,
when, in her own interest as well as in his, she felt bound to advise her
cousin to resign. I was in the House of Commons at the time and heard
the War Secretary’s speech. It was fulsome and disingenuous. It did not
ring true. When he spoke about his “emotion” the House felt that it was
fudge. If the changes which were proposed were necessary, and involved
the abolition of the Duke’s office, it would have been honest to say so,
instead of keeping up the farce that “The Duke makes way in order that
certain changes may be introduced.”

The Duke’s activities in other spheres, especially in all charitable
endeavours, did not cease with his retirement from the Army, in which,
from the outside, he continued to take the deepest interest. He was
strong enough in 1901 to ride at Queen Victoria’s funeral, though he
was then eighty-two years old; three years later, on the 17th of March,
he died. He was a warm-hearted man, and a most faithful friend, honest,
upright, and true in every relation of life.

The Duke of Cambridge’s affectionate nature was shown in the deep
attachment which existed between him and his mother. Never were mother
and son in more complete sympathy. The Duchess, indeed, was one of
those exceptional people who have the gift of winning hearts. During
the years when she and Princess Mary—before her marriage to the Duke of
Teck—were the only members of the Royal Family who were seen in general
society, their presence always gave pleasure. They were so gracious and
so unaffectedly gratified by any attempt to entertain them. Those who
saw Princess Mary sail up the aisle of St. George’s Chapel at a royal
wedding, looking as if the regal dignity of a hundred kings had been
concentrated in her, will never forget it. The Garter Standards seemed to
bow and do homage to her.

The Duchess’ receptions at St. James’s Palace in what is now York House,
and at Cambridge Cottage, were delightful. At Kew they often took
the shape of a dinner, followed by a little dance. I remember a very
droll incident at one of her parties at St. James’s Palace at which
the future King of Greece, then a midshipman in the Danish Navy, was
present. Levassor, the greatest of all _amuseurs_, had been engaged
and was singing his very best. “Titi à la représentation de Robert le
Diable,” the drollest sketch of a Parisian street-arab at the opera,
and what he thought of it, was perhaps his masterpiece. When he came to
the third act, after an imitation of the famous trombone introduction
he said “On annonce”—at that very moment, from down below, there came a
loud, cockneyfied voice which was heard all over that small house: “The
Lord Mayor’s carriage stops the way!” It was excruciatingly funny, the
laughter was electric, and Levassor was bound to admit afterwards that he
had been beaten in his own special vocation by a London footman.

I feel inclined to add one word about the Duke’s father, whom I remember
coming down to Eton as an old man when I was a very small boy. He
attended Chapel, so I heard him give his famous, loud-voiced response
when the officiating clergyman said, “Let us pray,” and he piously and
fervently ejaculated, “With all my heart!” After Chapel he went into
the playing-fields to see a cricket match in Upper Club, but broke away
from the big-wigs as soon as he could and made me pilot him. I never saw
him again, for he died in 1850. He was the only one of King George the
Third’s sons whom I ever saw.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had held the office of Secretary for twelve years. When I was first
appointed Mr. Disraeli gave me to understand that the department was in a
most unsatisfactory state. Mr. Corry, his private secretary, told me that
“the Chief” said “the place was an Augean stable and must be swept out.”
I was to evolve kosmos out of chaos, and chaos it certainly was. I was at
once opposed tooth and nail by Lord Henry Lennox backed by the solicitor
to the department and the director of works, an engineer officer. The
position became untenable, and I wrote to the Prime Minister telling him
that in view of this obstruction it was not possible for me to carry out
his instructions, and so I put my resignation in his hands. The result
was the appointment of a Committee of the Cabinet of which the Chancellor
of the Exchequer was Chairman and which included, among others, Lord
John Manners, a former First Commissioner. The Committee fully justified
me, and when I produced my scheme it was accepted in its entirety by a
Departmental Committee of which Sir William Stephenson was Chairman.

It is no use going into the details of old official squabbles, however
troublesome they may have been at the time. They are only worth
mentioning as a proof of the generous way in which Lord Beaconsfield
always supported his subordinates—if they were in the right—even at
inconvenience to himself from a political point of view; and in this
case it put him in a great difficulty on account of Lord Henry Lennox’s
position and family. However, the Duke of Richmond, meeting my father,
said: “I hope you do not think that I am supporting the attack upon your
son”—so all was well.

When once I got into harness I felt that no man could have more congenial
work. It was all the more interesting from the fact that there was a
good deal of leeway to make up. It had been a tradition of the Office,
as one of the senior clerks told me, that the Secretary should never
go and see anything, because if he did he would not be in such a good
position to say “No.” I felt that such an attitude would certainly not
be one that I could adopt. Saying “No” is one of the chief difficulties
of the Secretary’s position, and it is one which often needs the use of
considerable tact, especially when he is dealing with the mightiest in
the land, for the “accounting officer” can only work within the four
very tight corners of the Parliamentary votes; on the other hand I felt
that it was his duty to ascertain beforehand what was really needful and
what was likely to be asked for and this could only be done by careful
personal inspection. If the request was right and reasonable it could be
provided for in the coming estimates; if not the “No” could be said with
effective knowledge and without giving offence.

Apart from private requisitions, which are always difficult to deal with,
there were a great many old historical buildings which were showing
unmistakable signs of decay. Of Hampton Court, for instance, it is
hardly an exaggeration to say that in many places it was crumbling away.
Most of “the King’s beasts” had toppled over from the roof of the great
hall. Large patches of brickwork were literally rotting away. In the
cloisters, the old brick walls were smothered with plaster, black with
age, and covered with a whole pencil network of ignoble names. There was
no fire brigade; should a fire occur the building was at the mercy of
the flames until some assistance could be procured from outside. During
the interregnum between the resignation of Lord Henry Lennox and the
appointment of Mr. Noel I went to Mr. W. H. Smith, who was then Secretary
to the Treasury, and always most sympathetic and liberal in dealing
with any question which I took to him, and put before him the piteous
condition in which this great and beautiful historic monument then
was. He saw the importance of the thing and the result was that a fire
brigade was formed, manned by the employés in the Palace, and Mr. Smith
acceded to my request for an annual sum of £500 to be included in the
estimate for such work of restoration, and what might almost be called
patch-work, as might be necessary.

I don’t know what the present fire arrangements are; they have probably
been greatly improved since my time, but even with such appliances as we
had, three small outbreaks of fire were at once got under control, and,
as everybody knows, in a case of fire it is the first five minutes that
are of importance. With the £500 a year, an allowance which I believe is
still continued, the grand old buildings were gradually put into decent
condition and so they will be maintained. Mr. Ernest Law, antiquary and
writer on art, whose books on Hampton Court are the authority, was always
ready to put his knowledge at the service of the Office, and I had at my
right hand, in Mr. Lessels, the architect in charge of the Palace, a man
who really delighted in his work. So long as Mr. Law lives the public may
rest assured that a jealous eye will watch over the welfare of Cardinal
Wolsey’s magnificent structure, which has been his dearly-loved home from
boyhood and the romantic beauties of which probably sowed the first seeds
of art in his brain.

Great works of restoration were carried out at Windsor Castle, and at the
Tower of London and amongst the other great historic monuments. Of the
works at the Tower I have given some account in my “Tragedy in Stone.”
There was also much to be done in Scotland. But on all this I need not
dwell here.

One part of my duties was a real delight to me. The care of the Royal
Parks became a passion, and successive First Commissioners very kindly
gave me a free hand in dealing with work in which they knew that I took
the greatest interest. The flower gardening in Hyde Park had been begun
many years before by Mr. Cowper Temple when he was First Commissioner,
and had been continued down to my time. But it was a very elementary
affair. The trees and shrubs moreover had been totally neglected. The
trees, surely a most important consideration in any park, were crowded
and killing one another. No new varieties had been introduced. The
shrubs, old-fashioned lilacs, privets, ancubas and the like, had grown
lanky, leggy, and hardly capable of flowering. St. James’s Park in
especial was in a most degraded condition. Battersea Park, where the
superintendent had made a small sub-tropical garden, was the best tended
of the Parks; but even there I found room for much improvement.

In short I endeavoured more or less to remodel all the Parks, and I
think the public was generally pleased with the work that was done. Two
improvements which have certainly given pleasure are the rhododendron
garden on both sides of Rotten Row and the Dell at the east end of the
Serpentine.

When I took over the care of Hyde Park the place where the Dell now
is was a shrubbery with open hurdles which was the lair of all the
nightbirds and undesirables who haunted the Park after dark. They slept
under the bushes and every morning a gang of men had to clear away a mass
of filth indescribable. I determined to do away with this scandal. I put
up an unclimbable fence, laid the place out as a sub-tropical garden with
palms, tree-ferns, dracænas and other beauties, planted the little stream
with water-lilies, royal fern and so forth, and made it from an eyesore
and a den of horrors into what it now is.

For that some years afterwards, long after I had left the Office of
Works, I earned a piece of praise which gave me intense pleasure.
One Sunday I saw quite a number of people looking at the Dell. I
too was moved to go and see. Up came a couple of young guardsmen,
non-commissioned officers. They stood for a few moments and as they
walked away one of them said, “What’s the use of going abroad when we’ve
got such a thing as that here in London?” I never felt so flattered.

To the Queen and to the Duke of St. Albans as Lord Grand Falconer was
confined the privilege of driving in Rotten Row. The last time that I saw
the Queen drive there was once when she came up from Windsor to see my
newly-planted rhododendron garden. She was very much pleased, and I had
a letter from Sir Henry Ponsonby to say so. At one time the Duke of St.
Albans used to drive along Rotten Row once a year in order to keep up the
privilege, but whether that is continued now I know not.

There was one interesting piece of work outside the normal duties of
my office in which I was concerned. It was a graceful idea of Mr.
Gladstone’s to commemorate his victory in the famous Midlothian Campaign
of 1880 by some sort of monument in Edinburgh. It occurred to him that
it would be an appropriate gift if he were to reproduce the old City
Cross, the “Mercat” Cross as it was called, which used to stand in the
High Street and from which the Royal proclamations used to be heralded.
It was from that Cross that Prince Charles Edward, the young Pretender,
was proclaimed King of England and Scotland in 1745. It was swept away
in 1756 as an obstruction, an act of vandalism which Sir Walter Scott
scourged in “Marmion.” It had been an octagonal tower surmounted by a
shaft carrying a unicorn which had been destroyed by Cromwell. The shaft
had been removed to Drum, near Dalkeith. Mr. Gladstone was very keen upon
rebuilding the little tower outside St. Giles’s Cathedral, and replacing
the shaft, which was to be brought back from Drum.

He asked me to help him in the business part of his undertaking, which
I was only too glad to do. On the recommendation of Lord Rosebery, Mr.
Sydney Mitchell, a Scot, was chosen to be the architect. I had a good
deal of correspondence with Mr. Gladstone upon the subject, for he was a
sedulous letter-writer. People at that time had not yet fallen into the
lazy habit of using typewriters; all his letters were holograph in his
own hand, and some of them very long. The modern fashion would have been
quite out of tune with his exquisite old world courtesy.

The late Lord Bath, who, though a Tory, was one of his great admirers,
said to me once that Mr. Gladstone’s punctilious politeness always made
him feel shy. “He will take off his hat!” How he found time for writing
is a mystery. Upon one detail he was much exercised. He had discovered,
how I know not, that Sir Walter Scott had managed to obtain some of
the stones of the old Mercat Cross, and used them in building the
walls at Abbotsford. He was very keen to gain possession of these and
to incorporate them in the new Cross. To his great disappointment Sir
Walter’s successor refused his request. He wrote to me at great length
and almost indignantly upon the subject, but I felt bound to say that
I thought that it was intelligible that the present possessors should
decline to tamper with Sir Walter’s building, indeed, that they might
almost consider that it would be an act of impiety to do so. However, in
the end the finished work gave Mr. Gladstone as great pleasure as it did
to the citizens of Edinburgh. The Latin inscription was composed by Mr.
Gladstone, rather against his will, in deference to a general wish that
there should be an inscription of some sort. He wrote and consulted me
upon the subject. With Dr. Johnson’s views in my head, I suggested that
it should be in Latin. Mr. Gladstone wrote back:

                                   “Hawarden Castle, Nov. 7th, 1885.

    “The idea of a Latin inscription crossing my mind amidst
    the perplexities of the stories about disestablishment[45]
    disturbed me much. Why should there be an inscription beyond
    the date of the re-erection? I quite agree that whatever there
    is should be in Latin. It might be put on at a later date as
    well as now. There is certainly the gallant malediction of
    Scott to commemorate; but I should be glad to know what has
    passed through your mind as to the substance before considering
    the form.

    “I go to Dalmeny on Monday and we will consider about a day for
    the opening.”

The new Cross was finished in 1885, and dedicated in November of that
year.

Mr. Gladstone then wrote to me:

                               “10, Downing Street, Feb. 12th, 1886.

    “DEAR MR. MITFORD,

    “I send the draft for the balance due on account of the Mercat
    Cross, and have in addition only to repeat my thanks to you
    personally for your most efficient aid and to express my
    satisfaction with the manner in which this high class work has
    been executed.

    “I will write to Mr. Mitchell.

                        “Yours most faithfully,

                                       (_Signed_) “W. E. GLADSTONE.”

The last time that I saw Mr. Gladstone to speak to was on a fine summer’s
day in 1886. I had gone over to Downing Street to see his private
secretary, Mr. (now Sir Henry) Primrose on business connected with my
resignation. When we had finished our talk he said that he was sure
that Mr. Gladstone would like to see me. The great Prime Minister was
sitting in the little garden reading, but got up and bade me welcome
with all the gracious courtesy which distinguished him. He was most kind
and sympathetic, talking much of Lord Redesdale, whose page he had been
at the Eton Montem when my cousin was in Sixth form and he a lower boy.
Many a time and oft did I listen to his speeches in aftertimes, sitting
opposite to him in the House of Commons, but never again did I hear his
voice in the privacy of personal conversation. He was one of those great
men whom to have known is a valuable privilege.

If I have dwelt longer on the story of the Mercat Cross than the subject
itself might justly warrant, it must be ascribed to that pride which the
dwarf of our childhood’s tales felt when he marched out to war side by
side with the giant.




CHAPTER XXXVII

BATSFORD, AND THE HOUSE OF COMMONS


I was now a free man, and after a trip of a month in France I sold my
London house, took possession of Batsford and made up my mind to become a
country squire. I was made a magistrate and a Deputy Lieutenant, attended
Petty and Quarter Sessions and interested myself in agricultural matters.
In short, I tried to learn my business. I did not go about, as one of
my neighbours did, with a sample of wheat in my breeches pocket; but
landlording having become at that moment a poor trade, fast travelling
on its way to that bottom which it touched a year or two later, and from
which it has now mercifully in a great measure recovered, I was anxious
to see whether something could not be done to relieve the distress under
which the farmers with wheat at less than twenty shillings a quarter were
suffering.

One afternoon I met one of my tenants, a most capable man for whom I
soon grew to entertain a great respect, and joining company with him
began to talk over matters. He suggested to me that nothing would be of
such benefit to the farmers in the neighbourhood as having a high class,
sound shire stallion. He said, and indeed I had myself noticed, that
there was not a decent cart-horse in the whole country-side. The land, he
pointed out, was excellently adapted for horse-breeding, good pasture,
with plenty of lime in the water to make bone, and he felt certain that
within a few years a good trade in cart-horses might be got up. I jumped
at the idea. I had always been a great admirer of a good cart-horse, my
fancy being largely stimulated by the dash and vigour of Rosa Bonheur’s
“Horse Fair,” which, if it does not satisfy the judges of horses in
all respects, has yet the living spark of genius which belongs to a
fine poem; her famous roan horse must have been inspired by the noble
description in the Book of Job, which is far more a prophecy of the
shire, pawing in the valley and rejoicing in his strength, than of the
lordly thoroughbred. It was such horses as these that carried the mailed
knights—Richard Cœur de Lion and Front de Bœuf—into the lists of chivalry
at Ashby-de-la-Zouch—horses bred by the union of the old “great horse”
of Britain with the mares of Flanders. That great horse had qualities
which attracted the notice of Julius Cæsar. It astonished him to see a
horse strong enough, when forced back upon his haunches, to hold up a
war chariot going down hill; and when we think of what a clumsy affair a
war chariot must have been, carrying besides the charioteer at least one
heavily armed man, perhaps more, we cease to wonder at Cæsar’s admiration
of an animal that was new to him.

As a Londoner I had been greatly fascinated by the proud teams of some
of the great brewers, horsed by the progeny of the sires owned by such
men as the late Lord Ellesmere, Lord Wantage, Mr. Edward Coke, Sir Walter
Gilbey and others. I told my farmer friend that I had seen that Mr. Coke
was going to have a sale at Longford, in Derbyshire, and knowing him to
be a fine judge of horseflesh, promised that if he would go with me, I
would try and obtain a horse. He was delighted, and agreed to help me.

We went and looked over the stallions, but there was not one that quite
satisfied my friend’s critical eye. We went round the stalls with my old
schoolfellow Reggie Buller, a colonel in the Grenadier Guards (famous as
the first boy who introduced a cutaway coat in place of the old “tails”
at Eton), who was a sort of uncle to Mr. Coke’s stud. Rather nettled
at our not seeming to fall down and worship he turned to my friend and
said, “You must have some very good horses in your neighbourhood if none
of these please you.” “No,” was the answer, “we have nothing but rotten
ones, and that’s what makes me such a good judge of a bad horse!”

Well, we failed to buy a stallion, but presently the auctioneer got into
his rostrum, and I, as always is the case with me, got intoxicated with
the excitement, and having come to the conclusion, not without reason,
that a horse would never make his reputation unless he had a few really
first-rate mares by means of which to advertise his stock, determined to
lay the foundation of a stud of my own by buying Chance, who was said to
be the best Shire Mare that ever was foaled. I had no reason to regret
the purchase, for she had never been beaten in the past from the day when
she was champion foal, and was destined never to be beaten in the future.
She won every prize for me, including the special gold medal given by
Queen Victoria to commemorate her Presidentship of the Royal Agricultural
Society at its Jubilee Show at Windsor in 1889. It may be interesting
hereafter to note the price, 520 guineas. Prices have gone up since then.
I wonder what such a mare would be worth to-day.

As visitors at hotels are known by the numbers of their rooms and not by
their names, so I became known in the agricultural world as the possessor
of the famous mare. More than once at shows I heard the question and
answer, “Who’s that man?” “Why, don’t you know him? He’s the owner of
Chance.” Later on I bought two grand horses, Hitchin Conqueror, who was
champion, and Laughingstock, reserve for champion, at the Shire Horse
Show at Islington, and was the first man to win a championship there with
an animal of his own breeding; which I did with a beautiful mare called
Minnehaha, a daughter of Laughingstock; but she, poor thing, caught
a cold at the Agricultural Hall and died of pneumonia. Her death was
the beginning of a long run of bad luck after a course of immense good
fortune.

But what pleased me most in my success was that it enabled me to start a
Shire Horse Show at Moreton-in-Marsh. The consequence was that in a few
years’ time the farmers round about me were able to show a grand lot of
cart horses, and my triumph was complete when one of them sold a gelding
to the agent of one of the railway companies for a hundred guineas. Those
who bred from pedigree mares made fancy prices for their foals, and the
neighbourhood became famous among breeders and dealers as a horse centre.

For the last quarter of a century and more I have been much mixed
up with the horse world. For many years I was on the Council of the
London Shire Horse Society and was finally elected President. With the
International Horse Show at Olympia I have been connected from the
beginning—first as judge and afterwards as director. With Lord Lonsdale
as our President I think we may claim to have done something towards
keeping up horse-breeding at a moment when motor traction had dealt it a
heavy blow; nor is that all.

International competition has taught our people that we are not the only
heirs of the centaurs, and has stimulated our army riders especially to
new endeavours. When I was a boy it used to be the fashion to laugh at
the idea that any foreigner could ride. We know better now. The French,
the Belgian, the Italian and the Russian cavalry-men are all magnificent
horsemen, and at first absolutely beat our men out of the field at show
work. But the lesson has been taken to heart, and with practice and
a little encouragement from the War Office, our officers have shown
that they can hold their own against all comers. But to produce such
perfect machinery as is turned out by the school at Saumur for instance,
needs backing from above. I went last year (1914) at the invitation of
the Société Hippique to see the Saumur men ride—a piece of absolute
perfection as illustrating the _entente cordiale_ between rider and
mount, the brain and will-power of the man commanding the movement of
every muscle of the horse.

In breeding I did not confine myself to Shires. I inherited a famous old
thoroughbred stallion called Arbitrator, that Admiral Rous pronounced to
be the best model of a steeplechaser that he ever saw. He was the sire
of a good many capital hunters and carriage horses. I also bred Hackneys
for a few years, but they were not a success, though to head the stud I
bought a son of Sir Walter Gilbey’s famous horse Danegelt.

I am glad to have seen something of country life before the old system
of County Management had been abolished by the introduction of County
Councils, which have swallowed all the duties of Quarter Sessions save
only their judicial functions. In Gloucestershire, under the chairmanship
of Sir John Dorington, one of the ablest and most conscientious of
administrators, whose worth was afterwards acknowledged by his election
to the chair of the County Council, the magistrates certainly did their
work admirably. Having had a pretty long experience of the civil service,
working under the stern and sometimes rather narrow rule of the Treasury,
I was perhaps a more or less competent critic, and I must say that I was
full of admiration for the way in which the business of the county was
carried on. The County Council has larger duties to perform, and very
well its work is done; it is, moreover, a tribute to the efficiency of
the squirearchy that it is so largely represented in a body which is none
the worse for a leaven of the farmer and labour classes.

The quarterly meetings of the magistrates, which lasted for one, two
or three days, were useful and pleasant gatherings. We put up at the
Judges’ lodgings at Gloucester, and had the opportunity of discussing
business and comparing notes with men from distant parts of the county.
The loss of those meetings was an incident of the change which I greatly
regretted. Quarter Sessions were of the nature of a very pleasant club
at which, in addition to the transaction of business, there was all the
charm of a delightful social gathering. The motor car, which has made
such a revolution in country life, has also borne a hand in the abolition
of our agreeable symposia. There are few places so remote that it is
necessary to sleep out when you can travel to your County Hall at the
rate of twenty miles an hour.

The men who habitually attended Quarter Sessions were all of them able
men, cultivated and well read. One dear man, now long since departed,
was a little too well read. He was very proud of his scholarship and
especially of his knowledge of Cicero—the one classic bore whom, above
all others, I disliked. One night I had gone to bed with a bad headache,
and unable to dine. My friend came to my room after dinner, full of
sympathy. He sat down on my bed and quoted Cicero for an hour or more.
There was no escape. I lay there and listened in silent patience to
excerpts from the treatise “De Amicitia,” wishing that it had never been
written, or at any rate that Amicitia would prompt my persecutor to leave
me to bear the throbbings of my head in peaceful solitude.

The years of my life have been years of transition in many countries.
It would have been strange if my own country had been exempt; but I am
old-fashioned enough and conservative enough to regret many changes, and
many losses; not the least of these regrets is given to the old Quarter
Sessions.

Hardly had I settled down at Batsford when the defeat of Mr. Gladstone’s
Government was followed by a general election. Lord Hertford, who was
president of the South-West Warwickshire Conservative Association, called
on me and asked me to stand for the Stratford-on-Avon Division. I did not
see my way to complying at that moment. Although I should have had little
hesitation in standing for a borough, I felt that I did not know enough
about country life and the requirements of farmers and labourers to
face the ordeal of a contest in an agricultural constituency. It seemed
to me that I should be about the worst candidate that could be chosen.
Lord Hertford tried hard to persuade me, but I was obstinate, and I did
well, for an excellent Conservative candidate was found in Mr. Townsend
of Honington Hall, near Stratford, a very accomplished and very popular
man who won the election. He knew his lesson and I did not. I might, and
probably should, have made every sort of blunder.

The next few years were peaceful and uneventful. I was occupied with
all those interests which made a country gentleman’s life so full of
interest. We seldom went to London, and then only for a few days at a
time, but in 1889 I bought a yacht and was elected to the Royal Yacht
Squadron. That was a great pleasure and forged a new link with the outer
world, from which we had more or less cut ourselves adrift.

In 1892 there was again a general election, and this time Mr. Townsend
did not wish to stand again. He was a most conscientious member, never
sparing himself, and his health was beginning to give way under the
fatigue of the House of Commons. Once more Lord Hertford appealed to me.
He wrote to me, begging me to defend the seat, but adding very honestly
that it was a forlorn hope, as the opposite side had secured as their
candidate Mr. Fell, a prominent local contractor and great employer of
labour who would most probably win; at any rate, his popularity would
make him a very powerful enemy. This time I could hardly refuse, so I
went into harness at once and held my first meeting at Stratford itself.

We made a strong show, for the Liberal Unionists, led by Mr. Charles
and Mr. Edgar Flower, had accepted me wholeheartedly, and gave me very
zealous support. The opening of the campaign was full of good augury.
But I was certainly lucky. A few days later the dreaded Mr. Fell, for
private reasons, retired from the contest, and the Radical party had to
look about for a new candidate. Their choice fell upon Mr. Warmington,
an outsider, and I felt that, however able he might be, I should still
have a certain advantage over a carpet-bagger. And so it turned out.
I won with a majority of more than seven hundred. It was not an easy
constituency to contest. The distances were very great. Railways gave
little help, and motors had not yet sprung into existence. It was very
hard work, but my friends were very kind, especially the Flowers, and
they lightened the burden as much as possible.

I look back upon that election with much pleasure, in spite of its
fatigue, as a time full of happy memories. Of these none is happier
than the thought of the relations between my opponent and myself. Mr.
Warmington proved to be the most courteous and kindly of men; and I don’t
think that throughout the fight, which was pretty rough, there was an
angry or even unfriendly word uttered by either of us. Our supporters
were not so discreet, and there were one or two meetings which were
distinctly unpleasant.

Parliament met on the 4th of August, and on the 11th Lord Salisbury’s
Government was turned out by a vote of want of confidence, led by Mr.
Asquith. It was a most telling speech, for Mr. Asquith is a lord of
language. But then, it is easy to preach to the converted. I have often
heard it discussed whether a speech in the House of Commons ever turned
a vote. The question was once put to Lord John Russell. He was equal to
the occasion. Just as Mother Eve, according to Milton, was “the fairest
of her daughters,” so Lord John was the most convinced of his own
supporters. He did not hesitate. “Yes,” he answered. “My great speech in
1832 is known to have turned eighteen votes.”

My three years as a member of the House of Commons were passed in what
has been called the cold shades of Opposition. But those shades, chilly
as they may be to the leaders, are warmth itself for the rank and file of
the party. When the sun is shining, speech is the exclusive privilege of
the front bench. The private member may not utter lest he encounter the
steely glance of the Chief Whip and the bored inattention of Ministers.
During an eclipse he may deliver pin-pricks as he chooses, and the
sharper their points are the better the leaders are pleased. But when the
light begins to blaze again, let not the poor little member think that
he has earned the right of speech. If he has the misfortune to catch the
Speaker’s eye, then he will learn to appreciate the arctic powers of a
Ministerial frost.

When I entered the House of Commons Lord Randolph Churchill said to me,
“You have come to the dullest place on earth, with great compensations.”
Lord Randolph was right. Except on field days, when there was a “full
dress” debate, the House of Commons was a terribly “dull place” and the
compensations, like the rewards of virtue, were slow in coming. For three
years we streeled through the Division lobbies, sometimes sitting up all
night, only to see the mystic piece of paper containing the numbers of
the division turned over to the Government Whip, while our own shepherd,
Akers-Douglas, now Lord Chilston, whom we all loved, had to stand by
him, empty-handed, but with great dignity preserving an equal mind in
arduous circumstances. Of the pin-pricks of which I spoke there was no
lack. On the bench immediately behind the seats of the mighty there sat
near me Hanbury, afterwards Secretary to the Treasury and Minister of
Agriculture, and Bowles, both sharp thorns in the side of the Government;
the latter producing damaging facts as a conjuror brings toys and flowers
out of his hat; but what are damaging facts worth when set before a deaf
adder that stoppeth her ear? And what adder is so deaf as the Government
party in the House; the party which never forgets the chances of some
benefit from the distributors of loaves and fishes? Now it is worse
than ever. There is the salary. Men think twice before turning out a
Government, which means a dissolution, and the loss of £400 a year.

Mr. Gladstone, who, eighteen years earlier, had given out that he felt
himself to be too old to remain actively engaged in public life, now, at
the age of eighty-two, entered the lists once more as Prime Minister,
and as full of fight as ever, carrying mainly upon his own shoulders,
but splendidly seconded by Mr. John Morley, the whole weight of the
Home Rule Bill, upon the passing of which he had set his heart. It was
upon a titanic undertaking that he entered, in spite of his years; a
really superb effort; for this was to be no humdrum Parliament for the
discussion of petty questions of fiscal or parochial interests.

It was to be a tussle of giants, and Mr. Gladstone knew it. Yet he did
not flinch from it, and his vigorous courage compelled the admiration of
all of us, foes as well as friends. There came a moment when he felt that
he must husband his strength, and so one fine day we were informed that
Mr. Gladstone would, from that time forth, only lead the House up to the
dinner hour, after which time Sir William Harcourt would be in command.
This led to quite the wittiest thing—given all the circumstances—that was
said during that Parliament. On hearing the announcement, Mr. Darling
(now Mr. Justice Darling) got up and said, “Are we to infer, then, Mr.
Speaker, that after to-day there will be a greater light to rule the day
and a lesser light to rule the night?” There was a roar of laughter.
There was no great love between Mr. Darling and Sir William Harcourt,
and the interjection was a hit, a very palpable hit. Sir William, in
his stately way, frowned an Olympian frown, but reserved his fire for a
future occasion.

It was naturally upon the Home Rule Bill that the energies of the great
men on both sides were concentrated. Mr. Gladstone’s difficulties
were colossal; it was at one time doubtful whether he could count on
the whole-hearted support of all his partisans in regard to some of
the provisions of his measure. It was even whispered that his chief
lieutenant, Mr. Morley, had been on the point of cutting the painter upon
the question of its finance. But however that may have been, the appeals
to their loyalty that he made were successful, and he was saved from the
position of having to stand isolated like a rock attacked on all sides by
the Biscayan buffets of the waves of opposition. What remained to him of
his forces after 1886 rallied round him as a united party.

Perhaps no measure was more violently fought over in the whole history of
the British Parliament; on one occasion, in July, 1894, it ended in what
very nearly became a free fight in Committee. It was said that Colonel
Saunderson even struck a blow. I can certify that there was no truth in
that, for I was actually standing next to him, sleeve to sleeve; his
arm with his fist clenched was held out straight in front of him, but
there was no blow struck. The riot was furious and disgraceful enough
without any exaggeration; Mr. Ashmead Bartlett theatrically shook his
fist across the House at Mr. Gladstone, shouting: “This is your doing,
Sir.” The Speaker was sent for, and never shall I forget the effect of
the appearance of that majestic presence. Mr. Peel entered solemn and
dignified, above all as calm and emotionless as a statue. His pale, noble
features might have been carved in ivory. In an instant the turbulent,
noisy mob of legislators was quelled like a parcel of naughty schoolboys
by the mere sight of the Head Master. Mr. Peel’s command of the House was
magnetic, and he could cow the most unruly. I doubt whether any other man
could have exercised the same silent power that he did at that difficult
and trying moment. He was the embodiment of the old Roman poet’s idea:
“Vir pietate gravis.”

In the Home Rule debates Mr. Gladstone had to deal with formidable
adversaries, men proof against all the magic of his great eloquence,
and who never missed a chance of proving the joints in his armour. Mr.
Balfour’s speeches were superb. He was not only gifted with the power of
words, but he was possessed of a consummate knowledge of the subject, a
knowledge acquired during the time when, as Chief Secretary for Ireland,
he had by travel and personal investigation made himself master of every
detail in connection with the distressful country. All the floods of Mr.
Gladstone’s eloquence passed over him, leaving him high and dry. There
was no drowning him.

Mr. Chamberlain, too, was a giant in debate, certainly the greatest
debater that I ever knew. His speeches were magnificent and full of that
mysterious power over an audience which is one of the rarest of faculties
given to a statesman; but when it came to the shorter discussion in
Committee, there he was absolutely matchless. No matter what card might
be played against him he always seemed to have the ace of trumps up his
sleeve. Never was this better exemplified than in the debate of July 3rd,
1893.

Mr. John Dillon, member for East Mayo, had been accused by Mr.
Chamberlain of making a firebrand speech inciting to murder. Mr. Dillon
could not deny the accuracy of the charge, but he justified himself by
saying (I am quoting from Hansard): “The speech was delivered in 1886, a
short time after the massacre of Mitchelstown, where he had seen before
his own eyes three innocent men shot down—and shot down in cold blood,
by policemen, who were acting under the orders of an officer who was so
bankrupt in character that even the Rt. Hon. gentleman (Mr. Balfour),
the Tory Chief Secretary, had dismissed him from his employment.... That
officer was charged by the jury with gross incompetency, if not worse,
and of being the cause of the murders committed at Mitchelstown.... The
recollection of these events was hot in his mind when he made the speech
in question, and had been for weeks and months before.”

As Mr. Dillon uttered these words, with all the funereal solemnity for
which he was famous, I saw Mr. Chamberlain give some instruction to one
of his faithful runners sitting near him, who presently came back with a
volume in his hand. When Mr. Dillon sat down, Mr. Chamberlain got up to
reply and said:

“The Committee has heard the defence of the hon. member, that he was
speaking in circumstances of such intense provocation that in fact almost
any language would be justified, and that he himself was in a condition
of mind in which he could hardly control himself. Why? Because the
massacre of Mitchelstown had taken place only a short time ago and he
was still thrilling with the horrors of that massacre.” (_Ministerial_
cheers.) “Yes! You cheered it!” (Renewed _ministerial_ cheers.) “Do
you know the fact is that the massacre of Mitchelstown took place on
September 9th, 1887, and that this speech was delivered on December 5th,
1886? The hon. member for East Mayo, who had more than a week to prepare
himself, and has had the facts, dates, places and everything before him,
now comes down to this House and palms off a statement of that kind.
Well, sir, in these circumstances how can we accept the hon. member’s
tardy repentance?”

There was naturally much laughter. Mr. Dillon looked sheepish, and the
Radical party felt that their cheers had been a little premature. I was
going to dine at the House that evening, and before dinner I went into
the lavatory to wash my hands. One man was there before me—Mr. John
Dillon. To him entered another Irishman, who, probably not seeing me,
said: “Ah! John, Joe had ye that time!” “Yes,” was the answer, and then,
after a pause, “DAMN him!” Never did I hear that prayer uttered with more
heartfelt fervour.

I had the greatest admiration for Mr. Chamberlain. I made his
acquaintance first at dinner at Sir Charles Dilke’s in 1874, and often
met him afterwards. His talk was always good to listen to: the short,
crisp, incisive sentences which were so characteristic of his public
speeches were equally attractive in private conversation, and he had a
voice which was a mine of wealth in itself. I have rarely heard a more
fascinating utterance than his. The language was extraordinarily good;
there never seemed to be a syllable too much and every word told. I
thought his talk more pleasing than that of John Bright—though that is
saying a great deal. But in Bright there was always a certain assumption
of superior righteousness—the sort of patronizing manner that made him
say to Lord Clarendon when he was staying at The Grove: “Now this is
the sort of estate to which I do not object.” Lord Randolph Churchill
once mercilessly ridiculed the self-righteous manner of John Bright. At
a time when Bright had more or less retired out of the fighting line,
he interrupted Randolph in the middle of a speech. Randolph turned upon
him as if he had been suddenly awakened out of a long sleep. “The Right
Honourable gentleman interrupts me—I thought that he was no longer to
be reckoned with—but let him wait! I will tear from him those robes of
righteousness in which he loves to exhibit himself to his constituents,
and he shall appear before them naked and ashamed!” I am quoting from
memory, but I do not think that I am far out.

Chamberlain could dispute a point, and did dispute many points with many
men, and the victory in argument, at any rate, was pretty sure to be with
him, but he fought on equal terms, claiming no superior vantage-ground
from which to attack. To me he was a wonderfully attractive personality,
and when he was stricken down I felt that it was a cruel blow to the
British Constitution. Had he been spared to us the state of home politics
would have been very different now. It was a tragedy which deprived of
utterance him to whom utterance meant so much—and not to him alone.

The two Irishmen for whom I conceived the greatest respect at that time
were Mr. John Redmond and Mr. Tim Healy, though I knew neither of them.

Mr. Redmond was then only the leader of the Parnellite party, and he had
but the merest handful of men with him—nine in all. Time after time he
got up, practically alone, without a supporting cheer—for owing to the
split in the Irish party the anti-Parnellites listened to him in mute
neglect, and the Government party who truckled to them followed suit,
while we were silent for another reason; yet Mr. Redmond stood there,
brave and unmoved, never allowing the studied indifference of his hearers
to chill his very real eloquence. It was a great test of courage—it
was a great performance. It was in a spirit of lofty scorn that he
addressed the Irishmen around him—now his devoted slaves, then his
foes—saying: “Yes! You talk of your gratitude to the living Englishman”
(Gladstone)—“but who now thinks of the dead Irishman?” (Parnell). The
words and the tone were withering.

Here again I am quoting from memory, and I may be wrong in a word or
two, but I think not. He seemed to scourge the men whom he taunted with
their ingratitude to their former chieftain. The words I have quoted are
few enough, and written they seem cold; but as he uttered them they were
liquid, scorching fire, and at that moment he reached a height which he
himself probably never suspected. Parnell had never been popular with his
followers. They recognized his power, and they knew that he was necessary
to them, but their allegiance was purely one of self-interest. He was too
imperious and supercilious—looking down upon them from the height of his
superiority—to command any affection. He held himself perfectly aloof
from them, and would not even let them know where he was living.

Mr. Tim Healy’s talents were of a very different order. His caustic,
sardonic humour was always telling; his knowledge of the forms of the
House—a very sharp-edged weapon—was consummate, and he was past-master
of the art of interjections. When he rose in his place, even though
it should be for less time than it takes to write this, it was pretty
certain that somebody would be made to wince under his biting sneers.
He could make a capital speech as occasion served him, but it was as an
interruptor that his stinging words drew blood. He was recognized as a
power in the House, and a welcome tonic bracing it up in its feeblest
moments of enervation.

Apart from the two men that I have mentioned the Irishmen of the ’92
Parliament were dreary and uninteresting. The old spirit of Irish wit
seemed to have died out: if it still had a spark of life in the drivers
of the jaunting-cars in Dublin there was none of it at Westminster among
the dull dogs whom Ireland sent to us. Their leader, Mr. Justin McCarthy,
was an amiable man of letters, whom, I believe, everybody who knew him
liked, but as a politician he was not inspiring, and the rest of the
men were long-winded bores. When they got up to speak the tea-room, the
library and the smoking-room rapidly filled. The message that one of the
_Dî majores_ was up—Gladstone, Chamberlain, Morley, Balfour, Hicks-Beach,
was needed to charm men back to the green benches, and among our men
Colonel Saunderson could always draw an audience. Party considerations
and not Mr. Gladstone’s eloquence carried the Bill through. Just before
the final Division I was speaking with a not very violent Liberal friend
of mine, and asked him how he, with his opinions, could vote for Home
Rule. His answer was that he did not like it any better than I did, “But
I can’t desert the old man.” Shortly afterwards he was made a Baronet! I
cannot do more than record a few sketchy impressions of what took place
in regard to this revolutionary measure. Its history is public property.

The Home Rule Bill was passed by the House of Commons on the 1st
of September, after a fight which had lasted eighty-five days. It
was promptly thrown out by the House of Lords, in which the Duke of
Devonshire led the attack. After a holiday of about a month the House of
Commons met again and took in hand the Parish Councils Bill, a highly
contentious measure of great importance, in which Sir Henry Fowler was
the Prime Minister’s Chief Aide-de-Camp. The Employers’ Liability Bill,
in which the Government were beaten by the Lords on the question of
contracting out under certain conditions, was another Bill of great
weight which had to be dealt with, and with all this burden of work to
carry Parliament continued to sit on into March, when on the 3rd it was
prorogued, after a session of thirteen months—the longest on record. The
respite was but short, for the new session began only eight days later.

In the meantime an event of the greatest moment had taken place. Mr.
Gladstone, who was now eighty-four years of age, had definitely resigned
the Premiership, and retired into private life. For some time past his
ears and eyes had both been failing. As he told the Queen, his hearing
had become so dull that even in the Cabinet he was no longer able to
follow the discussions of his colleagues; he was suffering from cataract,
for which he underwent a successful operation, but though he regained
his sight, he felt that his activities were spent. After his retirement
there came, from time to time, flashes of the old glory, some of which
must have startled Constantinople, from Hawarden, Chester, Liverpool;
a polemical discussion with the Pope on the subject of the recognition
of Anglican orders, if it achieved nothing, at any rate commanded
admiration. Such meteoric apparitions were all that his countrymen were
now to know of the great political hero who was thenceforth a recluse at
Hawarden. The political arena had lost its greatest living athlete, the
House of Commons saw him no more.

From Lord Morley’s “Life of Gladstone” it is plain that the Queen, in
accepting his resignation, made it clear to him that it was not her
intention to consult him as to her choice of his successor. Had she done
so he would have recommended Lord Spencer. In the House of Commons the
general feeling had been that if Mr. Gladstone retired, which was fully
expected, his mantle would fall upon Sir William Harcourt. As to what
actually took place that day at Windsor there were many wild stories
floating about. Some wise men said that Mr. Gladstone had suggested Lord
Rosebery’s name to the Queen—that we know was absolutely untrue; another
story was to the effect that Sir Henry Ponsonby was so sure of Her
Majesty’s intentions that he actually summoned Sir William Harcourt to
be in attendance. Probably another lie. When the moment came the Queen,
acting upon her own responsibility and initiative, upon which in the
choice of a Prime Minister she always insisted, sent for Lord Rosebery.

Mr. Gladstone died in 1898. Of those who play a conspicuous part, even
a noble part, in the history of their day, it is strange how very
few survive their own death. During a life-time which has now lasted
perilously near to eighty years I can recollect the deaths of many men
of whom it was said, and truly said, that the world was the poorer for
their loss. But they crossed the Styx, and the world jogged on, decently
inconsolable as a widow, and as forgetful.

Within the limit of my life in our own country two statesmen only, both
now long since dead (I do not count Peel, for I was but a small boy when
he died), yet stir the hearts of men—Disraeli and Gladstone, and even
in the case of the latter the wick in the lamp is already beginning
to flicker ominously. In America there has been one such man, Abraham
Lincoln. In France not one. In Italy two, Cavour the great politician
and schemer, Garibaldi the Paladin hero of romance. Here again, as in
the case of our own two great men, we see a difference. The magic of
Cavour’s name would not now raise a company of bersaglieri, whereas that
of Garibaldi would carry the fiery cross through the remotest mountain
districts of Italy. The glamour which still casts a halo round the
memories of such men as Disraeli the mystic, and Garibaldi the great
_condottiere_, lies in their appeal to the imagination. Admire Gladstone
and Cavour as we may and must, we cannot but admit that it would have
been impossible to create a flower league in honour of the one or to
compose a patriotic hymn in celebration of the other.

The one German hero of my time who “being dead yet liveth” is Bismarck.
Nor, as I think, could a better example be found to illustrate what I
mean by the appeal to the imagination. The idea which his brain evolved,
a united Germany—his own creation—queening it among the nations of
Europe, was not only a mighty conception, but it was also one which
fitted into the poetry of the old Germanic mythology. Physically
he himself, the great heavy-handed giant, had something of the
characteristics of the God Thor—Buddhists might have said that he was a
reincarnation of the Thunderer. When Jules Favre went to discuss terms of
peace with him, had not the unhappy Frenchman to face an orgie of strong
drinks that was a torture to him, topping up with a bowl of flaming
brandy such as none but an old Norse God could swallow? That was the
high-water mark of Kultur and that is why Bismarck lives and will never
die to the end of time. He forged a terrific weapon, a Siegfried’s sword,
and for the misfortune of the world it has fallen into hands directed by
a brain ill-fitted to use it.

Gamblers tell us that the cards never forgive a mistake. The same might
be said almost—not quite—as truly of politics. Bismarck’s one colossal
mistake was the annexation of Alsace and Lorraine, creating in Germany
that persistent nightmare, the dread of the _revanche_. But for that, the
Germany of his dreams might still be a queen in commerce, in science, in
literature, a bright beacon shedding its light over the world, gratefully
admired and even loved. But now!

Gladstone made some mistakes and he left us one heritage of woe—yet his
personality and the respect which it commanded still survive; it will
be for another generation to estimate the results of what some of us
think to be the unhappy dislocation caused by his Irish policy. It has
taken forty-four years to show the full value of the theft of Alsace and
Lorraine. What will be said of Home Rule forty-four years hence? Let us
pray!

Sir William Harcourt was now the leader of the House of Commons, and very
well and ably he filled that difficult office. He was really a great
parliamentarian, thoroughly imbued with respect for the House and its
great traditions, versed in all the intricacies of its procedure, and a
jealous defender of its dignity and privileges. People may say what they
like, but a great and commanding presence is an asset to him who would
be a ruler of men. Harcourt’s tall and imposing figure like that of Saul
the son of Kish, his ready wit and facility of speech, combined with ripe
knowledge and tried experience, made him a great leader. His qualities
gave point to his praise and inspired a certain awe in his followers. If
officially he was rather a Tartar, out of Office he was a most agreeable
member of society, full of fun and an excellent _raconteur_,—as a host
incomparable.

In the new session the first spark of interest, or perhaps it would be
more fair to say of amusement, was struck by that delightfully saucy imp
of mischief, Henry Labouchere who, with his tongue in his cheek, proposed
an amendment to the address in which he argued for the abolition of the
Veto of the House of Lords. No account of the House of Commons of his
time could by any possibility omit to take notice of “Labby.” In spite
of all his impertinencies everybody liked him. The smoking-room was
his kingdom, and there he sat enthroned, always witty and amusing, and
serving as a bond of union between men of all shades of opinion, some of
whom, but for him, would never have exchanged a word. He was no respecter
of persons, but was never malevolent except in the case of the chief
of his party, to whom he would quite openly allude as the “grand old
Ananias.” “Don’t you trust that fraudulent old impostor,” was a frequent
saying of his. There must have been some deep-rooted cause of offence to
provoke such hostility, for Labouchere was really one of the kindest of
men. No trouble was too great for him to take on behalf of a friend.

I remember a case where it was of vital importance to an acquaintance of
his, by no means an intimate, that a certain case should be kept out of
the newspapers. Labby sat down at once and wrote off to all the editors
of the chief Radical papers—the Conservative press had already been
squared—begging them to boycott the case and use their influence with the
smaller fry in the same sense. No word of the affair ever saw the light.
Now that is a far higher type of kindness than the mere gift of a few
pounds the loss of which would not be felt.

It was that same kindness which prompted his persistent attacks against
the harpies and bloodsuckers who prey upon society. His Christmas Toy
Fund was another most benevolent institution. In spite of all the violent
abuse to which he was often subjected, I think that he went down to the
grave with a record of better work than many men who have died in the
odour of sanctity. I knew him fairly well, for though he was about three
years older than myself we were at Eton together and afterwards in the
Diplomatic Service at the same time, though never at the same post.

At the St. James’s Club I once asked him why he was so bitter against
the House of Lords. Bitterness he disclaimed with a laugh, but he went
on to say in his sneering way, “So long as I bring forward a motion from
time to time for the abolition of the Peers, my seat for Northampton is a
freehold.” He had just come back from a visit to his constituents who, as
he told me—with much humour—had entertained him at a public tea, in the
middle of which a little girl about twelve or thirteen years old, with
two tails down her back like the Kenwigs children in “Nicholas Nickleby,”
was made to stand upon a chair, being too short to be seen otherwise,
and began to sing a song the impropriety of which was simply appalling.
“I asked the meaning of it,” said Labouchere, “and was told that it was
a Malthusian hymn.” It used to be freely said that when his uncle Lord
Taunton died he was in hopes that the peerage would be recreated for him.
The pranks that he had played when he was in the Diplomatic Service,
though innocent enough in their rebelliousness, counted against him—so he
had to content himself with abusing the grapes.

He could scoff and flout and sneer—no man better—but often he gave
the impression of laughing at himself quite as much as at those whom
for the moment he might be holding in his thumb-screw. It was as if a
man preparing a bitter draught for some other person were careful to
keep the dregs for his own use and swallow them. Like Thomas Carlyle’s
loud guffaw to which I have alluded elsewhere, his sneers had the
back-hitting qualities of a boomerang. He hated the surroundings into
which his affectations drove him, and being at heart an aristocrat of
the aristocrats, sneered at his class and at himself for being of it and
loving it.

I imagine that if Sir William Harcourt had been asked by what special
achievement he would choose his worth as politician, statesman and
financier to be measured, he would have selected the Death Duties Budget.
Although I hated the Bill I am bound to admit that to pilot it through
the Commons was a great effort. It was full of highly contentious matter,
some of it as objectionable to his own party as to ours. It was not the
sort of measure that a powerful minister with a servile majority at his
back can bludgeon through a House that has never tamely submitted to
bullying.

Even now that members are paid there have been signs, comforting signs,
that an English Member of Parliament still recognizes the dignity and the
self-satisfaction of a conscious independence.

Harcourt was conciliatory and diplomatic, but he was as firm as a rock.
Personally, as I have said, I disliked the Bill and I had the audacity
to think it bad finance. It seemed to me that the fortunes of the
inhabitants of a country constitute its capital, and that at every death
to take away a considerable portion of the corpus of the dead man’s
estate is to deplete the capital of the country. If going a step further
you apply the portion so taken to the purposes of the year, you are then
to that extent treating capital as income. To live upon capital can be
healthy neither for a private person nor in the case of the public purse.
I maintain that the sum realized out of what I held to be capital should
be used not as income but for the reduction of the National Debt. I also
thought and still think that an estate should be immune from death duty
for a certain number of years—otherwise two or more deaths in rapid
succession must have a ruinously unjust effect upon estates—and indeed be
a still further injurious attack upon the capital of the country. “Then,”
said my opponents, “the Bill would cease to be a ‘Death Duties Bill.’”
“Bless my soul,” I answered, “with what equanimity should I behold that
disaster!” In short, I was told that I was wrong, that I knew nothing
about finance, and so I held my peace. But I am glad to see that after
all these years there are now many men who are at one with the views of
my ignorance.

Lord Milner was pretty generally accredited with having been at Sir
William Harcourt’s elbow and it was known that it was he who worked
out the details of the Bill; some people went so far as to say that he
inspired it. Lord Milner had been at that time Chairman of the Board
of Inland Revenue for two years, and he was the authority whom, above
all others, the Chancellor of the Exchequer was bound to consult. I am
inclined to think that the idea of the death duties was the Chancellor’s
own conception, which it became the not uncongenial duty of Lord Milner
as a civil servant to work into shape.

In Committee especially the Bill met with stout opposition. The men of
our front bench with Mr. Balfour and Sir Michael Hicks-Beach to lead
them and such doughty champions as Mr. Walter Long and Mr. Chaplin ready
at any moment to spring to arms, fought with great determination. Mr.
Goschen was less than half-hearted. But behind the front bench were
Mr. Hanbury, Mr. Byrne, afterwards a judge, and Mr. Bowles. Byrne was
a famous lawyer and fighter of inestimable value, a standing menace to
the Bill. Bowles who in his early days had had the advantage of sound
financial training in the legacy department of Somerset House, had by
sheer hard work and talent rapidly made himself a man of note in the
House, to be enhanced later by the marked ability which he showed on the
Public Accounts Committee.

That inexorable coiner of happy nick-names, Toby M.P., had in consequence
of a speech on naval affairs—the speech of a seaman full of technical
knowledge—dubbed him “Captain Cuttle,” and Mr. Punch’s academicians from
that time forth made him famous in that character, by representing him
clad in a reefer and tarpaulin hat, with a hook where he should have
had a hand. The joke was so exquisitely comic that it laid hold of the
public, and so well was he known by the hook assigned to him by Toby
M.P., that on one occasion when he was speaking some stranger who was
told that he was Mr. Bowles indignantly denied the possibility, inasmuch
as he had the full complement of hands, and no hook.

Well, “the Cap’en,” as Toby called him, was the Chancellor’s most
formidable foe, not only on account of his financial ability, but because
by most accurate historical, legal and constitutional study he had made
himself master not only of the complicated forms of the House but also
of the facts and precedents which had given rise to those forms. That
knowledge is one of the deadliest weapons which a Parliamentarian can
wield. It is a study which is too much neglected, because it is one
which needs the greatest industry, the most patient research. To most
men it would seem intolerably dull; but it has its reward. It is not
too much to say that most of the mistakes that have been made in recent
years—some of them almost criminal—would have been impossible had members
realized how they were flying in the face of the laws of their own august
institution.

Mr. Bowles’ interleaved copy of the Bill with every line, every sentence,
every word, carefully weighed and annotated was a monument of industry.
So profound was this talented man’s study of its provisions that no
flaw in its harness could escape him. There is no denying that he was
Harcourt’s great danger; but the Bill had been very carefully drawn;
there might be a good many amendments, but there was no possibility of
altering its principles. There was, however, a moment when Sir William
was almost in despair of being able to pass his Bill. He relied greatly
upon the profound legal knowledge of Sir John Rigby, the Attorney
General, who was his right-hand man in the conduct of the Bill. Sir John
Rigby was to be raised to the Bench—and Sir William looked upon his loss
as fatal—he even, according to Lord Tweedmouth, who had a way of letting
cats out of bags, went so far as to tell the Cabinet that he must drop
the Bill. As a matter of fact that very loss saved the Bill. Sir John
Rigby might be a great lawyer but he was ineffective in the House. A
rather ridiculous appearance likened to that of pantaloon in a pantomime,
and a manner that was anything but dignified, marred his ability. The
urbanity and general popularity of Sir Robert Reid (Lord Loreburn) who
succeeded him proved to be a godsend to the Chancellor and the measure
was never in danger.

I myself had the good fortune to secure one of the rare amendments. In
Committee I ventured to plead for the exemption of legacies to schools
and universities. Sir William in the most friendly way yielded in the
case of the universities, but when I pressed him upon the subject of
schools he was obdurate. The curious thing was that not one of the
members for universities took up the matter. They sat there silent and
uncaring, and did not even back me up or thank me for having succeeded in
doing what was obviously their special duty and not mine.

For three months we fought ding-dong, and in the end, of course, the big
battalions won, though with severe gaps in their serried ranks. “Never
mind,” said our men, “when we come into power again we shall put all
that straight.” I knew better. The ruin of families is a matter of small
account in the eyes of a Chancellor who is framing a Budget. The death
duties had come to stay, and in staying, grow.

After the emotions of the Home Rule Bill and the thirteen months’
session, the Parish Councils and the Death Duties Bills, the session of
1895 seemed very insipid. It reminded me of the flesh of the penguins
in the “Swiss Family Robinson,” which the father pronounced to be “une
viande fade” (translated by one of my brothers seventy years ago and
more, “fade viands”).

The House droned on in conscientious dullness until at last it was roused
on the 21st of June by the War Minister’s announcement of the resignation
of the Duke of Cambridge, to which I have alluded elsewhere, and an hour
or two later it was thrown into the wildest excitement by the defeat of
the Government, by a majority of seven, on the supply of cordite. It was
but a small majority, but it was enough; and when the paper was handed to
Mr. Akers-Douglas the intoxication was mænadic. The Government was out.

It was the last Division of the House of Commons in which I was destined
to take part, for I was perfectly determined not to stand again. I should
have liked the House well enough but for the holidays, which were odious.
Primrose League meetings, bazaars, political gatherings in schoolrooms,
attended perhaps by a dozen yokels, two or three old women and a little
boy, illuminated by a cheap lamp or two, one of which was sure to go out
and smell horribly, made life impossible.

After a session like that of 1893-94 I felt that I had a right to a
little peace. Not a bit of it. Before a week was out there came the old
complaint, “We have not seen much of our member lately.” Was I Sir Boyle
Roche’s bird? So when the dissolution came I thanked the constituents and
made my bow, beaten by the hard work of the holidays.

I was glad to have regained my freedom and went back gleefully to my
garden, my horses and my turnips; among the latter I include petty
sessions, cottage hospital meetings and their kin. But a chapter in life
is rarely closed without regret, and a seat in the House of Commons
gives a man a sense of being in the swim which he hardly realizes until
he has lost it. Even so, he has had a great experience and has gained
a knowledge of the working of the machinery of the State which nothing
else can give. A Parliament in which one by one almost all the items of
the Newcastle[46] programme have been carried into effect, may hardly
offer great temptations to an independent man believing in the good old
Constitution which made England great. Still it is the governing power of
the country; every man should, as far as possible, make himself master of
its procedure, and the best road to that end is to endeavour to gain a
seat in it. Let him try the experiment for one Parliament, and if, at the
end of that time, he does not like it, he can but put out the lights and
ring down the curtain—as I did.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

1896

SIR JOSEPH HOOKER


In 1896 I brought out a little book, “The Bamboo Garden,” which was
very well received, though naturally it appealed only to a very limited
public. Besides a few indulgent friends, it could only interest those
who possess gardens of sufficient importance to enable them to grow the
plants of which it treats. If I remember right the first account handed
in by the publishers showed a deficit which had to be wiped out by a
considerable cheque. In time the edition became exhausted and the book is
now out of print, so I suppose that in the long run I was no great loser.
However, it brought me one triumph which was worth more than money. If
anybody had told me beforehand that I should be mentioned in Sir Joseph
Hooker’s great work, “The Flora of British India,” I should have deemed
it as improbable as that I should be made a Knight of the Garter. But
wonderful as it is to me, there I am!

My pride may be forgiven if I copy what the great man said. After some
preliminary remarks about the Arundinaria tribe, he writes: “Since
the above was written, Mr. Freeman-Mitford’s ‘The Bamboo Garden’ has
appeared, a work replete with valuable observations upon the habits, mode
of growth, and other characters of the hardy species of bamboo, including
five Indian, cultivated by him. In it is pointed out (see ‘Arundinaria
Simoni,’ p. 60) for the first time the true characters of the two types
of sheath and blade that occur in bamboos, and which do not, so far as I
know, in any other tribe of grasses. In a communication which Mr. Mitford
has been good enough to make to me on this subject, he has formulated
his views as follows, and has kindly allowed me to introduce them here.”
Then follows a technical paper by me for which there is no place here.
Was I not justified in feeling proud?

The Secretaryship of the Office of Works brought me into relations with
many of the princes of science, among them there was none who inspired
me with more respect than Sir Joseph Hooker; indeed, for various reasons
we were brought together so closely that what began as a very pleasant
friendship warmed into an affection which only ceased with his life. He
retired from his official position at Kew in 1885, and from that time
till his death, in 1911, we remained in intimate correspondence.

He was delightful in conversation. He had done so much and seen so much
from the time when he qualified as a surgeon in order to accompany Sir
James Ross as botanist in the _Erebus_ on the Antarctic Expedition of
1839. He had known practically all the eminent men of science of Europe
and America, and was himself the last survivor of the mighty triumvirate,
Darwin, Hooker, Huxley, whom I also knew as a most charming personality.

A notable feature in Hooker’s character was his extreme modesty. Of
his apprenticeship in surgery—no mean feat, accomplished as it was
in a few months—he was wont to talk as if it had been no more than a
boyish lark. Of his great journey in India,—pregnant with important
scientific results,—he spoke as if it had been the mere holiday trip of
a restless Englishman, whereas it produced not only what was admittedly
one of the best books of travel that ever were written, but also gave
evidence of undaunted courage and of the most astute diplomatic talent
in dealing with critical and unexpected conditions. Simple he was, and
self-effacing, yet when Kew was attacked and a powerful Minister, Mr.
Ayrton, whom Dizzy once called the cleverest member of the House of
Commons, attempted to reduce the noble scientific institution of which
he was the head to the level of the nurserymaid and her perambulator,
he could show fight to the death, and he won. In order that Kew should
be beautiful, he was willing to work with all his might. But it must
be something else besides: it must be a school of botany for the whole
world. Its first duty was to science.

The correspondence with myself upon the subject of bamboos, to which I
have alluded above, bore witness to that quality of modesty which is the
hall-mark of the greatest men, at any rate, it is only the greatest that
possess it. Writing to me once upon a technical point, he told me that he
thought I was wrong. Very timidly, and very respectfully, I stuck to my
guns, and gave my reasons. His answer was characteristic. He admitted the
truth of what I had urged upon him, saying, “Never hesitate to correct me
if I am wrong.” That, coming from so great a man, was magnificent.

Hooker’s life was ideally beautiful. Following in the footsteps of his
distinguished father, who was his first master and whom he adored with
all that strength of veneration and love which he showed in all his
friendships, for instance in that with Darwin, he lived to be recognized
both at home and abroad as the greatest of living botanists. In middle
life he passed through a period of delicate health which certainly gave
no promise of the ripe old age which he attained. In 1865, as Sir William
Thiselton Dyer tells us, he was so ill that he had to be carried in
blankets by four men to see his dead father’s body leave the house.

In 1876, when I was Secretary of the Office of Works, under which Kew
at that time was placed, Sir Joseph came to me and said that the work,
especially the correspondence with the colonies, had assumed such
dimensions that it was impossible for him to carry it on single-handed.
Lord Salisbury was, of all the Ministry, the man most interested in
science, so, although the matter did not concern his department—then the
India Office—I thought it would be a good thing to bespeak his support
in the Cabinet before bringing forward a matter involving extra expense.
Lord Salisbury was most sympathetic, and in the end Mr. (now Sir William)
Thiselton Dyer was appointed Assistant Director.

Kew went on and prospered greatly; but in 1885 Sir Joseph’s old symptoms
began to reappear and he had to resign. Upon the strength of a memorandum
written by me, Sir William was appointed to succeed him. Sir William
Dyer, to my great regret, has told the world in his obituary notices of
Sir Joseph in the Proceedings of the Royal Society and in the “Dictionary
of National Biography” that Kew “in 1850 passed to the control of the
Office of Works, to which officially it was only a pleasure ground
and which _never_ felt much sympathy for its scientific character and
functions.” I have underlined the word _never_ because it could only
mean that Sir William was not referring exclusively to the wretched old
hostility shown by Mr. Ayrton. That Sir Joseph did not always take the
same view of the relations between himself and the office of which I was
the head for twelve years—far longer than any other secretary—is proved
by sheaves of letters which I received from him in which he constantly
alludes to the support which I personally gave him. Moreover, those
letters mostly end with the words, “Yours affectionately.” Had I felt
no sympathy with Kew, Sir Joseph would hardly have shown the deepest
sympathy with me for thirty-seven years. As a complete answer to Sir
William Dyer’s twice published attack I am tempted to bring forward
Sir Joseph Hooker’s dedication to me of the volume of the _Botanical
Magazine_ for 1897.

                         “The Camp, Sunningdale, December 1st, 1897.

    “MY DEAR MITFORD,

    “Duty and pleasure alike prompt me to offer you the dedication
    of vol. cxxiii. of the _Botanical Magazine_, giving me as it
    does the opportunity of recalling the years of our cordial
    official co-operation when the Royal Gardens profited so
    greatly in every department through your energy, foresight, and
    love of plants.

    “To this claim I must surely add the service you have rendered
    to horticulture and botany by your labours in introducing,
    cultivating and studying the hardy bamboos, of which your
    charming work, ‘The Bamboo Garden,’ is the first-fruits. Nor
    can I omit an allusion to your own garden, unrivalled as it is
    amongst the private collections of hardy plants in Europe for
    extent, scientific interest and beauty.

    “Believe me, my dear Mitford,

                         “Affectionately yours,

                                                     “J. D. HOOKER.”

Armed with this, to Sir William Dyer I think I can say “habet!”

In spite of the two alarms of 1865 and 1885, Sir Joseph Hooker’s
vitality was so great that he lived till 1911, and was able to labour
on until the summer of that year. Only a few months before his death he
wrote to me about the work upon which he was engaged, a study of the
balsams, and told me with pride that he was able to use his microscope as
well as ever.

I went to see him that summer in his lovely suntrap at Sunningdale. He
was the same bright, cheerful friend of old days and most affectionate
in his welcome. The microscope and the MSS. littered on his study
table still spoke of work, work, work. “It’s dogged as does it,” was
a favourite quotation of his. We went into the garden and Lady Hooker
gave us tea under the trees. He chatted gaily over old times and about
old friends, and was greatly interested in the talk of an American
lady, a lover of trees, who had come to pay him a visit. But in spite
of his indomitable spirits I found him much aged during the last few
months—indeed, at ninety-four that was to be expected, and I felt that
this would be our last meeting. I was not much surprised when I heard
that on the 10th of December the dear old man had passed away, mercifully
and painlessly, in his sleep.




CHAPTER XXXIX

1898

ANURADHAPURA


In the year 1898, business took me once more to Ceylon. One of my sons
had gone out there to start in life as a tea-planter, and I must needs
go to see how he was faring and what were his prospects for the future.
And so we set out, my daughter Iris and I, and my old friend Reginald
Yorke, the best of shipmates, came with us. He, too, had a son in Ceylon,
who some years later was crushed to death against a tree by a wounded
elephant in East Africa.

When I first saw Ceylon in 1865 Point de Galle was the place of call for
steamers—a bad and dangerous harbour, but so prodigally beautiful, with
its coral reefs and its palm groves fringing the sea, studded with the
quaint outrigged boats of the fisher-folk, that one could fancy oneself
arriving in such an island as those into which Captain Cook felt his way
in the Pacific. Galle was quite unspoilt and primitive—just like the
pictures of the spice islands in the travel books of our childhood—a
fitting approach to one of the fairest of God’s creations. I felt as if
I should never weary of watching the intensely blue sea lapping the very
roots of the cocoanut palms, which tradition said could never flourish
far from the sound of its waves. Here was indeed the poetry of travel,
the reward of them “that go down to the sea in ships ... and see the
works of the Lord and His wonders in the deep.”

Colombo is very different, and I am glad that my first amazed sight of
the tropics was at Galle, and not in a place, safe indeed, but eminently
prosaic and uninspiring. Colombo is Ceylon, the land of business men,
planters, jewel merchants and Dutch-hybrids; Galle was Lanka, that
ancient island from which Wijayo, the invader, expelled the demons; the
land of saints and heroes and kings; the land of romance and holy lore,
of which the Mahawanso, “The Genealogy of the Great,” is the epic.

There was no temptation to spend a needless hour in Colombo. Happily the
train soon whirls the traveller into the midst of the baffling beauty of
the scenery that lies between the sea and Kandy, scenery so lovely that
the traveller feels inclined to rub his eyes and ask whether this can be
real, whether he is not asleep, and tasting a dream-vision of paradise.

Hatton, whither we were bound, is less beautiful, for the glory of the
jungle has been ruthlessly swept away to make room for the tea-plant.
Every available inch is under cultivation of what at first sight look
like euonymus plants set out in a nursery gardener’s rows. Here and
there are pretty villas, with gardens full of all manner of strange and
attractive plants: for Hatton is a great centre, and, lying high, is
very healthy, so there are many planters who come here for refreshment
after months spent in the feverish damp of the lowland rubber and
cocoanut plantations. And yet even here a man may turn his back upon the
rupee-bearing tea-plant and feast his eyes upon a great mountain shaped
like a crouching lion, or upon the distant majesty of Adam’s Peak, with
its legends and its ghost. Here we stayed for some while, for there was
plenty to do.

Along the road, not more than a mile or so, if my memory serves me, from
Hatton, there was a small Roman Catholic chapel and graveyard, to which
some good priest came from time to time, to say mass, hear confessions,
and shrive his flock. It was no more than a tiny plaster hut, fifteen
feet by eight, with an altar, and on the altar two candlesticks on either
side of the Figure on the Cross, to which some humble, pious soul had
added as ornaments his two most precious treasures: two empty Huntley and
Palmer biscuit-tins! It was a most touching offering, reminding me of the
widow’s mite.

Once before I had come across the traces of the great Reading potentates
in a strange place. It was in Mongolia, three or four hundred miles
north of Peking. I had taken refuge from the noon-day sun in a Mongol
encampment, and the chieftainess, a fat, hideous old woman, shapeless in
her sheepskin robe, allowed me and my companion, for a consideration, to
rest in her _yurt_, a leathern tent with an opening at the top to let out
the smoke of the camel-dung fire. She was a great lady in her way, though
very dirty, and the outward and visible sign of her high position was a
large Huntley and Palmer tin, in which were growing a few heads of garlic
wherewith to flavour the mess of mutton and millet, with chunks of brick
tea and salt, which was stewing in her gipsy kettle. Of that tin she was
as proud as a duchess of her strawberry leaves.

When the preliminaries of my business were settled I had a few days
on my hands, while the lawyers were playing their part. If the law is
slow in England it will readily be conceived that it acquires no speed
in the sweltering heat of Colombo; so Yorke and I determined, after
seeing Neuara Eliya and Kandy, to go and explore the mysteries of the
buried city of Anuradhapura far away in the north. I believe that it
is now brought into touch with the rest of the world by a railway; but
seventeen years ago that did not exist. So we hired a carriage and
started from Matalé. We saw the carved cave temples of Dambulla and in
the distance the great rock fortress of Sigiri—marvels in their way; but
the attraction was Anuradhapura, the capital of the kings when Lanka had
not yet become degraded into Ceylon.

For many miles the road ran through the thick, impenetrable forest—a
little thinner in places close to the wayside. Here and there a small
clearing and a few native huts; but for the most part not a human
habitation, nor a brown man, woman, or child, to be seen. The steamy air
was full of that subtle, mysterious perfume of heavily-scented flowers
and rich, pungent spices which is wafted far out to sea. The very
leaves of the forest seemed to thrill at the voluptuous caress of the
soft, perfumed breeze. A delicious, languorous, enervating atmosphere,
in which to dream and never to do. Some of the huge butterflies are
very beautiful. Of birds we did not see many, nor did we hear their
song—though some are said to pipe most sweetly. One bird there is that
breaks the stillness with its hoarse melancholy croak in which the
Singhalese imagination hears the words, “Ko Hattha Paroa! Ko Hattha
Paroa! Where are the seven axes!” Just as our children hear in the call
of the cushat the exhortation to the thief to “take two coos, Taffy—take
two coos, Taffy.”

Once upon a time there lived in a village of Lanka a woman who had
several sons, all of whom dwelt with her. One day the seven brothers
went out into the forest to cut wood. The night fell, the evening meal
of rice was prepared, but no sons came home to partake of it. Their
mother wondered, but took no great heed, thinking that some accident had
delayed them, until the next day men from a neighbouring village came and
told her that her sons had been killed and eaten by wild beasts. But she
being a covetous and greedy woman uttered no wail of sorrow for the lost
children whom she had borne, but only cried out: “Ko Hattha Paroa! Where
are the seven axes?” Oh, cruel! cruel! oh, heartless mother! whose sons
were dead and she only mourned over the loss of the axes! So the Gods
were wroth, and to punish her turned her into a bird, laying upon her
this curse, that till the crack of doom, knowing no rest, she should flit
through the darkness of the jungle, ever uttering her unhappy cry: “Where
are the seven axes? Where are the seven axes?”

The road itself is the only sign of man’s handiwork. The forms and
colours of the jungle are often startlingly beautiful. Some of the trees
remind one of home; others, roped together by graceful lianes, are a
revelation—their branching, their foliage, and their flowers a new
sensation. Mixed with them are feathering bamboos, barbarously gorgeous
crotons and poinsettias, and here and there an orchid, peering out of
a cranny in a rock. From a great picturesque stone by the roadside I
brought back two deliciously scented odontoglossums which flourished for
years at Batsford.

All of a sudden, as we drove along, we were aware of a large company of
monkeys, some thirty or forty of them, of all sizes and ages, running
by the side of the road, just inside the thicket. They were led by an
old and venerable ape, very grey, with white whiskers, the image of a
Hyde Park preacher—had he only worn a shabby black coat, shiny in greasy
patches and at the elbows, he would have acted the part to perfection. He
was a dictatorial old gentleman, whose word was a law unto his people. I
say “word,” for that he had some means of issuing his commands to them
was certain; that they understood him and obeyed his orders was equally
certain. Sometimes he led the way, sometimes he dropped back and gathered
in stragglers. He was apparently much agitated, though we could not have
been the cause, for he made no attempt to avoid us, but led his troop
parallel to our carriage. After running like that for three or four
hundred yards, he gave the word of command, and the whole troop crossed
the road in front of us. We stopped the carriage to see what happened.
After, perhaps, a hundred more yards, the monkeys disappeared into the
jungle on the other side.

Suddenly we heard a rustling on the side on which the monkeys had first
appeared. I was aware of two gleaming yellow eyes, and presently a
great leopard, cautiously, stealthily, crept out of the dense foliage,
evidently following the spoor. I could have shot him at less than ten
yards. In a moment he caught sight of us as our carriage stood still in
the road, gave one spring back and vanished. He doubtless was the cause
of the old preacher’s strategic retreat, and our presence helped him to
make it good.

When I saw those yellow eyes I could but think of the myriads of eyes
lurking in the jungle, watching unseen, like Fates—eyes of birds, eyes
of beasts, eyes of strange, weird insects, little beadlike eyes peering
sleeplessly out of flat, triangular heads that lie deadly in the centre
of glistening scaled coils. Two little pricks, no more of a wound
than could be made by the point of a tiny needle, and in half an hour
death—death unshriven. What a wicked, sinful, murderous jungle! How
beautiful and how mysterious!

Men talk of the silence of the jungle. Is the jungle ever silent? Is
there not always the murmur of leaf and bough, stirred in some mysterious
way like the quivering aspen—the legendary tree of the Holy Cross, never
at rest—even when there seems to be no wind? Is there not always the
rustling whisper of malevolent creatures in ambush, waiting to destroy
something feebler or less cunning than themselves? What a sight it would
be if, as God paraded the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air
before Adam that he might name them, we might cause the creatures of
just one square mile of the Singhalese forest to be driven in procession
before us! The variety of forms, the contrast of stature and girth,
from the huge elephant down to the minutest of creeping things—what a
wonder-world it would reveal!

As we neared the mystic city, the night fell. In this land there is
no twilight, no delicious gloaming, no opalescent fading of the glare
of day into the soft, loving mystery of night. The darkness came down
like a dense black veil upon the jungle: the death of the day was
sudden, remorseless. But all at once, out of the gloom there shone a
great light. There was no moon, but millions upon millions of fireflies
floated gracefully, dancing in the air over the jungle; it was as if the
stars which were shining gloriously overhead had sent down shower after
shower of dazzling sparks—tiny jewelled morsels of the Southern Cross—to
illuminate our triumphant entry into what now looked like the city of
some wonder-working magician. We could see the outlines of buildings,
temples, palaces, and above all, here and there the great Dagobas, rising
out of the plain like isolated hills covered with a pall of dense trees
and lianes, piercing the darkness of the night. Once they were noble
shrines of brickwork, proudly rearing their tiara-like towers heavenward,
built to encase some relic of the Wise One, the Buddha; but centuries of
neglect have smothered them with vegetation out of all shape, till only
their great height remains of all their former glory.

Wonderful are the ways of the jungle! A leaf falls and decays into dust,
settling into some chink of a mouldering wall. Little by little other
leaves join it and decay into mould. A bird drops a seed; tropical
rains wash it into the haven of rest; there, fulfilling its mission, it
germinates in the ever moist soil, to which as a pious child it in time
adds its tribute of falling foliage. More seeds are borne by other birds,
or carried on the wings of the wind. More decay breeds more life, until
by degrees all trace of building vanishes, swallowed up by an omnivorous
parasitic growth. The work of man’s hand, the record of the ambition of
kings and of a priestly caste would be lost and forgotten, but for the
inquisitive West, which never rests from digging into the secrets of the
East, guarded in vain by the seven-headed cobras, the Nagas of Hindu myth.

Had it not been for the learned curiosity of Mr. Turnour, the Mahawanso,
the great epic poem of Ceylon, the Book of Kings of the island, would
perhaps never have been deciphered, and the secrets of the ruins of
Anuradhapura would have remained as great a riddle as those of Stonehenge
or the Rollright Stones. Although the reading of the Mahawanso did not
present the same gigantic difficulties as the cuneiform inscriptions of
Nineveh, it was yet a task of great difficulty. The records were kept
by priests; they were written in Pali, the language of the Buddhist
priesthood, imperfectly understood by themselves, but in diction so
mystic and obscure that the ancient scribes found it necessary to write a
commentary, or translation into the vulgar tongue of the dark original.
This _tika_, as it was called, appears to have been lost until about
the year 1826, when it was discovered among a collection of manuscripts
which were given to Mr. Turnour by the high priest of Saffragam. Even the
priests, lazy and ignorant, could make nothing of the precious legacy of
their predecessors. Once he was possessed of the invaluable clue, Mr.
Turnour’s task must have been comparatively lightened. Still it remained
a great feat, thanks to which we are the richer by a human document of
the highest interest. Sir James Emerson Tennent’s account of Mr. Turnour
and his labours is well worth reading.

Strip the old Pali Poem of its monkish legends and fairy tales, and we
have the authentic story of an ancient civilization, some five hundred
years older than our own era. It is the tale of men who lived and loved
and hated and fought; of men who bought and sold and were moved by the
same greed of gain, the same passions, the same ambitions that move us
to-day. Whatever their faults or their crimes may have been, all that
they did was on a colossal scale. Their ideas were magnificent, heroic.

When in the sixth century before Christ, the great conqueror Wijayo came
from India as a merchant and established his power in Ceylon, the first
need was to assure the food supply of the island, which up to that time
had been mainly dependent upon imported rice; food meant agriculture,
and agriculture meant irrigation; hence those vast reservoirs in which
the great crocodiles still lurk, basking lazily on the sunburnt rocks
at Anuradhapura. Two hundred years later came the Apostle of Buddhism,
Mahindo.

Tissa—Dewananpia Tissa—the beloved of the saints—was at that time king;
he quickly became converted and begged Mahindo to pray Asoka, the famous
King of Maghada, to bestow upon him a cutting of the sacred Bō tree
(ficus religiosa) under which Prince Siddartha sat in the Mrigadeva,
the deer forest near Benares, where he preached his first sermon after
he had attained perfect wisdom. Asoka was willing, but there was a
difficulty—the sacred tree must not be cut with a knife; so a miracle was
required and the miracle came. With a vermilion pencil the king painted a
circle round the chosen branchlet. Immediately heavenly music was heard,
the wind raged and the thunder roared, the beasts of the forest howled,
birds screamed, demons yelled, men shouted; the little branch detached
itself and planted itself in a golden vase prepared by Mahindo’s sister,
the holy Sanghamitta, when it happily took root and was transported with
great solemnity and pomp to Ceylon, where with more miracles and divine
manifestations of the elements, it was planted in that sacred enclosure
in which it stands to this day. It is undoubtedly the oldest tree in the
world for the planting of which the date can be fixed. For upwards of
two thousand years there it has stood, the object of worship by pilgrims
from all those countries where the memory of Buddha is held sacred. For
all those centuries the same litanies have been recited before it, the
perfume of the champak and other flowers, the offering beloved of Buddha,
laid in the same patterns, has risen from its four altars.

Kings and High Priests, men mighty in many lands, have carried hither
their sins and their penitence, praying for the mercy of a pure life
and the attainment of that mysterious hereafter which men call Nirvana.
And the sacred tree itself?—The wonderful tree before which throughout
the ages millions upon millions of men have prostrated themselves in
adoration? Not a majestic specimen as such trees go—indeed, it is
undutifully dwarfed by its own descendants mounting guard over it in
the various courtyards of the Temple. Yet there it stands in all its
sanctity, just as it was described by the old Chinese pilgrim Fa Hsien,
who saw it in the fourth century. The Temple, or, rather, perhaps I
should say the enclosure, occupies about two or three acres. It is
surrounded by an outer wall some twelve feet high. To the left and
to the right of the entrance gate are two huge Bō trees, each with a
palm-tree growing out of it, said to be emblems connected with primitive
forms of nature worship. Some of the masonry is curious. The stones are
laid upon their edges, lozenge-wise, and of these the alternate stones
are omitted, leaving a series of lozenge-shaped niches blackened with the
grease and smoke of ages, for on high days and holy days myriads of lamps
are set a-burning in them.

Travelling makes us feel the narrow boundaries which have been set for
the working of man’s brain. Wander over the face of the earth and you
will find the same proverbs, the same fairy-tales, the same legends, the
same ghosts, the same superstitions—even the same jokes. You will find
the stories of Boccaccio and the “Cent Nouvelles Nouvelles” repeated
in China and Japan. In all these cases the difference is only in the
clothing in which local custom dresses them. So with religious offerings:
we lay our roses and lilies and violets upon the altar; the Singhalese
brings the champak; the idea is the same. Flowers and lamps! Like the
vestal virgins, all men light fire in their sacred places.

Other relics were given by King Asoka. Dagobas were raised to contain
these—colossal structures of solid brickwork with a tiny receptacle for
the sacred treasure. So the new religion flourished greatly and the piety
of successive kings founded great monasteries containing thousands of
monks, little heeding that these comfortable homes were the negation
of a rule as strict as that of St. Francis, which enjoined upon the
yellow-robed shavelings no better dwelling than a “pansala,” a shelter of
leaves.

Fancy and imagination are wonderful architects, but it is hard even for
them to build up a semblance of the glories of Anuradhapura as they must
have been in the days when the great Brazen Palace, of which the sixteen
hundred jagged stone pillars still stand, upheld a colony of some two
thousand monks in its nine stories: days when, scattered over the vast
plain, buildings the magnificence of which is witnessed in the sculptured
stones, seven-headed Nagas, and elaborately carved moonstones, huge half
discs of granite decorated with processions of elephants, lions, horses
and the sacred goose (hansa), and scroll-work that is almost Italian in
feeling, rose at the bidding of an art which had reached its zenith when
we were still in darkness. Gold, precious gems, and colours were used
in profusion to adorn what is now the mere wreckage of a past barbaric
grandeur, swallowed up in the riotous vegetation of the tropics. Fa Hsien
bears eloquent witness to the wealth of flowers used in the worship at
the temples, and the richness of the innumerable royal gardens is a
matter of history.

As regards the authenticity of the Bō tree, Tennent argues well that it
must be the identical tree and no substitute planted to replace one that
had died. Had that tree, sacred throughout the East, died, its death
could not have been concealed; the emotion created by the news would have
been too deep. The story of the loss must have penetrated furthest Asia.

There is indeed much in the story of the ancient Buddhist Kings of Ceylon
which calls up wonder and praise. They were great gentlemen. Here is
a story of knightly virtue that is worth retailing. Two hundred years
before our era Elala, a Malabar adventurer, invaded Ceylon, defeated
and killed the reigning King Asela, and reigned for forty years over
the island. At the end of that time Dutugaimunu, a prince of the old
royal family, whose dream it had been from boyhood to exterminate the
Malabars, raised an army against Elala and after prodigies of valour
defeated and slew him. There his enmity ceased. Full of admiration for
the dead usurper’s courage, and for the justice which he had shown during
forty years—even though a Brahman, protecting the Buddhist priesthood—he
erected a great monument on the spot where Elala died, and there it
still stands a record of a true knight’s generosity. Moreover he issued
a decree that even the Kings of Lanka should on nearing the monument
silence the music of their processions and dismount from their litters,
and this custom continued well into the nineteenth century, when the
kings had long since disappeared. Could a Bayard have shown greater
chivalry towards a dead enemy?

There are now probably more travellers who visit Anuradhapura than there
were when I was there. As for the residents, there were men who had
passed the best years of their lives in Ceylon and had barely heard of
it. The old city was to them as are St. Paul’s Cathedral and the Tower
of London to the average West End Londoner—something so near that there
is no need to hurry to go and see it. For myself, I would gladly have
spent weeks among the scattered ruins, and even have gone further afield
to see and learn—but time pressed and we had to hie back.

I was loth to leave the wilds without obtaining a glimpse of the Veddahs,
those primitive savages whom the Indian Conqueror, Wijayo, drove into
the forests and rock caves which are still their lairs, just as Jimmu
Tennō, perhaps a century earlier, had hunted the Ainus of Japan. There
is no doubt that these are the lineal descendants of the ancient Yakkos
described in the Mahawanso, of the truthfulness of which they are a
living proof. The testimony is reciprocal. No wonder that the Brahmans in
all their pride of race and high breeding should have looked upon these
hideous and degraded savages as Demons. Perhaps nowhere on the face of
this earth does there exist a more untamed race. They know no God and
have no religion; a few guttural sounds, which are their only means of
communication, can scarcely be called a language. Twelve arrows were once
given to them to be distributed equally among four recipients. There was
no man among their chiefs who was capable of so abstruse a calculation.
Their food is of the filthiest, though they cook the flesh of the
monkeys and giant lizards which are their most relished dainties—the
former almost cannibalism. Their weapons are the bow and a sort of rude
hatchet; their clothes as little as maybe; they have not to contend with
cold, and decency is the least of their cares. In their persons they are
appallingly ugly and repulsive. Their misshapen limbs are deformed, their
mouths and teeth animal and revolting. Long and filthy matted black hair,
and in the men beards, reach to their middle, falling in tangled strands.
Such is the description given of them by Tennent and others. The picture
of a race belonging to a prehistoric age, to a long since forgotten
world. And yet in spite of all this, so great is the respect paid to
pedigree by the Singhalese, ashamed of their mixed ancestry, that these
degraded but pure-raced outcasts are looked upon as beings of a high
caste, their very barbarism shrouding them in the glamour of eld.

How many of these poor wretches there may be cannot be reckoned with
accuracy; among scattered tribes living in hiding-places no census is
possible. In the opinion of an old and well-informed settler in Ceylon,
they do not exceed two thousand—if indeed there are as many. It is
not too much to say that the Veddahs are one of the greatest of human
curiosities. It is difficult to think of a race living for twenty-five
centuries unchanged, untouched by any vestige of progress, and that too,
not cast away upon a desert island—not lost like Stanley’s pygmies in the
baneful swamps of the dark African forest, but living cheek by jowl with
five successive civilizations, the Brahman, the Buddhist, the Portuguese,
the Dutch, and the British. It is difficult to believe that as time
speeds on some measure of civilization will not at last penetrate even
this survival of the unfittest.

Professor Tiele, the learned Dutch author of “The History of Religion,”
says: “The statement that there are nations or tribes which possess no
religion, rests either on inaccurate observation, or on a confusion of
ideas. No tribe or nation has yet been met with destitute of belief in
any higher beings; and travellers who asserted their existence have been
afterwards refuted by the facts.” Ceylon is easily accessible and it
would be interesting if some scientific investigator would tell the truth
of what has been said of the Veddahs. That they should believe in no
spirit, worship no fetish, seems incredible.

This was a delightful journey, with something of the charm of the olden
time about it. We rode in our own carriage, such as it was; started at
our own time, stopped where we pleased, and lingered by the way as our
fancy might dictate. Nowadays—well, as Thackeray once put it, “We arrive
at places, but we travel no more.”[47]

I am loth to bid farewell even to the memory of the beautiful island.
Eight years later, in 1906, I was there again, but only on a flying
visit, when Prince Arthur’s mission was on its way to Japan to invest
the Mikado with the Order of the Garter. We had to make the most of the
few hours which were allotted to us, but we managed to run up through
dreamland to Kandy, to stand in wonder by the side of the beautiful
lake. Through a motley crowd, in which the picturesque old-world dresses
of the chieftains, the bright yellow robes and brown shaven pates of
the Buddhist monks were conspicuous, we were taken to see the Temple of
the Tooth and its sacred relic, which was to be shown in honour of a
Royal Prince, but which no man but the ordained priest must touch. When
the King of Siam visited the Temple, he wished to be allowed to hold
the Tooth in his hand. But the priests would not hear of it. In vain
he pleaded that in his youth he, too, had been ordained. No! said the
priests; he had forsaken the priesthood and abjured his vows and it must
not be. He insisted, but they were obdurate, and so in his misery, like
the Israelites by the waters of Babylon, the King of Siam sat down and
wept.

Once, as we were told, the priest-guardians of the Holy Tooth were
outwitted. Between forty and fifty years ago there arrived from Siam
a company of pious monks, bearing with them a vessel of their temple
filled with holy water, into which it was their purpose to dip the sacred
Tooth in order that they might carry back with them to their own country
some of its mystic virtues. On arriving at Kandy, they were told that
to obtain this favour would be no easy matter—indeed, that it would be
well-nigh impossible. However, they made their wish known to one Tikiri
Banda, a Singhalese of high caste and a man of authority, and he, not
without due bribes, promised to make an agreement with the priests of the
Temple in order that their wishes might be fulfilled. On a certain day
they went to the Temple, bearing with them their sacred vessel of holy
water. In the meantime it had become noised abroad that some desecration
of the Tooth was contemplated; a crowd flocked into Kandy from the
neighbouring villages, full of wrath lest this evil thing should be done:
as at Ephesus when the holiness of the Temple of Diana was threatened,
there was a mighty stir and great confusion. The priests were willing
enough to show the Tooth to their brethren from Siam, but they were not
willing that it should be touched or dipped in the water. So there arose
a hot dispute, in which Tikiri Banda was attacked by both sides.

As it fell out, the Government agent happened to be passing that way,
and being aware of a great commotion, went into the Temple to see what
was amiss; recognizing Tikiri Banda, he called upon him to explain.
“Sir,” said Tikiri Banda, “this is a small matter not worthy of your
Excellency’s attention. These pious men do but wish to do thus in order
that their country may have a share in the virtues of this holy relic
of our Lord Buddha.” And fitting the action to his words, before the
dumbfoundered and gaping priests of the Temple could stop him, he took
the Tooth reverently between his fingers and dipped it in the bowl. The
trick was done.

And that is how by this man’s cunning the priests of the Temple were
discomfited and the priests from Siam having obtained their pious wish
were able to carry back the blessed water to their own country, where no
doubt it has performed many notable miracles and wonders.

The Tooth has often been described. It is of enormous size, and by
heretics it is believed to be the tooth of an elephant. It must be
remembered that according to monkish legend Buddha was of supernatural
stature—one authority says that he was eighteen feet high; another
thirty. A suitable tooth had to be found. Monasteries appear to be all
over the world schools for the painting of lilies and the embroidery of
fine gold.

Close to the Shrine of the Tooth there is another temple, which we were
told was mixed Hindu and Buddhist. Only once in the year does a priest
enter the sacred building; for the rest of the time its solitary tenant
is a very old cobra, whom the priests feed with milk passed in under
the door in a platter. When the priest goes in the snake retires into
a corner, where he sits up, with his hood spread out, to watch the
proceedings. Sheltered under the piety of his hosts, who may not take
life, not even that of a poisonous snake, he is safe from all hurt. Now
since cobras as is well known always live in pairs, as they came out of
the Ark, this ancient snake on the contrary seems to have followed the
monastic rule of celibacy appropriate to his holy domicile. Seeing that
Buddhism was in its inception a revolution against Brahmanism, it seems
incongruous, if true, that one sacred building should harbour the two
religions. Hardly more incongruous, perhaps, than that a sacred Bō tree,
a scion of the old tree of Anuradhapura, growing in the enclosure of the
British church, and surrounded by two tiers of ornamental masonry, should
be hung with rags and _ex votos_ by humble penitents. It is good to think
of the generosity of a clergyman who can respect the heartfelt religion
of those among whom he dwells, even though it be not his own.

It was sad to be obliged to rush away from Ceylon as soon as we had
reached it. A mere glimpse of its loveliness was tantalizing, but the
furthest East was calling, and we must obey the summons.




CHAPTER XL

1900

KING LEOPOLD II


On the 4th of April, 1900, England was startled and shocked by the news
that the Prince and Princess of Wales had been shot at. They were on
their way to Denmark, and their train was at rest at Brussels when a
young ruffian named Sipido fired two shots at the Prince point blank.
Happily both shots missed their aim. Those who were with him assured me
afterwards that the Prince never flinched or moved a muscle of his face.
He was absolutely cool and unconcerned—probably the only person present
who showed no emotion. England was deeply incensed. We could not think
why a Prince who was so dearly loved both at home and abroad should have
been the object of this wanton and murderous attack. I wrote at once to
congratulate him on his escape and by return of post received the gay,
light-hearted letter which was so characteristic of him:

                                               “Copenhagen, April 7.

    “I am most grateful for your kind letter of sympathy on what
    might have been very serious, but fortunately ‘M. l’anarchiste’
    was a novice at pistol shooting—as I cannot imagine how he
    missed me at two yards. However, ‘All’s well that ends well,’
    and the sympathy shown us has been most gratifying.”

Royal personages need some courage to face these attempts, which on one
occasion King Umberto, after being shot at, turning round to his equerry,
coolly called the “buonamani del nostro mestiere!”[48] A later attack was
more successful and more tragic!

Three men besides Sipido, who turned out to be a mere boy of fifteen,
were tried for the outrage. But the Belgian authorities did not behave
well on this occasion. The three accomplices were acquitted and young
Sipido was sentenced to be placed under police supervision until he
should come of age—an amazing sentence for such a crime! Probably not
without connivance he escaped to France and was only sent back to Belgium
under the extradition treaty between the two countries at the demand of
the British Government. It was made out that the attack was a protest
against the Boer War; but there was an undercurrent of hostility on
the part of Belgium which had been strengthening for some time. That
hostility was the work of King Leopold.

The relations which existed between the old King Leopold, the Nestor of
Europe, as he was called, and Queen Victoria, are well known. When his
son came to the throne in 1865, the friendly relations between him and
his English cousins continued. The King was a great collector of Chinese
works of art, and the Prince of Wales brought him one day, in 1870, to
my father’s house to see the porcelain and enamels which I had brought
back from Peking. The terms on which they then were could only be called
cordial and affectionate, and thus they lasted until after the year 1878,
when the Congo Free State was established.

The policy of the King, and the cruelties to which it led, entirely
alienated the Prince of Wales, whose kind heart could brook nothing of
the kind; while the rumours which were current all over Europe as to the
private life of the King made him personally odious to Queen Victoria;
the position became more and more strained, until at last the King’s
visits to England were more or less private and secret; on more than one
occasion I met him prowling about the streets of London unattended, and
evidently wishing to avoid recognition, though he spoke to me once when I
came suddenly upon him and he could hardly help it.

I had good reason to know how bitterly he felt the coldness of his
English relations, accentuated as it was by the deservedly violent
attacks upon him in the English Press, for in 1903 I was _Président
d’honneur_ of the International Jury at the quinquennial exhibition of
the Royal Agricultural and Horticultural Society of Belgium held at
Ghent. The King came and it was part of my duty to accompany him round
the show. When we came to the Congo section, he took me on one side
and spoke to me for the best part of an hour upon the subject of his
grievances against England, insisting upon it that he had been most
cruelly traduced; he maintained that the barbarities of which the Belgian
officials had been accused were all lies, and, pointing to the exhibits,
he said, “How could we have obtained these results if we had been guilty
of such atrocities. Is it credible that free men would come to serve us
if we treated them as your press says that we do.” The words “free men”
gave something to think about! My position was awkward, to say the least
of it.

Yet although “There’s such divinity doth hedge a king,” the altar in
King Leopold’s case had long since been bereft of its sanctity; I could
but take refuge in the ambiguous truth that newspapers often deal in
exaggeration, adding that the libretto of Offenbach’s _Grande Duchesse_
perhaps made a mistake when it made Hortense Schneider sing: “Il faut
toujours ajouter foi à la gazette de Hollande.” The King laughed, and for
the moment the ugly corner was turned, but I had been careful not to lead
him to suppose that anybody could hold him guiltless.

His animosity against England increased with time. Five years later I
was again President at the Ghent Exhibition. This time when the foreign
representatives were formally presented to him, the King turned a glassy
eye upon me, and said: “I think I have seen you before. Was it here, or
could it have been at Bruges?” This from a King who had known me for
twenty-eight years, and had always been most friendly, and was, moreover,
endowed with the royal faculty of never forgetting a face, seemed rather
chilling, especially as he with obvious intent plastered my French
colleague, the Vice-President, with pretty speeches. Again I had to go
round the show with him, but he never once uttered a word.

King Edward, when I told him that Sir George Holford and myself were
going over to Ghent, very graciously wrote personally to the King, asking
that we might be allowed to visit the gardens at Laeken. King Leopold
instructed his Grand Maître de la Cour to tell me that the glass houses
at Laeken were under repair, but that if, in spite of that, we “should
make a point of going,” etc., etc., etc. Needless to say we did not “make
a point of going.” King Edward was very much amused when I came back to
London and told him what had happened. He recognized his Leopold, knowing
full well that the discourtesy was aimed at himself. His loving cousin
was an artist in pin-pricks.

The King was not a prepossessing person. He was a tall, thin man, during
his later years rather bent, lame, and limping with the help of a stout
cane, on which he leaned heavily; yet never during a long tramp through
the Exhibition galleries showing the slightest trace of fatigue. A long
grey beard fell over his breast, masking the lower part of his face, of
which the features were good, though his eyes were shifty and unpleasant.
He had a soft voice, but a soft voice is not always agreeable—his
certainly was not, for he had a curious, rather mincing utterance,
speaking as Agag walked—delicately, but not in such a way as to inspire
confidence.

He was undoubtedly a first-rate master of affairs, as General Gordon and
all other men of business who had dealings with him well knew; such a man
once told me that King Leopold was the shrewdest financier whom he had
ever come across; yet with all his cleverness he left behind him a tangle
of affairs, public and private, which in no creditable fashion became a
fat oyster for the lawyers of his country to wrangle over.

It was a fortunate thing for the world that he died when he did. Had he
lived till now, Belgium would hardly have played the heroic part which
she did in August and September, 1914. It is whispered—indeed, it is an
open secret—that documentary evidence exists to show that King Leopold
was deeply engaged to Germany, and that he was prepared, not without
reward, to allow Germany to invade France through Belgium. Sir Robert
Walpole once said that every man has his price, the only difficulty being
to ascertain what that price is. In King Leopold’s case the problem was
easy. Not in vain had he studied the story of Danaë, and the penetrative
powers of the shower of gold were familiar to him!

Happily at the critical moment of her direst need, Belgium has been
blessed with a King worthy of her own heroism, a King indeed of the
Belgians, _primus inter pares_.


1901

When we celebrated our silver wedding on the 31st of January, 1899, we
had the rare happiness of seeing around us our nine children, all safe
and sound. That, alas! can never happen again.


1903 AND 1905

I have dealt elsewhere with the death of Queen Victoria and with the
coronation of King Edward. I have also spoken of the part played by the
King in foreign affairs: I feel inclined to say one more word upon that
subject here. In the spring of 1903, the year after the coronation, the
King had made up his mind to visit his friend the King of Portugal, and
afterwards to go to Paris. It was a poorly kept secret, well known to all
those who were in any way behind the scenes at the time, that the King’s
ministers were very much averse to his paying those visits officially
as King of England; they would have preferred that he should travel as
Baron Renfrew, or Duke of Rothesay, or under any of those titles by
which kings and queens are wont, ostrich-like, to hide their absolutely
patent incognito. The Government dreaded any ceremonial on account of the
unpopularity which had been carefully worked up abroad against England
at the end of the Boer War. In France, moreover, the ill-will caused
by the Fashoda business was supposed to be still rankling. Ministers
were afraid lest some affront should be offered to the King which might
lead to diplomatic complications. His Majesty, however, with that
perfect confidence in himself which distinguished him, was determined
that his first visits to Lisbon and Paris after his coronation should
be marked by all the ceremonial due to his exalted position. As the
French statesman whom I have already quoted in a former chapter, said:
“Il savait ce qu’il pouvait oser.” The visit to Lisbon was a brilliant
success. The King was received with acclamation and his popularity was
boundless; it could not be otherwise; but ministers were still nervous
about the reception with which he might meet at Paris. They desired
that all official demonstrations should be waived and that he should be
received with no more ceremony than might be accorded to a traveller of
distinction; they even suggested that there should be no Presidential
banquet, though they did not object to an informal luncheon(!), but that
was the utmost which, so far as they were concerned, they were prepared
to consider permissible. The King put his foot down and would submit to
no restriction. He was King of England, and as King of England he would
enter Paris, in the full assurance that he would meet with a worthy
welcome. Sir Edward Monson, who was at that time Ambassador at Paris, and
who was to meet him at some half-way station, was urged to advise the
King, on reaching Paris, to make a speech which should tend to conciliate
those who might be less amiably disposed. His Majesty gave the Ambassador
to understand that he knew quite well what he was about, and that he was
not afraid of the responsibility which he had taken upon himself. When
Paris was reached the reception at the station was perfectly polite and
courteous, but quite cold, lacking any sign of enthusiasm. This I was
told by a French friend who was present.

Now for the transformation scene. The King drove straight to the Embassy,
where he received a deputation from the British Chamber of Commerce.
In reply to their address, he made a speech in which he took occasion,
in those gracious terms of which he was such a master, to express his
feelings of friendship for France and his love of Paris, speaking of the
joy that it was to him to find himself once more among the Parisians as
one of themselves. The words uttered by him circulated like wildfire,
and from that moment any gloom that there might have been (and indeed
was) had been dispelled, and the sun shone over a friendship which paved
the way for historic results. No honest man would attempt to detract
from the merits due to Lord Lansdowne and the ministers who cemented and
nursed the good understanding between France and England. No honest man
can say that their efforts were not greatly helped by the charm and the
tact which achieved so marvellous a popularity, and smoothed away so many
asperities.

Nor were these efforts of King Edward’s mere flashes in the pan, born of
ephemeral excitement or the thirst for personal popularity that would
have been utterly foreign to his keen, eager mind. They were strenuous
attempts to exert in the cause of peace all those powers of fascination
with which he had been so generously gifted. He knew full well how potent
a factor for good or for evil the attitude of a king could be in public
affairs. He felt himself to be in the highest sense the representative
of his country, and he was determined to spare no effort, to shirk no
detail, in his endeavours to improve its position in the world. That was
with him the first and foremost consideration.

Two years after the famous first visit to Paris as crowned King came one
of the first results of the “Entente.”




CHAPTER XLI

THE VISIT OF THE FRENCH FLEET IN 1905


The year 1905 will always be memorable in the annals of the Royal Yacht
Squadron, that greatest of all clubs, of which King Edward was, and King
George now is, the Admiral. In that year the friendly understanding
between France and England, so happily conceived and so charged with
destiny, was celebrated by two meetings between the fleets of the
two countries. The first of these took place at Brest, and it was
arranged that the return visit should be at Cowes during the regatta
week. The King also settled that the French Admiral and his principal
officers should be entertained officially—or perhaps I ought to say
semi-officially—at luncheon by the Royal Yacht Squadron on the 8th of
August. It was certainly a unique and important occasion as being the
first time that the club had been used as the scene of an international
political banquet, and the gathering was worthy of it.

It was the command of the King, who took the greatest interest in all the
details of the reception, that I should be the speaker to welcome our
guests. Lord Ormonde, our Commodore, was in the chair, the Duke of Leeds,
as Vice-Commodore, facing him. Besides Admiral Caillard and his officers,
we had as guests the French Ambassador, M. Paul Cambon, Sir Francis
Bertie, now Lord Bertie, our Ambassador at Paris, Sir John Fisher, First
Sea Lord of the Admiralty, now Lord Fisher, and, of course, all the
principal members of the Squadron. After the toasts of the King and the
President of the Republic had been proposed by the Commodore, I had to
perform my rather difficult duty. My speech was as follows:

    “Messieurs, J’obéis à l’appel de notre Commodore. La tâche
    qu’il m’a imposée serait bien difficile, bien au-dessus de
    mon courage, n’étais-je sûr de pouvoir compter d’un côté
    sur la bienveillance et sur l’indulgence de nos hôtes, et
    si de l’autre je ne savais pas que ce sera à l’unanimité, à
    l’unanimité enthousiaste, que mes collègues acclameront sinon
    mes pauvres paroles, au moins les sentiments dont elles seront
    la faible expression.

    “Messieurs, nous célébrons aujourd’hui une occasion rare dans
    l’histoire des pays—unique dans celle de notre cercle quoiqu’il
    soit bientôt séculaire. Jamais ces vieux murs lézardés n’ont
    assisté à pareille fête. Humbles amateurs, nous avons l’honneur
    de recevoir chez nous les grands professionnels des deux plus
    importantes marines du monde. Mais ce n’est pas tout—il y a
    mieux que cela.

    “Depuis neuf cents ans il n’y a pas eu d’invasion de
    l’Angleterre. Nous en avons été menacés mainte fois. Les
    Espagnols l’ont tentée. Les plongeurs fouillent jusqu’à
    nos jours parmi les épaves de leur flotte, englouttie par
    les vagues il y a près de quatre siècles. Les Hollandais
    ont voulu recommencer la partie; cela ne leur a pas mieux
    réussi. Aujourd’hui, trève de forfanterie, Messieurs, trève
    de vantardise! Depuis hier l’invasion de l’Angleterre est un
    fait accompli, et c’est à bras ouverts que nous accueillons
    nos envahisseurs. Car il ne s’agit pas d’une invasion hostile,
    mais d’une invasion d’amis, d’une invasion de cœurs battant à
    l’unisson avec les nôtres. Les bouches à feu ont parlé, mais
    cela n’a été que pour saluer de part et d’autre le Tricolor et
    l’Union Jack.

    “Messieurs, il n’en a pas toujours été ainsi. Proches voisines,
    la France et l’Angleterre ont eu leurs jalousies, leur
    querelles, et leurs hostilités. Entre voisines c’est bien
    permis; c’est même, dit-on, d’usage. Mais nous avons changé
    tout cela! Nous avons trouvé notre chemin de Damas, et c’est
    notre auguste Souverain qui nous y a conduits. Aimant son
    pays avant tout, travaillant sans relâche pour le bien de son
    peuple, le Roi a gardé néanmoins, je le sais, un petit coin
    bien chaud dans son cœur pour la France.

    “C’est grâce à son initiative, admirablement secondée
    d’ailleurs par Monsieur le Président de la République, par
    les Ministres et par les Ambassadeurs des deux pays, que nous
    montrons aujourd’hui au monde entier le spectacle de deux
    grandes nations marchant comme deux bonnes sœurs, la main dans
    la main, vers le même noble but—la paix—c’est-à-dire vers le
    progrès, la civilisation et le bonheur de l’humanité.

    “C’est pour cela que nous sommes fiers et heureux, Amiral, de
    voir vos beaux cuirassés amarrés dans cette rade historique.
    Formidables engins de guerre, ils sont ici Missionnaires de la
    Paix, venus pour mettre le dernier sceau au pacte d’une amitié
    qui nous est bien chère, d’une amitié saine, loyale, et combien
    desirée par tous ceux qui ont à cœur les intérêts des deux pays!

    “Que cette amitié soit durable, qu’aucune jalousie, aucune
    intrigue ne vienne la troubler—voilà, je me plais à croire, le
    vœu intime et sincère de tous ceux qui m’entendent.

    “Messieurs, je crains d’avoir abusé de votre patience, aussi
    vais-je me taire. Mais avant de m’asseoir je vous prie,
    Messieurs mes collègues de l’Escadre Royale, de remplir vos
    verres, et de boire avec moi à la santé de l’amiral Caillard,
    à celle des officiers distingués dont il est entouré, et à la
    gloire impérissable de la Marine Française.”

Admiral Caillard then rose and made the following reply:

    “Tous, ici, nous partageons les sentiments exprimés par Lord
    Redesdale. Nous sommes charmés de l’accueil sympathique qui
    nous a été reservé au Royal Yacht Squadron Club, et cette
    impression, s’ajoutant à celle des marques d’amitié que nous
    donnèrent la flotte de l’Atlantique à Brest et, hier, la flotte
    de la Manche, les graveront dans notre souvenir d’une façon
    indélébile.

    “Je bois à la santé du Royal Yacht Squadron Club.”

That night the French Admiral gave a reception on board his flagship, at
which the King was present. There was cordial talk of the luncheon at the
Castle, which had given the French Fleet great pleasure and no little
satisfaction to the King.

During the forenoon of Wednesday, 9th August, His Majesty the King
reviewed the French Fleet, which subsequently at 1 p.m. weighed anchor
and proceeded to Portsmouth.

In London there was a great luncheon in Westminster Hall given by
both Houses of Parliament with the Lord Chancellor, Lord Halsbury, in
the chair. The French officers were also entertained at one of those
magnificent feasts for which the hospitality of the City is world-famous,
and this furnished the occasion for what was one of the noblest
expressions of chivalrous feeling that could be conceived. It aroused
great and admiring enthusiasm at the time, but in the course of years
these things are forgotten, and the French visit is worth recording here
if for no other reason. When the procession of carriages passed through
Trafalgar Square, where a great crowd had gathered, Admiral Caillard
stood up in his landau, turned to the column, and with great dignity
saluted the statue of Nelson. All the officers of his following did the
same. It touched England to the quick, and even now, after the lapse of
ten years, I cannot tell the tale without emotion. Could that knightly
inspiration, so gracefully carried out, have been bettered?

       *       *       *       *       *

In the summer of 1905 King Edward did us the honour of paying us a
visit at Batsford; it was the fulfilment of an old promise, and on the
8th of July he arrived. The King was an enthusiastic gardener, and for
many years I had the honour of sharing with him in what, in a letter to
a friend, he once described as his favourite pursuit. At Sandringham,
Buckingham Palace, Windsor and Balmoral he never wearied of walking about
with Sir Dighton Probyn, another fanatic worshipper of the great god Pan,
and myself, planning or listening to plans for improvements.

Among the guests who were to meet his Majesty we had invited two great
horticulturists, Mr. Chamberlain, whose special cult was that of orchids,
and Georgina, Countess of Dudley, whose skill and care converted a
hopeless jungle into one of the loveliest pleasaunces that could provoke
a poet’s song. The King brought with him Sir George Holford, the greatest
of all English gardeners—so there was much flower talk. When the King
arrived I was rather taken aback, for almost the first thing that he said
to me was, “Now I must warn you that I will not go up a hill”—with a
great stress on the _not_. This was rather a blow, for such merit as the
garden at Batsford possesses is due to the fact that it is nothing but a
hill, and indeed a pretty steep one. However, it was a lovely afternoon,
and we all sallied forth. Presently, when we came to a turn leading
upward, the King began wandering on and so, led by one view or grouping
of plants after another that took his fancy, he climbed and climbed until
he had reached the furthest and highest point.

The next day was taken up with church and a long drive to Stanway over
the Cotswold Hills, which I was eager to show him, and so he saw Campden,
Broadway and some of the picturesque neighbouring villages with their old
seventeenth-century houses dating from a time before the grazing country
was broken up during the Napoleonic wars, owing to the boom in wheat—a
time when every man was a flock-master and every good-wife span. When the
plough came, the old houses, so full of architectural charm, were divided
up to furnish labourers’ cottages. The King was very much pleased with
this view of a part of his dominions that was new to him, and he was loud
in his admiration of Inigo Jones’s beautiful work at Stanway, where Lord
and Lady Elcho gave him tea.

But my triumph as a gardener was complete when on the Monday the King put
off his return to London till midday so that he might once more walk up
the hill, which, at first, he had declared to be _tabu_.

The King’s visit was not only a great honour for us, but it gave immense
pleasure to a great many of his loyal subjects to whom, living as they do
in a rather out-of-the-way part of the country, kings and queens had, up
to that time, been like the gods of Olympus, mystic beings, venerated but
unseen. The last king that had been seen in Moreton-in-Marsh was Charles
the First. The room in which the Martyr King slept is still shown at the
White Hart.

Later in the same year, 1905, the King sent for me and told me that he
was about to send the Garter to the Emperor of Japan, that Prince Arthur
of Connaught was to take it, and that it was his Majesty’s wish that I
should go with the Mission. Of course I was only too glad to obey. We
started in January, 1906, on what turned out to be a most delightful
expedition, a success in every way. The voyage out with halts at Aden,
Ceylon, Singapore, and Hong Kong was full of interest. The Prince played
his part admirably and the return journey through Canada gave me an
impression of that richly blest country which can never be forgotten. I
have already published an account of “the Garter Mission to Japan,” so I
need say no more about it here.

Before we left for Japan the King did me the honour of conferring upon me
the Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, and when I came home I was
given the K.C.B.


1908-9

The King’s relations with the Emperor of Russia had always been of the
most friendly and even affectionate character. As Tsarevitch the Emperor
paid a visit to Sandringham, and the near relationship to Queen Alexandra
had been kept very much alive by those family parties in Denmark at which
King Christian’s sons and daughters with their husbands and children
were wont to keep up a patriarchal kinship. No family was ever united
by stronger ties of love and affection than that of the Danish King and
Queen, and those bonds were never allowed to slacken. It was only natural
therefore that our King and Queen should wish to pay a visit to their
nephew in his own country.

St. Petersburg was then not in such a condition politically as to
warrant their going there, so the meeting took place at Reval in the
month of June. The visit was purely dictated by family affection, and
there was not the most distant suspicion of politics attached to it.
There were, however, a few—happily very few—ill-conditioned members
of Parliament who chose to assume that the King, by going to Reval,
was more or less giving a sign of approval to the severity with which
rebels were said to be treated in Russia, a severity, by the by, which
has since been shown to have been greatly exaggerated. The professional
agitator seldom allows himself to be hampered by accuracy. The German
Press also took exception to this meeting, and held it up as evidence
of a dark and sinister anti-Teuton plot. It is really amazing that
the King should have been suspected of hatred against Germany. Nothing
could be further from the truth, as I have good reason to know. The King
delighted in his yearly visits to Germany; he loved the country where
he had many friends, not to speak of his near relations; he delighted
in his intercourse with them, which was greatly facilitated by his
exceptional knowledge of their language, in which he took some pride in
exercising his skill; and yet the newspaper writers, who in Germany seem
to be a singularly ill-informed race, were never weary of girding at the
King and proclaiming a hostility which was purely the invention of a
mischief-making spite.

All this had the effect of irritating him; he could not see why he might
not give a token of affection to a near relation without being called
over the coals by a section of his own people, and held up by foreign
pressmen to the hatred of a nation for which, as he had shown throughout
his life, he entertained nothing but the friendliest feelings. The King
showed his just displeasure by excluding from his invitations to a garden
party at Windsor the Members of Parliament who had attacked him. In that
he did no more than any private gentleman would have done. No gentleman
invites to his house a man who has offered him a public affront for which
no apology has been offered. Is the King to be the only man in his realm
who must allow who will to insult him unchallenged and unrebuked? Yet
there were people who blamed him. In my humble judgment he did right.

In the month of August, 1909, the Emperor Nicholas paid the King
a return visit at Cowes in his yacht, the _Standart_. There was a
brilliant gathering for the regatta week, and the King gave more than one
entertainment in his nephew’s honour. I had the honour to be invited to a
great banquet on board the _Victoria and Albert_, and after dinner had a
long talk with the Emperor, who asked many questions about the old days
at St. Petersburg in his grandfather’s time. He was obviously very much
delighted with his reception, and was graciously pleased to accede to a
suggestion which I made by the King’s command that he should become a
member of the Marlborough Club.

Again the agitators snarled and sneered at the visit, but M. Isvolsky,
who was with the Tsar, very tactfully said that the protest only served
to accentuate the cordiality of the welcome by the people. Nothing came
of what was an ugly piece of discourtesy on the part of some men who
should have known better; and the Emperor sailed away from Cowes on the
5th of August, leaving behind him in the minds of all those who had had
the good fortune to meet him a happy memory of a truly royal geniality
and kindness.




CHAPTER XLII

BAYREUTH IN 1912


In 1912 I received an invitation from Herr Siegfried Wagner to be present
at the _General-Probe_ (dress rehearsal) of the Bayreuth Festival. My
daughter Iris, my usual travelling companion, went with me.

There is a certain quaint charm, an individuality, about the old German
towns that once upon a time, in days which are after all not so very
remote, were the seats of small princely Courts and Governments. Bayreuth
was a typical example of an old “Residenz.” Broad streets flanked by
substantial houses, squares with fountains or statues adorning their
centres, an old palace or castle—the relic of feudal times—and a more
modern palace of French eighteenth-century inspiration; outside the town
a “Hermitage,” with a Temple of the Sun, sham ruins and other rococo
follies built of cement plastered with mosaics of coloured stone and
rock-crystal or glass, in a garden with deliciously shaded, cool walks:
these are the legacies of former glories, when the “high-well-born”
who crowded to the palace elbowed and jostled for a bow, a smile, or a
gracious word from a Markgraf or a Markgräfin with all the honour-hunger
of men and women in all times and in all Courts.

Think of the bitterness and mortification of a lady left out from a
garden-party at the Hermitage when there were to be private theatricals
in the Roman Theatre, at which Voltaire was to be stage-manager and act
with her Royal Highness in person! Think of the triumph, not untinged
with spite, of her next-door neighbour who could flaunt in her face
the coveted invitation card! Oh, it was a very real Court! There were
chamberlains with their wands; ladies-in-waiting, maids-of-honour,
privy councillors, officials of all grades, an army chiefly composed
of officers. There were hoop petticoats, powder and rouge and patches,
red-heeled shoes, and if there were not many diamonds we may be sure that
there was plenty of paste. Just such a Court as Thackeray and Offenbach
loved to make fun of, and even Frederick the Great, as we shall presently
see, made the target at which to sling his ridicule.

Hauff, writing in the first years of the nineteenth century, in his
sardonic “Memoiren des Satans,” whom, by the by, he represents as taking
a special interest in the pigmy Courts, makes Satan ask the Wandering
Jew whether there is anything more grotesque to be seen than “diese
duodez Länder,” these duodecimo countries. So it was not foreigners
only who laughed at the absurdities which they presented. However, _de
mortuis nil nisi bonum_. All now vanished! Gone the transparencies,
gone the chamberlains and the Court ladies, gone General Bourn and his
staff! All shades—shades that have crossed the Styx. The metamorphosis
is complete. The palaces are used as museums or public offices, the
houses of the “high-well-born” are shops and places of business, the
fountains, in which admiring courtiers saw the rivals of the Grandes Eaux
de Versailles, play for an hour on Sundays for the benefit of honest
burghers waxing fat upon their afternoon lager, as good Bavarians should,
in the groves of the once exclusive Hermitage, turned by the wheel of
time into a glorified beer-garden.

The memoirs of the Markgräfin Wilhelmine give a perfect, but none too
attractive, picture of the little Court of Bayreuth. She was the daughter
of King Frederick William of Prussia, and her mother was a Princess of
Hanover, sister of George the First of England. Her life as a child and
as a young lady was one long misery. Her mother hated her, and the hatred
was increased by the failure of all her conspiracies to marry the girl
to her first cousin, the Prince of Wales. Her father, too, had his views
as to marrying her to suit his whims or interests, so that she became
immeshed in a perfect network of intrigues and plots and counterplots.

Frederick William was a man of such a violent temper that one is tempted
sometimes to doubt his sanity. His cruelty to his children was, even if
we largely discount the Markgräfin’s story, simply incredible. His son,
afterwards Frederick the Great, when a grown-up youth, beaten, cuffed,
kicked, and dragged round the room by his hair; later on arrested,
threatened with torture, and his best friend, Katt, beheaded before
his face;—Wilhelmine struck in the face with his clenched fist and
handed over to governesses who ill-used and tortured her. He was a man
of no little political sagacity, and he laid the foundation upon which
Frederick the Great built up the greatness of Prussia, but in his home
he was a savage utterly without control. The marriage with the Prince of
Wales fell through because King George very properly refused to subscribe
to the King of Prussia’s conditions; the suitors favoured by the King
were sent to the right-about by Wilhelmine’s own strength of character.
She fought with her back to the wall, she won the day, and they were
dismissed. And so it came to pass that at the age of twenty-two she, in
1731, married the hereditary Prince of Bayreuth.

The Royal Family of Prussia were anything but a happy gathering. The
King and Queen were objects of terror so little tempered by any dutiful
regard that, although Wilhelmine now and again makes little attempts at
an expression of filial affection, too gushing to be real, they were
rather hated than beloved by their children: the sisters were for ever
quarrelling and plotting the one against the other, and as they grew
up and married small Princes there was plenty of opportunity for the
exhibition of petty jealousies and spite. Between Wilhelmine and her
brother, Frederick the Great, there was some show of affection, at any
rate on her side, and in the days of his dire calamities she did what
she could to stand between him and the cruelty of their father; but on
his side the affection was only intermittently returned; and indeed by
her own showing she can hardly have been the sort of person who would
arouse sympathy or attract love: clever she was, beyond a doubt—her
correspondence with Voltaire testifies to that; but there was nothing
soft or womanly about her character.

Her father-in-law, the Markgraf, was the object of her special hatred and
of a contempt which she did not care to conceal. When the poor drunken
fool was dying she was away at Potsdam with her father, and she received
the intelligence with undisguised pleasure. “Les nouvelles que je reçus
de Bareith furent bien satisfaisantes. Mlle. de Sonsfeld me mandait que
la santé du Margrave dépérissait à vue.” He did not die until two years
later, in May, 1735—a long period of waiting for a Princess who was in a
hurry to be promoted to her full dignities!

Frederick the Great entertained a very adequate respect for the glories
of a Markgraf’s Court, nor had he the consideration for his sister’s
feelings which might have curbed his satire. When, shortly before the
death of their father, the King of Prussia, he paid his sister a visit
at Bayreuth, he seems rather to have taken pains to mortify her: “Il se
fit présenter toute la Cour, et se contenta de regarder tous ceux qui
la composaient d’un air moqueur, après quoi nous nous mimes à table. Il
ne fit dans toute la conversation que turlupiner tout ce qu’il voyait
en me répétant plus de cent fois le mot de petit prince et de petite
Cour. J’étais outrée.” Poor little Court! But there was to be worse
within the sacred precincts themselves than the cruellest mockery from
outside. When the Princess became Markgräfin her favourite maid-of-honour
was a certain Fräulein von Marwitz, of whom in 1735 she wrote: “Pour la
Marwitz je l’aimais à la passion; nous n’avions rien caché l’une pour
l’autre. Je n’ai jamais vu un rapport de caractère pareil au nôtre; elle
ne pouvait vivre sans moi, ni moi sans elle; elle ne faisait pas un pas
sans me consulter et elle était approuvée de tout le monde.” A beautiful
friendship! But alas for the inconstancy of female alliances! It was not
very long before the lovely Marwitz—for she was lovely—fulfilled her
courtly mission by setting her cap at the Markgraf, and stealing his
heart from the mistress who loved her, if indeed she ever loved anybody
but herself.

As I said before, it was a very real Court. It was a centre of political
intrigues; for the rivalries of Austria and Prussia kept the small
capitals of Germany in a continual fever; while, apart from greater
questions of policy, jealousies, ambitions, and heart-burnings worthy of
Versailles and the Œil de Bœuf were directed upon petty promotions and
evanescent favouritisms. As for the chief luminaries, they shed a light
over their little firmament relatively not inferior to that of the Roi
Soleil himself.

The last years of the Markgräfin’s chequered life were by far the
happiest. Their correspondence during those years shows the revival
of a complete understanding between Frederick the Great and her, and
bears every witness of mutual admiration. He appreciated her undoubted
talents; she sympathized with his endeavours and gloried in his success.
Their affection was warmer and more real than it had been even in their
childhood. She speaks of it with delight as a “retour de sentiments des
personnes qu’on aime.”

Besides this natural source of a great joy there was also her
intellectual friendship with Voltaire. She made his acquaintance in 1740
at Reinsberg, a country place where the great Frederick had gathered
together a whole assembly of men of letters and science, whom in
spare moments he refreshed with his flute. Three years later Voltaire
accompanied the King to Bayreuth, where he outstayed his royal patron
for a fortnight, during which he helped the Markgräfin in a whole series
of entertainments and theatricals. Their correspondence, in which
she delighted, lasted till her death, upon which he wrote one of the
trashiest sonnets that ever appeared signed by a great name. The editor
of her journal calls it a “monument immortel”!

The Markgräfin Wilhelmine was not only a woman of remarkable talent, but
she was a Princess typical of the times in which she lived and of the
position which she occupied. If she did not directly play a leading part
in the historical events of those days, she was intimately mixed up with
those who did. She left her mark upon her husband’s principality, and it
will always be difficult to think of Bayreuth without remembering her as
a most notable personality in its princely family.

Times have changed; but if the tinsel of a pinchbeck Court has
disappeared, Bayreuth to-day is more brilliant and more famous than it
was in the days when the smiles or frowns of the Markgrafen and their
consorts made the Paradise or the Gehenna of their courtiers. Then the
old Franconian capital could hardly have been known outside of Germany
or Austria, and even there it only ranked as one of many such towns. Now
the mighty genius of one man has transformed it into the Mecca of a great
cult, celebrated wherever the magic power of poetry, music, and art holds
sway, drawing the willing pilgrims to its shrine.

The performance of a drama at the Fest-Spiel-Haus gives the impression
of something sacred, something of the nature of a religious ceremony.
All the circumstances combine to give intensity to that idea. From the
beginning of time, ever since the Sumerians raised the Tower of Babel,
as we are now told to imitate the sacred pinnacles of the highlands from
which they swept down upon the Mesopotamian plain; long before Babylon
or Nineveh were cities, hills and mountains in every country have been
places of worship. Mount Zion, Sinai, Carmel, Ararat, Olympus, Fuji in
far Japan, a thousand peaks in a thousand lands tell the same tale.
Outside the town of Bayreuth, at a distance of perhaps half a mile is
a little hill, and upon this fitting site is erected the Temple of
the great High Priest of Art. An avenue of horse-chestnut trees some
thirty years old, that have just reached the dignity of giving a little
welcome shade, leads up to it. And here on a day when one of the great
masterpieces is to be played, for a full hour before the given time you
may see a long stream of the faithful toiling up under broiling sun or
pouring rain, careless of either, only eager to be in time when the
trumpet shall sound to tell that the doors are open. Laggards there are
none.

The Fest-Spiel-Haus (call it not a theatre!) is a very simple,
unpretentious building: it is guiltless of all ornamentation both outside
and inside: a covered verandah for shelter runs round it, but there is
nothing superfluous, no pillars or gewgaws or caryatides, nothing to
convey an idea of the feast of poetry that will presently be opened. Only
the rapt look in the faces of the worshippers tells of expectancy and
the knowledge of the joy to come. It is the expression which may be read
in the features of a pious Mussulman when at eventide he kneels on his
prayer-carpet and turns his face towards the holy city of his faith; it
is a look that you may see in a procession of poor Russian pilgrims when
they come in sight of the walls of Jerusalem.

In their appreciations of other men’s writings professed critics,
especially when their desire is to praise, are often led into
metaphysical analyses in which subtleties are discovered at which no one
could be more astonished than the authors to whom they are ascribed.
When Pope was attacked by Crousaz for the heterodox opinions put forth
in the “Essay on Man,” Bishop Warburton, who, by the by, had previously
himself fallen foul of the poet for the same reason, took up the cudgels
for him, professing to have discovered certain hidden meanings which had
previously escaped him. Pope in his gratitude wrote: “You understand my
work better than I do myself.” We almost feel that there is just a little
tinge of perhaps unconscious satire in his gratitude.

Much has in this same analytical way been read into Wagner’s work by his
admirers and disciples. Yet there was no need for it, for the Tone-Poet
has himself told us of the motives and ideas which were at work in his
brain when he gradually gave birth to his great inventive conception, the
Tone-Drama.[49] But even when Wagner himself becomes his own interpreter
we prefer the work to the interpretation; for that is apt to be as
cryptic to the average reader as St. Peter found the epistles of “our
beloved brother Paul”—“in which are some things hard to be understood,
which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the
other scriptures, unto their own destruction.”

A great work of art, as it seems to me, needs no interpreter. If a poem,
a picture, or a musical composition fails to touch me, then I think that
there must be something lacking, either in my power of apprehension, or
in the work of art itself. In neither case will the interpreter be able
to fill the gap. If my senses or my understanding are hard, he cannot
soften them. If the work is faulty, all the preaching in the world will
not make it right. The true test of a work of art is its power of appeal.
The master is the man who can make his fellow-men thrill with pleasure or
shiver with horror; if he needs a third person to explain his meaning,
then he is no true artist, and his work is for the scrap-heap. Wagner
was essentially above all men of his time the one master who could stir
the feelings of those whom he addressed, the one man who could make
his own art an article of faith in others. To split hairs as to the
why and the wherefore of his power, to read into his work metaphysical
intentions, appears to me to be unnecessary and trivial, and therefore
almost a sacrilege. If by all the analyses and verbiage with which he
has been plastered you could educate other Wagners there would be some
justification for them; but you cannot make Wagners, and his imitators
have been without exception wretched failures.

On the other hand, the relation of the mental processes by which he
arrived at his great invention of the Tone-Drama is a psychological
study of absorbing interest, and a story of profound significance in the
history of art. Most of the commentators are long and wearisome beyond
words—especially is this the case with some of the lesser Germans. Would
they but lay to heart old Hesiod’s warning, νήπιοι οὔδ’ ἴσασιν πλέον
ἥμισυ πάντος. Children! and they know now how much better the half than
the whole.

Richard Wagner was but six months old when his father, Friedrich, died.
He was a registrar of police in Leipzig, a man of a culture far above
the ordinary level of his humble official position. By the law he won
his bread, but his heart was in the theatre, and it was owing to him
that his friend, Ludwig Geyer, painter and actor, who had himself been
educated for the law, definitely adopted the stage as his profession, in
which he attained a great success. A few months after Friedrich’s death,
this Geyer, a good and worthy man, married the widow and devoted himself
with all a parent’s affectionate care to little Richard, who knew no
other father, and loved him dearly. But the tender relationship did not
last long. Before Richard was nine years old Frau Geyer was again left
a widow. “She was a good wife and mother,” we are told, “and her son
idolized her. The memory of her love supported him in all the storms of
his life, and he was talking of her on the evening before his death.”

After Geyer’s loss she seems to have been the centre of a small literary,
artistic, and theatrical coterie which met at her house, and in these
surroundings Richard Wagner’s childhood budded and bloomed. For him in
his earliest days the theatre was everything—always the theatre. He was
the constant companion and playmate of his stepfather, who carried the
child with him even to rehearsals. Indeed, the whole family was bitten
by the stage-craze. His eldest brother, brought up to be a doctor,
threw away pills and potions and lancet, and became an actor; his three
sisters followed the same bent: what wonder that this child, full of
imagination and poetic fancy, brought up in the glare of the footlights,
should catch the contagious fever which was burning up all those near and
dear to him? Even in the next generation the flame was still blazing.
The voice and acting of his niece Johanna is yet a glorious memory among
the very oldest opera-goers, and his son Siegfried, an architect by
profession, has found his true vocation in the direction of the Bayreuth
theatre, and is known as himself a composer of operas.

The dramatic impulse was vibrating in every fibre of Richard’s nature. By
the time he was sixteen he had completed a tragedy suggested partly by
_King Lear_, partly by _Hamlet_, inspired wholly by heredity. And here
was laid the foundation of that dramatic art which was destined to bring
a new revelation to the world. He was a Poet—above all things a Poet; but
it was borne in upon him that the message of the Poet must be incomplete
as a language speaking to the soul unless it were united to the mystery
of another power; that power was music, and of music he knew nothing, or
no more than what enabled him to play the piano by ear.

But he felt his vocation. Listen to what he says of those early days.
“Whilst I was finishing my great Tragedy I for the first time became
acquainted with Beethoven’s music at the concerts of the Gewandhaus at
Leipzig; its impression upon me was all-powerful; with Mozart, too, I
made friends, especially through his _Requiem_. Beethoven’s incidental
music for _Egmont_ inspired me so that for nothing in the world would I
let my finished Tragedy leave the stocks until it should be furnished
with similar music. Without a moment’s hesitation I felt confident that
I could myself write this all-important music, but still thought well
first to furnish myself with a few chief rules of thorough-bass. In order
to achieve this as far as possible, I obtained a week’s loan of Logier’s
‘Methode des General-basses,’ and worked at it zealously. But the study
did not bear fruit so quickly as I had thought. Its difficulties charmed
and riveted me; I determined to become a musician.” And this, remember,
was a boy of sixteen. Icarus himself, harnessing the horses of the Sun,
was not more audacious. But Wagner was not to share the fate of Icarus.

I remember how once when a lady consulted Lord Leighton about her boy,
who showed a great talent for painting, his answer was: “Let him have the
education of a gentleman in the first place, then, if he should still
have an inclination for art, let him specialize.” The story of Wagner
shows the wisdom of those words. His biographer tells us how greatly
Wagner profited by his classical education, and he points out what an
untold advantage this gave him over the other great musical writers, such
as Mozart, Beethoven, Gluck. Had Mozart, for instance, as he suggests,
been kept at school instead of being trotted out as an infant phenomenon
at Courts and in the palaces of great nobles, would he have allied the
genius of his music to such piteous libretti as those with which he had
to be satisfied? Is it not possible that in him, as in Wagner, the poet
might have been united with the composer?

In Wagner, as we have seen, the poet came first, then the musician: the
education of the gentleman was the dominant influence. During his school
and college life he showed such a predilection for language that his
masters thought that he would become a great philological professor. They
missed the point that it was language in the singular, not in the plural,
that fascinated him: he had not the gift of tongues, nor did he take any
special interest in comparative philology, but the power of expression,
the poet’s power, inspired his music, in the same way that his music
gave birth to his poetry. The two wedded made him unique. Without his
classical education, which opened out to him Homer, Æschylus, Sophocles,
and drove him to learn English in order that he might enjoy Shakespeare
untranslated, the two could never have grown to the noble stature which
they assumed; possibly they might never have been born.

To dwell upon the wretchedness, the poverty, the hunger, the crushed
hopes of many years, to recall the miseries of a union with a wife who,
full of good intentions as she was, neither understood him nor believed
in the ultimate victory of his mighty genius—to think of Wagner, “the
most German of all artists,” banished from the Fatherland which he loved
so passionately, eating such bitter bread of sorrow that one cannot
at this distance of time read the story without emotion—all this is
only so far necessary to an understanding of Bayreuth as it shows the
indomitable courage of the hero.

That he should have lived through the tragic days of Paris and Zurich
is little short of miraculous. Happily better times were in store for
him. He was able to come back to Germany. Poor Minna Planer, from whom
he had been separated for many years, died in 1866. Death severed a tie
that must have been intolerable to both. Marriage must be a vengeance of
devils or a reward of the gods. Wagner tasted both, for in his second
marriage he found all the comfort, the agreement, and the faith in him
which had been lacking in the first.

Minna Planer, the actress wife, had been nothing but a hindrance, a
millstone round the eager man’s neck. To be the helpmeet of a prophet,
a seer, a man of genius, a woman must above all things believe in her
husband, in his power to dominate men, in the magnetism of his will. What
would Mohammed have been without the faith of Khadijah, who trusted him
when even his own relations cried “Fool” and “Madman”? Prince Siddartha
deserted his wife and her babe to wander into the wilderness in search
of wisdom, but sweet Yasodhara bore him no grudge, for she had faith in
his mission, and when at last he became Buddha she joined the company of
believers and followed his teaching. This is the sort of trust that it
was not in the nature of Minna to give. Her commonplace soul could not
understand his impatience of the bonds of convention, or the wild flights
of his soaring imagination. How he must have fretted under the galling
restraint! How the sword must have strained to leap from the scabbard!

Happily the last years of his life were blessed by the loving care and
sympathy of Cosima, the daughter of his best friend, Franz Liszt—a wife
rare among women, whose soul and heart were in unison with his own—and
cheered by watching the growth of children whom he adored, reared in the
home which he had made beautiful for their joy. But this is no attempt to
give even the thinnest outline of the Master’s life. For a biography and
for a complete study of his work the curious must go to the fountain head.

From such study we may learn much. We hear wild talk about Wagner’s
“operas”: it would be well that we should arrive at some understanding
as to how far he may be said to have composed “operas” at all—that is to
say, “operas” in the old accepted sense of the word. Probably the best
way of facing the problem will be to take refuge in a compromise.

The Master’s life has been divided into two equal halves—the first
lasting from his birth in 1813 to 1848, the year of those political
troubles in which he became so unhappily involved; the second from 1848
to his death in 1883. His creative activity began when he was yet a
child—we have seen how when he was but sixteen years old he had completed
his “great tragedy,” which taught him that music was essential to drama,
that the language of the senses must find its complement in the language
of the soul, that music alone can appeal to the fancy and the imagination
as poetry does to the reason.

This of course at once throws down the gauntlet to argument: no poet
that ever lived has been gifted with the musical faculty as was Richard
Wagner, yet who can assert that Shakespeare, Dante, that great prose poet
Cervantes, were not kings over the fancy and imagination of mankind?
Can they be said to be incomplete because their works were not wedded
to music? Still this was the principle which was the guiding beacon of
the Wagnerian inspiration, and from that he never steered aside. The
arguments of enthusiasm are sometimes hard to follow. We are warned that
we must not look upon Wagner “as a poet and a musician as if he were in
some monstrous way gifted with two extraordinary talents, but that the
yearning for music in the deepest and most hidden depths underlies the
poetical impulse, and that music which then pours forth from the poetry
like perfume from the leaves and flowers of trees, is in very truth the
informing though unseen sap of this tree.”

Here, we are told, is the key to the understanding of this poet. And
yet we have seen that the boy was first of all a poet, and that it
was the poetic faculty which called forth the musical faculty! I find
it difficult to reconcile the two ideas. Apart from the merits of his
work, the great gulf which separates him from all other composers lies
in the fact that whereas before him there have been great poets and
great musicians—Shakespeare, Dante, Milton, Bach, Beethoven, Mozart,
Gluck, and others—it was in Wagner that for the first time the genius of
music and the genius of poetry were united. But it was not until he had
discovered his power in poetry that his power in music was revealed to
him. This seems to me unanswerable. But there is further evidence to be
brought forward in the shape of his own _Frederick Barbarossa_. Here was
a work which, when he had completed it, he found to be unsuited to music:
it failed to inspire him and so it remained unwedded. That teaches us
much in regard to the relationship between poetry and music in Wagner—not
all poetry was to be expressed in music. We must return to this question
later.

The works of the first half of Wagner’s life were operas in the strict
sense of the word. That they differed from all existing operas is
certain, but that was no more than would be expected from their genesis
and their author. So do Rossini’s operas differ from Mozart’s,—the whole
Italian school from the German. _Die Feen_ and _Das Liebesverbot_,
founded on Shakespeare’s _Measure for Measure_; _Rienzi_ and _The Flying
Dutchman_, _Tannhäuser_ and _Lohengrin_ (surely the most entrancing of
all romantic operas), _Siegfried’s Death_, can have no other title;
and—apart from _Barbarossa_, which had no claim to it—they make up the
sum of the theatrical work executed before 1848. Wagner, writing for the
stage, found the model in existence and adopted it. Even the strictest
of his disciples admit this. Indeed how can they deny what he himself
asserted?

Those were hard times. But music which had come at the Poet’s call
furnished him a scanty means of life as Kapellmeister. Then came 1848
and banishment, days of still greater stress and need, and misery
indescribable, when only the dreariest drudgery of a music-seller’s hack
kept body and soul together. Yet those were the days when he threw off
the last shackles of conventionality and gave to the world the newly born
idea of the Tone-Drama. That was the time when he first found himself and
opened the wings of his mighty genius, soaring into regions which no man
before him had dared or indeed been able to attempt.

The unsuitability to music of his _Barbarossa_ had opened out a new
conviction in the Tone-Poet’s mind. Music and poetry must go hand in
hand; the idea of writing music to another man’s verse—that is to say,
to command—was intolerable to him; but that the union should be happy
the subject must be fitting; it must be “the purely human freed from all
conventionality.” Again: “When I with full consciousness and of my own
free will gave up Frederick [Barbarossa], I had entered upon a new and
decisive period of my development as artist and as man, the period when
my conscious artistic will set out upon an entirely new path made with
unconscious necessity, a path upon which I am now starting as artist and
man to meet a new world.” Upon this his greatest critic says: “The works
which followed, created upon this foundation and freed from the Ghost of
Opera, reveal this _new world_.”

Wagner recognizes the dual nature of man. There is the outer man and the
inner man. The perfect drama appeals to both. But music is the language
of the inner man, which has for its special duty the expression of
feelings and sensibilities—indeed, it can represent nothing else.

No man that ever lived was so fitted both by nature and by experience
to appreciate the true functions of the drama as Richard Wagner—he was
born a poet, he was cradled in the theatre, his classical education,
“the education of a gentleman,” as Leighton put it, opened out to him
the masterpieces of Æschylus, Sophocles, and Shakespeare. When under the
spell of a distinctly felt want he took to music, behold! that was his
birthright also—he was the child of the Muses. His long apprenticeship as
Kapellmeister—conductor of the orchestra—in the Opera House at Dresden
made him familiar with the operatic works of the great masters. But it
taught him a great lesson: it showed him what was the true value of
music, what was its relation to the sister art of poetry, and he, poet
and musician as he was, learnt how to give the highest dignity to both.
Their union was his task, and in 1848 he had come to the realization of
the significance of that task, for he felt in the fullest degree the
fetters in which the masters who preceded him had worked. He perceived
that their noblest inspirations were only to be found in the expression
of feelings: where they failed was when they attempted to describe facts.

“Music,” said Schopenhauer, “never expresses a manifestation, but only
the inner essence of all manifestations.” The key to Wagner’s music is
to be found in the following propositions which he himself lays down as
fundamental:

“1. Feelings and sensibilities alone are what is to be expressed in the
language of music. It expresses in the fullness of perfection the inner
feeling of the purely human language set free from that language of words
which has become the special organ of the understanding.

“2. That which is impossible of expression in the absolute language of
music is the exact definition of the subject of feeling and sensibility
in which these reach a true reality.

“3. The widening and extension of the musical expression consists in the
winning of the power to indicate that which is individual and special
with clear distinctness, and

“4. The language of music can only attain this in its marriage with the
language of words.

“5. This marriage can only be successful when the language of music is
at once joined to so much of the language of words as is in harmonious
relation to itself; the union must go forward exactly in the direction
where the language of words has itself already manifested an imperious
necessity for true sensuous expression of feeling.

“6. This is defined only according to the inner meaning of that which is
to be expressed, so far as this grows from a matter of understanding to
a matter of feeling—an inner meaning which can only be grasped by the
understanding remains only expressible by the language of words, but the
more it extends to a movement of feeling the more explicitly it needs a
means of expression with which the language of music alone can furnish
it. (Conclusion from these premises.) Here then is clearly defined that
which the word-and-tone poet has to express: it is the purely human
set free from all conventionality (from all that which is formal and
historical).”

Such are the principles upon which the second half of Wagner’s work,
that which was carried out after 1848, is based; at least such is
Wagner’s own setting forth of those principles. How far these views,
so confidently laid down as artistic canon law, are justified by his
own creations and by those of others is a question capable of being
debated. Wagner’s own work is not uniformly in consonance with them. If
the historical and the formal are to be shut out from the realm of music
as unfitting, how can we account for so grand a conception as _Rienzi_,
a work at least as historical and formal as the discarded _Barbarossa_?
If nothing conventional is to be portrayed, what is to be said of the
_Meistersinger_, one of the greatest of all Tone-Dramas, though it is
throughout a picture of medieval middle-class life in Germany? Divest it
of the poet’s inspiration and of the magic charm of music and it sinks at
once into the commonplace from which genius has lifted it.

As a matter of fact there is no phase of man’s life and man’s activity
so prosaic that “das rein-menschliche,” the purely human or ideal, is
not in some shape or other contained in it. To amplify Schopenhauer’s
dictum, music cannot describe a cathedral with its apse, its nave, its
clerestory, its towers; but it can and does describe the spirit of piety
which raised that monument of faith; and it is conceivable that a great
tone-poet, such as Beethoven, should even describe in music the act of
building it. Wagner himself described the forging of the sword by the
Dwarf. He could not in the language of music have portrayed the sword
when forged. The question is to find the ideal wherever it may be hidden.
Wagner found it in _Rienzi_ and in the _Meistersinger_: he failed to find
it in _Barbarossa_. Here surely is one of those arbitrary contradictions
with which we occasionally meet in men of transcendent genius. It is only
the smooth man of average brains that is uniformly consistent.

The triumph of the ideal is revealed in the _Ring des Nibelungen_,
which is wholly Fairy Tale, and in _Parsifal_, which is wholly
Worship. In these as poet and as musician Wagner reaches his highest
achievement—poetry and music are united in an indissoluble wedlock; the
senses are enthralled, and the world bows before the great wizard.

If we turn for a moment to the dramatic composition of other composers
we shall see how entirely they are at their best when their works are
inspired by the ideal, “das rein-menschliche.” That is where the great
oratorios derive their glory. They are the musical expression of the
loftiest thoughts of which man’s soul is capable; that is why such
a masterpiece as the opening recitative of Handel’s _Messiah_ cries
directly to the soul—no one who once heard Sims Reeves deliver the great
message of comfort could ever forget it. To go to the opposite pole
of music, the brightest comic opera that ever was produced was surely
Rossini’s _Barbiere_. I am old enough to have heard it sung by the
greatest cast that could be imagined—Bosio as Rosina, Mario Almaviva,
the grand old Lablache as Dottor Bartolo, Ronconi the barber, Tagliafico
Don Basilio. Rendered by such incomparable singers and actors, the whole
opera sparkled from the first bar to the finale.

But what took one out of one’s self was Don Basilio’s _La Calunnia_,
a piece of almost Wagnerian declamation. Calumny is “purely human,”
indeed a human monopoly, for animals do not traduce one another, and as
Tagliafico, a great artist, told the tale, the effect was electric. The
trivial and commonplace but quite delightful prettiness of the rest was
forgotten in the presence of a great dramatic effect. It would be easy to
multiply instances, but these two suffice to show the overwhelming power
of music to express the ideal.

A main difference between Wagner’s Tone-Drama and what we have known
as “opera” lies in the union of the Tone-Poem with the Word-Poem as
two sisters of equal rank, each prepared as the occasion requires it
to give precedence to the other. In the so-called opera the music is
everything; the book may be, and often is, the merest balderdash, void
of all literary or poetic worth. In what Wagner calls “the art work of
the future,” the music, as he himself puts it, “has to take up a quite
different position; it is only where the music is the predominant partner
that it may unfold itself to its full breadth; but, on the other hand,
wherever dramatic speech is the most important, there the music must
absolutely subordinate itself to it. But it so happens that music has the
capability, without being altogether silent, of so imperceptibly effacing
itself before language that is teeming with thought, as to make it appear
that that alone is of importance and yet to continue giving it support.”
It must be evident that this perfect accord between the poem and the
music is one of the secrets of the incomparable dignity of Wagner’s
work. The recognition of the equal value of both precludes the infusion
of anything mean or trivial into either. Here again we may bring into
comparison the oratorio, in which the music is wedded to the glorious
language of the Bible.

Probably one reason why it was so long before Wagner achieved anything
like general success outside of Germany lay in the misuse of the word
“opera,” and also in the fact that his dramas were brought out in
theatres intimately associated with works of less lofty aspirations.
Smart ladies, mounted in diamonds, and white-waistcoated dandies, had
been accustomed to listen entranced to lovely, if somewhat sugary,
melodies threaded like pearls on strings of recitative, during which
conversation and flirtation were not only permitted but expected.
They came to hear Wagner looking for the same musical diet, and were
disappointed. They expected to hear Wotan grind out barrel-organ tunes,
or Brünnhilde declare with many trills that she is “vergine vezzosa.”
The dignified declamation of Wagner’s heroes and heroines was lost upon
them. Philistia was bored and showed it. At first they did not realize
the fact that a work like the _Ring des Nibelungen_ is one comprehensive
whole, of which one part separated from the rest tells no tale. They know
better now; yet even to-day people go into raptures over one portion of
the _Ring_ without hearing what has gone before or what is to follow.
They believe that they have heard a Wagner “opera.” The great tragedy of
Wotan is missed. _Lohengrin_, with its romantic and beautiful poem, took
the fancy of the English public much more readily. _Tristan_ too became
a favourite; but I have often wondered whether the _Meistersinger_, in
spite of the noble character of the poet-shoemaker Hans Sachs, has ever
quite appealed to nine-tenths of the Covent Garden audience.

But at any rate Wagner has become the fashion, and it is now essential
to good breeding and a reputation for culture that he should be received
as The great master—always, be it understood, of “opera.” Yet for the
reasons at which I have hinted I rather doubt the sincerity of the
adoration which is expressed. Dr. Johnson once said, “No man is a
hypocrite in his pleasures”; had Dr. Johnson seen the tiaras and the
white waistcoats displaying their nobility in the boxes and stalls of
Covent Garden he might have seen fit to modify his opinion.

At Bayreuth things are very different: the sincerity of the audience is
almost as striking as the beauty of the performance. A drama given in the
Fest-Spiel house is no mere theatrical entertainment; it is more like
a religious ceremony. The people standing outside the building, like a
congregation in some country churchyard waiting for service to begin, are
very quiet, speaking little, and that little in hushed voices, tuning
themselves to the diapason of the solemn feast which is in store for
them. When the doors are opened they troop in silently, and reverently
take their places. There is no chatter; if speech be needed it is in a
whisper. The audience—worshippers would be a better word—sit in rapt
contemplation, waiting for the ceremony to begin.

After a while subdued and solemn strains from the hidden orchestra creep
into the theatre—the opening notes of the _Rheingold_. The performance
of the _Ring des Nibelungen_ has begun. The house is darkened, and will
have no more light than what is sent to it from the stage. Slowly, very
slowly, the curtain is drawn aside, and through a dim mist faintly we
see the Rhine-maidens swimming in the sacred stream. So perfect is the
illusion that we seem to be looking into the very depths of the river
from some fairy vantage-ground. The poetry of music, language, motion
(dancing was one of those elements of the ancient Greek drama of which
Wagner recognized the value), all combine to make that perfect appeal to
sight and hearing and the senses of the soul which is the essence of the
Tone-Drama.

There is no dropping of the curtain at the end of the first act—clouds
of steam roll up lazily in the foreground, and are met by falling mists
of gauze and network—the stage grows dimmer and more dim, until all is
hidden. Slowly and mysteriously the clouds fade away, and the second
scene is revealed. Beautiful as are the first two scenes, I think that
the Cave of the Dwarfs is even more captivating. The great rocks on the
right of the stage run back into the mystery of space; the trickling of
water gleaming here and there amid the mosses gives a most realistic
effect—just what may be seen in some natural Alpine cavern. On the left
is the glowing forge of the gnomes, which looks as if the whole stage
must presently blaze into flames. The horrors of this miniature hell,
with the appearance of the laidly worm and the little crooked dwarfs
rushing about intent upon some weird business, leave the impression
of a Satan’s Sabbath. It is a scenic effect beyond all anticipation,
difficult to realize. Wagner was a great magician, and could transport
his people whither he listed—for, mark you! it is all his doing—his the
conception, his the execution. The book, the music, the scenery, the
stage-management, all the invention of that one brain. What a power he
wielded!

You must journey to Bayreuth to feel its full force. There the master
mind, the singers, the orchestra, and last, not least, the audience, are
all in sympathy, and it is the creation of this sympathy which shows how
great Wagner was.

The religious feeling which runs through the performance, the reverence
with which it is received, are enhanced by the abstention from anything
like applause. The nearest approach to it is something approaching to
a sob of relief which follows upon such supreme moments as the fall of
the curtain upon the flames of Valhalla (in the _Götterdämmerung_); but
that sob says more than all the ridiculous calls before the curtain with
which we destroy any illusion that may have been created by the finest
efforts of our actors. Romeo and Juliet, Hamlet and Ophelia, Othello
and Desdemona called to life again to grin a fatuous good-night to the
audience! _Proh pudor!_ Let the players go to Bayreuth and learn what is
due, if not to the dignity of their own art, at any rate to the genius of
the poet whose interpreters they are.

Wagner felt music as the revelation of the language of another world—a
language of which Beethoven, Mozart, Bach were the teachers. We have seen
how the music of _Egmont_ appealed to him as a boy. With what force he
used that language to appeal to the deepest feelings of those to whom he
specially addressed himself will best be recognized by those who may have
the privilege of attending the _General-Probe_, the dress rehearsal of
one of the festivals.

Here are no tourists, no sham amateurs travelling to the little
Franconian town because it is “the thing” to do, and as though the
pilgrimage conferred a degree in culture. The guests are all invited from
the very flower of Germany’s intellect—men who have earned honour in the
most varied careers, women who are famous in many branches of work. These
are the worshippers who flock to the shrine of the Cult, these the minds
that the great poet holds in the thraldom of his genius. With the silence
of conviction they accept his preaching: the Early Christians meeting in
the Catacombs could hardly have been more reverent or more reserved.

In any sketch of Bayreuth, however flimsy, a word must be said about
Wahnfried, the home of Wagner’s happiest days, the house where those who
were nearest and dearest to him must almost feel as if they were still
under the guardianship of that mighty soul: so filled is the place with
memories of his presence that even strangers seem to be held by the spell
of his spirit hovering over the trees that he loved, the garden that he
laid out with such care and such consummate simplicity.

There is nothing ambitious, nothing pretentious here. It is just a plain,
dignified gentleman’s home, _entre cour et jardin_; the court surrounded
on three sides by shady alleys, an avenue of horse-chestnuts leading
to a little forecourt in which the central ornament is a bust of King
Louis of Bavaria, after Liszt, Wagner’s greatest friend, and certainly a
powerful protector, who would have done so much more for him had he been
able. Over the doorway is a sgraffito, “Wotan the Wanderer”; no other
decoration save only in great letters the famous inscription, “Hier we
mein Wähnen Frieden fand WAHNFRIED sei dieses Haus von mir benannt.”
“Here where my wild dreams peace attained WAHNFRIED [Dreams-Peace] be
this house by me named.” A poor jingle of a translation, but perhaps the
original is not to be rendered in another tongue. But what a tinge of
melancholy lies in it! A long day of struggles and misery, an evening of
peace and happiness, and then suddenly at Venice—the Night!

Few people will deny that in a man’s home much of himself will be found
reflected. I am not now speaking of those houses built to a pattern,
even if it be a fanciful one, and adorned and furnished by some famous
decorator: in these the reflection is that not of a mind, but of a firm,
and there is a brotherly or at farthest a cousinly likeness between all
those that are the work of the same partners: the difference is mainly
one of pounds, shillings, and pence: even the books in the library look
as if they had been ordered by the yard. The piano is placed for looks,
not for sound. The pictures are chosen by the fashionable dealer of the
day.

The house of a man of character and distinction bears the impress of his
own imagination. Especially is this the case when he himself has built
it. In Wahnfried everything speaks to you of Wagner. The design was his:
the admirably proportioned rooms were planned and measured by him: every
detail was thought out with strenuous care and loving foresight. The
library, it has been said, “bears eloquent testimony to the universality
of Wagner’s genius.” The works of art, the knick-knacks, all tell their
story. There are several quite admirable portraits by Lenbach, pictures
that will live; one portrait especially of Frau Wagner is a masterpiece
that will not be denied.

But a likeness of Schopenhauer, painted by Lenbach after the
philosopher’s death, has a story that is worth repeating. When
Schopenhauer died, Wagner, who had the greatest admiration for him,
begged Lenbach to paint a portrait of him. “But I never saw him,” said
the artist, and declared that it was impossible. Now it so happened
that a certain photographer, in cleaning out his drawers, came upon
a photograph of Schopenhauer, the existence of which he had quite
forgotten. Wagner, who had secured it, showed it to Lenbach and asked him
whether that would not help him. The painter looked at it, and exclaimed,
“Why that is my little old man!” and then told the tale of how one
day walking in the street he had met a curiously comic little old man
fidgeting about hither and thither from one shop-window to another, and
had been so struck by the grotesqueness of the little creature that he
followed him about, making mental notes of him, for the whole afternoon.
So he was delighted to undertake the portrait, and by the help of the
photograph, supplementing his own memory, produced what must be reckoned
a famous work of art.

At the back of the house is the garden. Here too the all-embracing genius
of the master found room for play. He laid it out with exquisite and
delicate taste. A lawn with flowers leads to a little shady wood, and
that again opens on to the public gardens of the town. In front of the
wood, or rather in a recess screened and shaded by it, is a bust of the
master facing the house. It marks his grave. He lies in the home which he
loved, in the place where he found Peace.

It was in this sacred grove that I had the honour of being received by
the gracious lady of Wahnfried. She is now, alas! able to see very few
people, but she made an exception in my favour, and I had half an hour’s
delightful conversation with her. In appearance I thought her little
altered from what I remember her in 1877, when she came with her husband
for the great concerts at the Albert Hall, and when those who had not the
privilege of speaking with her were fascinated by her beautiful presence.
Though she is not strong, the years have touched her lightly—a little
more snow in the hair, the features a little more marked, reminding one
more than ever of her great father, Franz Liszt—but she has retained all
the grace, all the charm, all the magic of sympathy, all the keenness of
thought for which she has been world-famous. Indeed, the world owes her
no small meed of gratitude for the zeal and brilliant talent with which
after the master’s death she threw herself into the work of keeping alive
the great performances of the Fest-Spiel-Haus.

There was a moment of financial difficulty when the fate of Bayreuth
trembled in the balance; she has swept away all doubt, and her enthusiasm
has been so infectious that the little Franconian town has become one of
the centres of the world’s culture: all its past is forgotten, even Jean
Paul is hardly remembered, so all-absorbing is the Wagnerian aura. Royal
personages, the princes in the several realms of art, science, letters,
and politics, men and women famous in all the walks of life, have made
these celebrations their trysting-place, and people who elsewhere grumble
at the highest extravagance of luxury are content to put up with the
simplest of fare and the humblest accommodation if only they may be
allowed to lay their tribute on the high altar of genius.

A gathering at Wahnfried is something to remember; it is a goodly
company, a cosmopolitan galaxy of talent. Failing health prevents the
great hostess from welcoming her guests in person, but she is well
represented by her children, Siegfried Wagner and his sister, round whom
are assembled all the most distinguished of the visitors to the town. It
is a company in which a man must needs feel very humble. For here every
one has achieved something in the world. Here is a recognized authority
as antiquary and historian; there the great physician who watched over
Prince Bismarck’s latest years: famous musicians, learned professors,
a few notable soldiers, are much to the front: one lady is translating
into German an American philosophical work; other ladies are engaged in
various branches of art; some are successful actresses, others well-known
and cherished singers; here are painters who have achieved fame, younger
men who are climbing that same giddy ladder; of literary men there is no
lack. The conversation is brilliant; it is only interrupted now and then
by such music as would compel even the Philistines to hold their peace.
It would be strange indeed if in the home of Richard Wagner obedience
were not given to the old Italian warning, “Il più grande omaggio alla
musica è il silenzio.”




CHAPTER XLIII

A LAST WORD


Since my memory of what took place at St. Petersburg in 1864 was made
ready for the printer, the storm which some of us foresaw as the
inevitable consequence, sooner or later, of the shameless betrayal of
Denmark in that year, has burst upon the world in all the fulness of its
fury. Never have the vials of wrath been poured upon mankind with such
remorseless cruelty; of that cup of a poison which has been brewing for
fifty years we now have to drink the bitter dregs.

How clearly does every link in the chain of villainy stand out! In 1864 a
scrap of paper, signed by Prussia in 1852, assuring the inviolability of
Denmark, is torn up. England, after much bluster and many threats, stands
by and looks on unconcerned. Remember the words of Prince Gortchakoff:
“I put on one side the supposition that England will ever make war for
a question of honour” (see pages 241-245). Then followed 1866, when the
robbers quarrelled over their booty. Then 1870, when France paid the bill
for the mistakes of her Emperor.

The foreign policy of Louis Napoléon was not fortunate. He never
altogether recovered the prestige which he lost in Mexico—an unhappy
venture if ever there was such—but how bitterly he must have repented
his attitude in 1864, when for an affront to his vanity he stood aloof.
Yet mortified vanity was not the only motive power which goaded him
to his ruin. He hated Austria—as he proved by his actions. But in the
beginning of his reign he had a great predilection for Prussia. I have
been told by a distinguished Frenchman who knew intimately all that
occurred behind the scenes in the late fifties and early sixties that at
a banquet which took place at the Tuileries the ambition of Prussia came
under discussion. The French Emperor professed unbounded admiration for
the North German character, in contrast to that of the Southern German
and Austria. He said that he considered that Prussia stood for progress,
culture and civilization. The Empress, on the contrary, made no secret of
her preference for Austria.

What an answer to Louis Napoléon’s infatuation are the tragedies of
Liége, Louvain, Reims, Arras, Ypres; and how true the prophetic words
of the mad German philosopher-poet, Nietzsche: “There are political
and social fanatics who zealously and eloquently call for an overthrow
of all institutions, believing that the proudest temple of a beautiful
humanity would then rise automatically ... unfortunately we know by
historical experience that every such overthrow revives the wildest
energies, the long-buried horrors and excesses of remote ages.” The last
institution to be overthrown has been that of international rights and
the honour-compelling force of treaties. We have seen the consequences.

Even worse than the folly of Louis Napoléon was that of those Frenchmen
of fifty years ago who, seeing that Kiel would give Germany a navy,
urged that it would be good policy for France to further, even by her
inactivity, the ambition of Bismarck. Would it not lead to the lowering
of England’s sea-power, and, as M. de Massignac—no visionary, but a sober
diplomatist—put it—“would not that be for the advantage of France?” (see
page 241).

How would France stand to-day were the German fleet not locked up,
fearing to move out of its mine-protected harbour, stolen from Denmark?
What would be the condition of the French towns on the shores of the
North Sea?

Being a trustee of the Anglo-German Foundation, that more than princely
gift which Sir Ernest Cassel dedicated to the memory of King Edward
the Seventh, I had to go to Berlin on business, in the month of
October, 1913. My colleagues and myself were treated to a right royal
reception—right royal in every sense of the words. I had the opportunity
of talking with all the leading men, from the highest downward. There
was one subject upon which they all dwelt without exception, and
that was the embarrassment of the English Government in the face of
the difficulties in Ireland, the rights of women, colonial and Indian
discontent. Of course the conversation took the shape of disinterested
discussion: subsequent events showed that in reality my hypocritical
entertainers had not been above trying to pick the brains even of
so inconspicuous a person as myself. Nothing pleased them more than
speculating upon the possible attitude of individual members of our
Government and of the Opposition, discussing them all one by one. Was
the North of Ireland really determined? Would Ulster fight, and if so,
how far could the army be relied upon? How far would the influence of
Sir Edward Carson prevail? Would the Government deal firmly with the
suffragists, and if so how? What fiscal sop would have to be thrown to
the Colonies? Was India disloyal? It was impossible not to be touched by
the sympathy shown by the kindly and disinterested Teuton in the troubles
of England!

The very able and interesting article signed “Americanus” in the
_Spectator_ of August 7th, 1915, after pointing out the preparations
made by Germany for four decades and “her practical anticipation for at
least two years of the present alignment of the nations,” goes on to
say: “The avowed surprise of German statesmen as to the intervention
of this country in behalf of Belgium is thus shown to be a diplomatic
affectation,” and he indicates that the evidence brought forward in
the Beck case at Boston “establishes in the most practical way the
expectation of Germany for over two years that her own ambitions might
bring her at any time into conflict with England, Russia and France.”

The surprise was no affectation. It was very real. The German
Excellencies, it is true, were well aware that all England’s sympathies
would be with France and Russia, and that she would bitterly resent any
violation of Belgian territory. Their ultimate objective, moreover, was,
as we now know, England. All their preparations had been made with the
intention of destroying our naval supremacy. The surprise lay in the
discovery that England was ready to put all internal trouble on one side
and to throw her whole might into the scale with her allies. But when
the mere declaration of war swept away every trace of disagreement and
served only to knit together into the closest bonds of union England,
Ireland, discontented women, India, and the Colonies—all the elements
of distraction—and to act as an amalgam, welding together the British
Empire into a solid fusion such as no man had ever dreamed of—then
their indignation knew no bounds. The Germans believed that they had
found their Day for crushing Russia and devastating France, with such
subsidiary advantages as the annexation of Belgium and Holland. After
that should come the turn of England—England without a friend, an ally,
or a lover. The psychological moment had arrived when England’s hands
were, as they thought, tied, and she would be compelled to renounce her
honour.

Here I can add a piece of evidence which has probably escaped attention.
Straws show which way the current is set. The Kaiser, firmly convinced
that all would go on as usual in an England apathetic in all matters save
those relating to sport, on the 10th of July entered his yacht for the
Cowes Regatta, and as usual sent the great cup which he gave annually
to the Royal Yacht Squadron. Prince Henry of Prussia was expected at
Cowes, was actually in England, and only telegraphing his excuses to
his host and hostess on the Saturday morning hurried back to Germany.
On the 3rd of August the Royal Yacht Squadron held a meeting and by
special desire of the King we abandoned the Regatta. On the 4th of August
England declared war. The disillusion must have been mortifying. As for
the _Meteor_, she remained at Kiel, where, with the rest of the Kaiser’s
ships—as harmless as herself—she still lies.


THE END

          _Printed at The Chapel River Press, Kingston, Surrey._




FOOTNOTES


[1] Maéda, the family name of the Princes of Kaga. Princess Arisugawa,
who was in England a few years ago, was a daughter of the house of Maéda.

[2] See Vol. I., p. 385.

[3] He died on the 7th of July, 1871, of confluent smallpox. England and
the world were the poorer by his death. To the Service and the country
his loss was great; to his friends irreparable.

[4] The dates were very much confused by the various newspapers, some of
which give the 11th for Admiral Bell’s catastrophe. They are correctly
given here. I have submitted the account to Admiral Sir Henry Stephenson
and he confirms my account in every detail. Herr von Brandt gives the
date of Admiral Bell’s loss as the 8th, which is right, but he says our
adventure took place a few days earlier, which is wrong.

[5] He was not even in Japan, for he was only appointed to a student
interpretership in the following year.

[6] The universal custom among married women in Old Japan. I suppose
that to-day it would be impossible to find such a case throughout all
the islands, where the ladies now follow French fashions and are dressed
by Paris. The shaving of the eyebrows was an important event, announced
in the case of the Empress in the _Kiōto Gazette_ of April 20th, 1869,
in the following words: “To the Princes of the Blood, Kugés and Princes.
The first day of next month having been fixed for the ceremony of
shaving off the eyebrows of the Empress, you are ordered to offer your
congratulations at the Palaces of the Empress Dowager and of the Empress.
It is not necessary to present offerings. Persons in mourning will attend
on the following day.” The recipe for lacquering the teeth is given in my
“Tales of Old Japan.” It was formerly the fashion for the Emperor and his
nobles to blacken their teeth. It originated with one Hanozono Arishito,
who was Sadaijin, or minister of the left, at the Court of the Emperor
Toba early in the twelfth century. He was an æsthete, with feminine
tastes, who plucked out his eyebrows, blackened his teeth, powdered his
face and rouged his lips, so as to look as like a woman as possible. The
custom became widely spread among nobles in the twelfth century.

[7] Ashikaga Yoshimasa ruled Japan as Shōgun in the latter half of the
fifteenth century. He was famous for his culture and for his æsthetic
tastes. His symposia at Ginkakuji, the Temple of the Silver Pavilion, are
celebrated in Japanese history. (See my “Garter Mission to Japan,” pp.
193-198.)

[8] As a curious illustration of a common custom observed by men setting
out to commit a crime, I may say that the two men had changed their names
to Miyeda Shigéru and Shujaku Misawo.

[9] Sponge cake—Castéra—so called because the recipe was received from
Spain—Castile.

[10] Both in China and Japan we had always had in old days to be very
watchful as to the titles given to our Sovereign.

[11] “There was no torture before death, no hideous form of death itself,
through which the priests did not pass along with their converts, not
even the boiling waters of Unzen or the slow, agonizing death of the
pit.” Longford’s “Story of Old Japan,” p. 265.

[12] Two gentlemen of the Satsuma clan whom Satow and I knew well were
taken by the Shōgun’s people during the riots in Yedo and crucified.

[13] _I.e._, the wicked men have repented.

[14] See below—No. 5.

[15] “Imamairi Tenshi no Tsuboné,” “recently arrived lawful
waiting-woman.” “Tsuboné” is literally “the room occupied by the women.”
_Cf._ German, Frauenzimmer, and Arabic, Harim.

[16] Not to the Daimios. This refers to the refusal of Daimios, as that
of Satsuma in the case of the murder of Mr. Richardson, to give up the
guilty men.

[17] This is an obscurely worded allusion to the want of control
exercised by the former Government over Rōnins and lawless persons, who
secured for themselves an influence by terrorism. The fourteenth question
points to the Emperor’s body-guard and their party.

[18] In the teeth of the opposition of the feudal lords (Daimios).

[19] See my “Garter Mission to Japan,” pp. 26-30.

[20] In my “Tales of Old Japan.”

[21] “Mr. Butterfly.” I have seen the trick performed many times, but
never with the skill and grace of this old fellow. He was the recognized
master of this very pretty trick.

[22] This refers to the following anecdote of the Emperor Ichijō (tenth
century A.D.) as related in the “Kokushi Riyaku,” or abridged “History of
Japan”: “One cold night the Emperor, his heart full of pity and mercy,
stripped off his clothes. The Empress Jōtō, astonished at this, asked the
reason. The Emperor answered and said, ‘The season is now cold; I think
of the poor who are naked. How can I bear that I alone should be covered
and warm?’ The Emperor Ichijō was distinguished for his knowledge and his
love of letters. He excelled in poetry and music.”

[23] In regard to the letter see the “Annual Register” for 1880.

[24] Lord E. Fitzmaurice’s “Life of Granville,” Vol. II., p. 450.

[25] Lord E. Fitzmaurice’s Biography, Vol. I., p. 181, _seq._

[26] See reference to Danish Duchies’ war in 1864 in Vol. I., p. 241,
_seq._

[27] The sometime jester of the House of Commons who wore the cap and
bells and wielded the bauble with much popularity. He was such a zealous
teetotaller that when he came into his inheritance it was told of him
that he emptied the whole of his cellar of fine old port wine into his
fish-pond. The fish all died, bearing testimony to the dangers of alcohol.

[28] Dean Burgon’s “Newdigate Ode.”

[29] “No, sir! Claret is the liquor for boys; port for men; but he who
aspires to be a hero must drink brandy.” Boswell, April 7th, 1779.

[30] Some idea may be formed of the formidable nature of Abd el Kader’s
opposition to the French by the following list of Generals whom he had to
meet. Clausel, whom he defeated; Count Vallée, who could only remain on
the defensive; Bugeaud, Lamoricière, Cavaignac, Changarnier, Pélissier,
Bedeau, St. Arnaud, Bosquet. Besides these, there were the three French
Princes, sons of Louis Philippe, the Duc d’Orléans, Duc de Nemours, Duc
d’Aumale, and the Duc de Joinville in command of the Fleet. The cost to
France in blood and money must have been something huge.

[31] Latakieh.

[32] Acts of the Apostles, ix., 11.

[33] Sir William Howard Russell, the famous war correspondent of the
_Times_.

[34] “Cannon and Knapp,” p. 248.

[35] “Cannon and Knapp,” p. 222.

[36] Pinus Lambertiana—the sugar pine.

[37] Delane’s memory was prodigious. I remember a dinner at the house of
the Lord Chief Justice, Sir Alexander Cockburn; the conversation turned
upon a certain _cause célèbre_. Cockburn said that he knew nothing about
it. “That is strange,” said Delane, “for you were one of the junior
counsel.”

[38] “Conversations with Prince Bismarck.” Poschinger. English version
edited by Sydney Whitman.

[39] The Anticyræ were the islands to which the lunatics of Rome were
sent.

[40] Afterwards M.P. for Hull—famous at all games; boxer, amateur
champion at billiards, whist-player and author of a treatise on whist—a
fine singer and father of Fred Clay, the composer. His dinners in Montagu
Square, at which I was often a guest, were delightfully Bohemian and
artistic.

[41] Curiously enough it was Disraeli himself who let the cat out of
the bag. It was he who called the attention of George Smythe (Lord
Strangford), his old colleague in the Young England Party, to an article
in the _Morning Chronicle_ in 1848, in which the words of Thiers were
translated. The _Globe_ published Disraeli’s speech and Thiers’ article
in columns side by side—and George Smythe told the whole story in defence
of Disraeli in a letter to the _Times_. It is always said that Thiers’
“speech” was a panegyric on the death of Marshal St. Cyr. This can hardly
be right, for St. Cyr was alive in 1848 and Thiers would scarcely have
pronounced such a eulogy upon a third-rate living General. See Mr. T. P.
O’Connor’s “Life of Lord Beaconsfield,” p. 452.

[42] Buckingham—the home of the _buckings_ or _beech-men_.

[43] Disraeli, “Life of Lord George Bentinck.”

[44] Among those whom the Prince of Wales invited were the Duke of
Wellington, the Duke of Rutland, Lord John Manners, Sir Stafford
Northcote (Lord Iddesleigh), Mr. Gerard Noel, Sir Frederic Leighton, Mr.
Shaw Lefevre, and myself. I do not remember whether there were any others.

[45] Of the old Cross.

[46] The programme was formulated by the National Liberal Federation,
meeting at Newcastle, October 2nd, 1891. It included Home Rule,
Disestablishment of the Welsh Church, local control of liquor traffic,
electoral reform, payment of Members of Parliament, establishment of
District Councils and the ending or mending of the House of Lords.

[47] Essay on Steele.

[48] “The _pourboires_ or perquisites of our profession.”

[49] Richard Wagner’s “Gesammelte Schriften und Dichtungen.” E. W.
Fritzsch, Leipzig.




INDEX


  A

  Aidzu, Prince of, 416, 437, 471.

  Ailesbury, Marquis of, 449.

  Airlie, David, seventh Earl of, 29.

  ——, Henrietta, Countess of, 29, 668.

  Akidzuki, Prince, 486.

  Albert (Prince Consort), 53, 71, 144, 164 _et sq._, 173, 241, 677,
        700-1.

  —— Victor, Duke of Clarence, 174.

  Alcester, Lord, 502.

  Alcock, Sir Rutherford, 355 _et sq._, 375, 385, 393 _et sq._

  Alexander I., Emperor of Russia, 255, 298.

  Alexander II., Emperor of Russia, 210 _et sq._, 218, 227-8, 236, 247
        _et sq._, 257, 264 _et sq._, 331, 545-6.

  Alexander III., Emperor of Russia, 238.

  Alexandra, Queen, 62-3, 211, 311, 551 _et sq._, 754, 766.

  Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, 495 _et sq._, 522, 641, 688.

  Amateur Musical Society, 190.

  Amélie, Queen of the French, 33, 49.

  Ampthill, Lady, 525.

  ——, Lord, 135.

  Anderson, Mary, 201-2.

  Andrassy, Count Julius, 176.

  Angoulème, Duchesse d’, 34.

  Anson, Mrs., 680.

  Antonelli, Cardinal, 133.

  Anuradhapura (Ceylon), 739 _et sq._

  Apponyi, Count, 126, 230.

  ——, Countess, 126, 211, 230.

  Argyll, Duke of, 535, 539, 668.

  Arnold, Dr. (of Rugby), 57.

  ——, Matthew, 516, 668.

  Arthur of Connaught, Prince, 453, 500, 750, 765-6.

  Ashanti war, 174.

  Ashburnham, Bertram, 23, 540.

  ——, Hon. Charles, 27.

  ——, Charlotte, Lady, 26.

  ——, Lady Georgina, _see_ Mitford.

  ——, John, 3, 26.

  ——, Lady Katherine, 73.

  ——, Lord, 25 _et sq._

  ——, Lord (bibliophile), 27.

  ——, Sophia, Lady, 25.

  ——, Hon. Thomas, 27.

  Ashburton, Harriet, Lady, 652.

  Ashley, Hon. Francis, 52.

  Asquith, Right Hon. H. H., 186, 716.

  Aston, 94.

  ——, Mr., 492.

  Augusta, German Empress, 81 _et sq._

  Aumale, Duc d’, 33, 129, 568, 571.

  ——, Duchesse d’, 129.

  Auvergne, Prince de la Tour d’, 242.

  Awa, Prince of, 410.

  Ayrton, Mr., 735, 737.


  B

  Bach, 659, 786, 788.

  Bacon, Francis, 13.

  Baden, Grand Duchess of, 83.

  Balfour, Right. Hon. A. J., 66, 719, 726, 723, 730.

  Baliol, Guy de, 7.

  Balmoral, 168, 176, 552 _et sq._, 692 _et sq._, 764.

  Balston, Edward, 64.

  Balzac, 82.

  Bancroft, Sir Squire, 200, 203.

  ——, Lady, 203.

  Baouschkin, 258.

  Barrington, Sir Jonah, 20.

  Bartlett, Mr. Ashmead, 719.

  Bassano, Duc de, 521.

  Bath, Lord, 707.

  Batsford, 12, 21 _et sq._, 91, 685, 710 _et sq._

  Battenberg, Prince Henry of, 174.

  ——, Princess Henry of, 693.

  Baudrand, General, 32.

  Bayreuth, 769 _et sq._

  ——, Hereditary Prince of, 771.

  Beaconsfield, Benjamin Disraeli, Earl of, 125, 168-9, 173, 534, 725;
    and second Lord Redesdale, 24;
    attends Congress of Berlin, 158, 245, 665 _et sq._;
    Queen Victoria’s affection for, 183;
    his account of the Duc D’Osuna, 250;
    a great orator, 535, 548, 675;
    and Dr. Quin, 543;
    dissolves Parliament, 549;
    appoints author Secretary to the Board of Works, 642, 661, 703;
    his appearance and characteristics, 661 _et sq._, 668-9, 670 _et
        sq._, 681;
    Gladstone and, 664;
    Monypenny’s Life of, 669, 680;
    his wife’s devotion to, 670;
    and Mr. Pigott’s appointment, 672-3;
    on the Prince Imperial’s death, 673-4;
    his death and funeral, 676 _et sq._;
    his descent, 678-9;
    his friends, 680.

  ——, Lady, 661, 670.

  Beaumont and Fletcher, 71.

  ——, Louis de, 12.

  Bechelemicheff, General, 205.

  Bedford, Paul, 198.

  Beecher, Lady, _see_ Miss O’Neill.

  Beethoven, 657, 659, 777-8, 781, 788.

  Bell, Admiral, 420-1.

  Bellingham, John, 22.

  Belloli, 273.

  Bendigo, 103.

  Benedetti, Count, 529 _et sq._

  Beresford, Lord Charles, 496.

  Berlin, Congress of, 233, 245, 534, 665 _et sq._

  ——, Treaty of, 178-9.

  Bernard, Captain, 334-5.

  Bernhardt, Sarah, 201.

  Bernstorff, Count, 240.

  Bertie, Sir Francis, 116.

  Bethell, Mr., 63.

  Bethmann-Hollweg, Dr., 83.

  Biddulph, Sir Thomas, 174.

  Bidwell, John, 115.

  Biggar, Mr., 632.

  Bill, “Curly,” 626-7, 637.

  ——, “Mexico,” 599 _et sq._

  ——, “Prairie,” 595 _et sq._

  Billard, Dr., 37-8.

  Bishop, Sir Henry, 80.

  Bismarck, Prince, 84 _et sq._, 114, 158, 176, 216, 238, 241-2, 245,
        252, 525-6, 529 _et sq._, 557, 665 _et sq._, 725-6, 792, 794.

  Blackwood, Sir Stephen, 66.

  Blaine, Mr., 631-2.

  Bland and Backhouse, Messrs. (“China under the Empress-Dowager”),
        359, 360, 363.

  Blessington, Lady, 125, 543, 679.

  Blondin, 186.

  Boer War, 175, 179, 755, 758.

  Boggett, Mr., 645.

  Bonaparte, Prince Pierre, 527.

  Bonchurch, 74.

  Borthwick, Algernon, _see_ Glenesk.

  Bothal Castle, 6, 7.

  Boucicault, Dion, 199.

  Boulanger, General, 159.

  Bourboulon, M. de, 330.

  Bowen, Lord Justice, 101.

  Bowles, T. Gibson, 717, 730-1.

  Bowring, Sir John, 344.

  Bradford, Lady, 686.

  Bradshaw, Lieut., 450.

  ——, Mr., 81.

  ——, Mrs., 80-1.

  Braham, Mr., 127-8.

  Brahms, 659, 660.

  Brandt, Herr von, 377, n. 421, 424, 427, 430, 440.

  Brassey, Mr. Albert, 23.

  ——, Earl, 101.

  Bright, John, 535-6, 721.

  Brin, Baron, 433.

  Brinkbourne, Augustine Priory of, 6.

  Brooks, Shirley, 65.

  Brougham and Vaux, Lord, 543.

  Broughton, Lord, 63.

  Browning, Robert, 127, 167, 656, 658.

  Bruce, Sir Frederick, 329 _et sq._, 343, 353, 366.

  Brunet, Captain, 471.

  Brunnow, Baron, 219.

  Buchanan, Sir Andrew, 205.

  ——, Mr. (President of U. S. A.), 138 _et sq._

  Buckle, Henry Thomas, 545, 669, 683.

  Buckstone, John Baldwin, 198.

  Budberg, Baron, 223.

  Bugeaud, Marshal, 568.

  Buitzow, M., 340.

  Bulkeley, Mrs., 125.

  Buller, Charles, 652.

  ——, Colonel, 711.

  Bullock, Commander, 397 _et sq._

  Bunsen, Baron de, 168.

  Burke, Mr., 688-9.

  ——, Sir John Bernard, 2;
    his “Landed Gentry,” 4, 7.

  Burnand, Sir Francis, 74.

  Burne, Mr. H. C., 20.

  Burton, Decimus, 656, 694.

  ——, Lady, 563-4, 574-5.

  ——, Sir Richard, 561 _et sq._

  Bushby, Colonel, 690.

  Byng, Mr., 123.

  Byrne, Mr. Justice, 730.

  Byron, Lord, 60.


  C

  Cagliari case, The, 136-7.

  Caillard, Admiral, 76, 763.

  Calcraft, Henry, 545, 662, 669.

  Callier, M., 429.

  Cambon, M. Paul, 761.

  Cambridge, King’s College, 55.

  Campbell, Sir George, 684.

  ——, Walter, 693.

  ——-Bannerman, Sir Henry, 701.

  Canby, General, 607.

  Carafa, Signor, 137.

  Cardew, Captain, 386.

  Carlos, King of Portugal, 758.

  Carlyle, Mrs., 649, 652 _et sq._

  ——, Thomas, 2, 16, 127, 167, 197-8, 649 _et sq._, 728.

  Carpentier, 121.

  Carruthers, Mr., 635.

  Carson, Sir Edward, 795.

  Carter, Mr., 64.

  Cassel, Sir Ernest, 187, 794.

  Castiglione, Countess, 194.

  Caunt, Ben, 101, 117.

  Cavendish, Lord Frederick, 688-9.

  Cavour, Count, 581, 725.

  Cecil, Lord Robert, 66.

  Chamberlain, Basil, 94.

  ——, Joseph, 116, 719 _et sq._, 723.

  Chanoine, Captain, 378.

  Chaplin, Mr. Henry, 730.

  Charlemagne, 28-9, 35.

  Charles I., 11, 26, 51, 684, 765.

  Charles II., 11-12, 14, 645.

  Charles Edward, Prince (Young Pretender), 707.

  Charles Martel, 29.

  Charlotte of Wales, Princess, 167.

  Chase, Mr., 147-8.

  Chaucer, 94.

  Chaumont, Robert de, 34.

  Chelmsford, Lord, 66, 100.

  Chesterfield, Lady, 680.

  Ch’ien Lung, Emperor of China, 354.

  Chilston, Lord, 715.

  China, 328 _et sq._;
    British Ministers in, 329 _et sq._, 343 _et sq._, 356 _et sq._;
    voyage from Marseilles to, 333 _et sq._;
    Peking, 341 _et sq._;
    antiquities in, 351 _et sq._;
    Prince Regent of, 358 _et sq._;
    the Dowager Empress of, 359 _et sq._;
    winter in Peking, 365, 371;
    foreign interests in, 367-8;
    foreign legations in, 368 _et sq._

  Ching T’ai, Emperor of China, 366.

  Chitty, Mr. Justice, 67.

  Chorley, H. F., 201.

  Chōshiu clan, 379, 387-8, 397, 407, 412, 414, 473.

  ——, Prince of, 416, 459, 482.

  Christian IX., King of Denmark, 238-9, 242-3, 767.

  Churchill, Lady, 173.

  ——, Lord Randolph, 66, 540, 669, 684 _et sq._, 717, 721.

  ——, Winston, 685.

  Circourt, M. de, 53-4.

  Clanwilliam, Third Earl of, 566, 664.

  Clare, John Fitzgibbon, Earl of, 19.

  Clarendon, George Villiers, Earl of, 125, 128, 136-7, 155 _et sq._,
        169, 515, 522 _et sq._, 721.

  ——, Lady, 534.

  Clay, Frederick, 669.

  ——, General Cassius, 226, 273.

  ——, James, 669.

  Clemenceau, Eugene, 177.

  Clementi, Museo, 190.

  Cleveland, Duchess of, her “Battle Abbey Roll,” 2, 4, 6, 7, 9, 27.

  Cloncurry, Valentine-Browne Lawless, Lord, 20-1.

  Clyde, Colin Campbell, Lord, 343.

  Cobden, Richard, 150-1.

  Cockburn, Sir Alexander, 662.

  Cockerell, W. A., 115.

  Coke, Mr. Edward, 711.

  ——, Mr. Henry, 118.

  Coleridge, Edward, 64.

  Collings, Mr. Jesse, 698.

  Colville of Culross, Lord, 519.

  Constantine Nicolaievitch, Grand Duke, 212, 255, 269.

  Contades, Madame de, 43.

  Cook, Captain, 739.

  Cookesley, Mr., 64.

  Cooper, Fenimore, 611, 638.

  Cooper, Miss Gladys, 203.

  Corry, Monty, _see_ Rowton.

  Costa, Sir Michael, 190 _et sq._

  Coventry, Lord, 101-2, 681.

  Cowley, First Lord, 115, 150 _et sq._, 155.

  Cowley, Second Lord (afterwards Earl), 150, 557.

  Crampton, Sir John, 138.

  Craven, Lady Mary, 125.

  Crawley, George, 321.

  Creptovitch, Count, 284.

  Cribb, Tom, 104.

  Crimean War, 90, 194, 546.

  Cruikshank, George, 367.

  Crystal Palace, 78-9, 88.

  Cumberbatch, Mr., 316.

  Currie, Lord, 66, 116.


  D

  Dagmar, Empress of Russia, 238.

  Dainagon, Marquis Tokudaiji, 453.

  ——, Sanjo, 452.

  Dalhousie, Lord, 496.

  Dallas, Mr. (American Minister), 141.

  Dalling, Lord, 149.

  Dante, 780.

  Darling, Mr. Justice, 718.

  Darwin, Charles, 93, 167, 736.

  Daté, Prince (of Uwijima), 446, 448, 456, 459, 462 _et sq._, 468-9.

  Daudet, Alphonse, 332.

  De Bellonet, M., 368-9.

  Delane, John Thadeus, 125, 169, 544, 650.

  Delcassé, 177.

  Delessert, M., 47-8.

  Dent, Mr. John, 331.

  Derby, Lady, 534.

  ——, Lord, 113 _et sq._, 151, 173, 534, 547.

  De Ros, Lord, 696.

  Descharmes, Captain, 378.

  Devey, Mr., 540, 645.

  Devonshire, Duchess of, 125.

  ——, Eighth Duke of, 521, 537, 539, 545 _et sq._, 663, 723.

  Dickens, Charles, 65-6, 91, 129, 166-7, 202, 208, 516 _et sq._, 535-6.

  Dickens, Charles (jun.), 65.

  Dilke, Sir Charles, 721.

  Dillon, Mr. John, 720-1.

  ——, Lord and Lady, 25.

  Disraeli, Isaac, 670.

  ——, Sarah, 670.

  Dmitri Donski, 289, 298.

  Dodgson, Rev. C. L. (Lewis Carrol), 99.

  Dolby, Miss, 192.

  Dolgorouky, Prince and Princess, 205.

  Dorchester, Lord, 429.

  Dorington, Sir John, 713-14.

  D’Orsay, Count, 125, 679.

  Dostoievski, Feodor, 227, 283.

  D’Osuna, Duc, 250, 274.

  Downshire, Lord and Lady, 99.

  Doyle, Richard, 127, 652.

  Drake, Sir Francis, 10.

  Dreyfus, Captain, 378.

  Du Chaillu, Paul, 562.

  Dudley, Georgina, Countess of, 764.

  Duff, Billy and Folly, 104-5.

  Dufferin, Lady, 126.

  ——, Lord, 310, 515.

  Dumas, Alexandre (père), 41-2, 82.

  du Maurier, George, 229.

  Durnford, Francis Edward, 64, 70.

  Dyer, Sir William Thiselton, 736-7.


  E

  Echizen, Prince of, 405.

  Edgar, Miss, 52.

  Edward III., 10.

  Edward VII., 200, 211, 311, 641, 794;
    his wedding, 161-2;
    Sir Sidney Lee’s biography of, 163-4, 171 _et sq._, 176 _et sq._,
        184, 186;
    his early years, 164 _et sq._;
    his tastes and characteristics, 166 _et sq._, 184 _et sq._;
    hospitality at Marlborough House and Sandringham, 169, 170;
    and the Kaiser, 175;
    his popularity in France, 176;
    and the Emperor of Austria, 178-9;
    Coronation postponed, 179, 180;
    his Coronation, 180-1, 758;
    his health, 181 _et sq._;
    his love of England, 183;
    his last illness and death, 186 _et sq._, 676;
    and the Marlborough Club, 519 _et sq._;
    visit of author to, 551 _et sq._;
    and the removal of the Duke of Wellington’s statue, 695 _et sq._;
    attempt on his life, 754-5;
    and Leopold II., King of the Belgians, 755 _et sq._;
    his reception on his visit to Paris after the Boer War, 758 _et
        sq._;
    and the visit of the French Fleet in 1905, 761 _et sq._;
    visits author at Batsford, 764 _et sq._;
    confers honours on author, 766;
    his affection for the Emperor Nicholas, 766 _et sq._

  Edwardes, Sir Fleetwood, 174.

  Edwards, Mr. Sutherland, 214 _et sq._

  Egerton of Tatton, Lord, 189.

  Egmont, John Perceval, Earl of, 22.

  Elcho, Lady, 765.

  ——, Lord, 122, 765.

  Eldon, John Scott, Earl of, 18.

  Elgin, Lord, 329, 346, 368, 381, 698.

  Eliot, George, 167.

  Elizabeth, Queen, 2, 11, 14.

  Ellenborough, Lady, 565-6, 575.

  Ellesmere, Lord, 711.

  Ely, Lady, 173.

  Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 321.

  Enomoto, 471-2.

  Esher, Lord, his book, “The Influence of King Edward,” 163 _et sq._

  Essex, Lady, _see_ Miss Stevens.

  Eton, 50 _et sq._, 87, 210, 371, 510.

  Eugene, Prince Imperial, 673-4.

  Eugenie, Empress of the French, 152, 154, 369, 525, 527, 674, 794.

  Eulenburg, Count, 530.

  Evans, Miss Jennie, 65.

  Exbury, 2, 12, 16, 30.


  F

  Fair, Mr., 627 _et sq._, 637.

  Faithorne, William, 193.

  Fane, Colonel, 341.

  ——, Julian, 557.

  ——, Sir Spencer Ponsonby, 557.

  Farrer, Mr., 18.

  ——, Mrs. Henry, 17-18, 38, 45.

  Favre, Jules, 726.

  Fawcett, Henry, 697.

  Fechter, Charles, 202.

  Fell, Mr., 715-16.

  Ferdinand I., Emperor of Austria, 83-4.

  Feuillet, Octave, 231.

  Fingal, Arthur Plunket, Earl of, 20.

  Fisher, Lord, 761.

  Fitzgerald, Mr. Seymour, 239.

  Fitzmaurice, Lord, 536 _et sq._, 547-8.

  Flahault, Comte de, 331.

  Fleury, General, 243.

  Flower, Charles, 716.

  ——, Edgar, 716.

  Fontanier, Mr., 369, 553.

  Fonvielle, M., 527.

  Forbes, Capt., 617, 621 _et sq._, 637.

  Ford, John, 71.

  Foreign Office, 108 _et sq._, 132, 151, 555, 562, 642, 666, 670.

  Forster, William Edward, 550.

  Fowler, Sir Henry, 723.

  Francis Joseph, Emperor of Austria, 83-4, 178, 538.

  Franks, Sir Augustus, n. 366.

  Frederick, German Emperor, 82, 156, 174, 552.

  Frederick the Great, 770 _et sq._

  Frederick VII., King of Denmark, 242.

  Frederick William I., King of Prussia, 770 _et sq._

  Freeman, Mary, 22.

  ——, Mrs., 22.

  ——, Thomas Edwards, 22-3.

  Freeman-Mitford, Hon. Iris, 739, 769 _et sq._

  Fremantle, Sir Charles, 66.

  French Fleet, visit of, 761 _et sq._

  Frobisher, Sir Martin, 10.

  Froissart’s Chronicles, 70.

  Froude, James Anthony, 167, 650 _et sq._

  Fuad Pasha, 310-11.

  Fuller, Thomas, 2.

  Fulton, William de, 13.


  G

  Gaisford, Dean, 95 _et sq._

  Galitzin, Prince Boris, 288, 291, 297.

  Gamard, Madame, 39.

  Gambetta, Léon, 177.

  Gänsel, Mr., 630.

  Garibaldi, n. 122, 377 _et sq._

  ——, Francesca, 579.

  Garrick, David, 199, 202, 518.

  Gautier, Théophile, 231.

  Gavarni, 107.

  Gent, Miss, 192.

  George I., 770.

  George III., 75, 123, 700, 703.

  George IV., 26, 81, 174.

  George V., 181, 188, 520, 761.

  George, Duke of Cambridge, 62, 699 _et sq._, 732.

  Gerebzoff, M., 290 _et sq._

  Geyer, Ludwig, 776.

  ——, Frau, 776.

  Gibbon, Edward, 156.

  Gifford, Scott, 115.

  Gilbert, W. S., 202.

  Gilbey, Sir Walter, 711, 713.

  Gilpin, Sawrey, 16.

  ——, William, 16.

  Gladstone, William Ewart, 125, 169, 173, 677;
    and Eton, 57;
    and slavery, 142;
    and the Ambassador’s vote, 157;
    and Queen Victoria and Prince of Wales, 165;
    and the protectorate of the Ionian Islands, 325;
    as an after-dinner speaker, 535;
    and Austria, 537-8;
    and Home Rule, 539, 540, 684, 719, 726;
    resigns leadership of the Liberal Party, 547-8;
    once more in power, 549, 697-8;
    his wonderful oratory, 550, 623, 723;
    and the Bulgarian atrocities, 650;
    and Disraeli, 664;
    his letter to the author, 698-9;
    his Government defeated, 715;
    Prime Minister again at eighty-two, 718;
    retires into private life, 724;
    his death, 725.

  Glenesk, Lord, 125, 677.

  Glinka, M., 340, 370.

  Gloster, Colonel, 333, 640.

  Glover, Mr. Thomas, 372.

  Gluck, 778, 781.

  Godfrey, Mr. Herbert, 180.

  Godwin, E. W., 648.

  Goethe, 71, 98, 356.

  Goldsmid, Otto, 197.

  Goltz, Count Karl von der, 82 _et sq._

  ——, Count Robert von der, 83.

  Goodall, Provost, of Eton, 58, 60, 65.

  Goodford, Dr., 56, 65, 77, 90.

  Goodlake, General, 54, 91.

  Gordon, General, 756.

  ——, Rev. Osborne, 98-9, 106.

  Gortchakoff, Prince, 534;
    and the Polish insurrection, 218, 220 _et sq._, 266;
    and Lord Russell, 218, 305;
    his popularity, 228;
    his personal appearance, 229;
    his characteristics, 228 _et sq._, 233;
    and the author, 234-5;
    and Schleswig-Holstein, 235, 238, 240, 244, 274, 793;
    his policy in Central Asia, 245;
    and Lord Granville, 546;
    and Congress of Berlin, 665, 667.

  Goschen, Lord, 686, 730.

  Gosse, Edmund, 68, 573.

  Gounod, 516.

  Gower, Frederick Leveson, 540 _et sq._

  Gramont, Duc de, 158, 332.

  Gramont Caderousse, Duchesse de, 43.

  Grant, Sir Francis, 671.

  ——, Mrs., 611-12.

  ——, Miss, 611-12.

  ——, President, 611-12, 617.

  Granville, Lady (senior), 524.

  ——, Lady, 534.

  ——, Lord, 110, 157-8, 169, 251, 524, 533 _et sq._, 664.

  Graziani, 182.

  Greig, Admiral, 253 _et sq._

  Grévy, President, 158.

  Greville, Mr. Alexander, 75-6.

  ——, Mr. Henry, 47, 81, 542.

  ——, Mr. Charles, 125, 251, 542, 544.

  Grey, Sir Charles, 174.

  Greystoke, Ralph de, 13.

  Grisi, 25, 116, 192, 194-5.

  Gros, Baron, 381.

  Grosvenor, Lady Constance, 125.

  ——, Lord Richard, 539.

  Grote, George, 16.

  Gudzevitch, 258-9.

  Guillard, M., 82.

  Guizot, François, 32, 48, 53.

  Gwillim’s Heraldry, 3.


  H

  Haack, Countess, 83.

  Hahnemann, Christian, 543.

  Haig, Captain, 496.

  Haldane, Lord, 184-5.

  Halifax, Lord, 524, 537.

  Hallé, Sir Charles, 516.

  ——, Lady, 516, 655.

  ——, Lazarus, 655.

  Hamilton, Lord George, 534.

  Hammond, Lord, 109 _et sq._, 515, 526.

  Hanbury, Mr., 717, 730.

  Hare, Sir John, 203.

  Hanotaux, Gabriel, 177.

  Harbord, Hon. William, 204.

  Harbottle, Bella, 13-14.

  Harcourt, Sir William, 172, 663-4, 676, 718, 724, 726 _et sq._

  Hardinge, Sir Charles, 178.

  Hardwicke, Earl of (Lord Lieutenant of Ireland), 21.

  Harold, King, 3.

  Harrison’s Gymnasium, 113-14, 122.

  Hart, Sir Robert, 344 _et sq._

  Harte, Bret, 610.

  Hartington, Marquis of, _see_ Duke of Devonshire.

  Hastings, Marquis of, 514.

  Haussonville, Comte d’, 241.

  Hawtrey, Mr. Charles, n. 50.

  ——, Dr. Edward Craven, 52 _et sq._, 767.

  ——, Mr. John, 50.

  ——, Mrs. John, 50.

  ——, Mr. Stephen, 61.

  Hayashida, 452 _et sq._

  Healy, Mr. Tim, 722-3.

  Heathcote, Mr., 22.

  ——, Mrs., 22.

  Heenan, 104, 117 _et sq._

  Heishirō, Yokoi, 479.

  Henderson, Sir Edmund, 689 _et sq._

  Hêng Chi, 364-5.

  Hennessy, Mr., 224.

  Henry I., 6.

  Henry II., 10.

  Henry III., 6, 12.

  Henry IV., 10.

  Henry V., 11.

  Henry VIII., 644.

  Henry of Prussia, Prince, 796.

  Herbert, Sir Robert, 66.

  Herder, Johan von, 71.

  Heron, Gerald, 10.

  Hertford, Lord, 715.

  Hesse, Louis II., Duke of, 211.

  Heton, Thomas, 13.

  Hewitt, Captain, 113, 397.

  Heyking, Baroness von, 342, 372.

  Hicks Beach, _see_ Lord St. Aldwyn.

  Hidétada, 379.

  Hidéyoshi, 390.

  Hidéyori, 390.

  Hillingdon, Lord, 75.

  Hizen, Prince of, 456, 459, 473.

  Hoare, Prince, 22.

  Hoche, M., 85-6.

  Hodgson, Provost, of Eton, 58 _et sq._, 64, 76-7.

  Holbein, 644, 670.

  Holford, Sir George, 756, 764.

  Holy Land, 558 _et sq._

  Hooker, Sir Joseph, 166, 635, 644, 692, 734 _et sq._

  ——, Lady, 738.

  Hortense, Queen, 331.

  Houghton, Lord, 127, 652.

  House of Commons, 710 _et sq._

  Hsien Fêng, Emperor of China, 360.

  Hugo, Victor, 72, 82, 250, 356.

  Humbert, King of Italy, 754.

  Hunt, Ward, 537, 683.

  Huxley, Thomas, 166.


  I

  Iddesleigh, Lord, 663, 695.

  Ignatieff, General, 149, 367-8.

  Inouyé, Count, 388.

  Irving, Sir Henry, 199.

  Isabella (Queen of Edward III.), 12.

  Isvolsky, M., 768.

  Ito, Prince, 383, 388, 415, 432, 435, 459, 461.

  Ivan the Terrible, 39, 292 _et sq._

  Iwakura, 468.

  Iyémitsu, Shōgun, 379.

  Iyémochi, Shōgun, 377-8, 386.

  Iyéyasu, Shōgun, 379, 380, 390, 422-3, 471.


  J

  Jackson, John, 104.

  ——, R. A., John, 15.

  James I., 11.

  Japan, Mount Fujiama, 374-5;
    sudden earthquake in, 375;
    struggle between the Daimios and the Shōguns, 377, 388, 412 _et
        sq._, 424 _et sq._;
    foundation of the Army and Navy in, 378;
    Castle of Ōsaka, 389 _et sq._, 408;
    the fall of the Tokugawa power in, 379 _et sq._, 390-1;
    Hara-kiri, 391;
    proposed new port for foreign trade, 397 _et sq._, 403 _et sq._;
    picturesque scenery in, 400 _et sq._, 443-4;
    the Shōgun’s address, 421 _et sq._;
    Mr. Longford’s History of, 429 _et sq._;
    Prince Yōdo of Tosa, 437 _et sq._;
    native assault on the crews of the Vénus and Dupleix, 440 _et sq._;
    a tea-house in, 442-3;
    the Mikado holds a reception, 456 _et sq._;
    edict of the new Government, 464-5;
    Christianity in, 466 _et sq._;
    Shintoism in, 467 _et sq._, 497;
    submission of the Daimios to the Mikado, 473 _et sq._;
    announcements from the Kiōto Gazette, 478 _et sq._;
    the new Parliament, 486-7;
    foreign relations of, 487 _et sq._;
    debates in Parliament, 491 _et sq._;
    visit of the Duke of Edinburgh to, 495 _et sq._;
    Austrian mission to, 500 _et sq._;
    Government treatise quoted, 503 _et sq._

  Jelf, Rev. W. E., 91 _et sq._, 97, 101.

  Jersey, Lady, 566.

  Jewsbury, Miss, 654.

  Joachim, n. 378, 516, 655, 659, 660.

  Jocelyn, Lady, 125.

  John, King, 6.

  Johnson, Dr., 7, 68, 133, 165, 519, 563, 669, 708, 787.

  ——, Jack, 121.

  ——, William (afterwards Cory), 64.

  Joinville, Duc de, 33, n. 568.

  Jones, Aaron, 103, 117, 122.

  ——, Inigo, 765.

  Jonson, Ben, 71.

  Jung Lu, 360 _et sq._


  K

  Kaga, Prince of, 397 _et sq._, 402 _et sq._, 459.

  K’ang Hsi, Emperor of China, 367.

  Kant, Emmanuel, 634, 671.

  Károlyi, Count, 537-8.

  Katakazy, M., 229, 266.

  Katsura, 439.

  Kean, Charles, 198.

  Keate, Dr., 56, n. 64, 72.

  Keble, Rev. John, 95.

  Keeley, Mrs., 202.

  ——, Robert, 198.

  Keene, Charles, 647.

  Kembles, The, 198;
    _see also_ Mrs. Sartoris.

  Kendal, Mrs., 202.

  Kennedy, Benjamin Hall, 55.

  Keppel, Sir Henry, 397, 419, 499.

  Kéroualle, Louise de (Duchess of Portsmouth), 683.

  Khalil Pasha, 230-1.

  Kido of Chōshiu, 388.

  Kiel, 236, 239.

  Kimberley, Earl of, 243.

  King, Sir George, 383.

  ——, Tom, 121-2.

  Kinglake, Alexander William, 64, 72, 308, 313, 522, 556, 647.

  Kishiu, Prince of, 498.

  Komei, Mikado, 386-7, 433.

  Kotchoubey, Princess, 211, 230, 233-4, 281.

  Koucheleff-Bezbarodko, Countess, 207-8.

  Kōzō, Nakai, 449 _et sq._, 456.

  Krupp, Herr, 368.

  Kubota, Prince of, 483.

  Kühner, Raphael, 92.

  Kung, Prince Regent, 330, 358 _et sq._, 368.

  Kuzé, Higashi, 433-4, 462 _et sq._, 468.


  L

  Lablache, Luigi, 166, 192.

  Labouchere, Henry, 727.

  L’Aigle, Marquis de, 517.

  Lamartine, Alphonse de, 82, 565.

  Lamballe, Princess de, 35.

  Lamington, Lord, 679.

  Lamoricière, General, 568.

  Landseer, Sir Edwin, 166, 201.

  Langham, Nat, 103-4, 117, 121.

  Langley, Captain, 81.

  Langley, Mrs., 81.

  Lansdowne, Lord, 759.

  Lavalette, 156.

  Law, Mr. Henry, 705.

  Lawrence, Sir Thomas, 24.

  Lawson, Sir Wilfrid, 548.

  Lay, Mr. H. N., 344.

  Lebœuf, General, 332, 528.

  Lee, Sir Sidney, 163, n. 165, 171, 177, 181.

  Leeds, Tenth Duke of, 761.

  Leighton, Sir Frederic, 201, 209, 312, 516-7, 535-6, 655 _et sq._,
        671, 695, 778, 782.

  Lemon, Mark, 65.

  Lenbach, 790-1.

  Lennox, Lord Henry, 683 _et sq._, 703-4.

  Leopold I., King of the Belgians, 155, 167-8.

  Leopold II., King of the Belgians, 754 _et sq._

  Leslie-Anstruther, Mary, _see_ Farrer.

  Lessels, Mr., 705.

  Letac, Marie, 39 _et sq._

  Levassor, 702.

  Leventhorpe, Lieut., 421.

  Lewis, Lady Theresa, 523.

  Lhuys, M. Drouyn de, 223-4, 242.

  Liddell, Dean, 95.

  Liddell and Scott’s Dictionary, 56, 92.

  Li Hung Chang, 368.

  Lincoln, Abraham, 139, 140.

  Lind, Jenny, 115, 196 _et sq._

  Lindsay, Sir Coutts, 673-4.

  ——, Lady, 673.

  ——, Robert, 91.

  Lindsey, Lord, 645.

  Lin Fu (author’s Chinese servant), 399, 411, 551-2.

  Lisburne, Fourth Earl of, 98.

  ——, Fifth Earl of, 98.

  Liszt, Franz, 779, 791.

  Lobanoff, Prince, 675.

  Locock, Mr., 204.

  Loewe, Dr., 239.

  London, Albert Memorial, 691;
    Arlington Street, 87, 89;
    Battersea Park, 705;
    Buckingham Palace, 166, 168, 171, 180, 182, 184, 694, 705, 764;
    Carlton Club, 664, 679;
    Carlton Gardens, 127;
    Chelsea, 644 _et sq._;
    Constitution Hill, 88;
    Downing Street, 108, 132, 151, 555, 562, 642, 666, 670, 708-9;
    Hanway Street, 329;
    Holland House, 180, 194;
    Hyde Park, 128, 656, 691 _et sq._;
    King Street, 76;
    Marlborough Club, 170-1, 519 _et sq._, 767;
    Marlborough House, 169, 171, 695;
    National Gallery, 74, 658;
    Natural History Museum, 635;
    Panton Street, 113;
    Piccadilly, 87;
    Prince of Wales Theatre, 203;
    Royal Academy, 209, 657;
    Saint James’ Club, 126, 728;
    Saint James’ Park, 705;
    Saint James’ Street, 640;
    Saint Paul’s, 209, 657, 676;
    South Audley Street (birth-place of author), 30;
    Stafford House, 53;
    Travellers’ Club, 534;
    Tower of, 705;
    Victoria and Albert Museum, 74;
    Westminster Abbey, 180-1, 676;
    White’s Club, 519;
    Whitehall, 690.

  Londonderry, Lady, 566.

  Long, Mr. Walter, 730.

  Longford, Professor, 380-1, 429 _et sq._, 466.

  Lonsdale, Lord, 713.

  Lothrop, Mr., 637.

  Loti, Pierre, 328-9.

  Louis XVI., 34.

  Louis of Bavaria, King, 789.

  Louis Philippe, King of the French, 31-2, 49, 129.

  Lowe, Governor, 594, 637.

  Lowell, Russell, 200.

  Luart, Marquis du, 251.

  Luttrell, Henry, 541.

  Luzy, Mlle. de., 47-8.

  Lynch, Judge, 610, 626.

  Lyndhurst, Lord, 680-1.

  Lyons, Second Lord, 114, 131 _et sq._, 527, 557.

  Lyte, Sir Henry Maxwell, his “History of Eton College,” 55-6, 60,
        63-4.

  Lytton, Lord (afterwards Earl), 116, 127-8, 557, 668-9.


  M

  Macaulay, Lord, 125, 127, 669.

  McCarthy, Mr. Justin, 723.

  McCook, Governor, 611, 617 _et sq._

  Macdonald, James, 680.

  Mace, Jem, 121.

  Mackay, John, 627, 631, 637.

  Macmahon, Maréchal, 75, 158.

  Macmillan, Messrs., 554-5.

  Macready, William Charles, 198.

  Maéda, House of, 399.

  Malakoff, Duc de, 126-7.

  Malet, Sir Edward, 150, 160.

  Malmesbury, Fourth Earl of, 137, 346.

  Manchester, Duchess of, _see_ Devonshire.

  Manners, Lord John, 678, 695, 703.

  Manning, Cardinal, 24.

  Manteuffel, Otho von, 83-4.

  Margherita, Queen of Italy, 195.

  Marie, Empress of Russia, 211, 282, 285.

  Marie Antoinette, Queen of France, 34-5.

  Mario, 116, 192 _et sq._, 522.

  Marlowe, Christopher, 71.

  Marochetti, Baron, 201.

  Marshall, Colonel, 564.

  Martin, John, 645.

  Marwitz, Fräulein von, 772.

  Mas, M. de., 364.

  Massignac, M. de, 241.

  Massinger, Philip, 71.

  Mason, Mr., 143 _et sq._

  Mathews, Charles, 112, 123, 198.

  Maupas, 331.

  Maximilian, Emperor of Mexico, 31.

  Maxwell, Sir Herbert, 123.

  Mayerne, Sir Theodore, 645.

  Meade, Sir Robert, 115, 546.

  Medjwal, Sheik, 566.

  Melbourne, Lord, 173, 183.

  Menken, Ada Isaac, 122.

  Mercier, M., 147.

  Meredith, George, 655.

  Mesnil, Marquise de, 35.

  Meyer, Baron, 681.

  Meyerbeer, 191.

  Mezzofanti, Cardinal, 563.

  Middleton, Sir Gilbert de, 12, 13.

  ——, Sir William, 129, 130.

  Mikhail Feodorovitch, 293.

  Millais, Sir John, 209 _et sq._, 539.

  ——, Lady, 209.

  Miliutin, General, 266.

  Mills, Sir Charles, 75.

  ——, Mr. D. O., 632, 637.

  Milner, Lord, 729.

  Milton, John, 94, 780.

  Mitchell, Mr. Sydney, 707.

  Mitford, Anthony (of Ponteland), 11.

  ——, Bertram, 11, 29.

  ——, Bertram (Squire of Mitford), 17.

  ——, Castle of, 3 _et sq._

  ——, Cawen, 11, 29.

  ——, Cuthbert, 11, 29.

  ——, Edward, 4.

  ——, Elizabeth, 15, 22.

  ——, Frances, 17-18.

  ——, Lady Georgina (mother of author), 2, 25, 38 _et sq._

  ——, R.N., Capt. Henry, 17 _et sq._, 29.

  ——, Henry Reveley (father of author), 2, 16 _et sq._, 24 _et sq._,
        29, 30, 33-4, 37 _et sq._, 64, 77, 79, 81, 251, 680.

  ——, Sir John de (_circa_ 1066), 4, 5, 7.

  ——, Sir John de (_circa_ 1369), 10, 11.

  ——, Sir John de (_circa_ Henry VI.), 11.

  ——, John (_circa_ 1740), 15, 29.

  ——, John, _see_ Redesdale.

  ——, John (merchant), 12, 14 _et sq._, 29.

  ——, Col. John Philip, 14.

  ——, Louisa, 17-18.

  ——, Mary, _see_ Farrer.

  ——, Percy, 189 _et sq._

  ——, Philadelphia, 13.

  ——, Robert (_circa_ Elizabeth), 11, 29.

  ——, Robert (_circa_ Charles II.), 11-12, 29.

  ——, Thomas, 11.

  ——, Sibella, _see_ Bertram.

  ——, Sir William de (_circa_ Henry V.), 10, 11.

  ——, William, 12, 15, 29.

  ——, William (historian), 15 _et sq._, 29.

  Mito, Lord of, 379, 386.

  Molesworth, Lady, 517 _et sq._

  ——, Sir William, 519.

  Moltke, General von, 110, 156, 529, 531.

  Molyneux, 104.

  Monson, Sir Edward, 759.

  Montagu, Olivier, 586 _et sq._

  Montebello, Marquis de, 225, 502-3.

  Montgomery, Alfred, 125, 342, 534, 543-4, 612, 680.

  Montpensier, Duc de, 32, 158.

  Moore, Lionel, 109.

  More, Sir Thomas, 10, 644.

  Morier, 55.

  Morley, Lord (of Blackburn), 15, 101, 669, 698, 718, 723-4.

  Morny, Duc de, 331 _et sq._, 545.

  Moustiers, M. de, 310.

  Mozart, 659, 777-8, 781, 788.

  Mozin, Charles and Theodore, 42-3.

  Muhijeddin, Sidi, 567.

  Mulert, Pastor, 529.

  Muravieff, General, 214 _et sq._, 221.

  Murchison, Sir Roderick, 562.

  Murray, Mr. John, 217.

  ——, Leigh, 198.

  Mutsu Hito, Emperor of Japan, 387, 391, 393, 408, 432-3, 445 _et
        sq._, 454 _et sq._, 467 _et sq._, 495 _et sq._, 750, 765.


  N

  Napier, Lord, 206-7, 213, 218, 222 _et sq._, 240, 243 _et sq._,
        253-4, 268, 272, 305-6, 524, 557.

  ——, Lady, 206-7, 225, 229, 273, 305.

  Napoleon, Prince, 152 _et sq._

  ——, n. 64, 290, 542.

  Napoleon III., 49, 127, 152 _et sq._, 174, 242, 331 _et sq._, 521-2,
        525, 527 _et sq._, 569, 581, 793-4.

  Nattier, 22.

  Neale, Colonel, 375, 385.

  Neilson, Adelaide, 201.

  Nelson, Mr., 305.

  Nemours, Duc de, 33, n. 568.

  Nesselrode, Count, 233, 284.

  Neville, Lady Dorothy, 612-13.

  Newcastle, Fifth Duke of, 57, 125, 140.

  Newman, Cardinal, 95.

  Newton, First Lord, 114, 131 _et sq._, 153.

  Ney, Marshal, 126.

  Nicholas, Grand Duke, 285.

  Nicholas I., Emperor of Russia, 211-12, 221, 252 _et sq._, 263-4,
        295, 555-6.

  Nicholas II., Emperor of Russia, 178, 675, 766 _et sq._

  Nickalls, Tom, 587, 602 _et sq._

  Noel, Mr. Gerard, 686 _et sq._, 694-5.

  Nogi, General, 391, 422.

  Noguchi (Sir Ernest Satow’s servant), 399, 407.

  Noir, Victor, 527.

  Norfolk, Duchess of, 148.

  Normanby, Lord, 135-6.

  Northcote, Sir Stafford, _see_ Lord Iddesleigh.

  Northumberland, Hugh, Duke of, 18, 26.

  Norton, Hon. Mrs., 126.

  Novalis, 71.

  Novello, Clara, 192.

  Novikoff, M., 272.


  O

  O’Connor, Mr. T. P., n. 674.

  O’Donnell, Mr., 632.

  Offenbach, 331, 410, 526, 756.

  Office of Works, 683 _et sq._

  O’Flanagan, 19.

  Oliphant, Lawrence, 1, 2, 125, 189, 357, 374.

  Olliffe, Sir Joseph, 37, 331 _et sq._

  Ollivier, Emile, 332, 527-8.

  ——, Olivier, 336.

  Olmütz, 83-4.

  Omar Pasha, 310.

  O’Neill, Miss, 201.

  Oom, Dolly, 111-12.

  Oriolla, Countess, 83.

  Orléans, Duc d’, 33, n. 568.

  Ormonde, Lord, 761.

  Orsay, Count d’, 543.

  Osborne, Admiral Sherard, 344, 374, 499.

  ——, Bernal, 125, 129, 523, 534.

  —— Palace, 168.

  Oseraie, Madame (The Bras d’Or), 41-2.

  Outrey, M., 472.

  Overbeck, Baron, 333-4, 640 _et sq._

  Owen, Samuel, 22.

  ——, Sir Richard, 564.

  Oxford, All Souls, 96;
    Christ Church, 92, 95, 97 _et sq._;
    King’s, 95;
    Merton, 60.

  Oyama, Field Marshal Prince, 374.


  P

  Pahlen, Count Nicholas, 126.

  Palladius, Archimandrite, 367-8, 370.

  Palmerston, Lady, 124 _et sq._, 534, 566.

  ——, Lord, 118, 124, 173, 239 _et sq._, 241-2, 311, 325, 525, 534,
        547.

  Paramour, Mrs., 51.

  Parkes, Sir Harry, 375, 402, 406-7, 421, 424, 464, 470, 691;
    his limited education, 94, 358, 376;
    the rivalry between M. Léon Roches and, 376, 472;
    and the residence of the Legation in Japan, 383 _et sq._, 415-16;
    visits the Shōgun, 393 _et sq._, 418;
    and the proposed new Japanese port, 398 _et sq._;
    and the Icarus murders, 409, 411;
    visits the Prince of Awa, 410;
    and the native attack on the Foreign Ministers, 429 _et sq._;
    and the Sakai tragedy, 444, 446;
    invited to an audience of the Emperor, 447-8;
    a street attack on the Legation, 449 _et sq._;
    visits the Mikado, 456 _et sq._;
    and the Duke of Edinburgh’s visit to Japan, 495 _et sq._

  Pasca, 513.

  Patti, Madame Adelina, 192.

  Paul, Emperor of Russia, 246, 255, 278-9.

  Paxton, Sir Joseph, 79.

  Peacock, Mr., 449.

  Peel, Bart., Sir Robert, 173, 545, 657, 662, 679, 681.

  ——, Lady Emily, 545.

  Pélissier, General, n. 568.

  Pembroke, Adomar de Valence, Earl of, 13.

  Pennell, Croker, 115.

  Perceval, Lady Frances, _see_ Redesdale.

  ——, Right Hon. Spencer, 22-3.

  Percy, Lady Charlotte, _see_ Ashburnham.

  ——, Lord, 8 _et sq._

  ——, Thomas (Bishop of Dromore), 7.

  Perry, Commodore, 380.

  Persigny, Duc de, 126, 331, 527 _et sq._

  ——, Duchesse de, 126.

  Peter the Great, 233, 257, 294, 299, 367.

  Petit Thouars, Captain du, 440 _et sq._, 446-7, 463, 470, 472.

  Petz, Admiral, 500 _et sq._

  Phelps, Samuel, 198.

  Philip II. of Spain, 250.

  Phillips, Andy, 595 _et sq._

  ——, Mr., 641-2.

  ——, Sir Claude, 641.

  Phipps, Sir Charles, 174.

  Piatti, Signor, 517, 655.

  Pichon, 177.

  Pierce, Mr. (President of U. S. A.), 138.

  Pigott, Mr., 672-3.

  Pius IX., 282, 284.

  Planché, James R., 123, 201.

  Planer, Minna, 779.

  Plessen, Baron, 274-5.

  Plumer, Sir Thomas, 18.

  Plumptre, Mr., 63.

  Plunket, Lord, 20.

  ——, Mr., 697.

  Poe, Edgar Allan, 659.

  Poland, _see_ Russia.

  Polissador, 258.

  Polo, Marcus, 370.

  Polsbroek, M. de Graef van, 432.

  Pomaré (ex-Queen of Tahiti), 32.

  Pommier, M., 44.

  Ponsonby, George (Lord Chancellor of Ireland), 21.

  ——, Sir Henry, 99, 174, 690 _et sq._, 698, 706, 724.

  Poole, Mr., 543.

  Pope, Alexander, 5, 208, 774-5.

  Poschinger, 666.

  Praslin, Duc and Duchesse de, 47 _et sq._

  Prinsep, Val, 127.

  Probyn, Sir Dighton, 182, 341.

  Puschkin, Alexander, 263-4.

  Pusey, Dr., 95.


  Q

  Quain, Dr., 515.

  Quaritch, Mr., 27.

  Quin, M.D., Frederick, 125, 534, 542-3.

  Quitry, Felix de Chaumont, 34.

  ——, Marquis de Chaumont, 34-5.

  ——, Odon de Chaumont, 34.


  R

  Raeburn, Sir William, 654.

  Raleigh, Sir Walter, 10, 635.

  Ralston, Mr., 630 _et sq._, 637.

  Randall, Dr. (Archbishop of Canterbury), 187.

  Ranelagh, Lord, 122-3.

  Rauzan, Duchesse de, 37, 43.

  Reade, Charles, 201.

  Reavis, Mr., 590.

  Redcliffe, Lord Stratford de, 308, 311, 555 _et sq._

  Redern, Count, 252.

  Redesdale of Redesdale, First Baron (cr. 1902), Algernon Bertram
        Freeman-Mitford;
    his descent, 1 _et sq._;
    family reminiscences, 15 _et sq._;
    his descent traced from Charlemagne, 28-9;
    his birth, 30;
    early life in France, 30 _et sq._;
    recollections of the French Court, 31 _et sq._;
    life at Trouville, 37 _et sq._;
    the Praslin tragedy, 47 _et sq._;
    early days at Eton, 50 _et sq._;
    on Dr. Hawtrey, 52 _et sq._, 76-7;
    on the teaching at Eton, 55 _et sq._;
    his contemporaries at Eton, 65 _et sq._;
    on Swinburne, 68 _et sq._;
    visits the Great Exhibition, 78-9;
    goes to Coblenz, 80 _et sq._;
    on the German Court at Coblenz, 81 _et sq._;
    the Duke of Wellington’s funeral, 87 _et sq._;
    leaves Eton, 90;
    preparing for Oxford, 90 _et sq._;
    enters Christ Church, 97;
    impressions of Oxford celebrities, 96 _et sq._;
    contemporaries at Oxford, 100 _et sq._;
    on boxing, 103 _et sq._, 117 _et sq._;
    farewell to Oxford, 106-7;
    at the Foreign Office, 108 _et sq._;
    in the African department, 111 _et sq._;
    in the French department, 115 _et sq._;
    his colleagues, 115 _et sq._;
    on the Volunteer movement, 122-3;
    Lady Palmerston’s parties, 124 _et sq._;
    on smoking, 128-9;
    his review of Lord Newton’s “Life of Lord Lyons,” 130 _et sq._;
    on King Edward, 161 _et sq._;
    and Mr. Percy Mitford, 189, 190;
    on Music and the Drama, 190 _et sq._;
    on Sir Michael Costa’s conducting, 190 _et sq._;
    great singers in the sixties, 192 _et sq._;
    on bygone great actors and actresses, 198 _et sq._;
    life in Russia, 204 _et sq._;
    the journey to St. Petersburg, 204 _et sq._;
    first impressions of Lord Napier, 206-7;
    on Thackeray, 208-9;
    presented to the Emperor Alexander II., 210-11;
    on the Polish insurrection, 212 _et sq._;
    recollections of Alexander II., 227-8;
    on Prince Gortchakoff, 228 _et sq._;
    description of Princess Kotchoubey’s palace, 230, 233-4;
    on the German annexation of Schleswig-Holstein, 235 _et sq._,
        274-5, 305-6, 793;
    describes Court functions at the Winter Palace, 246 _et sq._;
    on the Emperor Nicholas I., 252 _et sq._;
    on Russian customs, 259 _et sq._;
    on the emancipation of the serfs, 264 _et sq._;
    Society at the Embassy, 272 _et sq._;
    describes Holy Week ceremonies, 276 _et sq._;
    the attack of Pope Pius IX. on the Tsar’s policy in Poland, 282 _et
        sq._;
    Spring parade described, 285-6;
    on Moscow, 287 _et sq._;
    meets M. Gerebzoff, 290 _et sq._;
    describes the Kremlin, 292-3, 297-8;
    history of St. Sergius, 298 _et sq._;
    visits the Lavra Monastery, 299 _et sq._;
    home again, 306;
    leaves England for the East, 307 _et sq._;
    first impressions, 308;
    describes the Sultan’s visit to the mosque, 309, 310;
    at the Dardanelles, 311 _et sq._;
    a week at Smyrna, 316-17;
    an excursion to the monument of Sesostris, 317 _et sq._;
    a visit to Ephesus described, 320 _et sq._;
    on the British occupation of the Greek Islands, 325 _et sq._;
    and Sir Frederick Bruce, 329 _et sq._;
    leaves England for China, 331;
    on the Duc de Morny, 331 _et sq._;
    the voyage described, 333 _et sq._, 339 _et sq._;
    on missionaries in China, 337 _et sq._;
    arrival at Peking, 343;
    on Sir Thomas Wade, 343-4, 347-8;
    on Sir Robert Hart, 345-6;
    studies Chinese, 350-1;
    visits the temples, tombs, etc., 351 _et sq._;
    on Sir Rutherford Alcock, 356 _et sq._;
    on Prince Kung (Prince Regent), 358 _et sq._;
    his account of the Empress-Dowager, 359 _et sq._;
    visits a Chinese bookseller, 365-6;
    rambles in Peking, 366-7;
    on English and Russian interests in China, 367-8;
    New Year celebrations, 370;
    springtime in Peking, 371-2;
    leaves Peking for Japan, 372;
    first impressions of Japan, 374;
    his account of the rivalry between Sir Harry Parkes and M. Léon
        Roches, 376 _et sq._;
    sketches on the Shōgun rule in Japan, 377 _et sq._, 386 _et sq._;
    struggle between Shōguns and Daimios, 377, 388, 412 _et sq._, 424
        _et sq._;
    a Yokohama house-warming, 381;
    a sudden fire, 381 _et sq._;
    at Yedo, 383 _et sq._;
    attends reception by the Shōgun, 389, 395-6;
    describes the Castle of Ōsaka, 389 _et sq._, 408;
    returns to Yedo, 397;
    a conference to discuss trading rights, 397-8;
    sent by Sir Harry Parkes to Kanazawa, 398 _et sq._;
    journey described, 399 _et sq._;
    an old Japanese legend, 400-1;
    his reception at Kanazawa, 402 _et sq._;
    his journey to Ōsaka, 404 _et sq._;
    has a narrow escape, 406 _et sq._;
    and the _Icarus_ murders, 409, 411;
    visits the Prince of Awa, 410-11;
    rejoicings in Ōsaka, 414;
    again visits the Shōgun, 418-19;
    a perilous excursion to the _Rodney_, 419 _et sq._;
    gives the Shōgun’s address in full, 421 _et sq._;
    obliged to fly from Ōsaka, 425 _et sq._;
    established at Hiōgo, 428;
    and the unwarrantable attack at Hiōgo, 428 _et sq._;
    goes with Dr. Willis to visit Prince Yōdo, 435 _et sq._;
    visits to a tea house described, 442-3;
    invitation from the Mikado, 447;
    describes a street attack on the Legation, 449 _et sq._;
    received by the Mikado, 456 _et sq._;
    at Ōsaka, 462 _et sq._;
    rejoins Sir Harry Parkes, 471;
    assists at the reception of the Duke of Edinburgh on his visit to
        Japan, 495 _et sq._;
    and the Austrian mission to Japan, 500 _et sq._;
    author leaves Japan, 502;
    meets old friends in Paris, 512 _et sq._;
    in London, 514 _et sq._;
    his first book, “Tales of Old Japan,” 515, 554-5;
    reminiscences of Adelaide Kemble, 516;
    and the Marlborough Club, 519 _et sq._;
    and the Villiers family, 523 _et sq._;
    on the Franco-Prussian war, 525 _et sq._;
    recollections of Lord Granville and Mr. Gladstone, 533 _et sq._;
    on some orators and after-dinner speakers, 534 _et sq._;
    memories of the 1880 Cabinet, 537 _et sq._;
    visits to Abergeldie, 551;
    dines at Balmoral, 552 _et sq._;
    resigns diplomatic work, 555;
    on some members of the Diplomatic Service, 555 _et sq._;
    visits Damascus, 558 _et sq._;
    on Sir Richard Burton, 562 _et sq._;
    visits Lady Ellenborough, 565-6;
    sketch of Abd el Kader, 566 _et sq._;
    at Damascus twenty years after, 574 _et sq._;
    his impressions of Garibaldi, 577 _et sq._;
    goes to America, 586 _et sq._;
    impressions of American cities, 587 _et sq._;
    hunting buffalo, 593 _et sq._;
    recollections of Brigham Young and Salt Lake City, 614 _et sq._;
    the romance of the black opal, 640 _et sq._;
    betrothal and marriage, 642 _et sq._;
    appointed secretary to Board of Works, 642, 683;
    memories of Chelsea, 644 _et sq._;
    his friendship with the Carlyles, 649 _et sq._;
    on some famous artists and musicians, 654 _et sq._;
    recollections of Lord Beaconsfield, 661 _et sq._;
    on Lord Randolph Churchill, 684 _et sq._;
    and the Fenian activities, 688 _et sq._;
    visits Ballater to discuss the projected underground railway with
        the Queen, 691 _et sq._;
    and the removal of the Duke of Wellington’s arch, 694 _et sq._;
    resigns his secretaryship to the Board of Works, 698-9;
    on the Duke of Cambridge, 699 _et sq._;
    past days at the Office of Works, 703 _et sq._;
    and the care of the Parks, 705-6;
    and the rebuilding of the “Mercat” Cross, 706 _et sq._;
    settles at Batsford, 710 _et sq._;
    interests himself in horse breeding, 710 _et sq._;
    enters Parliament, 716 _et sq._;
    three years in the House of Commons, 716 _et sq._;
    publishes “The Bamboo Garden,” 734;
    his friendship with Sir Joseph Hooker, 734 _et sq._;
    visits Ceylon for the second time, 739 _et sq._;
    explores the buried city of Anuradhapura, 741 _et sq._;
    and the attempted assassination of the Prince and Princess of
        Wales, 754-5;
    a talk with King Leopold, 756-7;
    celebrates his silver wedding, 758;
    and King Edward’s visits abroad, 758 _et sq._;
    and the visit of the French fleet in 1905, 761 _et sq._;
    visited by King Edward at Batsford, 761 _et sq._;
    goes to Bayreuth, 769 _et sq._;
    Court life at Bayreuth, 770 _et sq._;
    on Wagner, 775 _et sq._;
    visits Frau Wagner, 791-2;
    England and Germany, 794-6.

  ——, Clementine, Lady, 29, 642 _et sq._

  ——, Frances, Lady, 22.

  ——, John, First Lord, 15, 18 _et sq._

  ——, John Thomas Freeman-Mitford, Earl of, 22 _et sq._, 91, 114,
        515, 698, 709.

  Redmond, Mr. John, 722.

  Reinack, M., 241.

  Reeve, Mr. Henry, 544.

  Reeves, Sims, 192.

  Reid, Whitelaw, 632, 637.

  Reveley, Willy, 15.

  Reynolds, Sir Joshua, 22, 25, 645, 670.

  Ricardo, Mr. Lewis, 16.

  Richard II., 10.

  Richardson, Mr., 375, n. 490.

  Richmond, Sixth Duke of, 703.

  Richter, Dr. Hans, 191.

  Rigby, Sir John, 731.

  Roberts, Lord, 66, 175.

  Robertson, Mrs. Russell, 462.

  ——, Tom, 203.

  Robespierre, 34.

  Robson, Frederick, 199, 202.

  Roche, Sir Boyle, 732.

  Rochefort, Duc de, 527.

  Roches, M. Léon, 376 _et sq._, 417, 428-9, 433-4, 441, 444, 446 _et
        sq._, 472.

  Rogers, Sam, 117.

  ——, Samuel, 541.

  Romney, George, 22.

  Ronconi, 192.

  Roon, Von, 529, 532.

  Rosebery, Lady, 681.

  ——, Lord, 66, 159, 173, 685, 697, 707, 725.

  Ross, Sir James, 755.

  Rossetti, D. G., 647-8, 654-5.

  Rossini, 781, 785.

  Rothschild, Baroness Alphonse de, 125.

  ——, Sir Anthony de, 129.

  ——, Baron Lionel de, 545, 662.

  ——, Baron Meyer de, 681.

  Rous, Admiral, 713.

  Rowton, Lord, 661, 669, 676, 703.

  Roxburghe, Duchess of, 693.

  Ruggles, Mr. and Mrs., 595-6, 609.

  Ruskin, John, 99, 167.

  Russell, John, 22.

  ——, Lord John (afterwards Earl), 173;
    and the Duke of Wellington, 88;
    his appearance, 125;
    and the disturbance with America in 1861, 131, 140 _et sq._, 165;
    his despatches revised by Queen Victoria, 144, 183;
    and Lord Lyons, 148;
    and the Polish insurrection, 217 _et sq._;
    and the German annexation of Schleswig-Holstein, 238 _et sq._, 306,
        533;
    and the Ionian Islands, 325, 327;
    rivalry between Lord Palmerston and, 547;
    and Lord Beaconsfield’s novels, 667;
    his great speech in 1832, 716.

  ——, Lord Odo, 666.

  ——, Sir William Howard, 169, 577 _et sq._, 584.

  Russia, 204 _et sq._;
    the Winter Palace, St. Petersburg, 210-11, 246 _et sq._;
    the Polish insurrection, 212 _et sq._;
    Lord Salisbury on Poland, 217;
    Lord Russell’s policy with Poland, 217 _et sq._;
    winter in St. Petersburg, 232-3, 243;
    New Year ceremonies in, 233-4;
    love of the Russians for, 234-5;
    Nicholas I., 252 _et sq._;
    murder and crime in St. Petersburg, 257 _et sq._;
    piety of the Russians, 260;
    liberation of the serfs by Alexander II. in Poland and, 264 _et
        sq._;
    pre-Lenten days in, 269 _et sq._;
    breaking up of the Neva, 275-6;
    Holy Week in St. Petersburg, 276 _et sq._;
    Spring parades in St. Petersburg, 285-6;
    Moscow, 287 _et sq._;
    the Kremlin, 289 _et sq._;
    the Lavra Monastery, 299 _et sq._

  Rutland, Duke of, n. 695.

  Rylands, Mr. Peter, 684.


  S

  Sadayasu, Prince of Unshiu, 476 _et sq._

  Saigo, General, 391, 415.

  St. Albans, Ninth Duke of, 706.

  St. Aldwyn, Lord, 66, 100, 723, 730.

  St. Arnaud, Jacques de, 337, 568.

  St. Germans, Lord, 115.

  St. Petersburg, _see_ Russia.

  Salisbury, Lord, 131, 173, 556;
    at Eton, 66;
    attends the Congress of Berlin, 158;
    his offer to Lord Lyons, 159;
    his articles on Poland and the Danish duchies, 217, 238 _et sq._;
    and Lord Russell, 217, 219, 220;
    and Sir Robert Hart, 345;
    and Li Hung Chang, 368;
    Sir George Wombwell on, 685-6;
    his Government in 1885, 697;
    his Government turned out, 716;
    his interest in science, 736.

  Salt Lake City, 614 _et sq._

  Salting, George, 74 _et sq._

  Sammi, Funabashi, 484.

  Samurai, The, 384, 430 _et sq._, 449, 452, 455-6.

  Samurō, Ishikawa, 452.

  Sand, Mme. Georges, 231.

  Sanderson, Lord, 66, 114, 116.

  Sandringham, 169, 183, 764.

  Santley, Charles, 192.

  Sartoris, Greville, 513.

  ——, Mrs. (Adelaide Kemble), 516-17, 656.

  Satow, Sir Ernest, 424;
    a great Orient scholar, 94;
    his friendship with the author, 373;
    in the Legation at Japan with the author, 373 _et sq._;
    his great ability and tactfulness, 377;
    at Yokohama, 381 _et sq._;
    a visit to the Shōgun, 393 _et sq._;
    a journey to Kanazawa with the author, 397 _et sq._;
    the flight from Ōsaka, 426 _et sq._;
    with Dr. Willis, 435;
    and the native attack on the Legation, 449 _et sq._

  Satsuma clan, 379, 387, 389, 398, 407, 409, 412, 414 _et sq._, 424
        _et sq._, 428, 435, 473.

  ——, Prince of, _see_ Shimadzu Saburō.

  Saunderson, Col., 719, 723.

  Saurin, 340-1, 347-8.

  Savarin, Brillat, 309.

  Savile, John Lumley, Lord, 207.

  Sayers, Tom, 103-4, 117 _et sq._

  Schenk, General, 621-2.

  Schiller, 71.

  Schimmelmann, Major, 85.

  Schlegel, August von, 71.

  Schleswig-Holstein, 236 _et sq._

  Schliemann, 671.

  Schönerstedt, Herr, 51.

  Schopenhauer, 784, 790.

  Schumann, Clara, 655.

  Schuvaloff, Count, 233.

  ——, Count Peter, 233, 664-5.

  Scott, Sir Walter, 71, 164, 296, 551, 567, 707.

  ——, Sir William Bell, 654.

  Sebastiani, Marshal, 47.

  Selwyn, Bishop, 57.

  Senior, Mr. Nassau, 645-6.

  Seward, Mr., 131, 139 _et sq._, 144 _et sq._

  Seymour, Sir Hamilton, 256, 556-7.

  Shaftesbury, Sixth Earl of, 23.

  ——, Seventh Earl of, 52, 124, 162.

  ——, Lady, 124-5.

  Shakespeare, 69, 71, 94, 198, 314, 321, 778-80.

  Shao Hsing, Emperor of China, 369.

  Shaw-Lefevre, George John, 687-8, 694, 697.

  Sheffield, Mr., 150, 160.

  Sheil, Richard Lalor, 19.

  Sherbrooke, Lord (Robert Lowe), 125, 463, 534, 633-4, 671.

  Shih, Emperor of China, 353.

  Shimadzu Saburō, Prince of Satsuma, 416, 424, 438, 459.

  Shōjirō, Gotō, 408-9, 411, 415 _et sq._, 439, 441, 448 _et sq._, 456.

  Siddons, Mrs., 201, 516.

  Siebold, Mr. von, 483.

  Slidell, Mr., 143 _et sq._

  Smith, Joseph, 614 _et sq._

  ——, Sydney, 541.

  ——, Right Hon. W. H., 534, 704.

  Somerset, Duchess of, 126.

  Southesk, Lord, 643.

  Spencer, Lord, 537, 724.

  Spenser, Edmund, 71.

  Spurgeon, Charles, 98-9.

  Stafford, Lady, 545.

  ——, Lord, 321, 545.

  Stamford, Lord, 543.

  Stamfordham, Lord, 174.

  Stanford, Mr., 618.

  Stanhope, Capt. Chandos Scudamore, 419, 429.

  ——, Lady Hester, 565.

  Stanley, Lady Augusta, 173.

  ——, Dean, 677-8.

  ——, Lord, _see_ Derby.

  —— of Alderley, Lady, 25.

  —— of Alderley, Lord, 29, 659.

  Steinäcker, Herr von, 85.

  Steinberger, Colonel, 617, 620.

  Stephen, Sir James Fitzjames, 649.

  Stephens, Beauty, 116.

  Stephenson, Admiral Sir Henry, 419 _et sq._

  ——, Sir William, 703.

  Stepney, Sir Arthur Cowell, 307.

  Sternberg, Count Ungern, 324-5.

  Stevens, Miss, 201.

  Stirling, Mrs., 201-2.

  Stockmar, Baron, 167-8.

  Stowe, Mrs. Beecher, 141.

  Strangford, Lord, n. 674, 679.

  Stratheden, Lord, 696.

  Stuart, Mr., 148.

  ——, Mr. William, 309.

  Sturt, Napier, 104.

  Sumner, Mr., 148.

  Sutherland, Harriet, Duchess of, 173, 578.

  Suvoroff, Prince, 208, 215, 221, 269.

  Swinburne, Admiral, 68 _et sq._

  ——, Algernon Charles, 68 _et sq._, 76, 164, 654-5, 658.

  ——, Lady Jane, 68 _et sq._, 72.

  Sydney, Earl, 664.

  Sztreletzki, Count, 126.


  T

  Taifu, Kuabari, 484.

  Taiko, Sama, 390.

  Talleyrand, M. de, 241-2.

  Talma, François, 197-8.

  Tamatsu, Sonoda, 493.

  Taylor, Sir John, 694.

  ——, Tom, 201.

  Teck, Duke and Duchess of, 541, 702.

  Tempest, Miss Marie, 203.

  Temple, Mr. Cowper, 705.

  ——, William, Archbishop of Canterbury, 181.

  Tennent, Sir James Emerson, 745.

  Tenniel, Sir John, 685.

  Tennyson, Lord, 127, 166, 347.

  Tenterden, Lord, 66.

  Terry, Ellen, 201.

  ——, Miss Kate, 202.

  Thackeray, W. M., 127, 166, 208 _et sq._, 518, 584, 652, 770.

  Thalbitzer, Lieutenant, 386.

  Thesiger, Alfred, _see_ Chelmsford.

  Thiers, Louis, 49, n. 674.

  Thirlwall, Connop, 16.

  Thomas, Mr., 337 _et sq._

  Thun, Count, 84.

  Thynne, Francis, 2.

  ——, Lady Sophia, _see_ Ashburnham.

  Tiele, Professor, 750.

  Titiens, Theresa, 192, 194.

  Tokugawa Kéiki, 380, 386 _et sq._, 391 _et sq._, 398 _et sq._, 412
        _et sq._, 438, 471.

  ——, Mitsukuni, 379.

  Tolstoy, M. Jean, 251, 273.

  Toole, J. L., 192, 200.

  Tosa clan, 387-8, 398, 407, 409, 411-12, 414, 417, 424, 436, 440 _et
        sq._, 473.

  ——, Prince of, _see_ Yōdo.

  Townsend, Mr., 715.

  Tracy, Captain, 378.

  Travers, Bob, 103.

  Trebelli, Mme., 192.

  Tree, Miss Maria, _see_ Bradshaw.

  Trevelyan, Sir George, 669.

  Tsŭ Hsi, Emperor of China, 346, 360 _et sq._

  Turgenieff, Ivan, 272.

  Turkey, Constantinople described, 308 _et sq._;
    Stamboul, 309;
    Sultan’s visit to the mosque, 309, 310;
    Dardanelles, 311 _et sq._;
    Smyrna, 316-17, 319 _et sq._;
    monument of Sesostris, 317 _et sq._

  Turner, J. W. M., 311.

  Tutcheff, 228 _et sq._

  Tweeddale, Lord, 519.

  Tweedmouth, Lord, 731.

  Twesten, Herr von, 238.

  Tynan (Number One), 688, 690.

  Tyndall, John, 166.

  Tyrwhitt, St. John, 99, 100.


  U

  Ulcoves, Philip de, 6.

  United States, 137 _et sq._, 165, 586 _et sq._

  Uwajima clan, 387, 414, 438, 446.

  ——, Prince of, _see_ Daté.


  V

  Vallée, Count, n. 568.

  Valouieff, M., 269, 272.

  Vanbrugh, Miss Irene, 203.

  Vassiltchikoff, Prince, 262.

  Vaughan, Charles John, 55.

  Vera, Edoardo, 195.

  ——, Sophie, 195.

  Verbiest, Father, 367.

  Vestris, Madame, 123.

  Victor Emmanuel, King of Italy, 581-2.

  Victoria, Queen, 250, 393, 460-1, 540, 623, 670, 706;
    Second Lord Redesdale created an earl by, 24;
    her regard for Dr. Hawtrey of Eton, 53;
    appoints Archdeacon Hodgson Provost of Eton, 60;
    and “Alice in Wonderland,” 99;
    reviews volunteers, 123;
    and the _Trent_ affair, 144 _et sq._, 165;
    and the wedding of King Edward, 162;
    and King Edward’s early life, 164, 167;
    and the death of the Prince Consort, 165, 168-9, 173;
    her love of music, 166;
    her Court, 167;
    her death, 173 _et sq._, 188;
    and the Kaiser, 175;
    her method of working, 183-4;
    and the Naval review in 1853, 237;
    and the Danish question, 241;
    visited by the Emperor Nicholas, 256;
    and the native attack on the Legation in Japan, 456;
    and Lord Granville, 547, 549;
    author dines at Balmoral with, 552;
    and the massacre of Christians at Tientsing, 552-3;
    and Viscountess Beaconsfield, 661;
    and the Prince Imperial, 674;
    her affection for Lord Beaconsfield, 676 _et sq._;
    opens the new Law Courts, 688 _et sq._;
    and the new Underground Railway, 691 _et sq._;
    as President of the Royal Agricultural Society, 712;
    and Mr. Gladstone’s retirement, 724-5;
    and Leopold, King of the Belgians, 755.

  ——, German Empress, 667.

  Vienna, Treaty of, 218-19, 223, 245.

  Villiers, Mr. Charles, 125, 523-4, 534.

  ——, Mr. Edward, 523.

  ——, Mrs. Edward, 524.

  Vlangaly, General, 330, 366, 370-1.

  Vogel, Captain, 599 _et sq._

  Voltaire, 771, 773.

  Voysey, Mrs., 77.


  W

  Wade, General, 696.

  ——, Senator, 594.

  ——, Sir Thomas, 94, 330, 343-4, 347-8, 364, 557.

  Wagner, Cosima, 779, 791.

  ——, Friedrich, 776.

  ——, Richard, 194, 277, 775 _et sq._

  ——, Siegfried, 194, 769, 777, 792.

  Waldegrave, Frances, Lady, 127.

  Wallis, Ann, _see_ Mitford.

  Walpole, Sir Robert, 757.

  ——, Sir Spencer, 66.

  Wantage, Lord, 711.

  Warburton, Bishop, 775.

  Ward, Lord, 545.

  Warkworth, Hermit of, _see_ Bertram.

  Warre, Dr., 68.

  Watts, Dr., 124.

  ——, G. F., 127.

  Webster, Benjamin, 198, 201.

  ——, Sir Godfrey, 27.

  ——, Lady, 27.

  Wedgwood, Josiah, 59.

  Welby, Lord, 66.

  Wellesley, Lord, 51, 150, 544.

  Wellington, Duchess of, 88.

  ——, Duke of, 51, 75, 78, 87 _et sq._, 127, 150, 190-1, 651, 656,
        674, 694 _et sq._, 700.

  ——, Second Duke of, 612, 695.

  Wells, Mr., 147.

  Wemyss, Lord, 606.

  Wên Hsiang, 363.

  West, Sir Algernon, 66.

  ——, Mr. Temple, 519.

  Westminster, First Duke of, 122, 539.

  Westmoreland, John Fane, Earl of, 24-5.

  Weston, Mr., 593.

  Weyer, M. Sylvain Van de, 168.

  Wharncliffe, Lord, 655.

  Wharton, Philadelphia, _see_ Mitford.

  Whistler, James McNeill, 2, 73, 275, 644 _et sq._, 655.

  Widdrington, Lady Isabel de, 7 _et sq._

  ——, John, 10.

  Wieland, Christopher, 71.

  Wielopolski, Marquis, 213-14.

  Wigan, Mr., 198.

  ——, Mrs., 202.

  Wilberforce, Bishop Samuel, n. 149, 169, 535-6.

  Wilde, Oscar, 543, 647-8.

  Wilhelmine, Markgräfin, 770 _et sq._

  Wilkes, Captain, 143-4, 146.

  William the Conqueror, 23.

  William I., German Emperor, 81 _et sq._, 153 _et sq._, 155, 237.

  William II., German Emperor, 368, 796.

  William III., 177.

  William IV., 174.

  Williams, Mrs. Brydges, 670.

  ——, Montagu, 66.

  ——, Lord Justice Roland, 100.

  ——, Dr. Wells, 369.

  Willis, Dr., 381, 426, 435-6, 439, 441, 444, 449, 468, 502.

  Wilton, Lord, 514, 668.

  Windsor, 168, 705, 764;
    St. George’s Chapel, 161 _et sq._, 702.

  Winterhalter, 166.

  Wodehouse, Edmund, 67.

  ——, Lord, _see_ Kimberley.

  Wolf, Sir Drummond, 116-17, 677.

  Wombwell, Sir George, 91, 685-6.

  Wood, Robert, 320 _et sq._

  Woodford, John, 115-16.

  Wren, Sir Christopher, 645.

  Wyatt, Matthew, 694.

  Wyke, Anthony, 17.

  Wylde, 112, 123.


  Y

  Yamashina no Maya, Prince, 447, 457.

  Yōdo, Prince of Tosa, 408-9, 424, 435 _et sq._, 473, 482.

  _York_, H. M. S., 17-18.

  Yorke, Mr. Eliot, 496.

  ——, Reginald, 67, 739 _et sq._

  Young, Brigham, 614 _et sq._


  Z

  Zamoyski, Count, 216.

  Zenzaburō, Taki, 429, 432.

  Zingarelli, Niccolo, 190.

  Zinzendorf, Count, 645.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMORIES (VOLUME 2 OF 2) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


