The Project Gutenberg eBook of The journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Vol. IV, 1904
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Vol. IV, 1904

Author: Various

Editor: Thomas Hamilton Murray

Release date: March 28, 2020 [eBook #61687]
                Most recently updated: October 17, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
        produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
        Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY, VOL. IV, 1904 ***

[Illustration:

  THOMAS ADDIS EMMET, M. D., LL. D.,

  OF NEW YORK CITY. A FOUNDER AND LIFE MEMBER OF THE SOCIETY, AND MEMBER
    OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL.
]




                              THE JOURNAL
                                 OF THE
                             AMERICAN-IRISH
                          HISTORICAL SOCIETY.

                                   BY

                        THOMAS HAMILTON MURRAY,

                          _Secretary-General_.


                               VOLUME IV.


                             BOSTON, MASS.,
                       PUBLISHED BY THE SOCIETY,
                                 1904.

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                         AN INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


The present is the fourth volume of the JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN-IRISH
HISTORICAL SOCIETY. This volume, like each of those preceding it, is
complete in itself. It contains a record of the organization since the
third volume of the JOURNAL was issued, and presents a large amount of
additional material within our line of work. The Society continues to
maintain the high standard established by its founders, and is doing a
great amount of good in its chosen field. The organization has already
secured a place in the front rank of American historical societies, and
enjoys the most cordial relations with organizations long established.

                                                                T. H. M.

 BOSTON, MASS.,
         OCTOBER, 1904.




                  OFFICERS OF THE SOCIETY, A. D. 1904.


                          _President-General_,
                         =Hon. William McAdoo=,
                             New York City.

                       _Vice-President-General_,
                      =James E. Sullivan, M. D.=,
                           Providence, R. I.

                          _Secretary-General_,
                       =Thomas Hamilton Murray=,
                     36 Newbury St., Boston, Mass.

                          _Treasurer-General_,
                        =Hon. John C. Linehan=,
     State Insurance Commissioner of New Hampshire, Concord, N. H.

                       _Librarian and Archivist_,
                          =Thomas B. Lawler=,
                             New York City.


                           EXECUTIVE COUNCIL,

                           The foregoing and

 =Hon. John D. Crimmins=, New York City.
 =Hon. Thomas J. Gargan=, Boston, Mass.
 =Rev. James H. O’Donnell=, Norwalk, Conn.
 =Thomas Addis Emmet, M. D.=, New York City.
 =James L. O’Neill=, Elizabeth, N. J.
 =Thomas J. Lynch=, Augusta, Me.
 =Stephen Farrelly=, New York City.
 =James Jeffrey Roche=, Boston, Mass.
 =Francis C. Travers=, New York City.
 =John F. Hayes, M. D.=, Waterbury, Conn.
 =Charles A. Geoghegan=, New York City.
 =M. Joseph Harson=, Providence, R. I.
 =Edward J. McGuire=, New York City.
 =John Crane=, New York City.
 =John Jerome Rooney=, New York City.
 =John J. Lenehan=, New York City.
 =James Connolly=, Coronado, Cal.
 =Rev. Cyrus Townsend Brady=, New York City.


                         STATE VICE-PRESIDENTS.

 Maine—=James Cunningham=, Portland.
 New Hampshire—=Hon. James F. Brennan=, Peterborough.
 Vermont—=John D. Hanrahan, M. D.=, Rutland.
 Massachusetts—=Rev. J. W. McMahon, D. D.=, Boston.
 Rhode Island—=Hon. Thomas Z. Lee=, Providence.
 Connecticut—=Dennis H. Tierney=, Waterbury.
 New York—=Gen. James R. O’Beirne=, New York City.
 New Jersey—=John F. Kehoe=, Newark.
 Pennsylvania—=Hugh McCaffrey=, Philadelphia.
 Delaware—=John J. Cassidy=, Wilmington.
 Virginia—=Hon. Joseph T. Lawless=, Norfolk.
 West Virginia—=John F. Healy=, Thomas, Tucker County.
 South Carolina—=F. Q. O’Neill=, Charleston.
 Georgia—=Col. C. C. Sanders=, Gainesville.
 Ohio—=John Lavelle=, Cleveland.
 Illinois—=Hon. P. T. Barry=, Chicago.
 Indiana—=Very Rev. Andrew Morrissey, C. S. C.=, Notre Dame.
 Iowa—=Very Rev. M. C. Lenihan=, Marshalltown.
 Minnesota—=John D. O’Brien=, St. Paul.
 Missouri—=Julius L. Foy=, St. Louis.
 Michigan—=Hon. T. A. E. Weadock=, Detroit.
 Kentucky—=John J. Slattery=, Louisville.
 Tennessee—=Michael Gavin=, Memphis.
 Kansas—=Patrick H. Coney=, Topeka.
 Utah—=Joseph Geoghegan=, Salt Lake City.
 Texas—=Gen. A. G. Malloy=, El Paso.
 California—=John Mulhern=, San Francisco.

        ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

 District of Columbia—=Edward A. Moseley=, Washington.
 Arizona—=Col. O’Brien Moore=, Tucson.
 Indian Territory—=Joseph F. Swords=, Sulphur.

        ·       ·       ·       ·       ·

 Canada—=Hon. Felix Carbray=, Quebec.
 Ireland—=Dr. Michael F. Cox=, Dublin.




                       CHRONOLOGY OF THE SOCIETY.

  LEADING EVENTS IN THE CAREER OF THE ORGANIZATION FOR THE YEARS 1901,
      1902, 1903, AND 1904, OR OF SPECIAL INTEREST TO THE MEMBERS.


  1901. Jan. 2. Death of Hon. Ignatius Donnelly, a member of the
        Society, at Minneapolis, Minn. He was twice elected
        lieutenant-governor of Minnesota, and was a member of the 38th,
        39th, and 40th Congresses.

  1901. Jan. 9. Death of Rev. John F. Mundy, of Cambridge, Mass., a
        member of the Society.

  1901. Jan. 24. A meeting of the executive council of the Society is
        held this afternoon at the Murray Hill hotel, New York City,
        President-General Gargan in the chair.

  1901. Jan. 24. Annual meeting of the Society at Sherry’s, Forty-fourth
        St., and Fifth Ave., New York City. Hon. John D. Crimmins is
        elected president-general of the organization.

  1901. Jan. 24. Annual dinner of the Society, this evening, at
        Sherry’s, New York City. Letters expressive of regret at
        inability to attend were received from Hon. John Lee Carroll,
        president of the Sons of the Revolution; President Warren of
        Boston University, President Hall of Clark University, President
        Harper of the University of Chicago, Rt. Rev. Dr. Conaty of the
        Catholic University, Washington, D. C.; President Capen of Tufts
        College, and from many others.

  1901. Jan. 24. At the annual gathering of the Society to-night Rev. A.
        P. Doyle, C. S. P., read a paper on “Hon. Thomas Dongan,
        Governor of New York, 1683–1688.”

  1901. February. The _Cosmopolitan_ magazine for this month publishes a
        story, “The Requiem of the Drums.” The author was Capt. “Bucky”
        O’Neill, and the story was written shortly before the breaking
        out of the war with Spain, while he was still acting as sheriff
        of Prescott, Ariz. O’Neill became a captain in the “Rough
        Riders” regiment, and fell at the head of his company before the
        Spanish trenches of Las Guasimas. Hon. Theodore Roosevelt, of
        our Society, termed him “one of the best captains in the
        regiment.”

  1901. Feb. 5. A delegation from the United Irish-American societies of
        New York City waited on Mayor VanWyck to-day, and presented a
        resolution which praised him for refusing to lower the flags to
        half staff on the death of the British queen, Victoria. The
        delegation was headed by Daniel F. Cohalan, a prominent New York
        lawyer. Mayor VanWyck in reply thanked the committee and said
        that he was glad Americans viewed his action with favor.

  1901. Feb. 21. Francis C. O’Reilly, Orange, N. J., of the Society,
        passes away. He was the head of the Watchung Coal Company of
        Orange, a director of the Orange National Bank, and a member of
        several organizations, including the Orange Riding and Driving
        Club.

  1901. March. Dennis H. Mulligan passes away in Kentucky. A news
        paragraph dated Lexington, Ky., March 15, and published in the
        Louisville _Times_ states that Mr. Mulligan “was one of the few
        surviving types of the old-fashioned Kentucky gentleman, and his
        death caused profound sorrow among all who knew him. Mr.
        Mulligan was the father of the Hon. James H. Mulligan, formerly
        consul to Samoa. The old gentleman was in his eighty-seventh
        year when he died and had long been active in public matters. He
        owned a whole town in the very suburbs of Lexington. The place
        is known as ‘Grannon,’ and was incorporated as a town with
        Dennis Mulligan as mayor, by an act of the Kentucky legislature,
        while James H. Mulligan was in the state senate. ‘Grannon’ now
        falls to James H. Mulligan.”

  1901. March 19. Hon. John C. Linehan, Concord, N. H., of the Society,
        speaks at a hearing, in the New Hampshire State Capitol, in
        favor of erecting a monument to Hon. Franklin Pierce, a former
        president of the United States.

  1901. April 4. A meeting of the executive council held at the
        residence of Hon. John. D. Crimmins, 40 East 68th St., New York
        City. Mr. Crimmins, president-general, presided.

  1901. April 13. Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York City,
        president-general of the Society, delivers an address at the
        laying of the corner-stone of the new Hall of Records, New York.

  1901. April 19. Celebration by the Society of the anniversary of the
        battle of Lexington, Concord and Cambridge. The society visits
        Lexington, Mass., in the morning, and places a laurel wreath on
        the battle monument on the green. In the evening, the Society
        dines at the Hotel Brunswick, Boston, Congressman Henry F.
        Naphen presiding.

  1901. April 19. During the Society’s dinner at the Hotel Brunswick,
        Boston, this evening, it was announced that the Massachusetts
        Society of the Sons of the Revolution was assembled in an
        adjoining room, engaged in celebrating the same anniversary.
        Congratulations were exchanged between the two organizations.

  1901. April 21. Hon. Edwin D. McGuinness, a member of the Society,
        dies at his home in Providence, R. I. He had twice been
        secretary of state of Rhode Island and twice mayor of
        Providence.

  1901. April 29. Death of James Murphy, Lawrence, Mass., a member of
        the Society.

  1901. May. President-General Crimmins writes a communication to the
        New York _Evening Post_, eloquently defending the character of
        Gen. Richard Montgomery.

  1901. May 13. John F. Kehoe, Newark, N. J., becomes a life member of
        the Society.

  1901. May 23. Rt. Rev. James McGolrick, D. D., bishop of Duluth,
        Minn., becomes a life member of the Society.

  1901. May 24. An editorial in the Boston _Herald_ to-day, headed
        “England’s failure in Ireland,” declares that “If the test of
        business methods is the growth and prosperity of business, the
        test of methods of government is the growth and prosperity of
        the people. By this test Great Britain’s government of Ireland
        is the monumental political failure of modern times. It does not
        promote growth, prosperity, happiness, or loyalty. Nor is there
        at present any great reason to expect a turn of the course of
        population. The vigor of Ireland has been driven from it.
        America has profited incalculably by the exodus, and the record
        of the Irish race in this country affords a demonstration that
        cannot be gainsaid that the native forces of the race are not
        decadent when they have favorable opportunities of development.”

  1901. May 31. Secretary-General T. H. Murray, of the Society, has a
        communication in the New York _Sun_, calling attention to the
        neglected condition of the Gen. Richard Montgomery tablet and
        monument in the chancel wall of St. Paul’s church, Broadway, New
        York, and urging that proper attention be given the memorial.

  1901. June 10. Rt. Rev. Denis M. Bradley, D. D., bishop of Manchester,
        N. H., becomes a member of the Society.

  1901. June 10. R. A. Brock, secretary of the Southern Historical
        society, Richmond, Va., compliments our organization and pays an
        eloquent tribute to the Irish element in the composition of the
        American people.

  1901. June 17. Rev. Joshua P. L. Bodfish, Canton, Mass., a member of
        the Society, is re-elected a director of the Bunker Hill
        Monument Association.

  1901. June 20. Death in Brooklyn, N. Y., of Brvt. Brig. Gen. Robert
        Nugent. A cancer caused by a bullet wound received at the battle
        of Fredericksburg, Va., 1862, was the cause of his death. He was
        born in Ireland, 1824, and came to this country at an early age.
        At the breaking out of the Civil War he was lieutenant-colonel
        of the Sixty-ninth Regiment, N. Y. National Guard, and went out
        with that regiment in response to President Lincoln’s first
        call, taking part in the battle of Bull Run. At the expiration
        of ninety days the regiment was mustered out of the service.
        Lieut.-Col. Nugent then received a commission as captain in the
        regular army, and at the request of Gen. Sherman, then a
        colonel, he was assigned to the Thirteenth Infantry, of
        which Sherman had just taken command. Shortly after, Capt.
        Nugent obtained leave of absence, and going to New York
        organized the Sixty-ninth New York Volunteers and became their
        colonel. This was the first regiment of Gen. Meagher’s Irish
        Brigade. In command of this regiment Col. Nugent served at the
        battles of Fair Oaks, Gaines’ Mill, Savage’s Station, Peach
        Orchard, Malvern Hill, White Oak Swamp, Glendale, Antietam and
        Fredericksburg. A short time after the battle of Fredericksburg
        he was sent home to recuperate. He started to return to the
        front to rejoin his regiment, but was informed that he had been
        appointed provost marshal for the Southern District of New York.
        He had charge of this district during the draft riots, and took
        command of the troops. In 1865, after the Sixty-ninth had been
        mustered out of the service, Gen. Nugent rejoined his regiment,
        the Thirteenth Infantry. He served with this regiment until
        1876, when he was promoted, and transferred to the Twenty-fourth
        Regiment. In these two regiments he gained a reputation as an
        Indian fighter. He saw service in many battles in Montana,
        Dakota, and Wyoming against the Sioux and other Indian tribes,
        and was with Gen. Miles in the campaign against “Sitting Bull.”

  1901. July 4. Rev. James N. Supple, Boston, Mass., a member of the
        Society, was the official chaplain at the Boston municipal
        celebration to-day in Faneuil Hall.

  1901. Aug. 15. Most Rev. Patrick J. Ryan, archbishop of Philadelphia,
        Pa., becomes a member of the Society.

  1901. Aug. 29. President-General Crimmins, of the Society, being
        unable to attend our celebration to-day at Newport, R. I., sent
        a cordial letter, accompanied by a check for $50, which sum he
        wished used toward promoting the success of the occasion.

  1901. Aug. 29. The Society observes the anniversary of the battle of
        Rhode Island by exercises at Newport, R. I. This battle took
        place in 1778, the American forces being commanded by Gen. John
        Sullivan. At the celebration here mentioned, Mayor Garretson of
        Newport welcomed the Society to the city and delivered a
        patriotic address. Letters of regret at inability to be present
        were received from Dr. John Sullivan and T. Russell Sullivan, of
        Boston, Mass., kinsmen of Gen. John Sullivan; and from Governor
        Gregory of Rhode Island, Congressman Melville Bull, President
        Faunce of Brown University, and other gentlemen.

  1901. Sept. 14. Hon. Theodore Roosevelt, a member of our Society,
        takes the oath of office as President of the United States.

  1901. Sept. 22. Hon. Jeremiah Crowley, ex-mayor of Lowell, Mass.,
        dies. He was a member of the Society.

  1901. Sept. 30. Patrick J. Flatley, Boston, Mass., a member of the
        Society, passes away. He was a lawyer of much ability.

  1901. Sept. 30. Very Rev. Abbe John Baptist Hogan, S. S., D. D., a
        member of the Society, dies in France. He had been head of St.
        John’s Ecclesiastical Seminary, at Brighton (Boston), Mass.

  1901. Sept. 30. Joseph Geoghegan, Salt Lake City, Utah, becomes a life
        member of the Society.

  1901. October. John A. McCall, president of the New York Life
        Insurance Co., becomes a life member of the Society.

  1901. November. Very Rev. Michael C. O’Brien, vicar general of the
        diocese of Portland, Me., dies. He was a member of the Society.

  1901. Nov. 14. Rev. J. H. McKechnie, Worcester, Mass., a member of the
        Society, passes away.

  1901. Dec. 2. The president of the United States appoints the Rev.
        Edward J. Brennan of St. John’s church, New Haven, Conn., a
        chaplain in the U. S. Navy with the rank of lieutenant. Father
        Brennan took the oath of office in the Superior Court at New
        Haven, on Dec. 30.

  1901. Dec. 6. Meeting of the executive council of the Society at the
        residence of President-General John D. Crimmins, New York City.

  1901. Dec. 10. Hon. Patrick A. Collins, a member of the Society, is
        elected mayor of Boston, Mass.

  1901. Dec. 11. In to-day’s issue of the _Free Press_, Charles Town, W.
        Va., appears the following: “We are gratified to observe that
        Capt. James H. O’Bannon was again chosen superintendent of
        public printing by the Virginia legislature. He has occupied the
        position with fidelity to the state for a number of years. Capt.
        O’Bannon is a native of this county, learned the printing art in
        this town, and during the war of ’61–’65 was a gallant officer
        in the ‘Stonewall Brigade.’”

  1902. Jan. 7. Joseph G. Geoghegan, of New York City, becomes a life
        member of the Society.

  1902. Jan. 14. Meeting of the executive council of the Society at the
        Hotel Manhattan, New York City.

  1902. Jan. 14. Annual meeting and dinner at the Hotel Manhattan,
        Forty-second St. and Madison Ave., New York City. Hon. John D.
        Crimmins, New York, was reëlected president-general. During
        the evening the following telegram was received from the
        president of the United States: “White House, Washington, D.
        C., Jan. 14th, 1902. To Hon. John D. Crimmins, 40 East 68th
        St., New York: I thank you for your telegram. Please express
        at the banquet this evening my interest in the work of the
        American-Irish Historical Society, and assure its members and
        their guests of my hearty good wishes. Theodore Roosevelt.”

  1902. Jan. 18. The New York _Herald_ of this date has a review of a
        volume by J. B. Spillane, New York City, a member of the
        Society. Mr. Spillane’s volume is entitled _Minor Chords_ and is
        in memory of his deceased brother, Daniel Spillane. It comprises
        a collection of prose, poetical, and musical writings by the
        latter.

  1902. Jan. 19. Hon. Thomas J. Gargan, of Boston, Mass., contributes to
        a symposium in to-day’s Boston _Globe_ on the subject: “Does the
        Preservation of Historic Landmarks Help or Hinder the City’s
        Growth?” He contends that such preservation helps. Mr. Gargan is
        an ex-president-general of the society.

  1902. Jan. 23. W. H. Mahony, New York City, becomes a life member of
        the Society.

  1902. Jan. 25. Death of Rev. J. J. McNulty, rector of St. Cecilia’s
        church, Boston, Mass., a member of the Society.

  1902. Jan. 28. A dispatch from Sioux City, Ia., states that news has
        been received there that Very Rev. Philip J. Garrigan, D. D., of
        the Catholic University, Washington, D. C., has been appointed
        bishop of the new see of Sioux City. He is a member of our
        Society.

  1902. February. In the _North American Review_ for this month is an
        article by Hon. William McAdoo, of the Society, on “Launching a
        Battleship from the Congressional Ways.” Mr. McAdoo was formerly
        assistant secretary of the navy.

  1902. Feb. 1. Death of Patrick E. Riddle, of Roxbury (Boston), Mass.,
        a member of the Society.

  1902. Feb. 3. President Roosevelt to-day sent to the U. S. senate the
        name of Gen. St. Clair A. Mulholland, of the Society, for
        reappointment as U. S. pension agent at Philadelphia, Pa.

  1902. March 6. Letter received to-day from John Lavelle, Cleveland,
        O., a member of the Society, urging the extension of the
        organization throughout the West.

  1902. March 6. Hon. Patrick A. Collins, mayor of Boston and member of
        the Society, presides to-night at a banquet, in Boston, to
        Prince Henry of Prussia.

  1902. March 12. Death of Bernard McGuinness, Providence, R. I., a
        member of the Society. He was the father of Hon. Edwin D.
        McGuinness, who became secretary of state of Rhode Island and
        mayor of Providence.

  1902. March 14. Among the nominations sent to the U. S. senate to-day
        by President Roosevelt, a member of the Society, were these:
        Rev. Francis B. Doherty, of California, and Rev. Patrick P.
        Carey, of New York, to be chaplains in the army.

  1902. March 18. Death of John A. Sullivan, New York City, a member of
        the Society. He was a prominent resident of New York City,
        president of the Parker Manufacturing Co., president of the
        Catholic Club, and was collector of Internal Revenue under
        Cleveland.

  1902. April 1. Death of Hon. Thomas Dunn English, LL. D., Newark, N.
        J., a member of the Society.

  1902. April 2. President Roosevelt to-day appointed Col. Michael V.
        Sheridan to be a brigadier-general in the regular army. General
        Sheridan is a brother of the late Lieut.-Gen. Philip H.
        Sheridan.

  1902. April 2. Gen. St. Clair A. Mulholland, Philadelphia, Pa., of the
        Society, has an article in to-day’s _Public Ledger_ of that
        city, on the battle of Gettysburg. He pays a tribute to the
        Irish soldiers engaged therein.

  1902. April 10. Death at Atlantic City, N. J., of Mrs. Robert B.
        Roosevelt, wife of an uncle of President Theodore Roosevelt. She
        was born in Tipperary, Ireland, her maiden name being Marion
        O’Shea. Her brother, J. Augustus O’Shea, was a famous war
        correspondent.

  1902. April 19. The Society celebrates the anniversary of the battle
        of Lexington, Concord and Cambridge. The Boston members went out
        to Lexington in carriages, stopping en route at the Cambridge
        city hall, where they were officially received by Mayor McNamee
        and members of the city government. Arriving in Lexington, the
        Society called at the town hall to pay its respects to the town
        officials, and was cordially received by Selectman Hutchinson
        and others. The Society then proceeded to the village green and
        placed a laurel wreath on the battle monument. Later, the
        organization was entertained by Selectman Taylor and family at
        their home in Lexington, and then visited the quarters of the
        Lexington Historical Society.

  1902. April 30. Death at Englewood, N. J., of David L. Barrett, a
        member of the Society.

  1902. May 12. Meeting at the Hotel Manhattan, New York City, to-night
        to arrange for the excursion of the Society to Washington, D.
        C., to participate in the dedication of the Rochambeau monument.
        A visiting delegation was present at the meeting from the French
        Literary Circle of New York.

  1902. May 15. Death at Somerville, Mass., of Capt. and Brvt.
        Lieut.-Col. Samuel McKeever, U. S. A. (retired), a member of the
        Society.

  1902. May 23. The New York members of the Society left for Washington,
        D. C., this afternoon, by a special train over the Pennsylvania
        Railroad, to attend the Rochambeau monument dedication at the
        national capital. Headquarters were established for the Society
        at the New Willard Hotel, Washington.

  1902. May 24. The Society attends the dedication in Washington, D. C.,
        of the monument to Rochambeau. Previous to the dedication the
        organization was received at the White House by President
        Roosevelt, the reception taking place in the East room. About
        100 members and guests of the Society were present, including a
        number of ladies.

  1902. May 24. The Society was present, by invitation, at a reception
        in Washington, D. C., to-night, at the French embassy.
        Ambassador and Madame Cambon welcomed the visitors.

  1902. June 10. Hon. John F. Finerty, Chicago, Ill., a member of the
        Society, delivers an oration at the University of Nebraska.

  1902. June 11. At the annual meeting of the New Hampshire Historical
        Society, held at Concord, N. H., on this date, a paper was read
        by John Scales, A. M., of Dover, N. H., on “Master John Sullivan
        and Family of Somersworth and Berwick.” The paper has since been
        published in the _Proceedings_ of the New Hampshire Historical
        Society.

  1902. June 17. Villanova College, Pennsylvania, confers honorary
        degrees on two members of our Society, _i. e._, Hon. Morgan J.
        O’Brien and Hon. Joseph F. Daly, both of New York City.

  1902. June 18. Monument unveiled at Elizabeth, N. J., to Hon.
        William A. M. Mack, recently mayor of that city, and state
        vice-president for New Jersey of our Society.

  1902. June 18. President Roosevelt sends to the U. S. senate the
        nomination of Lieut.-Col. John R. McGinness, Ordnance Corps, U.
        S. A., to be a colonel. Colonel McGinness is a member of our
        Society.

  1902. June 27. A joint resolution appropriating $100,000 for a
        monument to the prison-ship martyrs, to be erected at Fort
        Greene, Brooklyn, N. Y., was passed to-day by the U. S. Senate.
        It provides that the appropriation of $100,000 shall be made on
        condition that an additional $100,000 shall be raised, the work
        to be done under direction of the Secretary of War, the Governor
        of New York, and the Mayor of New York City. Many of the
        prison-ship martyrs were Irish, as their names in the records
        indicate.

  1902. June 28. Death of M. D. Long, of O’Neill, Neb., a member of the
        Society.

  1902. July 9. The Boston _Transcript_ states that John E. Milholland,
        a member of the Society, “is trying to get the federal
        government to purchase, for $30,000, the ruins of old Fort
        Ticonderoga and restore it to the exact status it bore when
        Ethan Allen demanded its surrender.”

  1902. July 11. Corner-stone laid at Newport, R. I., of a monument
        to be erected in honor of the French who landed there during
        the American Revolution. Several members of our Society,
        including Mayor Patrick J. Boyle of Newport, participated in
        the exercises.

  1902. July 20. The Boston _Sunday Globe_ to-day contains a sketch of
        the First Regiment Massachusetts Volunteers in the war with
        Mexico. In the course of the article the writer states that the
        entire ten companies comprising the regiment were raised in
        Boston and Charlestown, though not a few of the recruits came
        from more or less distant points about New England. Recruiting
        was in progress for four or five months at least, during the
        fall of 1846 and the winter of 1847. Edward Webster, a son of
        Daniel Webster, was captain of A company, and John B. Barry was
        captain of B company, which was composed entirely of men of
        Irish birth or antecedents. The regiment was at the front for 18
        months, first with the army of Gen. Zachary Taylor and later
        with Gen. Scott.

  1902. August. Ginn & Company, publishers, issued this month a volume
        on _Essentials of American History_. The author is Thomas B.
        Lawler, a member of the Society.

  1902. August. The Society issued this month a volume on _The Irish
        Scots and the “Scotch-Irish.”_

  1902. August. The Society issued this month a pamphlet on _Gen. John
        Sullivan and the Battle of Rhode Island_.

  1902. Aug. 7. Death of John O’Hart, a member of the Society, Clontarf,
        Ireland. He was the author of _Irish Pedigrees_, _Irish Landed
        Gentry when Cromwell Came to Ireland_ and other works. A
        sketch states that he was “a Fellow of the Royal Historical
        and Archæological Association of Ireland, and a member of
        the Harleian Society of London. In 1875 he published his
        _Irish Pedigrees_, for the compilation of which he must have
        read extensively, and he himself acknowledges over a dozen
        authorities to whom he was indebted. It reached a fifth edition
        in 1892, and had obtained a very extensive circulation in the
        United States. A fellow-historian, Canon O’Hanlon, had for a
        quarter of a century worked with him in the cause of Irish
        antiquarian research. Mr. O’Hart was headmaster of the Ringsend
        National School, even before Canon O’Hanlon became pastor of the
        Church of the Star of the Sea, and it was during his position
        as headmaster that the deceased historian devoted all his
        spare time to the close research which has so enriched Irish
        historical literature. Mr. O’Hart was uncle, on the maternal
        side, to Maj. Richard Oulahan of Washington, D. C., late of
        Corcoran’s Irish Legion.”

  1902. Aug. 14. Hon. P. T. Barry, of the Society, has a communicated
        article in to-day’s Chicago _Daily News_ on “Major George
        Croghan.”

  1902. Aug. 29. Celebration by the Society of the anniversary of
        the battle of Rhode Island. The celebration took place in
        Providence, R. I., headquarters being established at the
        Narragansett. At the request of the Society, Governor Kimball of
        Rhode Island had the national and state flags displayed on the
        new marble state capitol in Providence. The Society dined at the
        Narragansett in the evening, as the guest of James E. Sullivan,
        M. D., of Providence. About 100 members and friends of the
        Society were present, including: Hon. John D. Crimmins,
        president-general, New York City; Hon. John C. Linehan,
        treasurer-general, Concord, N. H.; Governor Kimball of Rhode
        Island; Hon. Charles P. Bennett, Rhode Island’s secretary of
        state; Adjutant-General Sackett of Rhode Island; Rt. Rev.
        Matthew Harkins, D. D., bishop of the Catholic diocese of
        Providence; Rt. Rev. Thomas J. Conaty, D. D., Washington, D. C.;
        Hon. Asa Bird Gardiner, New York City; Hon. Morgan J. O’Brien,
        a justice of the New York supreme court; Hon. Pardon E.
        Tillinghast, a justice of the Rhode Island supreme court; Hon.
        Royal C. Taft, Providence, R. I.; Edward A. Moseley, Washington,
        D. C.; Thomas Addis Emmet, M. D., New York City, and many other
        prominent people. The leading address of the evening was by Hon.
        Asa Bird Gardiner, his subject being “The Battle of Rhode
        Island.”

  1902. Aug. 29. Hon. Theodore Roosevelt, president of the United
        States, wrote as follows to Secretary T. H. Murray, relative to
        the Society’s celebration on this date: “Oyster Bay, N. Y.,
        August 19, 1902. My Dear Mr. Murray: I warmly appreciate
        the cordial invitation which you extend on behalf of the
        American-Irish Historical Society to attend its anniversary
        celebration to be held at the Narragansett Hotel, Providence, R.
        I., on the evening of Friday, August 29th. It would afford me
        genuine pleasure to be present on this occasion and I deeply
        regret that the itinerary of the New England trip does not
        contemplate my being in Providence on the evening mentioned.
        Otherwise I should be most happy to send an acceptance. Accept
        my best wishes for the complete success of the meeting, and
        believe me, Very sincerely yours, Theodore Roosevelt.”

  1902. Aug. 29. In connection with the Society’s celebration on this
        date, the following letter was written by Dr. John Sullivan, of
        Boston, a descendant of Gen. John Sullivan: “Your very kind
        invitation to attend your banquet on the 29th inst., received.
        Please accept for the Society my regrets, not being able,
        physically, to attend such a jolly gathering of the true old
        Irish stock. I can no longer keep up with the band. If I keep
        from under the wheels of the ambulance, I will do well. Four
        years at the front will give any man a reminder that he’s ‘been
        there’ and he must be thankful that he got it no worse. On the
        evening of your banquet I shall remain up, and at the hour of 9
        o’clock will drink to the memory of the Irishmen in the American
        Revolution. My best wishes for your Society, and your invited
        guests, go with this from one who has the honor to be your
        obedient servant, John Sullivan.” Dr. Sullivan is a member of
        the Order of the Cincinnati, and was an army surgeon during the
        Civil War.

  1902. Aug. 29. Chief Justice Stiness of the Rhode Island supreme court
        wrote concerning our celebration on this date: “I have your
        very kind invitation to the banquet of your Society at the
        Narragansett Hotel in Providence, on the anniversary of the
        battle of Rhode Island, Aug. 29, in special honor of Gen. John
        Sullivan. I regret that I shall be unable to attend as I shall
        be absent from the state at that time. Your Society has reason
        to be proud of the young man, born of Irish parents, ... who
        held so high a place in the civil and military affairs of the
        colonies, and this state has reason to be grateful for the
        service he rendered in its defence at a critical period of the
        Revolution. Both as a member of the judiciary of the state
        and as president of the Rhode Island Historical Society, I
        congratulate your Society upon its efforts to call attention to
        service rendered our country by those of Irish descent.... I
        greatly regret my inability to be present at so pleasant an
        event and give you my best wishes for its interest and success.”

  1902. Aug. 29. Hon. Pierre de Margerie, French Charge d’Affaires,
        wrote relative to the Society’s celebration held on this date:
        “His Excellency, Mr. Jules Cambon, being in France, I have
        received the note of August 5, in which you ask the French
        ambassador to be present at the exercises which will take place
        on the 29th of this month, at Narragansett Hotel, Providence, R.
        I. I am quite sure that, if Mr. Jules Cambon had been in this
        country, it would have been for him a great pleasure to be the
        guest of the American-Irish Society, on the anniversary of the
        battle of Rhode Island, and that he will regret very much to
        have been unable to accept your very kind invitation.”

  1902. Aug. 29. In connection with the Society’s celebration in
        Providence, R. I., on this date, letters of regret at not
        being able to attend were also received from Governor Jordan
        of New Hampshire, Governor Crane of Massachusetts, U. S.
        Senator George F. Hoar, President Faunce of Brown University,
        and Edward Aborn Greene, of Providence, R. I., a descendant of
        Col. Christopher Greene, who served under Sullivan in the
        battle of Rhode Island. Letters were likewise received from
        Gen. Nelson A. Miles, Washington, D. C.; Archbishop Ryan of
        Philadelphia; U. S. Senator Wetmore, Newport, R. I.; Hon.
        LeBaron B. Colt, judge of the U. S. Circuit Court, Providence,
        R. I.; Hon. A. L. Brown, judge of the U. S. District Court,
        Providence, R. I.; Hon. Horatio Rogers, judge of the Rhode
        Island Supreme Court; James Phinney Baxter, president of the
        New England Historic, Genealogical Society; V. Mott Francis,
        president of the Newport Historical Society; E. Benj. Andrews,
        chancellor of the University of Nebraska; Stephen Farrelly, of
        the American News Co., New York City; Hon. P. T. Barry,
        Chicago, Ill.; Congressman Naphen of Massachusetts; John
        Lavelle, Cleveland, Ohio; Congressman Bull of Rhode Island;
        William Giblin, of the Mercantile Safe Deposit Co., New York
        City; Frank Thompson, New York City; James Connolly, Coronado,
        California; Principal Charles S. Chapin of the Rhode Island
        Normal School, and from others.

  1902. Aug. 30. Reception to the Society by Governor Kimball of Rhode
        Island. The event took place in the state capitol, Providence.

  1902. Sept. 11. Death of Rev. Thomas Scully, Cambridge, Mass.,
        a member of the Society. During the Civil War he served
        as chaplain of the Ninth Massachusetts infantry—an Irish
        regiment—and was twice taken prisoner.

  1902. Sept. 18. Announcement is made that Rev. D. J. O’Mahoney, O. S.
        A., Andover, Mass., a member of the Society, has been ordered to
        the Philippines by his ecclesiastical superiors.

  1902. Sept. 24. Death of William Hopkins, of the Society. He was a
        member of the staff of the Boston _Daily Globe_, occupying an
        editorial position on that paper. He resided at Newton, Mass.

  1902. Oct. 5. Under the head of “New Books,” the Charleston, S. C.,
        Sunday _News_ has a review to-day of the Society’s _Irish Scots
        and the “Scotch-Irish.”_

  1902. Oct. 6. A dispatch from Washington, D. C., to-day announces that
        the president has appointed Col. William Quinton to be a
        brigadier-general in the regular army. General Quinton is a
        member of our Society.

  1902. Oct. 18. Death of Pierce Kent, New York City, a member of the
        Society.

  1902. Oct. 19. Hon. John C. Linehan, treasurer-general of the Society,
        has a communication in to-day’s _Sunday News_ of Charleston, S.
        C., on “Irish Soldiers in the Union and Confederate Services
        during the Civil War.”

  1902. Nov. 10. Rev. D. H. Scanlon, pastor of the Berryville
        Presbyterian church, Berryville, Va., writes for information
        relative to the Society.

  1902. Nov. 15. Hon. John C. Linehan, treasurer-general of the
        Society, has an article in the Boston _Pilot_ of this date,
        entitled, “New England Prejudice in 1752–1855. Was it Racial
        or Religious?” He contends that it was largely racial.

  1902. Nov. 22. Thomas O’Hagan, Ph. D., of Toronto, Canada, a member of
        the Society, has a communication in the Boston _Pilot_ of this
        date, on “How History is Taught in Secular Universities.”

  1902. Nov. 29. Death of Rev. Thomas Shahan, Malden, Mass., a member of
        the Society.

  1902. Dec. 4. Meeting of the executive council of the Society at the
        residence of President-General John D. Crimmins, New York City.

  1902. Dec. 7. At a meeting in New York City to-night, in aid of the
        projected Hibernian Institute building, addresses were delivered
        by several members of our Society, including Hon. Thomas J.
        Gargan, Boston, Mass.; Hon. T. A. E. Weadock, Detroit, Mich.,
        and Hon. Morgan J. O’Brien and Hon. William McAdoo, of New York
        City.

  1902. Dec. 7. At the Hibernian Institute meeting just mentioned, Hon
        Thomas J. Gargan spoke on “The Irish in America Before the
        Revolution.” He told of the settlements they had formed, and of
        the many who had come here to add their blood to the tide that
        made the Revolution successful, the Irish pioneers who labored
        and built and then fought for their possessions and for the
        right of liberty and religious freedom. He said that modern
        research proved that the Irish had discovered America long
        before the advent of Columbus.

  1902. Dec. 7. Hon. T. A. E. Weadock, at the Hibernian Institute
        meeting, New York, this evening, spoke on “The Irish Influence
        on American Polity.” He said that a splendid influence of the
        Irish was that they took their part in the government, keeping
        it near to its first principle: that it was to be government
        by the people. If there was any great danger, it was that
        the people grew too busy with their affairs to partake of
        their right to the franchise and exercise their influence in
        government affairs. The Irish were too patriotic to neglect that
        duty, he said.

  1902. Dec. 13. Death of Patrick Dempsey, Lowell, Mass., a member of
        the Society. He was for many years a director of the First
        National bank of Lowell.

  1902. Dec. 21. Death of Capt. Patrick O’Farrell, Washington, D. C., a
        member of the Society. He was a lawyer, and a veteran of the
        Civil War.

  1903. Jan. 19. Annual meeting and dinner of the Society at the Hotel
        Manhattan, New York City. Hon. William McAdoo was elected
        president-general. Hon. Franklin H. Danaher, of Albany, N. Y.,
        read a paper on “Jan Andriessen, ye Iersman van Dublingh, and
        His Compatriots in Old Albany.”

  1903. February. The Society issues this month a volume on _Irish Rhode
        Islanders in the American Revolution_. This is the first time
        the subject has ever been specifically treated.

  1903. March 2. John J. Slattery, Louisville, Ky., of the Society, has
        a communication in the Louisville _Herald_, of this date, ably
        dealing with the “Anglo-Saxon” fallacy.

  1903. March 11. Hon. J. J. O’Connor, Elmira, N. Y., becomes a life
        member of the Society.

  1903. April 12. Death of Rev. John Flatley, Cambridge, Mass., a member
        of the Society.

  1903. May 19. Daniel M. O’Driscoll, Charleston, S. C., a member of
        the Society, passes away. He was a native of Bantry, Ireland.
        During the Civil War he was a military telegraph operator in
        the Confederate service, and sent the first message out of
        Petersburg, Va., announcing the surrender of Gen. Lee.

  1903. June. Thomas Addis Emmet, M. D., LL.D., of the Society, New York
        City, leaves there for Ireland, for the purpose of locating the
        grave of the Irish patriot, Robert Emmet. His search was not
        successful, but he hopes that a satisfactory result will be
        attained in the near future.

  1903. June 2. An order published at the War Department, Washington, D.
        C., to-day, names one of the batteries at Fort Strong, Long
        Island, Boston harbor, as Battery Drum, in honor of Capt. John
        Drum, Tenth U. S. Infantry, who was killed in the assault on
        Santiago de Cuba, 1898. Capt. Drum was an Irishman by birth, and
        was a member of our Society.

  1903. June 2. An order is published at the U. S. War Department,
        Washington, D. C., to-day, giving names to sea-coast batteries
        as follows: Fort Preble, Me., Battery Kearny; Fort Williams,
        Me., Battery Sullivan.

  1903. June 19. Celebration to-day of the 125th anniversary of
        the evacuation of Valley Forge by the Continental army.
        The celebration was under the auspices of the Valley Forge
        Anniversary Association. Archbishop Ryan of Philadelphia, Pa., a
        member of our Society, presided over the formal portion of the
        exercises.

  1903. July. Death in the Adirondacks of John A. Mooney, LL. D., New
        York City, a member of the Society.

  1903. July. In the _Granite Monthly_, of Concord, N. H., for this
        month, is an article by Hon. John C. Linehan, of the Society, on
        “New Hampshire’s Early Scotch Settlers from Ireland.” The
        article is written in an ironical vein, and very effectually
        disposes of the absurd claims of the imaginative “Scotch-Irish”
        cult.

  1903. July 7. Mrs. Edmund Burke, Milwaukee, Wis., writes informing the
        Society of the death of her husband. The latter was a member of
        the organization.

  1903. July 17. At a meeting of the Board of Governors of the Knights
        of St. Patrick, New Haven, Conn., held on this date, it was
        “Voted that the freedom of the club house be tendered to the
        members of the American-Irish Historical Society and its friends
        on Aug. 5, 1903.” The proffered courtesy was accepted.

  1903. Aug. 5. The Society holds a field-day at New Haven, Conn., and
        participates in the dedication of a monument to the Ninth
        regiment, Connecticut Volunteer Infantry, in the Civil War. This
        was an Irish regiment, and enlisted, from first to last, over
        1,600 officers and men.

  1903. Aug. 5. Headquarters for the Society on the field-day just
        mentioned, were established at the Tontine Hotel, New Haven. A
        dinner under the auspices of the organization, and in honor of
        the Ninth regiment, took place in the evening. Hon. William
        McAdoo presided. Among guests were Hon. Abiram Chamberlain,
        governor of Connecticut; Hon. Morgan G. Bulkeley, ex-governor
        of Connecticut; Hon. John P. Studley, mayor of New Haven; Hon.
        N. D. Sperry, member of congress from Connecticut; Hon. Eli
        Whitney, New Haven; Hon. Edward Griswold, Guilford, Conn.;
        Hon. John F. Hurley, ex-mayor of Salem, Mass.; Gen. Phelps
        Montgomery, New Haven; Maj. John Q. Tilson, New Haven, and a
        number of others. Letters were received from Hon. Theodore
        Roosevelt, president of the United States; U. S. Senator O. H.
        Platt, of Connecticut; M. Jusserand, the French ambassador to
        the United States, and Baron Speck von Sternberg, the German
        ambassador.

  1903. Aug. 5. Relative to the Society’s field-day at New Haven, Conn.,
        on this date, the following letter was received by Secretary T.
        H. Murray from the president of the United States: “Oyster Bay,
        N. Y., June 29, 1903. My Dear Mr. Murray: I wish I could be
        present with you on the occasion of the annual field-day of the
        American-Irish Historical Society. From early colonial days the
        Irish have been one of the great factors in our growth as a
        nation. Naturally, I take a particular interest in what they
        have contributed to our national history, inasmuch as I am
        myself of part Irish blood. From the days of Sullivan in the
        Revolutionary War to those of Sheridan in the Civil War, the
        Irish element in our country, conspicuous everywhere, has been
        especially prominent in deeds of arms, and, therefore, it is
        peculiarly appropriate that the meeting of your Society this
        year should be to commemorate the record of an Irish regiment in
        our great war. Sincerely yours, Theodore Roosevelt.”

  1903. Aug. 5. An invitation was extended the organization, on behalf
        of the New Haven Colony Historical Society, to visit the rooms
        of the latter to-day. The invitation was accepted.

  1903. September. T. H. Murray, secretary-general of the Society, is
        the author of a volume of 446 pages, issued about this time. The
        work is entitled a _History of the Ninth Regiment, Connecticut
        Volunteer Infantry, “The Irish Regiment,” in the War of the
        Rebellion, 1861–’65_. The volume is illustrated, and was brought
        out under the auspices of the Veteran Association of the
        regiment.

  1903. September. About this time, the Colorado State Library, Denver,
        sends a request for publications of our Society.

  1903. Sept. 7. Death of Stephen J. Geoghegan, New York City, a life
        member of the Society and a member of the executive council of
        the latter.

  1903. Sept. 15. About this time G. P. Putnam’s Sons, New York City,
        issued a new work by Thomas Addis Emmet, M. D., LL. D., on
        _Ireland Under English Rule: a Plea for the Plaintiff_.

  1903. Oct. 19. The Society observed the anniversary of the surrender
        of Lord Cornwallis and the British army at Yorktown (1781). The
        anniversary exercises took place at the Hotel Brunswick, Boston,
        Mass., James Jeffrey Roche, of Boston, presiding.

  1903. Nov. 11. Meeting of the executive council of the Society at the
        office of the City Trust Co., 36 Wall St., New York City. Hon.
        John D. Crimmins presided.

  1903. Dec. 26. Meeting of the executive council of the Society at the
        Catholic Club, 120 Central Park South, New York City.

  1904. Jan. 2. Meeting of the executive council of the Society at the
        Catholic Club, 120 Central Park South, New York City.

  1904. Jan. 12. Annual meeting and dinner of the Society at the Hotel
        Manhattan, New York City. Hon. William McAdoo presided and was
        reëlected president-general of the organization. Rev. Andrew M.
        Sherman, of Morristown, N. J., read a paper dealing with “The
        O’Briens of Machias, Me., Patriots of the American Revolution.”
        He is a descendant of these O’Briens. The paper, together
        with an account of the meeting and dinner, was subsequently
        published in book form, the expense of publication being
        generously defrayed by Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York City,
        ex-president-general of the Society.

  1904. Jan. 28. Death of Rev. James L. O’Neil, O. P., editor of
        _Dominicana_, San Francisco, Cal. He had previously been editor
        of the _Rosary Magazine_, New York City. At his initiative, “the
        editor of the _Rosary Magazine_” became a life member of the
        organization. The membership is arranged so that successive
        editors of the publication may enjoy the rights and privileges
        of the Society. Father O’Neil was the first to represent the
        magazine in the organization.

  1904. Feb. 5. A. B. Olson, Denver, Col., writes for information
        concerning the Society. He states that the Swedish-Americans
        contemplate forming an organization on similar lines.

  1904. Feb. 13. T. H. Murray, secretary-general of the Society, opens
        temporary quarters at 509 Fifth Ave., New York City, to advance
        the interests of the organization.

  1904. Feb. 15. Death of James F. Redding, Charleston, S. C., a member
        of the Society.

  1904. Feb.-March. The following gentlemen have become life members of
        the Society at this time: Rev. Henry A. Brann, D. D., New York
        City; P. E. Somers, Worcester, Mass.; George J. Gillespie, New
        York City; Hon. Patrick Garvan, Hartford, Conn.; Stephen
        Farrelly, New York City; Patrick Gallagher, New York City;
        Robert A. Sasseen, New York City; and Hon. Jeremiah O’Rourke,
        Newark, N. J.

  1904. March 2. Death of Hon. James M. Fitzsimons, New York City, a
        member of the Society. He was chief justice of the City Court of
        New York.

  1904. March 4. Death of Rev. Francis D. McGuire, rector of the
        Cathedral, Albany, N. Y., a member of the Society.

  1904. March 8. Hon. Edward F. O’Dwyer becomes chief justice of the
        City Court, New York. He is a member of the Society.

  1904. March 9. Death at Exeter, N. H., of Miss Margaret Sullivan, a
        granddaughter of Gen. John Sullivan of the Revolution. Her
        father, George Sullivan, son of the general, was an able lawyer,
        attorney-general of New Hampshire many years and held other
        prominent positions.

  1904. March 16. Edward F. McSweeney, Boston, Mass., of the Society,
        delivers an address entitled “A Forecast of Irish Influence on
        American Life.”

  1904. April 21. Obsequies of Bernard Foley, Roxbury (Boston), Mass., a
        member of the Society.

  1904. April 23. Death of Patrick Farrelly, New York City, of the
        American News Co. He was a member of the Society.

  1904. May 11. H. Warren Phelps, Columbus, O., applies for admission to
        the Society.

  1904. June. T. H. Murray, secretary-general of the Society, assembled
        a loan collection of Irish-American memorials to be exhibited at
        the Louisiana Purchase Exposition, St. Louis, Mo. A national
        supervisory committee was formed in connection with the project
        and included many members of the Society. The collection was
        placed on exhibition at St. Louis and attracted much attention.
        Among those who contributed articles to the collection were Hon.
        John D. Crimmins, New York City; Major Patrick Maher, New Haven,
        Conn.; William M. Sweeny, Astoria, L. I., N. Y.; Miss Mary Boyle
        O’Reilly, Boston, Mass.; Capt. Laurence O’Brien, New Haven,
        Conn.; Hon. Alexander C. Eustace, Elmira, N. Y.; Thomas Addis
        Emmet, M. D., LL. D., New York City; Capt. John J. Coffey,
        Neponset, Mass.; Thomas M. Cahill, M. D., New Haven, Conn.;
        Jeremiah O’Donovan (Rossa), New York City; Dennis H. Tierney,
        Waterbury, Conn.; Rev. James H. O’Donnell, Norwalk, Conn.;
        James E. Kelly, New York City, and Meagher’s Irish Brigade
        Association, New York City.

  1904. June. Among the articles loaned the collection just mentioned,
        for the Irish-American exhibit at St. Louis, Mo., was an
        Irish flag carried by the Twenty-eighth Massachusetts (the
        “Faugh-A-Ballagh” regiment) in the Civil War. The regiment
        formed part of Meagher’s Irish Brigade, First Division, Second
        Corps. The flag was loaned by Capt. John J. Coffey, of Neponset,
        Mass., a member of the Society, who wrote as follows to
        Secretary T. H. Murray concerning it: “This flag has a precious
        history. It was presented to the Twenty-eighth regiment, through
        the late Patrick Donahoe, by the Irish women of Boston, on Sept.
        24, 1861, at the same time Governor Andrew presented the
        regiment with the flag of the State of Massachusetts. My company
        [C], was selected as the right centre or color company, and my
        brother, Michael J., whose height exceeded mine by two inches,
        was selected as color sergeant of this green flag and carried it
        until he fell mortally wounded at the second battle of Bull Run,
        August 30, 1862; after that it went through Chantilly, South
        Mountain, and Antietam. On the memorable day of the attack on
        Marye’s Heights, at Fredericksburg, it was the only green flag
        unfurled—and by this I do not intend to cast any reflections on
        the four other regiments of the Irish brigade. Sometime before
        Chancellorsville, in May following, Colonel Byrnes and the other
        officers of the regiment concluding that it was too cumbersome,
        subscribed among themselves and procured a flag of lighter
        fabric (worsted), and laid the old flag (this one) aside, but in
        safe keeping, and you may rest assured that it has been
        scrupulously cared for and treasured by the custodian.”

  1904. June. Meagher’s Irish Brigade Association loaned to the
        Irish-American collection for the World’s Fair at St. Louis,
        Mo., two battle-flags carried by the Sixty-ninth regiment, New
        York, in the Civil War. One of these was an American flag and
        the other an Irish flag. Regarding the two flags, the following
        letter is of interest: “Mr. Thomas Hamilton Murray, New York
        City. Dear Sir: I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter
        regarding the Historic Loan Collection of Irish-American
        Memorials you are getting together for the St. Louis Exposition.
        I placed the matter before the Irish Brigade Association at last
        Sunday’s meeting, and they resolved to send you two of their
        best preserved battle flags. Also other relics which, I
        believe, will be of interest to visitors at the World’s Fair.
        These flags were presented to the Irish Brigade after the
        battle of Fredericksburg, Va., and were carried with honor
        through the battles that followed in which the Army of the
        Potomac participated. The flags were presented by a body of
        public-spirited citizens of American birth from the city of New
        York who, on hearing that the battle flags of the Irish Brigade
        had become so torn and shattered by shot and shell of the many
        battles, resolved to present them a new stand of colors.
        The presentation took place in the old Catholic church at
        Fredericksburg. I believe it is needless to caution you as to
        the preservation of these battle-scarred relics. I know that you
        and the gentlemen who compose your organization realize what
        these flags mean to us; how many recollections they tend to
        stimulate amongst us, for they are part of our very life, and
        were anything to happen to them it would be an irreparable loss.
        Money could never compensate for the tender memories they
        inspire of our comrades who died beneath them and the noble
        lessons of patriotism and duty that they bring to our minds, and
        will teach to the generations of the future. It has always been
        our unswerving custom never to allow these flags out of our
        custody, but when we read the names of the gentlemen that make
        up your organization, and the worthiness of the project
        contemplated, we felt that we could safely trust these sacred
        relics in your hands. Respectfully yours, Capt. John O’Connell,
        president Irish Brigade Association, 440 East 14th St., New York
        City, June 7, 1904.”

  1904. July 28. The Librarian of Congress writes, requesting
        publications of the Society for the Congressional Library.

  1904. August. Hon. John W. Corcoran, of Boston, Mass., a member of the
        Society, passes away. He was a lawyer by profession, had been a
        judge of the Superior Court of Massachusetts, and held other
        positions of trust and honor.




                   PAPERS BY MEMBERS OF THE SOCIETY.


                   EARLY IRISH SETTLERS IN VIRGINIA.

               BY HON. JOHN C. LINEHAN,[1] CONCORD, N. H.

Virginia was first settled by white men in 1607. On the authority of a
work published recently, Francis Maguire, an Irishman and a Roman
Catholic, visited the colony a year later. “He wrote an account of his
voyage to Virginia and submitted it to the privy council of Spain.” From
this it is evident that he was not in the interest of England and did
not remain in the colony.

Virginia, even in its early days, was not friendly to those of the faith
of Maguire. In 1625 the same writer mentioned that “Symon Tuchin master
of the _Due Return_ having been banished out of Ireland was reported as
strongly affected to popery, and the Governor and Council of Virginia
sent him as a prisoner, in January, 1625, to the Company in England.”
This ended the career of Symon in the Old Dominion, and no further
mention is made of him.

Who the first actual settlers in Virginia from Ireland were, and the
period of their arrival, can be determined only from the names printed
in the early colonial records and in the calendar of state papers
following.

The population of the colony from 1609 to 1624, as given in the work
mentioned, namely, _The First Republic in America_, was as follows:

In 1609 one authority gives it as being, in July, not over one hundred
and nine persons.

In 1611 it is estimated at about two hundred and eighty persons. In 1616
it increased to about four hundred. In 1618 it had increased to six
hundred. In 1619 it had dropped to about four hundred. The census of
1620 gives it as eight hundred and eighty-seven. In 1621 it fell to
eight hundred and forty-three. In 1622 it had increased to one thousand
two hundred and forty, and in 1624 it was reduced to eleven hundred.

An idea can here be formed of the struggles of the first settlers of the
Old Dominion against disease, famine, and the attacks of the Indians. In
1621 or 1622, the year is in dispute, there was a terrible massacre of
the settlers by the Indians, the number of killed being given as “three
hundred and forty-seven men, women and children.”

If names are any indication of the nativity of the bearers, the first
Irish settlers arrived in Virginia during this troublesome period. Their
condition in the colony could not be much worse than it was in their
native land, for about that time the long struggle for the possession of
the land, beginning with the Reformation, had taken root, not to end
until the war between William and James.

In Hotten’s _Original Lists_ of emigrants, among others is published the
names of the following persons arriving in Virginia between 1616 and
1624: John Higgins, John Cannon, John Collins, John Healey, Francis
Downing, John Fludd, Tege Lane, “of Corke in Ireland”; Tege Williams,
“Irishman”; John French, of Washford “(Wexford) in Ireland”; Thomas
Cawsey (Casey), James Connor, James Dore, Ann Mighill, John Duffee,
Thomas Doughtie (Dougherty); John Moore, Giles Martin, Thomas Jordan,
Francis Butler, Thomas Burns, “and Bridget, his wife”; Thomas Dunn,
Edmund Blaney, John Burroughs, “and Bridget, his wife”; John Griffin,
William Lacey, Alice Kean, Thomas Farley, A. Conoway, Hugh Hughes, Bryan
Rogers, William Joyce, John Haney, Elizabeth Haney, Peter Jordan, Luke
Boyse, Thomas Oage, his wife and son.

Some, undoubtedly, of the foregoing came here as the servants of English
landed proprietors in Ireland, and there is no doubt that others came as
actual settlers, for there is mention later of grants of land to some of
them. Let that be as it may, however, here was quite an addition to the
scant population of the colony of a liberal mixture of Irish blood with
that of the early English settlers.

On the same authority, Hotten, there was a large increase of the same
blood some years later, in 1635. Hotten copied his lists from the
originals preserved in England. Many of the originals were either lost,
mutilated, or destroyed. In consequence, they are incomplete. The period
thus partly covered is between 1600 and 1700. The following names are
published among hundreds of others in the lists as arriving in Virginia
during the year 1635: Richard Hughes, Garrett Riley, Miles Riley, James
Bryan, Thomas Murphie, Christopher Carroll, Philip Connor, Jo Dunn.

As the ages of the foregoing are given and the average was twenty years,
it is fair to presume that they came over as servants. They are followed
by Richard Fleming, Charles McCartee, Owen McCartee, Bryan McGowan,
Patrick Breddy, Bryan Glynn, John Neale, William Redman, William Hart,
Elizabeth Riley, Daniel Flood, William Hickey, John Herron, Edward
Hughes, James Morfey, Robert Bryan, Dennis Hoggan (Hogan), Jo Dermott,
Jo Butler, Jo O’Mullen, Charles Gibbon, Richard Kirby, Humphrey Buckley,
Olough Berne, Daniel Vaughan, Bryan Hare, Thomas Connier (Connor), Jo
Tullie, Donough Gorkie, Gerald Butler, John Griffin, Thomas Purcell,
John Duffy, Edmund Butler, James Gavett and John Gavett, “Irishmen”;
James Fenton, Thomas Dunn.

Hotten’s book also contains many names, Irish in appearance, of persons
who went to Barbadoes during the same period, or later, and states that
permission had been given many of them to go to New England and other
parts of the English colonies between 1635 and 1680. That many availed
themselves of the opportunity, and migrated to Virginia is evident from
the names printed in colonial records and the state publications. That
the greater part were useful citizens, and not a few of their
descendants filled positions of honor and emolument in Virginia, and in
the territories settled by her people, is quite clear.

Thomas Jordan, bearing the name both given and proper, borne by one of
the emigrants of 1624, was a sheriff of Nansemond county, in 1718, and a
public-spirited citizen.

Col. Fleming, a namesake of another of these sturdy immigrants, bore an
honorable part in civil and military affairs before and after the
Revolution, and has frequent mention in the publications treating of
those stirring times.

The McCartys have been prominent in Virginia almost from the earliest
period in the history of the colony. Whether or not all were descendants
of Owen and Charles McCartee, who came over in 1635, cannot here be
determined. The name, with various spellings, has frequent mention in
the colonial and state records. It has been represented in the National
Congress, and one of the bravest of the Confederates during the Civil
War, noted for his courage, was Capt. Page McCarty of Richmond. He was
equally noted as a duelist.

In a letter to the writer, some six years ago, Capt. McCarty said there
was a belief in the family that the original immigrants of the name came
from Kinsale in Cork, but some of the name, as is the custom nowadays,
called their ancestors “Scotch-Irish.” He was an exception, however.

In an account of the death and funeral of Washington, by his private
secretary, Tobias Lear, a native of New Hampshire, he wrote that the
families of McCarty, McClanahan, and Callahan were especially invited to
attend the funeral by the widow, at the request of Washington on his
death-bed.

Daniel McCarty was a justice for Fairfax county in 1770. Capt. Richard
McCarty was in command of an expedition against the Indians in 1779.
With him as an associate officer was Captain Quirk. The name is spelled
indifferently as McCartee, McCarty, McCarthy, etc., which makes it
appear that there were others of the same name later and spelling their
names in accordance with the Irish method.

In 1742 there is a record deeding two hundred and ninety-eight acres of
land to Dennis Conneirs,—the good old name of Connor was undoubtedly
twisted by the scribe. Major William Lynn was an officer in the
Spottsylvania militia in 1757. Lynn is a name frequently met in Ireland.
Judge Wauhope Lynn, of New York, is a splendid representative of the
Irish Lynns of Antrim, in Ulster, Ireland. Daniel Lyon and Daniel Currie
were two of the defenders of Hickey’s Fort against the Indians in 1758.
Another old Irish name heads a list of signers complaining against the
Brunswick county court in 1764. It is Malone, spelled properly, and was
borne by Shakespeare’s great Irish commentator, Edmond Malone, who has
frequent mention in Boswell’s Johnson, and who flourished in London
about the same period as his Virginia namesake.

John Hooe (Hoey), Lynaugh Helm, Henry Gee, William Keenan, Daniel
Herring, Daniel McCarty, Philip Nowland (Nolan), Elijah McClenachan,
John Grattan, Walter McClerry (Clary), James McLaw, Nicholas W. Curie,
Jeremiah Glenn, Jeremiah Early, John Fitzpatrick, William Mead, Charles
Lynch, were all magistrates in the several counties of Virginia in 1770.

In a letter of George Mason, written in 1775, declining a nomination to
Congress, he writes his excuses to Mr. McCarty and other inquiring
friends. Capt. Richard McCarty has frequent mention during the
Revolutionary period. As showing the friendship of the Irish people in
Ireland for the Americans during that struggle, the following extract,
written by an American agent, Philip Mazzei, from France to Governor
Jefferson of Virginia, is of interest:

“I shall now tell you how that came about. Mr. Mark Lynch, merchant in
Nantes, came to me with a bill I had drawn in Ireland on Penet & Co.,
D’Acosta having refused to accept it. My old creditor, Mr. John P.
Cotter, of Corke, had ordered that in case of non-payment, the bill
should be returned without protest or molestation. Mr. Cotter’s generous
and delicate behavior had probably prepared Mr. Lynch in my favor and
the sight of my situation completed the business. His countenance
expressed his sensibility at the bad usage I had met with in that town,
and in the most genteel manner offered me the assistance I was in so
great need of, on the security I had proposed to others.”

This letter was written in 1780. It is evident from the closing part of
the quotation that Mr. Mark Lynch, the Irish merchant in Nantes, had
cashed the draft. It recalls a similar act of kindness extended to Ethan
Allen by the people of Cork while he was a prisoner on board an English
vessel in the harbor of that city. They were so lavish of their
hospitality in money and provisions to the American prisoner that the
British captain put an end to it, saying at the same time that he would
not allow the damned Irish rebels to thus treat the damned American
rebels. It also recalls an entry in the diary of John Adams, where he
mentions the hospitable treatment he had received in Spain from two
Irish merchants located in one of its maritime cities.

Between the years 1700 and 1800, many Virginians bearing distinctive
Irish names, and filling honorable positions in civil and military
life, are published in the records of the times. They reflected credit
on the community. John Daly Burk wrote a history of Virginia, and
during the Revolutionary period Thomas Burke was governor of North
Carolina, and Ædanus Burke was chief justice of South Carolina. In
connection with this it is of interest to note that in the report of
the part taken by his regiment, the Thirtieth Virginia Cavalry, in the
battle of Bull Run, Col. Radford credits his adjutant, B. H. Burke,
with capturing Col. Michael Corcoran, of the Sixty-ninth New York.
Beside Col. Radford’s report is that of Lieut.-Col. Henagin of the
Eighth South Carolina. Some of the officers of this regiment, Capt.
Harrington, Capt. Hoole, Capt. McLeod, and Capt. John C. McClenaghan,
are also mentioned. It will be noticed that the name of the
colonel—Cash—and the lieutenant-colonel—Henagin,—are also Irish in
appearance.

The battery attached to the regiment was commanded by a Capt. Shields,
one of whose lieutenants was a McCarty; possibly it may have been Page
McCarty, mentioned before. This battery was from Virginia. The
adjutant-general of Gen. Beauregard was Thomas Jordan. It will be
noticed that this name, given and proper, was borne by one of the
immigrants coming over before 1624. Shields and McCarty were also among
the early Irish names. Surgeon McClanahan is commended in a letter
written by Gen. Robert E. Lee, and in the report of Gen. Stonewall
Jackson. He also speaks in the highest terms of his surgeon, Dr. Hunter
McGuire. A Francis McGuire was in Virginia in 1608, and a Capt. Francis
McGuire, who was a commissioned officer in the Revolutionary War, was
the occasion of trouble between the states of Pennsylvania and Virginia.

McGuire was charged with taking away a free negro man from Pennsylvania.
The correspondence between the states in consequence, as given in the
state papers, is quite lengthy. From this it can be seen that the
McGuires have figured from an early period in the history of the Old
Dominion down to the present. Dr. Hunter McGuire was by the side of
Stonewall Jackson when the latter died, after receiving the fatal wound
from a volley fired by his own men at Chancellorsville.

Perhaps no name is more closely connected with Virginia for a certain
reason than is that of Lynch. John Lynch was the son of an Irish
immigrant who arrived in Virginia in the early part of the eighteenth
century. His son, of the same name, was one of the first settlers of the
town bearing his name, Lynchburg. His brother, Col. Charles Lynch, was
prominent during the Revolution. He commanded a regiment at the battle
of Guilford Court House. His son bearing the same name was governor of
Louisiana. Col. Lynch was a bitter enemy of the Tories. It is said that
the term “Lynch law” originated with him. He was credited with having
hung not less than one hundred Tories by his own hand. Hence the
expression “Lynch law.” This, however, is disputed by Irish writers, who
claim that it originated with a mayor of Galway in the olden times, who,
when the sheriff refused to hang his son convicted of murder, took the
law into his own hands and executed him himself, following the example
of Brutus, who performed a similar act during the existence of the Roman
republic. One of the family, whether or not a descendant it is not
necessary to know, was Lieut.-Commander William F. Lynch of the navy,
who explored the valley of the Jordan some time before the Civil War. He
was a officer in the Confederate navy in the War of the Rebellion.

Capt. John Fitzgerald was Washington’s favorite aide. It is stated that
he was “the finest horseman in the American army.” His home was in
Alexandria. During the trouble with France after the Revolution he was
appointed to command the defences of that city. He was a man of the
highest character and was universally respected. Col. Alexander
McClanahan was one of a family, or clan, which furnished not a few
useful men to Virginia for over a century. His brother, Capt. Robert
McClanahan, was killed at the battle of Point Pleasant in 1770. This was
called one of the bloodiest Indian engagements on record.

Surgeon McClanahan, who has been mentioned in the letter of Gen. Lee
quoted, is undoubtedly of the same family. Within a few years, a Miss
Virginia McClanahan was president of the Daughters of the American
Revolution of the city of Washington.

John Lewis was an immigrant from Ireland who came to Virginia before the
Revolution. Two of his sons, Col. Andrew Lewis and Capt. Charles Lewis,
were in the battle of Point Pleasant, also. Charles was killed. The
colonel afterwards served in the War of the Revolution, reaching the
rank of general before the struggle was over.

Major William Croghan was an officer of the Virginia line in the
Continental army. The name was borne by many men who had distinguished
themselves during the Revolutionary period, and are well known to the
readers of American history.

Among other officers of the line were Captains James Currey, Lawrence
Butler, Michael Wallace, John McCoy and Matthew Carney; Lieutenants
Joseph Conway, Timothy Fealey, Peter Higgins, John Jordan, John Rooney
and William McGuire. Luke Cannon, Robert Hayes, William D. O’Kelley,
Patrick McElroy and Patrick Lockhart are also mentioned. Major Ferdinand
O’Neal was a distinguished officer of dragoons during the same period.
The name occurs frequently as O’Neal, McNeil, Neal, Neale, and Neilly.

A Captain Sullivan was also an officer in the Virginia forces, with a
Major Charles McGill. His company was known as Sullivan’s Militia. Capt.
John O’Bannon was major of Farquier’s battalion of militia of
Williamsburg. Col. William Fleming was one of the well-known officers
and a representative of the name was among the first settlers in 1635.
John Moylan was appointed clothier-general, and as such was sent to
Boston to get clothing.

Among those who were killed at Point Pleasant with McClanahan and Lewis
were Capt. McBride and Lieut. McGuire, and privates John MacMurdrey,
Francis McBride, Hugh Cunningham, John Foley, Andrew McConnell and John
O’Neal. About fifty in all were killed in this engagement.

These names are signed to petitions, appeals, or other papers on the
records from 1782 to 1786: George Flynn, Malcolm McGee, David Looney,
John Adair, Partick Wright, Anthony Geoghegan, Patrick Joyce, James
Sullivan, Richard Whelan, James Murphy, Joseph Delaney, William Kelley.

Alexander Drumgoole was sent on a mission to the Cherokee nation by
Governor Randolph in 1787.

Major Andrew Donnelly was a gallant officer during the Revolutionary
period. Capt. McMahon, who was mentioned, served with Wayne as a major
in the expedition against the Indians, and like Gen. Butler, who had
served through the Revolutionary War, was killed during that engagement.

Other names appearing on the records, either as magistrates or signers
to various papers, were James Corran (Curran), Patrick White,
Christopher McConners, Edward McCarthy, Cornelius Conway, Arthur McCann,
John McLoghlin, William Flood, Edward McGuire, Anthony Murphy, James
Goggins, John Connor, William Brennan, Major Thomas Healey, Capt. Samuel
Brady, Col. William Finnie (Feeney), James Dougherty, Joseph Carroll,
Archibald Casey, Capt. Daniel Mullins, Patrick Saggert, John Sexton,
John McCormick, Thomas Mulledy, David Dungan, Cornelius Brady, Thomas
Brannon, Abraham Donovan, Edmond Grady, John Dunn, Francis Kelly,
Bernard Gallagher, Thomas O’Hara, William Malone, Dennis Ramsay, Thomas
Reardon, George Sweeney, William Fitzgerald, Robert Fitzgerald, Edmund
Moran, Dennis Croghan, Philip Boyle, John Butler, Cornelius O’Laughlan,
Charles O’Neale, William McManahan, James Connell, Joseph McCaughey,
Alexander Leary, Richard Byrne, Thomas McGuire, John Lowery, Joseph
Hensey (Hennessey), Anthony Fitzpatrick, Bernard McCord, John McNeill,
Henry Garrett, Dan McCarthy, Thomas Burke, Nat Murphy, Charles Connor,
Edward Hart, William Danahan, John Casey, James Kelly, Michael Burke,
Patrick Wilson, John Cavanaugh, Richard Nugent, Andrew Donnelly, Jr.,
Lawrence Bryan, Michael Delaney, James Byrne, Michael Tiernan, James
Quinn, James Daley, John McEnery, Francis O’Meara, Henry Fitzgerald,
John McMullen, James McGonegal, John Hagerty, Pat Donohue, James
McCoughlin, Patrick Butler, Cornelius McGuire, Josiah McGuire, Cornelius
McKinley, John Lawless, William Doherty, Alexander Dugan, Cornelius
Harnett (Hartnett), Patrick Roche, Cornelius Fenny (Feeney), Simon
McLaughlan, Thady Kelly and James Murdaugh.

The foregoing, from appearance, were men of standing in the communities
in which they lived. As but comparatively few names appear in public
records, there must have been many others in Virginia of the same
nationality before the beginning of the nineteenth century. Those
mentioned were officers in the militia, justices of the peace, judges,
or holding other positions which had occasioned their names being
printed in the state papers. It will be noticed that the names can be
classed as Irish, distinctively. How many more there might be bearing
English names, but who may have been as Irish as the others, cannot be
determined.

When Ramsay’s _History of the United States_ was written in 1789, or
thereabouts, the following Virginians were among those who subscribed
for it in order to guarantee its publication: Patrick Gill, William
Carroll, Edward Cunningham, James Fleming, H. H. Lacey, John McDermott,
John McBride, M. Sullivan, Thomas H. Mitchell, J. C. Vaughan, A. Jordan,
W. C. Moore, H. H. Redman, Edward Sexton, Francis Riordan, John Bowery,
William Matthews. On examination it will be found that a majority of
these surnames appear among the early settlers of the Old Dominion.

Thomas Fleming, whose name has been mentioned, was colonel of the Ninth
Virginia regiment. One of its field officers was Major M. Donovan.

It is related in the Historical Collections of Virginia that Gen. Andrew
Lewis was born in Ireland, and came here with his father and two
brothers. They were obliged to fly from their native land on account of
the resistance made by them against being evicted by their landlord.

Another prominent man in Virginia in 1753 was Dr. James O’Fallon. He is
supposed to have been the ancestor of the O’Fallons of St. Louis, Mo.,
who were among the latter city’s first settlers. One of the latter, Col.
John O’Fallon, served on the staff of Gen. Harrison at the battle of
Tippecanoe. Another well-known Irish name was that of Michael Dillon,
whose death is recorded from a fall from his horse in 1704. Richard
Donnahan was concerned in Bacon’s Rebellion in 1677, and with him was a
Capt. Hubert Farrell, who is mentioned as being one of Bacon’s majors.

Philip Connor was an associate justice of the Provincial court in 1650,
and Robert Managan (Monaghan) is recorded as taking an apprentice Sept.
24, 1690.

In the main, the first settlers of Kentucky were Virginians. The wife of
Daniel Boone was the first white woman to stand upon the banks of the
Kentucky river. This was in June, 1775, and in the September following
she had for company Mrs. McCary and Mrs. Hogan.

Col. William Casey, born in Virginia, was one of the pioneers of the
dark and bloody ground. Col. Joseph M. Daviess, who fell at Tippecanoe,
was born in Virginia. His grandfather was an Irishman and his mother
Scotch. It is written of him that he had marked peculiarities of both
races. “The hardy self-reliance, the indomitable energy, and
imperturbable coolness which had from earliest times distinguished the
Scotch, were his; while the warm heart, free and open hand, and
ready-springing tear of sensibility, told in language plainer than words
that the blood of Erin flowed fresh in his veins.”

It is clear that this eulogy was not written by a “Scotch-Irishman.” His
name undoubtedly comes from Wales, so it is fair to presume that he had
in his veins commingled the blood of the three kindred races,—the Welsh,
the Irish and the Scotch.

William T. Barry, a noted lawyer, a soldier, an educator, and
postmaster-general under Jackson, was a Virginian of Irish parentage.
Michael Cassidy, born in Ireland, emigrated to Virginia, and finally
settled in and became one of the prominent citizens of Kentucky.

The descendants of the Irish settlers in Virginia in many instances
became eminent in the southwestern states and territories organized
after the Revolution. One of them was Gen. Benjamin Logan, a Virginian,
both of whose parents were Irish. He was one of Kentucky’s greatest men.
Three counties bear the names of Casey, Daviess, and Logan, in honor of
the three men mentioned.

Brig.-Gen. James Hogan, a native of Virginia, served in the Continental
army. He was commissioned Jan. 9, 1779.

In March, 1756, the Provincial Assembly of Virginia passed an act making
provision for protection against the enemy, the French and Indians, and
further enacted a bill providing for the raising of money, £25,000, for
the payment of the militia of the several counties, and for provisions
furnished by sundry inhabitants of the said counties. Among the names to
whom payments were thus made, nearly twenty years before the Revolution,
were the following: John Daley, Elizabeth Birk, Richard Murray, James
Nevil, John Bryan, John Burk Lane, John McAnally, Alexander McMullen,
Bryan Ferguson, John Fitzpatrick, William Cunningham, Robert Carney,
Darby Conway, Thomas McNamara, Michael Mallow, Hugh Divar, William
McGill, Robert Megary, John Shields, Cornelius Sullivan, Michael Dickie,
John Farrell, James Burke, John Jordan, George Farley, Adam McCormick,
Thomas Boyne, William Shannon, Bryan McDonnell, Robert Looney, Robert
McClanahan, Michael Doherty, Peter Looney, John McNeal, William Curry,
John McGowan, Ralph Lafferty, Patrick Frasier, Patrick Campbell, Michael
Kelly, Patrick Porter, James Kennedy, Patrick Lowery, Patrick Savage,
Patrick McCloskey, Charles McAnally, John Kilpatrick, James Boreland,
Hugh Martin, Patrick Cargon, James Mulligan, John Caine, Dennis McNealy,
Lawrence Murphy, Dennis Getty, William McMullen, William Garvin, William
Doherty, Joseph Looney, Patrick McDade (Dowd), John Casey, John Macky,
Thomas Sexton, Head Lynch, Patrick McDavitt, Ambrose Bryan, William
Meade, John Riley, Reuben Keef, Jeremiah Early, Joseph McMurty, Patrick
Hennessy, Edward O’Hare, Luke Murphy, James Murphy, Patrick Vance,
Patrick Hallogan, James McFall, Patrick Johnson, John Patrick Burks,
Thomas Dooley, James Dooley, Thomas Maclin, Thomas Connelly, Michael
Poore, James Lynch, David Kelly, Michael Lawler, William Collins, Miles
Murphy, John Hayes, Richard Burke, Cornelius Mitchell, William Gerrett,
Michael Ryan, Garrett Bolin, William O’Donnell, Patrick McKenny, Richard
Murphy, Francis Maginnis, Bryan Mooney, John Hickey, John Sullivan,
William Murphy, Thomas McGuire, Cornelius Cargill, Michael Dixon,
William Splane, Thomas Doyle, Michael Lynn, Edward O’Neal, Thomas
McClanahan, James Doyle, John Donnelly, William Fitzgerald, Henry Dooley
and Bryan Nolan. The people whose names are here given were soldiers in
the militia fighting against the French and Indians between 1738 and
1758, as well as citizens furnishing them provisions.

In the poll for the election of burgesses for the several Virginia
counties in 1741 are the following, among other names: Morgan Donnell,
Daily Callahan, Edward Barry, John Carfey (Coffey), Simon Carnel, Dennis
Connors, Edward Fagin, John Murphy, Patrick Hamericka, Michael Dermond
(Dermott), James Cullen, William Butler, Michael Scanlan, Gabriel
Murphy, James Dulaney, William Hogan, Henry Murphy, John Madden, Dennis
McCarty, Thomas Carney, William Buckley, William Reardon and Philip
Nolan.

The greater part of the names here given are in appearance Irish of the
Irish, of Gaelic, or of old Norman origin. An examination of the early
Virginia records will show, from 1619 to 1790, the entry of some of the
most ancient of the Gaelic names peculiar to Ireland, like O’Neil,
O’Donnell, O’Brien, O’Connor, accompanied by McMahon, McCarthy,
McClanahan, McGuire, etc.

In an address delivered by the venerable Dr. Thomas Dunn English to the
members of the American-Irish Historical Society, at one of its annual
gatherings in New York several years ago, he stated that when a young
man, over half a century before, he practised his profession in western
Virginia. He noticed while there the manners, customs, and phrases of
the mountaineers, and in later life, when he removed to New York, he was
surprised to see the similarity between them and the newly-arrived Irish
from the south, east, and west of Ireland. This for the first time
caused him to change his opinion as to the nationality of the ancestors
of the people in Virginia who had been classed as “Scotch-Irish,” for in
every respect they appeared more like the southern Irish whom he had met
later in New York.

Enough has been written to show what a large proportion of the people of
the Old Dominion before the year 1800 were of Irish descent. The mention
of any more names would simply be a tiresome proceeding.

While many of these people were distinguished in Virginia, the greater
part of their descendants were more eminent in the territories and
states to which they migrated. A distinguished Virginian, although not a
native of the state, was Major-General Benjamin F. Kelly of the Union
army. He was a native of New Hampshire, but went to West Virginia when a
youth. He was the grandson of Darby Kelly, who served three years in the
old French War in northern New York under Sir William Johnson. Darby was
a soldier, a schoolmaster, and a farmer, and his New Hampshire
descendants are, and have been, among the most useful citizens of the
old Granite state. Gen. Kelly is credited with raising the first Union
regiment and winning the first victory for the Union south of Mason and
Dixon’s line during the Civil War. His nephew, Capt. Warren Michael
Kelly, commanded a company in the Tenth New Hampshire Infantry,
commanded by Col. Michael T. Donohoe, and it is claimed that he led the
first white troops into Richmond after its evacuation.

Another distinguished Union officer, a West Virginian, if I am not
mistaken, was Gen. Milroy. Every Irishman is aware that this was the
good old Gaelic name of Mulroy, and in that form is borne by hundreds of
Irish persons in America to-day. On the Confederate side none of the
many distinguished officers serving under Gen. Lee had a better
reputation as a fighter than Gen. William Mahone. It is claimed that he
was opposed to the surrender of Lee, and that his troops were ready,
under his direction, to continue the fight.

That writers in time will do justice to those of the Irish race and to
Ireland for the part taken in the colonization of the country and in the
establishment of the republic, is unquestioned, but Irishmen and the
sons of Irishmen must interest themselves in this matter in each state
in order to accomplish that end. New England in this respect, through
its writers, has made known to the world the part taken by the Pilgrims
and Puritans in the building of this nation, and their example can well
be followed by people of our own race in laboring with the pen to show
that in the same work Irishmen and Irishmen’s sons have taken no small
part.

The authorities examined in connection with the writing of this paper
are Hotten’s _Original Lists_ of emigrants, the _Virginia Calendar of
State Papers_, the _First Republic in America_, Ramsay’s _History of the
United States_, Campbell’s _History of Virginia_; _Historical
Collections of Virginia_, _William & Mary College Quarterly_, _Gleanings
of Virginia History_, Collins’ _History of Kentucky_.


            THE IRISH PIONEERS OF THE CONNECTICUT VALLEY.[2]

                 BY EDWARD A. HALL, SPRINGFIELD, MASS.

Since the organization of the American-Irish Historical Society, in
1897, with Hon. Theodore Roosevelt, whose father’s mother was Irish, as
one of the charter members, and Rear Admiral Richard W. Meade as the
first president-general, many important facts have been recorded of the
contributions of the Irish element in the upbuilding of this republic.

A distinguished statesman and statistician recently stated that within
the memory of men now living upwards of twenty-one millions of
immigrants arrived and settled in the United States. This same authority
states that almost two thirds of our entire population is represented by
English and Irish blood in about equal proportions. In this computation
it should always be remembered that England was given credit for many of
the earlier Irish emigrants who were obliged to sail from English ports
and compelled to adopt English surnames.

It is, however, with thousands of Irish pioneers who immigrated to this
country before the time of men living now and who settled many of the
towns in or bordering on the Connecticut valley that I wish to occupy
the attention of my readers.

Up to a few years ago, the popular opinion seemed to be that the Irish
first began crossing the Atlantic after the famine of 1846, or about the
time of the building of the canals and railroads. That many Irish men
and women came to the Connecticut valley and participated in the
formation of the first settlements, that is from 1635 to 1735,
practically the first hundred years of American life, the records of the
towns will prove.

The descendants of the old Irish settlers here, in many cases, ceased to
look upon their ancestors as Irishmen, or at least forgot about, or
appeared not to be familiar with, their Irish origin, because of the
prejudices that existed respecting the more recent comers from the “ever
green isle” that have tended to make them disinclined to acknowledge an
ancestry which was so little in general favor and popularity.

As we become more educated, intelligent, and enlightened as a people,
however, and become familiar by careful study with the early history of
our country, we will learn to our great advantage of the names and deeds
of Irishmen who played a prominent part in the establishment of this
government. We will appreciate more fully something of the pride that
should animate us for being so fortunate as to be able to trace our
ancestry back to such worthy relationship.

The people of this race, men and women, born on Irish soil, and their
descendants, have been here from the first “prompted by the motives
common to all emigration, dissatisfaction with the old order of things
and the resolve to obtain a freer and better life in the new land under
favorable conditions.”

Here in the Connecticut valley the best, the cleanest, and strongest
blood of Europe has come in to strengthen and accentuate the old stock
that existed here, and the result has been the enterprising and
progressive communities of to-day in the cities and towns of the valley.

A recent publication announced the death of Sir William MacCormic, who
passed away recently, as the “celebrated English surgeon,” although he
was born in Ireland. Similar freedom has been taken in the case of the
Duke of Wellington, Edmund Burke, Goldsmith, Sheridan, Dean Swift,
Justin McCarthy, and other famous Irishmen. This is even worse than
being called “Scotch-Irish,” as is the fate of many of our famous
Americans of Irish ancestry.

We are all Americans and the Irish are all Irish, whether their
ancestors were from Spain, or France, or England, or Scotland; they all
became Irish as we became Americans, and the Irish who came here in the
early days of the colonies represented all the blending of these races.
We are all of us the resultant of a great many different, and,
apparently, antagonistic races. We commonly became Irish, Scotch, or
American as the result of the surroundings of two or three generations.

The first settlements in the Connecticut valley were made from
Cambridge, Dorchester, and Watertown, Mass., to the towns of Windsor,
Hartford, and Weathersfield in Connecticut. This migration took place in
1634–’35. It was of a wholesale character, almost depopulating those
towns in the eastern part of Massachusetts. Along with this exodus there
was another from Roxbury, Mass., led by William Pynchon in May, 1636.
This migration settled on the eastern bank of the Connecticut in
Springfield, Mass. Middletown, Conn., was settled soon after and may
possibly have been called after Middletown in Ireland.

Among the early records of Springfield, Mass., we find that Henry Chapin
sold to John Riley sixteen acres of land running 120 rods along the west
side of the Connecticut river, Nov. 4, 1684, the property being
described in the record as “West of the Connecticut River and north from
the Riley tract,” which would indicate that the 16 acres was an
additional tract to other lands previously owned by some member of the
Riley family. The sale was witnessed by Miles Morgan, who made his mark
in the form of a pick axe and the deed was recorded by John Holyoke.
This is a part of the territory known as “Ireland Parish” and is the
present site of the Holy Family Institute for orphan children at
Brightside.

Col. John Cummings purchased the territory of Cummington, Mass., of the
government, June 2, 1762, for £1,800. This town furnished to American
literature the poet William Cullen Bryant. He was the son of Dr. Peter
Bryant and was born on Nov. 3, 1794. As a poet he ranks among the best.
His productions are marked by great simplicity and clearness of
expression, pure morality, a genial and gentle philosophy, and a
well-tempered imagination, combined with a superior comprehension. Both
names, Cullen and Bryant or Bryan, are distinctively of Irish origin,
but are often called English, like many of the earlier Irish immigrants.

Among the Revolutionary soldiers from Cummington, the last survivor was
Daniel Timothy, born Jan. 7, 1755. He was in the service during the
entire war and lived to be over 100 years old. He was known by the name
of “Teague,” which is Irish for Timothy, and this is the name given him
in his pension certificate.

Felt’s history states that the town of Greenwich, Mass., was settled
about the year 1732, by an Irish colony, and among the names of the
first families are Powers, Hynds, Patterson, Cooley, Rogers, and Gibbs.
Capt. N. Powers was a descendant of the Powers from Ireland, as was also
Mr. Patterson, who died April 19, 1811, at the age of 79 years. In the
Revolutionary struggle the men were patriotic, and furnished their full
quota for the war.

The settlement of Hadley, Mass., was commenced in 1659, by a company of
persons residing in Windsor, Wethersfield, and Hartford, Conn., and is,
therefore, one of the oldest towns of the Connecticut valley, and has an
interesting history. The original territory of Hadley included the
present town of Hadley, Hatfield, Amherst, Granby, South Hadley, and a
part of Whately. A portion of the town was called “Patrick’s Swamp,”
possibly after some Irishman who resided there. Among the early settlers
we find the families of Thomas Coleman and John White.

Among the early settlers of Middlefield, Mass., was Col. David Mack, who
defined the boundaries of the town. It was incorporated March 12, 1783.
John Ford built the first grist-mill about the year 1780. Here also
settled the families of Malachi Loveland, J. Taggart and M. Rhodes.

The district of Williamsburg, Mass., set off from Hatfield, was
incorporated a town, Aug. 23, 1775. Early tax lists show Irish names,
such as Joseph Carey, Thomas Finton, George Dunn, James Ludden, Edward
Curtis, William Finton and Joseph Ludden.

The settlement of Worthington, Mass., was so rapid that from the time
the territory was sold at auction, June 2, 1762, the settlers flowed in
and became so numerous that the town was incorporated in 1768. Among the
first settlers are such names as John Kelley, Thomas Kinne, James
Kelley, Jeremiah Kinne, Mathew Finton, and N. Collins. The inhabitants
of this, like many other towns, were composed of a mixed population from
England, Ireland, and a few from Scotland and France.

The first settlement of Bernardstown, Mass., commenced about the year
1738, and it was here, on May 18, 1676, during the Indian troubles,
occurred what is known as the “Falls Fight,” when Capt. Turner with only
a comparatively small body of men, attacked and destroyed hundreds of
Indians at what has been called in honor of the commander of the forces,
Capt. Turner,—who lost his life during the engagement,—Turners Falls.

Major John Burke built one of the first four houses erected in the town,
and among the first settlers are the names of Griffin, Lee, King,
Gleason, Baker, and Bradshaw. Major Burke was clerk of the town for
twenty-two years, and became the first representative in 1764.

The history of many of the towns of western Massachusetts shows that
several of them had been set off and named in the first years of the
eighteenth century. They had very few inhabitants previous to the coming
of the Irish in considerable numbers about 1718. Several towns laid out
and named after that time, like Colerain, Montgomery, Gill, and
Charlemont, Conway, Monroe, Huntington, were called after places in
Ireland from whence the early settlers immigrated.

West of the Connecticut river the territory was divided up into towns
soon after the settlement of the boundary line between Connecticut and
Massachusetts, which took place in 1713, when the present town of
Suffield, formerly in Massachusetts, was thrown into Connecticut, and in
1632 the owners of the tract of land in that territory were given an
equivalent tract of six miles square by the Massachusetts legislature,
and this territory is included in the present town of Blandford, Mass.,
one of the first towns almost entirely settled by people from Ireland
who arrived in this country in considerable numbers about that time.

These people were Irish Presbyterians who came from Ireland about the
year 1718. Francis Brimley, A. M. Collins, Samuel Knox and Patrick Boies
came up from Hartford, Conn., and purchased land of Christopher Lawton
and Francis Wells, to whom the legislature had conveyed undivided parts
of the township.

The first clergyman was Rev. Mr. McClenathan, an Irishman, who received
£135 a year for his services. He did not give satisfaction and remained
only two years, when he became a chaplain in the army. Rev. James
Morton, also an Irishman, was installed as pastor in August, 1748, and
preached to the people for twenty years. He retired June 2, 1767, and
lived in Blandford, Mass., until his death, which occurred in October,
1793, at the age of 80 years.

Many of the representatives of the town to the legislature for nearly a
hundred years after its settlement were native born Irishmen or the sons
of Irishmen, among whom were Reuben Boies, William Knox, Timothy Blair,
John Ferguson, Daniel Boies, Patrick Boies, Samuel Knox, Daniel Collins,
and David Boies. The following are the names among the early families:
McClinton, Reed, Brown, Taggart, Blair, Wells, Montgomery, Stewart,
Campbell, Ferguson, Boies, Sennett, Wilson, Gibbs, Knox, Young, Carr,
Black, Anderson and Hamilton.

Hon. Patrick Boies, a descendant of the Boies family who settled in
Blandford, Mass., was the first lawyer admitted to the Hampden county
bar, in 1812, and one of the first sheriffs of Hampden county. A
daughter of Patrick Boies was the organist in St. Mary’s church,
Westfield, Mass., for several years. The first clergyman of the
Congregational church of Blandford, was, as stated, an Irishman named
McClenathan, one of the petitioners to Governor Shute.

Chester is another of the towns of Hampden county, Mass., settled a few
years after Blandford, almost entirely by Irish. The present town formed
one of the ten original townships sold at auction by order of the
general court, Jan. 2, 1762. About that time the first settlers of the
place began to arrive who in all probability were like large numbers of
Irish coming to this country at that time, Presbyterians, although the
names of some of them would indicate that they were Catholics, such as
John and David Gilmore, Thomas Kennedy, Daniel Fleming, William Moore,
Thomas McIntire, William Kennedy, John McIntire, James Clark, Andrew
Fleming. Other prominent settlers were the Gordons, Hollands, Knoxs,
Henrys, Hamiltons, Quiglays, Elders and Bells. This town was
incorporated Oct. 31, 1765, when it was called Murrayfield. Among the
clergymen who officiated at Chester we find the name of Rev. Andrew
McCune.

The first settlers of Granville, Mass., which was first called Bedford,
were almost all from Ireland. Following the first settler, Samuel
Bancroft, came Daniel Cooley, Thomas Spellman, John Root, Peter Gibbons
and Samuel Church. Dr. Holland in his “History of Western Massachusetts”
refers to the longevity of the early settlers of this town as quite
remarkable. The ancestor of the Cooleys from Ireland died at the age of
90 years; of the Spellmans, who died in 1767, at 93; of the Gibbonses at
92; of the Churches at 95, and of the Roots at 103. Hamilton, Goff,
Cortiss, Gibbons, Clark, Moore, Phelan were also early settlers at
Granville.

The one hundredth anniversary of the settlement of Rev. Timothy M.
Cooley, in 1795, took place in Granville in August, 1895, at which a
large number of the descendants of those early Irish settlers were
present, when they most fittingly honored the memory of their ancestors.
J. G. Holland says that the facts were communicated to him by Rev. Mr.
Cooley in 1854, when he was 83 years of age. He was born in Granville
and like many of the Cooleys of Hampden county was descended from old
Daniel Cooley from Ireland.

Among the early inhabitants of Rowe, Mass., which was settled in 1744,
we find the names of Michael Wilson, Henry Gleason, William Taylor,
Mathew Barr, and Joseph Thomas. They were a portion of the Irish colony
to Worcester county, which after a short time scattered to form new
settlements. The first permanent settlement of Shelborne was about 1760
by several Irish families who had lived for a time in Londonderry, N. H.
Among them are the names of Joseph Thompson, Patrick Lawson, Robert
Wilson, John Taylor, James Ryder, Daniel Nims and Samuel Hunter.

Quite a number of these men were soldiers in the Revolution and also
took an important part in Shay’s insurrection. The first settler of the
town of Ashfield, Mass., was Richard Ellis, a native of Dublin, Ireland.
He was soon followed by Thomas Phillips, whose sister he married.
Phillips built a log house for himself and family almost a half mile
north of Mr. Ellis. A family named Smith, which had settled in South
Hadley, soon joined them and they were followed by other families from
time to time so that in ten years they numbered about twenty families
and over one hundred people. They labored as none but the pioneers of
the forest know how to toil to obtain a comfortable support for their
families. The town increased years later in population and prosperity
and was incorporated in June, 1765, and ten years later they like
thousands of their countrymen took an active part in the Revolution,
when they drew up a preamble and resolutions signed by Ellis, Phillips,
and sixty-five others, denouncing England.

The settlers of Pelham, Mass., were Irish Presbyterians and in the
agreement of the original committee with Col. John Stoddard, of whom the
territory was purchased, occurs this passage: “It is agreed that
families of good conversation be settled on the premises, who shall be
such as the inhabitants of the Kingdom of Ireland or their descendants
and none to be admitted but such as bring good and undeniable
credentials or certificates of their being persons of good conversation
and of the Presbyterian persuasion and confirm to the discipline
thereof.”

The Irishmen of Pelham were on the right side in the Revolution. They
issued an address to their countrymen in Boston, Nov. 3, 1773, of which
the following extract is an illustration: “We are not at present much
intimidated with the pompous boasting on the other side of the water or
the claim that Great Britain could blow America into atoms.” They
unanimously voted their acquiescence in, and support of, a declaration
of independence fourteen days before the Declaration of Independence was
made at Philadelphia, and throughout the war they furnished from their
slender means and resources more than their proportion of men and money
for its prosecution.

The town of Chesterfield, Mass., was first occupied about 1760 to 1765
by Simon Higgins, George Buck, Pierce Cowing, Charles Kid, Robert
Hamilton, Benj. Kid, Con. Bryan, Thomas Pierce, John Holbard, Jerry
Spaulding, William White and David Stearns. They were mostly Irishmen
from Pelham and elsewhere. The first pastor called to preach the gospel
was Rev. Peter Johnson of Londonderry. They named one of the principal
streets of the town, Ireland street. This street was accepted March 17,
1763, and is the only street in the town which has remained unaltered.
The people of Chesterfield were patriots in the Revolution and voted, in
1775, to purchase 400 pounds of powder, 400 pounds lead, and 1,200
flints to supply the forty-seven Minute Men who marched to Cambridge
upon the Lexington alarm.

Of the territory comprising the original county of Hampshire, Mass.,
from which the counties of Hampden and Franklin have been set off, the
Irish settled a large portion of the area from which the early organized
towns were formed, such as Palmer, Chester, and Blandford. Pelham,
Colerain, Charlemont, Sunderland, and many districts were later set off
and organized into townships, such as Granville, Brimfield, Southwick,
Russell, Montgomery, Goshen, Conway, Ware, Amherst, Orange, Gill,
Huntington, Rowe, Greenwich, Worthington, and Middlefield.

The history of the towns of Berkshire county, Mass., shows that they
were mostly all organized a generation or two after the coming of the
Irish, who settled the original territory from 1718 to 1740, and
although the names on the town records show that many of them were
settled by the sons and grandsons of the settlers from Ireland, we can
only guess at the origin of others by their Irish names, such as the
Plunketts of Pittsfield and Adams, Patrick Murphy and Michael Sweet of
Savoy, with Patrick Tyrell, Whalen, or Phelan, Casey, Kerwin, Kneil, or
Neil, Hale, and McHale, Bryan, or Bryant, in several towns of the
county.

Isaac Magoon came from Ireland with the colony that settled in Palmer,
Mass., in 1727. The farm allotted to him by the legislative commission
was at the southwest corner of the Reed estate. He left two sons,
Alexander (who also left two sons, Isaac and Alexander), and Isaac who
married Lucretia, daughter of John Downing, and had thirteen children.
This family owned about 1,400 acres of the best land in Ware, Mass.
Several of the descendants of the Magoon family afterwards settled in
the Western states, and many of them probably know very little of their
Irish ancestry.

Among the very early Irish settlers whose descendants are at present
residents of the Connecticut valley, and of whom we have authentic
records, a few families deserve special mention because of the
prominence to which they have attained in the community. Irish men and
women, boys and maidens, were imported to these colonies in the very
first years of the settlements, while in June, 1643, an Irish
immigration took place that far out-numbered the Plymouth colony in
Massachusetts. Of the descendants of these early settlers, Hall J.
Kelley, one of the most enterprising men of Palmer, Mass., who developed
the village of Three Rivers, was born in New Hampshire, Aug. 24, 1790,
and was a descendant of John Kelly, who settled in Newbury, Mass., in
1633. John Riley and his wife, Grace O’Dea, came to this country from
Ireland about the year 1624. They settled at Hartford, Conn., where
their first two children were born,—John in 1646 and Joseph in 1649,
after which they moved to West Springfield, Mass., where Jonathan was
born in 1651, and afterwards Mary, Grace, Sarah, Jacob, and Isaac, the
dates of whose births are unknown, but all the eight children are named
in this order in his will of 1671. With the Rileys came a nephew of Mr.
Riley, named John Riley, and a young sister of Mrs. Riley, named
Margaret O’Dea. This couple got married at Springfield, Mass., in 1660,
and had two daughters, Margaret, born Dec. 21, 1662, and Mary, born June
2, 1665. John died Oct. 24, 1684, and his wife died Aug. 22, 1689. He
had two brothers, Richard, who remained in Hartford, and Patrick, who
with his wife Bridget moved to Middletown.

Garret and Miles Riley came in 1634 from County Longford, Ireland.
Patrick and Richard Riley came to Windsor and Wethersfield, Conn., in
1639. John Riley and wife, Margaret, came to Springfield, Mass., in
1640, where two daughters were born. Mary, born June 2, 1665, married
Joseph Ely, June 2, 1685; Margaret, born Dec. 21, 1662, married William
McGraney, July 19, 1685.

Bridget Clifford, who died at Suffield, Conn., May 7, 1695, came from
Ireland to this country with her brothers, John, aged twenty, and
Oliver, eighteen, in the vessel _Primrose_ for Virginia, 1635. John died
Dec. 25, 1668.

James Coggin and John Cogan, from Dublin, Ireland, settled at Windsor,
Conn., and removed to Hartford in 1641. John Connor, whose parents,
Philip and Mary Connor, came from Cork in 1634, was born at Middletown,
Conn., June 14, 1686. His son John was taken prisoner at Quebec, 1775.

Robert Smith, born in Ireland 1672, came to Palmer, Mass., 1728, where
he died Dec. 21, 1759.

Edward King located at Windsor, Conn., about 1635, and is described as
“An Irishman and one of the oldest settlers in this vicinity.”

John Cleary of Hadley, Mass., died in 1691. His son John was born Oct.
4, 1647, while his son John, Jr., was born April 3, 1671, and was slain
in Brookfield in 1709. Joseph, son of old John, was born Nov. 30, 1677;
and Joseph, son of John 3d, died in 1748. Joseph’s son Joseph was born
Sept. 3, 1705.

John Clark was born in Ireland, 1704. He had two sons, John and Moses,
living with him at Hadley, Mass.

The following interesting extract is from the records of Northampton,
Mass., Sept. 17, 1663: “At a legal Town Meeting there was then granted
to Cornelius, the Irishman, three acres of land upon condition that he
build upon it and make improvement of it within one year, yet not so as
to make him capable of acting in any Town affairs, no more than he had
before it was granted to him.”

John Fleming, born in Ireland in 1673, came to America and settled in
Palmer, Mass., 1721. Robert Farrell came from Ireland in 1720 and came
to Palmer a few years later. Samuel Shaw came from Queenstown, County
Cork, in 1720, and to Hampden County, Mass., in 1736.

The first inhabitants of Colerain, Mass., were mostly of those who had
immigrated from Ireland in 1718, although many of them, did not leave
Ireland until about the time of the settlement of the town in 1736. Some
came from the Irish settlement of Londonderry, N. H., and more from
Stow, Pelham, Woburn, and Roxbury, Mass., where they had previously
settled before coming to Colerain. Holland says, “They were a robust set
of men; six foot or more in height with frames of corresponding size;
possessing constitutions capable of great endurance and fitted for every
emergency.”

Capt. David Hamilton of Blandford, Mass., was born in Ireland, July 11,
1742, and his wife was born July 17, 1752. He immigrated to this country
prior to the Revolutionary War, and in that struggle for independence
took an active part, being captain of a company in the Continental army.
After the war, he purchased a farm in Blandford, on which his thirteen
children were born and reared, and hundreds of their descendants have
been active forces in the development and prosperity of the community.

The Codmans were descended from William Cod, who came to this country
from Ireland, and settled at Amherst, Mass., about 1740. The last
syllable of the name was added by his sons, one of whom was Dr. Henry
Codman, who died in 1812. Michael Carroll sold land in Hartford to Isaac
Graham for £180, May 13, 1728, and his grandson, Michael Carroll,
graduated from Harvard in 1813.

Richard Ellis, the first settler of Ashfield, Mass., and the ancestor of
many of the families of that name in the Connecticut valley, was born in
Dublin, Ireland, Aug. 16, 1704, and was thirteen years of age when he
landed in this country, as stated by one of his descendants, Aaron Smith
of Stockton, N. Y. Tradition has handed down the following account of
him: Mr. Ellis was the only son of a widow. A native of Ireland who had
become a wealthy planter in Virginia, and having no children, made
application to a friend in Dublin to send over a youth of promise to be
adopted into his family and brought up under his care and patronage.
Young Ellis was selected and started for this country. On his
embarkation his passage was paid and an agreement made with the captain
of the ship to land him safely in Virginia, but the captain proved
faithless to his trust, brought the youth to Boston, and there sold him
for his passage money. After serving out the time thus unjustly exacted
from him he left Boston and settled in Easton, Mass., where he married
Bridget Phillips and removed to Ashfield, then called Hunstown, where he
probably made a settlement about the year 1742. Here they lived and
raised a family of eight children.

One of the most distinguished soldiers of the Revolutionary War from
western Massachusetts was Col. Hugh Maxwell, who lived in that part of
Charlemont now within the bounds of Heath. Col. Hugh Maxwell was born in
Ireland, April 27, 1733. He was a devoted patriot and rendered his
adopted country valuable service in the French and Revolutionary wars.
He was in the battle near Lake George and at the capture of Fort William
Henry. It was chiefly owing to his influence that there was not a Tory
in his town. On the Lexington alarm he marched as lieutenant with a
company of Minute Men to Cambridge. He was in the battle of Bunker Hill
and received a ball through his right shoulder, and although he never
entirely recovered from his wound, he served throughout the war,
fighting at Trenton, Princeton, and Saratoga. He was also with the
suffering army at Morristown, and endured the horrors of Valley Forge.
Col. Maxwell enjoyed the friendship of Gen. Washington and other
distinguished patriots of the Revolutionary struggle. At the age of
sixty-six years Col. Maxwell started on a trip to visit the land of his
birth, and was lost at sea during the voyage.

Benjamin Maxwell, a brother of Col. Maxwell, also did service in the
French and Indian wars, and was a lieutenant in a company of Minute Men
in the Revolution. He lived in Heath, in the homestead occupied by his
daughter Mary. His sons were Winslow, Benjamin, and Patrick.

For more than a hundred years the descendants of the early settlers of
this valley have been spreading out far beyond the borders of New
England into the ever-retreating West, to people with thousands of their
kit and kin from Ireland, and to develop the fertile fields and reap the
harvests of prosperity and of cheerful endurance, daring enterprise and
patient perseverance. Their love of liberty, their devotion to religion,
their respect for law and order, chastened by sacrifice and suffering,
make them ideal citizens to found and develop states and maintain the
principles of the institutions established by the fathers of the
republic.


                    SOME VOICES FROM Y^E OLDEN TIME.

              BY THOMAS HAMILTON MURRAY,[3] BOSTON, MASS.

  Alexander Gilligan was a resident of Marblehead, Mass., in 1674.

  Many Irish participated in the settlement of Salem, N. Y., in 1765.
  (_The Salem Book._)

  Samuel and Robert Elder, brothers, came from Ireland about 1730 and
  settled in Falmouth, Me.

  In 1746 a marriage license was issued, Spottsylvania, Va., to
  Patrick Connelly and Ann French.

  Dennis Lochlin, of Putney, Vt., was a representative to the General
  Assembly of that state in 1777.

  Lucy Todd O’Brien married, in 1698, John Baylor of Gloucester
  county, Va. (_Virginia Historical Magazine._)

  The records of Braintree, Mass., note the birth “6th mo. 18. 1669”
  of Samuel Daly, a son of John and Elizabeth Daly.

  Timothy Hierlehey was captain of the seventh company of the First
  Regiment of the Colony of Connecticut, 1758.

  Rev. James Tate, a Presbyterian minister from Ireland, organized
  Tate’s Academy, in Wilmington, N. C., about 1760.

  At a great fire in Boston, Mass., 1787, among those whose premises
  were burned were Dennis Welch and Andrew Kalley.

  Capt. Wm. McGinnis, with 89 men of Schenectady, N. Y., was at the
  battle near Fort George, Sept. 8, 1755, and was killed there.

  About 1762–65, Rev. Ezra Stiles, of Newport, R. I.,acknowledges
  having received from Capt. Jno. Nichols a firkin of “Irish butter.”

  James Warren settled at South Berwick, Me., as early as 1656. He was
  a native of Scotland; his wife, Margaret, a native of Ireland.

  On May 14, 1663, Miles More and Michael Rice of New London were
  accepted as freemen by the General Assembly of Connecticut.

  Among the men serving under Capt. John Gilman, New Hampshire, in
  1710, were Daniel Lary, Thomas Lary and Jeremiah Connor.

  Major William Waters, son of Capt. Edward and Grace (O’Neil) Waters,
  patented land in Maryland as early as 1663. He left six sons.

  We learn in Frothingham’s _Charlestown, Mass._, that in 1640 “there
  came over great store of provisions both out of England and
  Ireland.”

  Edwin Larkin was located at Newport, R. I., as early as 1655. His
  name appears in the “Roule of y^e Freemen of y^e colonie of everie
  Towne.”

  Several years previous to 1686, “persons from Ireland, picked up at
  sea and brought hither, have £17 given them.” (Felt’s _Annals of
  Salem, Mass_.)

  As early as 1636, Edward Brick, or Breck, and his son Robert, “of
  Galway in Ireland,” are heard from in Dorchester, now a part of
  Boston, Mass.

  In 1659 “John Morrell an Irishman and Lysbell Morrell an Irishwoman
  were married 31st August by John Endecott,” Governor. (_Boston,
  Mass., Records_.)

  John Casey, James Brannon, John Bryan and James Moore were among the
  field officers appointed by the Provincial Congress of North
  Carolina, in 1776.

  Cornelius Conner witnessed a deed (conveyance of real estate), in
  1665, by John Clough of Salisbury, Mass. (_The Essex Antiquarian_,
  Salem, Mass., Jan., 1902.)

  Among the soldiers at Fort William and Mary, N. H., in 1708, were
  John Foy, Jeremiah Libby, John Neal, Samuel Neal, John Mead and
  Timothy Blake.

  John Donaldson, an Irishman, commanded, during the Revolution, an
  armed brig of 10 guns and carrying 45 men. He was at one time a
  resident of Salem, Mass.

  Stephen Decatur, Sr., married “a young lady named Pine, the daughter
  of an Irish gentleman.” Stephen Decatur, the distinguished naval
  officer, was their son.

  Samuel Neale, Quaker, was born in Dublin, Ireland, 1729. He came to
  this country, and in 1772 preached at Newport, R. I. He died in
  Cork, Ireland, 1792.

  John Moore, “formerly of Dublin,” is mentioned in Charlestown,
  Mass., about 1680. He was a shipwright. (Wyman’s _Genealogies and
  Estates of Charlestown_.)

  The Massachusetts records show that in 1661 “John Reylean an
  Irishman & Margaret Brene an Irishwoman were married 15th March by
  John Endecott Governor.”

  From the files of York County, Me., we learn that Thomas Crowley,
  and his wife Joanna, had a daughter Arpira Sayward who had a son
  Samuel, born about 1668.

  Roger Kelley was representative from the Isles of Shoals at the
  first General Court of Massachusetts under the new charter, 1692.
  (Farmer’s _Genealogical Register_.)

  Joseph McDowell and his wife, Margaret O’Neal, came from Ireland to
  Winchester, Va., about 1743. Two of their sons became distinguished
  in the Revolution.

  Hon. Charles Jackson, Governor of Rhode Island, 1845–’46, was a
  descendant of Stephen Jackson, a native of Kilkenny, Ireland, who
  came to this country about 1724.

  Col. James Moore, who commanded the First Regiment of North Carolina
  Continentals in the Revolution, was of the Irish Moores who had
  settled in that part of the country.

  In Felt’s _Annals of Salem, Mass._, is found mention, 1789, of “John
  Brenon from Dublin,” who “performs on the slackwire, balances and
  gives specimens of legerdemain.”

  Charles MacCarthy was one of the founders of the town of East
  Greenwich, R. I., 1677. He had previously resided in St. Kitts. He
  had a brother who went from Ireland to Spain.

  The oldest Irish organization in this country is the Charitable
  Irish Society, Boston, Mass. It was founded in 1737, and is still
  enjoying a prosperous existence. Gen. Henry Knox was a member.

  Thomas McDonoghue was a resident of Charlestown, Mass., in 1798.
  John Russell married Mary Malonie in 1772. Russell is heard of as
  early as 1769. (Wyman’s _Charlestown_.)

  Kennedy O’Brien was one of the early residents of Augusta, Ga. He
  was a merchant. A deposition made by him in 1741 is mentioned.
  (_Collections of the Georgia Historical Society._)

  According to Felt’s _Annals of Salem, Mass._, Butler Fogarty was a
  school teacher there in 1792. He gave up his school to become clerk
  of the Essex bank, but in 1794 went back to teaching.

  St. Patrick’s Lodge of Masons was instituted at Johnstown, N. Y., in
  1766. Another lodge bearing the same name was located at Portsmouth,
  N. H., and was chartered March 17, 1780.

  Edward Jones, of Wilmington, N. C., a native of Ireland, was elected
  to the North Carolina House of Commons in 1788 and served until
  1791, when he became Solicitor-General of the state.

  Edward Rigg, an Irishman, died in New York city, 1786. He was for
  many years a school teacher there. Edward Fogarty, another school
  teacher, died in New York city about the same time.

  Hon. Edward Kavanagh became governor of the state of Maine on the
  resignation of Governor Fairfield, 1843. Governor Kavanagh’s father
  was a native of New Ross, County Wexford, Ireland.

  Savage’s _Genealogical Dictionary_ of New England states that in
  1654 Edward Welch, “an Irish youth,” was sent over, by the ruling
  power in England, in the ship _Goodfellow_, “to be sold here.”

  John Campbell, who was twice speaker of the North Carolina House of
  Assembly, was reared in Coleraine, Ireland. He was “a wise and
  thrifty man.” (Moore’s _History of North Carolina_.)

  Among the members of Capt. Fullwood’s Company of volunteers, South
  Carolina, 1775, were William Martin, William McCoy, John Laferty,
  Patrick Fagan, Robert Reilly and Cornelius Donavan.

  It is stated that in 1720 the Irish of Lancaster County,
  Pennsylvania, were excused from rents “in consideration of their
  being a frontier people forming a kind of cordon of defence if
  needful.”

  Allan Mullins, surgeon, son of Dr. Alexander Mullins of Galway,
  Ireland, was married to Abigail, daughter of John Butler, of New
  London, Conn., April 8, 1725. (_New London Marriage Records._)

  In Pearson’s _Genealogies_, relating to the “Ancient County of
  Albany, N. Y.,” is mentioned Pieter Macarty of Half Moon who, in
  1736, married Greefje Rhee. His second wife (1742) was Anna Abt.

  Nicholas Rowe is mentioned at Portsmouth, N. H., in 1640, and
  Matthew Rowe at New Haven, Conn., in 1650. The latter had three
  sons,—John, Joseph and Stephen. (Farmer’s _Genealogical Register_.)

  Arthur Dobbs, governor of North Carolina, took the oath at Newbern
  in 1754. “He was an Irishman and had been a member of the parliament
  of that country.” (Moore’s _History of North Carolina_.)

  Daniel Neil was captain-lieutenant of Frelinghuysen’s Eastern
  Company of Artillery (New Jersey state troops), and subsequently
  commanded the same. He was killed at the battle of Princeton, 1777.

  In 1674 there were nine Catholic religious confraternities in St.
  Augustine, Florida, one of them being under the patronage of St.
  Patrick. (John Gilmary Shea in _The Catholic Church in Colonial
  Days_.)

  The Fellowship Club was organized at Newport, R. I., in Dec., 1752.
  The first meeting was held at the Black Horse Inn. John Murphy was
  admitted to membership in 1803, and William Callahan in 1817.

  In Wyman’s _Genealogies and Estates of Charlestown, Mass._, is
  mentioned Edward Larkin, a wheel-maker. He was admitted an
  inhabitant in 1638. His wife was Joanna. A son was named John
  Larkin.

  A return of the men enlisted by Lieut. Henry Piercy of the Second
  Pennsylvania Regiment, 1778, mentions Patrick McQuire, a native of
  Ireland, 42 years of age, and says that he “has the brogue on his
  tongue.”

  The provincial congress of North Carolina, 1776, appointed James
  Hogan paymaster of the Third Regiment and also of the three
  companies of Light Horse. (Wheeler’s _Historical Sketches of North
  Carolina_.)

  Thomas Burke was chosen governor of North Carolina in 1781. He was
  an Irishman by birth and had been educated for a physician. He came
  to America long prior to the Revolution and first settled at
  Norfolk, Va.

  We learn from the published records of Providence, R. I., that, in
  1682, Cornelius Higgins bought of Andrew Harris, of Pawtucket, R.
  I., 98¼ acres in Scituate, in the “precincts of y^e said Town^e of
  Providence.”

  John Keeney and Thomas Roach of New London, Conn., were nominated
  for freemen at the General Court, opened in Connecticut on Oct. 14,
  1669. Timothy Forde was nominated for freeman on May 14, 1668.

  John, Daniel and Nancy O’Brien were residents of New London, Conn.,
  in 1795. John Callahan and Henry McCabe were there in 1796. Patrick
  Mann and John Sweeney were residents of Hartford, Conn., in 1799.

  It is said of Arthur Dobbs, an Irish governor of North Carolina
  (1754), that he brought over a few pieces of artillery, one thousand
  muskets “and a plentiful supply of his poor relations.” (Moore’s
  _North Carolina_.)

  James Coleman, Maurice Murphey, Jr., Matthew Murphey, John Kenneday,
  and Francis Kenneday were among the organizers of a military company
  on the northeast side of the Pee Dee river, South Carolina, in 1775.

  On Aug. 16, 1688, at Northfield, Mass., three men, two women and a
  girl were killed by the Indians. One of the victims was John Clary,
  father of the John Clary who was killed at Brookfield, Mass., in
  1709. (_Temple._)

  John Neil, from Ireland, was in Scituate, Mass., as early as 1730.
  He established a pottery thereabouts. Edward Humphries, from
  Ireland, was a resident of Scituate as far back as 1740. (Deane’s
  _History of Scituate_.)

  Thomas Donohoe was major of the Sixth Regiment, North Carolina Foot,
  organized at Hillsborough, 1776. He became a member of the Society
  of the Cincinnati at the latter’s inception at Newburg, on the
  Hudson, 1783.

  The records of the Church of Christ, Bristol, R. I., note the
  baptism, in 1712, of Bridget, daughter of James and Bridget Cary. In
  1747, is noted the baptism of Michael and Bridget Phillips, children
  of Michael and Bridget.

  Among the old New York families may be mentioned the Van Bergens of
  Catskill and Coxsackie. Elizabeth Van Bergen, born in 1781, married
  Richard McCarty. One of her children married a daughter of John
  McCarty.

  John Casey of Muddy River (now Brookline, Mass.) was a participant
  in King Philip’s war, 1675–’76. He took part in the attack on the
  Indian fort in “the Great Swamp,” Rhode Island, and was wounded in
  that engagement.

  A prominent regiment in the American Revolution was the First
  Pennsylvania line. The regimental rolls show over 200 typical Irish
  surnames, some of them being several times repeated, borne by
  different members of the command.

  The 30th of 11th mo., 1642. “John Smith, Gent., his assessment of
  ——, unto the last county rate, is remitted unto him, upon
  consideration of the great losses that have of late befallen him in
  Ireland.” (_Boston Town Records._)

  In 1767–’68, the British warship _Cygnet_ wintered at New London,
  Conn. The purser of the ship bore the name John Sullivan. Becoming
  enamored of civil life as well as of Elizabeth Chapman, he married
  and settled in New London.

  James Stacpole, born in 1652, was probably a son of Philip, of
  Limerick, Ireland. James was living in Dover, N. H. (Rollinsford),
  in 1680. He died in 1736. The name is also spelled Stackpole.
  (Stackpole’s _History of Durham, Me._)

  Alfred Moore, Sr., of North Carolina, was a son of Judge Maurice
  Moore and nephew of Col. James Moore who commanded the First
  Regiment, North Carolina Continentals, during the Revolution. Alfred
  was a captain in the regiment.

  David Flanagan is buried at Bedford, Westchester County, N. Y. He
  was born in Dublin, Ireland, in 1759. During the Revolution he was
  clerk on board a vessel of the American navy. He subsequently became
  a bookseller, and died in 1805.

  At a great Boston fire, 1760, Michael Carroll and Capt. Killeran are
  mentioned among those whose homes were consumed. Mr. Carroll resided
  “Towards Oliver’s dock,” while Capt. Killeran was located at “Milk
  Street and Battery-March.”

  John Kelley, of Providence, R. I., died in 1701–’02. His widow,
  Grace Kelley, refused administration of the estate, and in her stead
  the Town Council appointed Pardon Tillinghast, Jonathan Sprague and
  James Browne. (_Records of the Town of Providence._)

  In 1677, 61 families at Salem, Mass., representing 295 persons, who
  were in needy circumstances owing to King Philip’s war, were given
  £44 5s from contributions collected in Ireland. This was a portion
  of “The Irish Charity.” (Felt’s _Annals of Salem_.)

  Gen. Thomas Proctor was born in Ireland, 1739, and settled in
  Philadelphia, Pa. He entered the Patriot army in the Revolution, and
  rendered distinguished service at the battle of Brandywine and
  elsewhere. He was an artillery officer. He died in 1806.

  Patrick Mark is mentioned in Charlestown, Mass., in 1685. He was
  then 55 years of age. His wife was named Sarah. Their children were
  Sarah, Peter, Hannah and Mercie. A daughter was killed by the
  Indians in 1691. (Wyman’s _Genealogies and Estates_.)

  Pittston, Me., was incorporated in 1779. Among the early settlers of
  the town were: Stephen Kenny, William Burke, Thomas Moore, Daniel
  Ring, Martin Hailey, Thomas Hailey, Joseph Hailey and William
  Hailey. (_Maine Historical and Genealogical Recorder._)

  James Given, a native of Ireland, born in 1777, participated in the
  Irish rebellion of 1798. Subsequently he came to this country and
  located at Fishkill, N. Y. A “useful and prominent citizen for 60
  years.” (_N. Y. Genealogical and Biographical Record_, Jan. 1893.)

  James Boies, writing in 1749–’50, from Cork, Ireland, to Samuel
  Waldo of Boston, Mass., says: “My business here is to carry
  Passengers & Servants,” meaning, of course, to America. He requests
  that letters be sent him “to y^e care of m^r Winthrop, merch^t in
  Cork.”

  Lieut.-Col. Goffe, an Irishman, was, in 1760, ordered by Gen.
  Amherst to take a regiment of 800 men, raised in New Hampshire, and
  cut a road through the wilderness from “No. 4” to Crown Point, or
  more properly to the Green Mountains. (_History of Springfield,
  Vt._)

  Rev. Ezra Stiles, writing at Newport, R. I., Aug. 9, 1774, says:
  “Last month arrived at New Castle [Del.] the snow _Charlotte_, Capt.
  Gaffney, from Waterford, with 100 passengers, and the ship _Hope_,
  Capt. McClenachan, from Newry, with 200.” (_Diary of Ezra Stiles._)

  Hon. Thomas Dongan, the Irish governor of the province of New York,
  1683–’88, was a wise and just man. He founded representative
  government in New York, and the Charter of Liberties given the
  colonists at that time has greatly served to perpetuate his fame.

  In a general return of Col. William Thomson’s regiment of Rangers,
  Sept. 20, 1775, occur the names Lieutenant Richard Brown, a native
  of Ireland, and Lieut. David Monaghan. Of the drummers, three were
  born in Ireland. The command was operating in the South.

  A paragraph in the _Virginia Historical Magazine_ states that Davis
  Stockton came from Ireland, with Michael Woods, and lived for some
  time in Lancaster county, Pa. About 1734 Stockton went to Albermarle
  County, Va., where he patented large tracts of land. He died in
  1760.

  William Preston was born in Ireland, 1730. He was captain of a
  company of rangers in Virginia in 1755–’56, and was a member of the
  Virginia House of Burgesses in 1766, 1767, 1768 and 1769. During the
  Revolution he held important commands in southwest Virginia.

  Sir William Johnson, an Irishman, “of Johnson Hall, in the County of
  Tryon, and Province of New York,” in his will, 1774, mentions
  bequests to William Byrne, of Kingsborough; Patrick Daly (“now
  living with me”); and Mary McGrah, daughter of Christopher McGrah.

  In June, 1794, Capt. Harding arrived at Portland, Me., from Ireland,
  in the brig _Eliza_. He brought about 200 passengers, men, women,
  and children, “chiefly farmers and weavers,” an “honest and
  industrious set of people.” (_Maine Historical and Genealogical
  Recorder._)

  Bryan Lefferty was attorney and private secretary to Sir William
  Johnson and became surrogate of Tryon county, N. Y. Johnson’s will
  is believed to have been drawn up by him. Sir William’s farm manager
  was an Irishman named Flood. (Simms’ _Frontiersmen of New York_.)

  In August, 1795, the brig _Eliza_, Capt. Wm. Fairfield, arrived at
  Salem, Mass., from Belfast, Ireland, with 89 emigrants. Among them
  were Samuel Breed, James and Sarah Dalrymple, John and William
  Lemon, the Dunlap family, and others of note. (Felt’s _Annals of
  Salem_.)

  One of the first military organizations in Albany, N. Y., enlisted
  in the Revolution, included David MCCarthy, James MCCarthy, John
  McEnry, David Sullivan, William Magie (Magee), Morris Welch, and
  other men whose names indicate Irish extraction. They signed the
  roll in June, 1775.

  William McMahon was a taxpayer in Falmouth, Me., in 1777. Mention of
  him is made in the _Maine Genealogist and Recorder_. The same
  publication speaks of Edward Clarey and Patrick Manan as having
  belonged to Capt. John Hill’s military company of Berwick, Me., in
  October, 1740.

  The intentions of marriage between Benjamin Blanchard of Canterbury,
  N. H., and Bridget Fitzgerald of Contoocook, were posted up “at the
  Meeting House Door” in Rumford, N. H., March 26, 1739. (John C.
  Ordway in _Salem [Mass.] Press Historical and Genealogical Record,
  Vol. 2_.)

  Thomas McLaughlin, of Bedford, N. H., was lieutenant in Capt. John
  Moore’s company, Col. Stark’s regiment, at the battle of Bunker
  Hill, June 17, 1775. McLaughlin was made captain of the company the
  morning after the battle, in place of Moore, promoted. (_Military
  Records of New Hampshire._)

  A Mrs. Hall and Mr. Keating arrived at New London, Conn., in August,
  1770, from Dublin, in the brig _Patty_. Captain Forbes in the 58th
  year of his age died at Cork, Ireland, on March 5, 1791. He was a
  native of Hartford, Conn., and had resided in Ireland for many years
  prior to his death.

  In 1790, Norwich, Conn., had a printer named Major John Byrne. About
  this time he went to Windham, Conn., where he published the _Phœnix_
  or _Windham Herald_. In 1795 he was the postmaster of Woodstock,
  Conn., and in 1807 a member of the Aqueduct Company of Windham.

  The British evacuated Boston, Mass., March 17, 1776, and the
  Americans marched in and took possession. Washington, from his
  headquarters at Cambridge, authorized as the parole for the day:
  “Boston;” and the countersign: “St. Patrick.” Gen. John Sullivan was
  brigadier of the day.

  Keeney’s Ferry, operated over the Connecticut River at Hartford,
  Conn., took its name from Richard Keeney, who was granted the
  privilege in Oct., 1712, by the Assembly. The ferry was discontinued
  by act of the Assembly in May, 1753. (_Rev. James H. O’Donnell,
  Norwalk, Conn._)

  Florence Maccarty bought land in Roxbury, Mass., in 1693. He was a
  provision dealer and contractor in Boston. He subsequently added to
  his Roxbury purchase, the property becoming known as the “Maccarty
  farm.” The tract at one time comprised 60 acres. (Drake’s _Town of
  Roxbury_.)

  John O’Kane came to this country from Ireland in 1752. He was then
  18 years of age. He located in or near Albany, N. Y., and married a
  daughter of Rev. Elisha Kent. On his marriage he is said to have
  dropped the “O” from his surname. (_N. Y. Genealogical and
  Biographical Record_, July, 1878.)

  Michael Magee was a member of Capt. Marsh’s Troop of Light Horse, of
  Essex, N. J., in the Revolution, and was wounded. Thomas Magee was a
  matross in Capt. Hugg’s Western Company of Artillery, New Jersey.
  (_Official Register of the Officers and Men of New Jersey in the
  Revolutionary War._)

  William Henry came from Coleraine, Ireland, and established a
  manufactory of arms in Pennsylvania before the Revolution. In 1777
  he was deputy commissary general and was active in sending supplies
  to the Patriot army at Valley Forge. He was elected to Congress in
  1784, and died in 1786.

  Matthew, John and Thomas Kilpatrick (also written Gillpatrick) came
  from Ireland in the early part of the 18th century and settled in
  Warren and Ware, Mass. In time the name was condensed to Patrick.
  John Patrick, of the family, was commissioned a lieutenant in the
  Patriot forces, Feb. 5, 1776.

  Among the sufferers in the French and Indian war, sometimes called
  Gov. Shirley’s war (1744–’49), was Michael Dogan, an Irishman. “He
  listed at Philadelphia, a soldier for Louisbourg, and was taken in
  his passage by a French” warship. He sickened, recovered, but had a
  fatal relapse. (_Drake._)

  James Devereaux was born at Wexford, Ireland, in 1766. He came to
  Salem, Mass., in 1780, with his uncle, John Murphy. In 1792
  Devereaux married Sally Crowninshield of Salem. Later, he commanded
  the ship _Franklin_, said to have been the first merchant vessel
  from the United States to visit Japan.

  Capt. James Neall of New Hampshire had a group of scouts, in 1775,
  and was engaged in guarding the frontiers of said province. The
  scouts included Sergt. Philip Johnson, Francis Orr, James Rowe,
  William Mack and John McMahon. (_Military History of New Hampshire,
  Adjutant-General’s Report, 1866._)

  Here are two inscriptions from the Granary Burial Ground, Boston,
  Mass.: (1) “Here lyes ye body of Sarah Mahoney, Dau’r of Mr. Cain
  Mahoney, of Marblehead, aged 26 years, Died Nov. 29, 1734.” (2)
  “Here lies the Body of Mrs. Elizabeth Kelly, wife of Mr. Patrick
  Kelly, aged 28 years, Died Sept. 25, 1758.”

  Andrew Brown was a native of Ireland, born about 1744. He was
  educated at Trinity College, Dublin, came to this country and fought
  in the patriot ranks at the battle of Bunker Hill. In 1777 he was
  made Muster-Master-General in the Patriot army. He died at
  Philadelphia, Pa., in 1793. (Drake’s _American Biography_.)

  Hugh Williamson was a member of the North Carolina House of Commons
  in 1782 and 1785; he was also elected to the Continental Congress.
  He was a native of Pennsylvania. His father, an Irishman, had been a
  clothier in Dublin, and came to this country in 1730. (Wheeler’s
  _Historical Sketches of North Carolina_.)

  George Conn emigrated from Ireland about 1720 and eventually settled
  in Harvard, Mass. His son, John, was born at Harvard, 1740, and
  located in Ashburnham, Mass., probably about 1761. John was
  lieutenant in a company of Minute Men and was with his command at
  Cambridge, Mass., 1775. He died in 1803.

  Patrick Burn, of Wenham, Mass., participated in the Cape Breton
  expedition (Louisburg), 1744–’49. Later, he and others petitioned
  for an allowance on account of services and sufferings. The
  committee of war was ordered to pay the selectmen of Wenham £7 “for
  the use of said Burn.” (Drake’s _French and Indian War_.)

  From the Town Records of Boston, Mass., Nov. 8, 1737: “Capt. James
  Finney Mess^{rs}. John Karr and William Hall Executed a Bond of the
  Penalty of Six Hundred Pounds to Indemnify the Town on Acco^t. of
  One Hundred and Sixty two Passengers Imported by the said Finney in
  the Snow _Charming Molly_ from Ireland * * *”

  At a meeting in 1744 of the proprietors of the common and undivided
  lands belonging to the town of Kittery, Me., among those drawing
  tracts of land were: John Gowen, Nicholas Gowen, Andrew Haley, John
  More, Joseph Mitchell, James Troy, Andrew Neal, and Samuel Ford.
  (_Maine Historical and Genealogical Recorder._)

  Thomas Butler settled in Kittery, Me., before 1695. He is
  grandiloquently described by a modern writer as “of the ancient
  English house of Ormonde.” Perhaps it would have been nearer the
  point to say that Butler was an Irishman “of the house of Ormonde.”
  He had a son, Thomas, born at Berwick, Me., 1698.

  From the Town Records of Boston, Mass., Nov. 8, 1737: “Hugh Ramsey,
  John Weire, and William Moore, Executed a Bond of the Penalty of one
  Thousand Pounds to Indemnify the Town from Charge on acc^o. of Three
  Hundred and Eighty One Passengers Imported by Capt. Daniel Gibbs in
  the Ship Sagamore from Ireland.* * *”

  “Daniel y^e Son of Darby and Elizabeth Mallonee” was baptized, in
  Barbadoes, 1679. The same year mention is made of Teag Conner, of
  the parish of St. Michael, Barbadoes. “Mary y^e Wife of Morgan
  Murphy” of the parish of St. James, Barbadoes, was buried in 1679,
  as was also “Cornelius y^e Son of Dearman Driskell.” (Hotten’s
  _Lists_.)

  John Kehoo and Edward Dalton, two young Irishmen, came to Salem,
  Mass., in 1776. “They were both remarkably handsome, and promising
  men, and by their circumspect conduct and industrious habits, soon
  gained the respect and confidence of the community.” Kehoo was lost
  at sea while aboard the privateer _Centipede_, in 1781.

  In Felt’s _Annals of Salem, Mass._, it is stated under date of April
  20, 1681, “a ketch, Capt. Edward Henfield, picked up a boat with
  Capt. Andrew and six of his crew, 150 leagues from Cape Cod. These
  persons, so rescued, belonged to a Dublin ship bound to Virginia.
  She sank on the 18th, with sixteen men and three women, who
  perished.”

  Daniel Gookin “of Cargoline, near Cork, Ireland,” commenced a
  plantation in Virginia in 1621–’22. He is said to have been born in
  England and to have “settled in Ireland.” He came to Virginia with
  fifty men of his own and thirty passengers, and located at a place
  called Mary’s Mount, near Newport News. (_Virginia Historical
  Magazine._)

  At a town meeting in Boston, March 12, 1771, “A letter from that
  celebrated Patriot, D^r Lucas of Ireland, owning the Receipt of one
  transmitted him by a Committee of this Town together with the
  Pamphlet relative to the horrid Massacre in Boston, March, 5,
  1770—was read and attended to with the highest satisfaction.”
  (_Boston Town Records._)

  From the Town Records of Boston, Mass., Sept. 19, 1744: “At the
  Desire of His Excellency the Governour The Select men Sent up to
  the Almshouse Sixteen Girls & Three Boys & a Woman arrived here
  yesterday from Cape Breton who were taken About Six Weeks since by
  a French Privateer [they] being bound from Ireland to
  Philadelphia * * *”

  From the _Connecticut Gazette_, Jan. 5, 1764: “Just imported from
  Dublin, in the brig _Darby_, a parcel of Irish servants, both men
  and women, to be sold cheap, by Israel Boardman, at Stamford.” The
  people thus advertised were doubtless of the “Redemptioner” class,
  to be disposed of for a term of years, to pay for the expense of
  bringing them over.

  From the Boston Selectmen’s Records, Jan. 15, 1715: “Jarvice
  Bethell, sho maker Late of Ireland who w^{th} his wife came by the
  way of New found Land into this Town in August Last is admitted an
  Inhabit^t on condition, he finde suretyes to y^e Satisfaction of y^e
  Sel. men to y^e value of 100 [£], Since its consented y^t Mr.
  Shannon’s bond Shall Suffice.”

  Hon. John Fanchereau Grimke was a colonel in the Revolutionary army
  and judge of the Supreme Court of South Carolina. Early in life he
  wedded Mary Smith. She was of Irish and English stock, and was the
  great granddaughter of the second landgrave of South Carolina, and
  descended on her mother’s side from the famous Irish chieftain,
  Roger Moore.

  Daniel McCurtin, believed to be of Maryland, was in the Patriot army
  at the siege of Boston. He kept a journal of his observations and
  experiences. The same has been published and narrates many
  interesting incidents of the siege. The journal may be found in
  _Papers Relating Chiefly to the Maryland Line During the
  Revolution_, edited by Thomas Balch.

  The town of Sterling, Conn., was named in honor of Dr. Henry
  Sterling, an Irish physician and surgeon, who was located in
  Providence, R. I., before and during the Revolution. When the
  patriots from Providence destroyed the British armed vessel
  _Gaspee_, June 10, 1772, Dr. Sterling responded to a summons to
  attend the wounded commander of the _Gaspee_.

  Timothy Murphy, an Irish physician, came to this country in 1776 and
  settled in Monmouth county, New Jersey. He engaged in farming;
  married Mary Garrison, granddaughter of Richard Hartshorne, of that
  county, who was a member of the Colonial Council and of the Assembly
  of the Province. Murphy served in the Patriot army during the
  Revolution.

  Nehemiah Walter was sent by his father from Ireland to America,
  about 1674, to serve an apprenticeship to an upholsterer in Boston.
  Having a fondness for books he, with the consent of his father,
  attended college and graduated in 1680. He settled in Roxbury,
  Mass., and married Sarah, a daughter of Increase Mather. (_N. E.
  Hist., Gen. Register_, Jan., 1853.)

  Rev. James Hillhouse was born in Ireland, and in 1720 came to
  America. He settled in Connecticut and married a great granddaughter
  of Capt. John Mason. Their son, William Hillhouse, became a member
  of the Continental Congress and was a cavalry officer in the
  Revolution. He represented his town in 106 semiannual sessions of
  the legislature.

  Sometime in 1745 as James McQuade and Robert Burns of Bedford, N.
  H., were returning from Penacook to their homes, whither they went
  to procure corn for their families, they were fired on by Indians
  who appeared to be lying in wait for the opportunity. McQuade was
  shot down and killed, but his companion escaped. (Drake’s _French
  and Indian War_.)

  The Rev. Robert Morris, who was pastor of the First Church in
  Greenwich, Conn., in 1785, was “born and brought up in N. York. His
  parents came from Ireland, the Father a rigid Churchman, his mother
  a Roman Catholic. He living and being brot up with a Baptist at N.
  York became one.” (_Rev. Ezra Stiles, quoted by Rev. James H.
  O’Donnell, Norwalk, Conn._)

  We find Joseph Manly in Conventry, Conn., in 1786; Patrick Butler in
  Hartford, and Richard Kearney in New London in 1793. In the list of
  expenses paid by Connecticut for the capture of Ticonderoga and
  adjacent posts, occurs the name of an Irishman: “To Patrick Thomas,
  for boarding prisoners, £1, 5s.” (Rev. J. H. O’Donnell in _Catholic
  Transcript_, Hartford, Conn.)

  On July 2, 1788, Captain Chapman, and nine emigrants from Ireland,
  were drowned a short distance from the shore of Fisher’s Island. He
  had just arrived with about 20 emigrants, some of whom were ill. In
  attempting to land the latter at a spot where they were to be placed
  in quarantine, all perished. (Rev. J. H. O’Donnell in _Catholic
  Transcript_, Hartford, Conn.)

  John J. Henry’s parents came from Coleraine, Ireland. John was born
  in Lancaster, Pa., 1758, and was with Arnold’s expedition to Quebec.
  He was captured by the British and kept a prisoner for nine months.
  On being released, he was offered a lieutenancy in the Pennsylvania
  line, but desired a captaincy in the Virginia line. Ill health
  interfered somewhat with his military career.

  According to Hotten’s _Lists_, Brian Kelley, aged 20, embarked for
  Virginia in the vessel _Safety_, 1635. Among those to be transported
  to “y^e Barbadoes,” 1635, were Dennis MacBrian, Teague Nacton,
  Dermond O’Bryan and Margaret Conway. They embarked in the
  _Alexander_. Mary Driskell, of St. James’ parish, Barbadoes, was
  buried 1678. Dorothy Callahan, of Barbadoes, was buried Aug. 10,
  1679.

  Miss Virginia Baker of Warren, R. I., author of a “History of Warren
  in the War of the Revolution,” writes us: “Perhaps you will be
  interested to know that the first Irishman known to have settled in
  Warren was one John O’Kelley. I think he arrived in town prior to
  1770.... I have located real estate that he owned.” Miss Baker also
  informs us that some of his descendants are still to be found in
  Warren.

  Cornelius Merry, an Irishman, of Northampton, Mass., had a grant of
  land in 1663. He married Rachel Ballard. Their children were John,
  who “died soon;” John (2d), born in 1665; Sarah, born 1668; Rachel,
  1670; Cornelius, Leah, and perhaps others. Cornelius, the father,
  participated in the “Falls fight” against the Indians. After the war
  he removed to Long Island, N. Y. (Savage’s _Genealogical
  Dictionary_.)

  John Lamb, who was captain of a brig called the _Irish Gimlet_ is
  found at New London, Conn., in 1774; Lawrence Sullivan “of
  Connecticut” was taken prisoner by the British at the battle of
  Bunker Hill, and was released February 24, 1776; Captain Richard
  McCarthy of New London, was wrecked in a storm off Plum Island, May
  27, 1779, when he and five sailors perished. (_Rev. James H.
  O’Donnell, Norwalk, Conn._)

  Capt. Philip Mortimer, who came from Ireland, was one of the
  selectmen of Middletown, Conn., in 1749. He was a rope maker, was
  very wealthy, and donated Mortimer cemetery to the town. Being
  childless, he sent to Ireland for his niece to come out and become
  his adopted daughter. The son of Capt. John Reid, Mortimer’s
  partner, was despatched to Boston with a coach and four and escorted
  her to Middletown.

  Glancing through Deane’s “History of Scituate, Mass.,” the other
  day, we found mention of Richard Fitzgerald, “a veteran Latin
  schoolmaster.” He wedded Margaret Snowdon, of Scituate, in 1729.
  Doubtless he was one of the many Irish teachers who abounded in the
  American colonies at that and subsequent periods. The Society has
  already published the names, and something concerning the career, of
  about forty such.

  Charles Clinton was a native of County Longford, Ireland, and was
  born in 1690. He and his friends, numbering about 200, chartered a
  vessel and sailed from Dublin in 1729 for Philadelphia, Pa. After a
  passage lasting 139 days the captain, inadvertently or by design,
  landed them on Cape Cod, Mass. Ninety-six of the ship’s company had
  died on the voyage. One of Clinton’s sons, George, became governor
  of New York.

  An Irish colony, consisting of sixteen families, was settled about
  1740, under the patronage of Sir William Johnson, himself an
  Irishman, on a tract a few miles southwest of Fort Hamilton, N. Y.,
  in the town of Glen. The settlers erected dwellings, cleared land
  and planted orchards. Indian hostilities, however, prevented the
  success of the settlement, and the pioneers returned to Ireland. (J.
  R. Simms’ _Frontiersmen of New York_.)

  Robert Dunlap was a native of the County Antrim, Ireland, and was
  born in 1715. He embarked for America in the spring of 1736. The
  vessel, with nearly 200 emigrants aboard, was wrecked at the Isle of
  Sable and nearly one half of the passengers perished. The survivors,
  including Dunlap, managed to reach Canso and were then taken to Cape
  Ann, Mass. Governor Dunlap of Maine (elected in 1833), was a
  descendant of Robert, the Irishman.

  The records of Trinity Church, New York city, contain mention of the
  following marriages: Hugh Kelly and Elizabeth Griffin, 1746; Ralph
  Steel and Mary Branegan, 1747; John Trotter and Ann Hogan, 1748;
  John Cusick and Mary Freeman, 1748; John Hurley and Elizabeth
  Hannon, 1748; Patrick Hawley and Jane Ament, 1748; Jeremiah Dailey
  and Margaret Fitzgerald, 1748; Patrick Boyd and Mary Peltreau, 1748;
  Patrick Martin and Rozannah O’Neil, 1748.

  The Boston _News Letter_, Sept. 12, 1720, has an advertisement in
  which it is stated that an Irish man servant, Edward Coffee, had run
  away from his master, Stephen Winchester of Brookline, Mass. Coffee
  was probably a bond servant or redemptioner. He is described as
  about twenty years of age, with “cinnamon coloured breeches with six
  puffs tied at the knees with ferret ribbon.” He also had “a wig tied
  with a black ribbon.” A reward was offered for his capture.

  Capt. James Magee, “a convivial, noble-hearted Irishman,” commanded
  an American privateer in the Revolution. In the winter of 1779 his
  ship was driven ashore near Plymouth, Mass., during a terrible
  storm, and 79 of the crew were frozen to death. Twenty-eight of the
  survivors were rescued by the men of Plymouth. Drake’s _Town of
  Roxbury, Mass._, states that in 1798 Capt. Magee bought an estate in
  Roxbury. In 1819 William Eustis purchased the estate of Magee’s
  widow.

  The Society of the Friendly Sons of St. Patrick, Philadelphia, Pa.,
  was instituted on March 17, 1771. No creed lines were drawn, and in
  the organization “Catholics, Presbyterians, Quakers, and
  Episcopalians were united like a band of brothers.” Stephen Moylan,
  brother of the Catholic bishop of Cork, Ireland, was the first
  president. The Society of the Friendly Sons of St. Patrick, New York
  city, was founded in 1784. Daniel McCormick, a Presbyterian, was the
  first president.

  In 1644, Roger Williams, arriving at Boston, from England, brought
  with him letters from members of the British parliament to “leading
  men of the Bay” in which, counseling friendship, mention is made of
  undesirable “neighbours you are likely to find near unto you in
  Virginia, and the unfriendly visits from the west of England and
  from Ireland.” It so happened that, eventually, Roger Williams
  himself became “undesirable” and “unfriendly” to the self-sufficient
  rulers of “the Bay”

  Thomas Healey is mentioned as of Cambridge, Mass., in 1635, and
  William Healey in 1645. John Joyce was an early resident of Lynn,
  Mass., and removed to Sandwich, Mass., about 1637. David Kelly was
  of Boston as early as 1664, and belonged to the artillery company
  there. Stephen Hart was of Cambridge, Mass., in 1632; Edmund Hart of
  Weymouth, Mass., 1634; John Hart of Salem, Mass., 1638; Thomas Hart
  of Ipswich, Mass., 1648. (Farmer’s _Genealogical Register_.)

  In a Virginia regiment, of which George Washington was colonel, long
  before the Revolution, appear the following surnames: Barrett,
  Bryan, Burns, Burke, Carroll, Coleman, Conner, Connerly, Conway,
  Coyle, Daily, Deveeny, Devoy, Donahough, Ford, Gorman, Hennesy,
  Kennedy, Lowry, McBride, McCoy, McGrath, McGuire, McKan, McLaughlin,
  Martin, Moran, Murphy, Powers, etc. The regiment participated in the
  struggles against the French and Indians. (_Virginia Historical
  Magazine._)

  Dennis Rochford, of County Wexford, Ireland, and his wife Mary, came
  to Pennsylvania with William Penn in 1682, on the ship _Welcome_.
  All or nearly all the passengers were Quakers. Two daughters of
  Dennis and Mary died on the voyage. The passengers were described as
  “people of consequence” and as “people of property.” Dennis was a
  member of the Assembly in 1683. (Scharf-Wescott _History of
  Philadelphia, Pa._, quoted in Vol. VI, Transactions of the Kansas
  State Historical Society.)

  In the “Great Swamp fight” in Southern Rhode Island, during King
  Philip’s war, 1675–’76, were the following soldiers from
  Connecticut, among others: James Murphy, Daniel Tracy, Edward
  Larkin, James Welch and John Roach. The town of Norwalk, Conn.,
  subsequently gave Roach, as a gratuity, a tract of land “consisting
  of twelve acres more or less, layed out upon the west side of the
  West Rock, so called.” In the Norwalk records Roach is spoken of as
  a soldier in the “Direful Swamp Fight.”

  Eaton’s Annals of Warren, Me., mention two Irish schoolmasters
  there. They were John O’Brien and John Sullivan. O’Brien was “a
  native of Craig, near Cork,” and taught in Warren for many years,
  beginning at about the close of the Revolution. He was “an elegant
  penman and a good accountant.” He married a daughter of Col.
  Starrett. Sullivan was a native of Dublin, Ireland, and began
  teaching in Warren about 1792. He was of “never failing good humor.”
  He died in Boston, Mass.

  Martin I. J. Griffin of Philadelphia, Pa., mentions Thomas Burke,
  the one-eyed member of the Continental Congress and governor of
  North Carolina, of whom Wheeler’s _Historical Sketches of North
  Carolina_ says: “No public functionary was ever employed by the
  state in more troubled times, none more active or talented, none
  suffered more, none less known to posterity. He was a native of
  Ireland and of the most finished education.” It was said of him that
  he publicly professed and openly avowed the Catholic faith.

  Here is an example of how certain names sometimes undergo a change:
  A legislative act was passed in 1806 providing that “John O’Neil,
  Jun., of Madison, in the county of Kennebec [Maine], shall be
  allowed to take the name of John Neil; James O’Neil, of said
  Madison, shall be allowed to take the name of James Neil; Samuel
  O’Neil, of Norridgewalk, shall be allowed to take the name of Samuel
  Neil.” (From _List of Persons whose Names Have Been Changed_, etc.,
  published by the state of Massachusetts, Boston, 1893.)

  George Berkeley, “the Kilkenny scholar,” Dean of Derry and later
  Bishop of Cloyne, visited Boston in 1731. His visit is thus
  mentioned in John Walker’s manuscript diary (in possession of the
  Massachusetts Historical Society): “Sept. 12, 1731; in y^e morn Dean
  George Barkley preacht in y^e Chapell from y^e 1^{st} Epistle to
  Timothy, y^e 3^d Chap., Verse 16, and a fine Sermon, according to my
  opinion I never heard such an one. A very great auditory.” By the
  “Chapell” was meant the King’s Chapel, still in use in Boston.

  From an entry in the _New England Historic, Genealogical Register_,
  Jan., 1893, we learn that Capt. John McCarty of New London, Conn.,
  died while on a return voyage from the West Indies in 1804. His wife
  died soon after, leaving four young children, including Elizabeth,
  who married Samuel Forman, of Syracuse, N. Y.; Rebecca, who married
  Schuyler Van Rensselaer of Albany, N. Y., and Abby, who married
  Sanders Van Rensselaer, brother to Schuyler. Capt. Richard McCarty,
  believed to be father or brother of Capt. John, was lost at sea in
  1779.

  At a meeting of the selectmen of Boston, Mass., April 15, 1737, a
  communication was mentioned as having been received from Capt.
  Samuel Waterhouse. The latter stated that he was “twelve weeks from
  London and seven from Cork; that smallpox had broken out on the
  voyage, afflicting four of his ship’s company.” One of these was put
  ashore, one died at sea, and two recovered. The ship having been
  cleansed, the Boston selectmen gave him permission to “come up from
  Nantasket to Spectacle Island” and drop anchor near the hospital
  there. (_Report of the Boston Record Commission._)

  Hon. James Buchanan, president of the United States, has left this
  statement concerning himself: “My father, James Buchanan, was a
  native of the County Donegal, in the Kingdom of Ireland. His family
  was respectable but their pecuniary circumstances were limited. He
  emigrated to the United States before the date of the Definitive
  Treaty of Peace with Great Britain; having sailed from —— [no port
  stated] in the brig _Providence_, bound for Philadelphia, in 1783.
  He was then in the 22d year of his age.” (Quoted in George Ticknor
  Curtis’ _Life of James Buchanan_, President.)

  In a volume published by the state of New York (Albany, 1860),
  record is found of marriage licenses, issued by the secretary of the
  province, previous to 1784. Among the names mentioned are: Edward
  Briscow and Jane McDermont, 1736; Matthew Sweeny and Mary Thorn,
  1756; Patrick Hyne and Hannah Van Sice, 1757; Andries Van Schaick
  and Alida Hogan, 1757; Owen Sullivan and Hannah Orstin, 1759; Wynant
  Van Zant and Jane Colgan, 1760; Rynear Van Yeveron and Hannah Hogan,
  1772; John Moore and Mary Van Dyck, 1772; Martin Van Haugh and
  Judith Carroll, 1775.

  In the Minutes of the Boston Selectmen, 1727, we find mention of the
  following “Strangers warned to Depart Accord^n to Law”: John White,
  an Irishman from Dedham; Robert Phenne, an Irishman from Wells;
  William Nugel, an Irishman from Philadelphia; Robert Sterling, an
  Irishman from Rutland; Patrick Jorden from Virginia; James Dawley,
  an Irishman from Lisborn; Joseph Doyle from Rhode Island. These men
  were doubtless worthy enough, but, perhaps, could find no one to “go
  their bond,” and thus secure the town against the possibility of
  their becoming, at some time, a public charge.

  For the “expedition against Crown Point,” 1756, New Hampshire raised
  a regiment of 700 men, commanded by Col. Nathaniel Meserve of
  Portsmouth. In this regiment were included the following: Daniel
  Murphy, James Meloney, Darby Sullivan, John McMahone, Daniel Kelley,
  James O’Neil, Jer. Connor, Daniel Carty, Benjamin Mooney, Michael
  Johnson, Darbey Kelley, John Meloney, James Molloy, James Kelly,
  John Welch, Thomas Carty, William Kelley, Bryan Tweny (Sweeny?),
  James McLaughlin, John McLaughlin, Thomas McLaughlin, and others
  bearing typical Irish names. (_Military History of New Hampshire,
  Adjutant-General’s Report_, Concord, 1866.)

  From the Boston Selectmen’s Records, Aug. 9, 1736: “By a List from
  the Impost office, It appearing that Nineteen Transports were just
  Imported from Cork in Ireland, in the Brig^t Bootle, Robert Boyd
  Commander, accordingly the said Master was sent for, Who appear’d
  And the Select men Ordered him to take effectual Care to prevent any
  of the said Transports from coming on Shoar from said Vessell, the
  said Master promised Accordingly that they should not come on Shoar,
  That he was obliged by his orders to Carry them to Virginia, Whither
  he was bound, and that in the meantime he would keep a Strict Watch
  on board his said Vessell to prevent their escape.”

  James Cochran, an Irish boy, is mentioned in the Massachusetts
  records. He was captured by Indians, but escaped and brought back a
  couple of scalps as evidence of his experience. The _Boston News
  Letter_, April 29, 1725, says of him: “James Cochran, ye youth that
  came into Brunswick with two scalps, came to town on Monday last,
  and on Tuesday produced ye same scalps before ye Honorable
  Lieutenant Governor and Council, for which he received a reward of
  two hundred pounds. And for ye further encouragement of young men
  and others to perform bold and hardy actions in ye Indian war, His
  Honor ye Lieutenant Governor has been pleased to make him sargeant
  in ye forces.”

  A gallant officer, who has almost been forgotten, was Gen. John
  Greaton of the Revolution. He was a native of Ireland. Augustus
  Parker, writing in the Boston _Transcript_, says of him that he
  belonged to the first company of Minute Men raised in America, in
  1775, and was chosen major, lieutenant-colonel, and colonel of
  Heath’s regiment. After the battle of Lexington he was engaged in
  the skirmishes about Boston, until he joined that memorable
  expedition to Quebec in the winter through the woods of Maine, where
  the army suffered untold hardships. He served through the war, was
  one of Washington’s most trusted officers, was mustered out October,
  1783, and died the following December, worn out in the service of
  his country. Gen. Greaton’s father kept the Greyhound tavern on
  Washington street, opposite Vernon street, in Roxbury, Mass.

  Rev. Cotton Mather was born in Boston, Mass., Feb. 12, 1663. He was
  a Puritan, hard and fast. In 1700 he delivered a sermon in honor of
  the arrival of Gov. Bellomont, calling it a “Pillar of Gratitude.”
  In this sermon occurs the following: “There has been formidable
  Attempts of Satan and his Sons to Unsettle us: But what an
  overwhelming blast from Heaven has defeated all those attempts....
  At length it was proposed that a Colony of Irish might be sent over
  to check the growth of this Countrey: An Happy Revolution spoil’d
  that Plot: and many an one of more general consequence Than That!”
  Mather was rather late in his opposition to Irish comers, for they
  had been arriving in this “Countrey” before he was born. Were he
  alive to-day he would doubtless realize that instead of checking the
  country’s growth, they have greatly contributed to that growth.

  Passing through Bridgeport, Conn., by train recently, we recalled
  the Rev. Robert Ross of that place. He was a son of Irish parents,
  and was ordained to the Congregational ministry in 1753. His
  biographer states that he was a remarkable man, six feet in height
  and well proportioned. His presence was imposing, and his ruffled
  shirt, wig and cocked hat seemed peculiarly in keeping with it. But
  he most strongly impressed himself upon the community through the
  warmth of his patriotism, and the decisiveness of his political
  convictions. He became a man of influence on the patriotic side and
  proportionally obnoxious to the royalists. At the outbreak of the
  Revolutionary War he preached on the text, “For the divisions of
  Reuben there were great searchings of heart.” A company of soldiers,
  raised to join the invasion of Canada in the fall of 1775, mustered
  in his door-yard and was commended to God in a fervent prayer by him
  before starting on their expedition.

  The dangers encountered by Irish immigrants who came over in the old
  days of sailing vessels is well illustrated by the following
  incident: The ship _Lime_ with 123 passengers sailed from Portrush,
  Ireland, July 26, 1738, bound for Boston. Three days after leaving
  Portrush she was leaking badly, so she put into Killybegs where
  twelve days were spent making repairs. She again sailed, but had to
  put into Galway to be again repaired. While at Galway, John Cate,
  the master, died of smallpox, and Matthias Haines, the only mate,
  was afflicted with the same disease. While at Killybegs and Galway
  25 of the passengers deserted the ship, and but little blame could
  attach to them for so doing. With the captain dead and the mate
  sick, the contractors hired Gabriel Black as master of the vessel.
  She finally sailed from Galway on Sept. 19, and reached Boston
  harbor Nov. 16, 1738. Mention of the incident may be found in the
  _N. E. Historic, Genealogical Register_, Oct., 1897.

  In 1630, Governor John Winthrop and others of the Massachusetts Bay
  Colony “hired and dispatched away Mr. William Pearse, with his ship
  of about two hundred tons, for Ireland to buy more” provisions. As
  he did not return as soon as expected, “many were the fears of
  people that Mr. Pearce who was sent to Ireland to fetch provisions,
  was cast away or taken by pirates.” In February, 1631, however, he
  arrived at Boston, Mass., bringing the following supplies: “34
  hogsheads of wheat meal, 15 hogsheads of peas, 4 hogsheads of
  oatmeal, 4 hogsheads of beef and pork, 15 cwt. of cheese,
  butter-suet, etc. These supplies were in good condition, and a day
  of thanksgiving was ordered by the governor.” (Frothingham’s
  _Charlestown_ and Drake’s _Boston_.) A second ship appears to have
  arrived about this time, for the colonists near by “lifted up their
  eyes and saw two ships coming in, and presently the newes came to
  their eares, says one among them, that they were come from Ireland
  full of victualls.”

  In Stackpole’s _History of Durham, Me._, is an interesting reference
  to Martin Rourk, at one time town clerk of that place. Rourk was
  born in Ireland about 1760, and came to America about 1773. He spent
  two years in his uncle’s store at St. John’s, and went to Boston,
  Mass., in 1775. He became clerk in the company of Capt. Lawrence of
  the Patriot army, and subsequently married his widow. In May, 1775,
  Martin Rourk is mentioned as in a picket guard, having enlisted in
  April of that year. He reënlisted several times, was at Ticonderoga
  in 1776, and is mentioned as a sergeant after 1777. He settled in
  Durham, Me., about 1784, and in 1796 bought a twenty-acre lot of
  Thomas Mitchell, was town clerk in 1790–1807, and is spoken of as an
  excellent penman. He was also “the foremost school teacher” of
  Durham. He died in 1807. His children were Jane, John, Hannah,
  William, David, Samuel, Silence, Cyrus, and Jacob H. Some of these
  had the name changed to Roak before 1820. John, one of the sons,
  wedded Joanna Larrabee and had seven children.


         IRISH IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES SINCE 1790.[4]

              BY EDWARD O’MEAGHER CONDON, NEW ORLEANS, LA.

Some recent writers on immigration to the United States from Ireland
have very materially underestimated the numbers of the Irish who came
here even since 1790, and it seems proper now to call attention to some
important facts which throw light on the matter, and endeavor to correct
the erroneous impressions produced by misleading statements.

It will not be difficult to show that the Irish have come to this
country since 1790 in much greater numbers than available records,
statistics, or estimates show, and that their descendants are much more
numerous than many suppose them to be. The same might be said of the
Irish who arrived here before the period just referred to, and
particularly before the Revolution—a fact to which I briefly called
attention in a little work written several years ago. In this paper,
however, consideration will be confined to the Irish who arrived here
since 1790 and their descendants.

Until September, 1819, there was no supervision of immigration by the
national government, and no records were kept by federal officers of the
arrival of immigrants. For the numbers, therefore, of those who came
here from 1790 to 1820 we are practically left without official or
positive information, and the statements or conjectures of the writers
who have dealt with this subject not only betray their imperfect
knowledge, but show that they failed to take into consideration some
weighty facts essential to the formation of correct estimates.

Thomas Cooper, an Englishman who visited this country in 1794, tells us
that “emigration of all kinds from Europe to the United States amounted
at that time to about 10,000 a year.” Samuel Blodgett, Jr., however,
writing in 1810, assumed that the number of immigrants did not average
more than 4,000 a year for the previous ten years, but he gave a table
of the population, in one column of which the number of “freemen and
slaves” who entered the United States in 1804 was put down at 9,500.
Blodgett says that he relies on “the best records and estimates at
present attainable,” but he fails to tell us where those records were to
be found, or by whom they were kept. A. Seybert, an ex-member of
congress, who wrote in 1818, says that the statements in Blodgett’s work
“are deficient in details; they consist chiefly of general results and
the estimates of the author. Though many of his tables are ingeniously
constructed, they do not furnish sufficient data for legislators.”
Seybert, while admitting the correctness of Cooper’s estimate of 10,000
arrivals during the year 1794, differs from him with regard to the
immigration for the following years up to 1817, and assumes that 6,000
persons only, on the average, arrived here annually from 1790 to 1810.
He, however, furnishes us with a statement of the number of passengers
who arrived at ten of the principal ports of the United States in 1817,
which shows the entrance in that year of 22,240 immigrants, of whom
11,977 came from Britain and Ireland; 4,169 from Germany; 1,245 from
France, and 2,901 from British America.

Professor Tucker, another ex-congressman, in a work published in 1843,
says, commenting on Seybert’s estimate, “Since an account has been taken
of the foreign immigrants who arrive in our seaports as well as from the
intrinsic evidence afforded by the enumerations themselves, we must
regard his estimate as much too low.” Tucker admits that “our estimates
of the whites who migrated hither before 1819 are purely conjectural,”
but yet he adopts Seybert’s estimate of 6,000 a year from 1790 to 1810—a
total of 120,000—and assumes that from the last named year until 1820,
114,000 immigrants arrived, thus making the total number who came here
between 1790 and 1820, 234,000.

He, however, remarks in a note that he could not go beyond this estimate
“on account of his respect for Dr. Seybert’s opinion,” but he “could not
give a less number because of his regard for the progressive increase of
immigration before and after the three years of the war of 1812–1815.”
J. D. B. DeBow, superintendent of the census of 1850, in one of his
volumes published in 1854, relies on Prof. Tucker’s estimates for the
number of those who arrived here during the thirty years preceding 1820,
while W. J. Bromwell of the state department, writing in 1856, raises
the number to 250,000.

It will be observed that these “estimates” are in fact merely
conjectures, and that in the only year (1817) during the entire period
from 1790 to 1820 for which actual figures are given, the returns from
only ten ports show the arrival of more than twice the average annual
number of immigrants estimated by the writers above referred to. It
seems, then, evident that the immigrants from 1790 to 1820, and
particularly those of Irish birth or blood, were much more numerous than
the writers quoted seem willing to admit, and we are amply justified in
coming to this conclusion by several substantial reasons.

Professor Tucker, who estimates the number of immigrants between 1790
and 1820 at 234,000, “calculated after a very laborious analysis the
number of foreigners and their descendants to be above 1,000,000 in
1840.” Now, according to his own tables, the total number of immigrants
who came here between 1790 and 1840 amounted to 949,346, and yet of all
these people—over seventy-five per cent. of whom were adults—and their
descendants, he would have us believe that there could only be found
alive in 1840 the number just given. The total population had increased,
within the period named, from 3,929,827 to 17,069,453—more than four
hundred per cent.—while the descendants of the immigrants increased,
according to him, only five per cent.

We shall see later that, even after the passage of the act of Congress
of 1819—which directed the collectors of customs at the seaports of the
United States to forward quarter-yearly lists of all the passengers
arriving at their respective ports to the state department at
Washington—the number of immigrants reported was for many years very
considerably less than that of those who actually came here. One careful
and reliable writer, Dr. Chickering, estimates the number of those not
accounted for at fifty per cent. of those reported. Bearing this in mind
it will seem almost certain that, before the time when returns of
immigrants were required by law, their numbers were underestimated in a
far greater proportion.

Large numbers of people left Ireland for America between 1790 and the
beginning of the War of 1812. During the century preceding the year
first named half a million of Irishmen—more than the number of Huguenots
who left France after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes—went to that
country and joined her armies to escape the English penal laws and
avenge the violation of the Treaty of Limerick. This fact is attested by
the French military records. But after the outbreak of the Revolution in
France the flight of the “Wild Geese” was checked, and comparatively few
entered the Revolutionary or Imperial armies.

Meanwhile the situation in Ireland was almost as gloomy as before.
Though as a consequence of the American and French revolutions the penal
laws had been somewhat relaxed, and in 1793 Catholics had been allowed
to vote at parliamentary elections, they were still persecuted and
harassed in almost every conceivable manner by the Loyalist faction. In
Armagh county murders, house burnings, and still more abominable crimes
were of constant occurrence, and many thousands of the people were
driven from their homes, some taking refuge in the South, some flying to
Scotland, and a large number coming to America. An idea of the condition
of things at that time in some parts of Ireland may be formed from
reading the declaration of Lord Gosford, governor of Armagh county, and
thirty magistrates, issued on Dec. 28, 1795.

“It is,” they said, “no secret that a persecution accompanied with all
the circumstances of ferocious cruelty, which have in all ages
distinguished that calamity, is now raging in this county. Neither age
nor sex, nor even acknowledged innocence is sufficient to excite mercy
or afford protection. The only crime which the unfortunate objects of
this persecution are charged with is a crime of easy proof, indeed, it
is simply a profession of the Roman Catholic faith.” The Presbyterians,
who had for a long time been excluded from power and position by the
“Sacramental Test Act,” and many of whom had, during the eighteenth
century, emigrated to America, were also much dissatisfied with their
condition and that of the mass of their countrymen.

“The journals of those days,” we are assured by a careful writer on this
subject, “show that the Northern Presbyterians were not sharers in the
disgrace or afraid to denounce the dominant faction. Neither must we
forget that Presbyterianism was socially, though not religiously,
outlawed almost to the extent of Catholicism.”

But the English government, which had absolute control of the so-called
Irish Parliament, turned a deaf ear to all demands for justice and
encouraged the Loyalists to continue their atrocious deeds. Under these
circumstances, a number of prominent and patriotic men of all
denominations, who had formed the United Irish Society a few years
before, for the purpose of bringing about a union of Irishmen of all
religious persuasions with the object of effecting a reform in the
Parliament, now becoming convinced of the hopelessness of attaining
their purpose by peaceful methods, resolved to imitate the example of
the American Revolutionists and make an effort to achieve the
independence of their country. The movement was unsuccessful, though its
suppression in 1798 cost the English government the lives of over 20,000
of the latter’s mercenaries.

Multitudes of the patriots who had taken part in the insurrection
escaped to America, a considerable proportion of these going in fishing
schooners to Newfoundland, where their descendants are to be found in
great numbers to-day, notwithstanding the large emigration from that
island to the United States. The failure of Robert Emmet’s effort in
1803 for the freedom of his native land also led to renewed proscription
and the flight of thousands across the Atlantic. No records of the
numbers of Irish who came here during the period referred to are
available, or could in fact under the circumstances be compiled. The
notices, however, in the newspapers of the time of the arrivals of
immigrants and the accounts of events then occurring in those parts of
North America still held by the English, as well as in the United
States, throw considerable light upon the subject.

Between 1652 and 1658, over 60,000 Irish—almost all adults—were by order
of the Cromwellian government transported to the West Indies and the
English colonies—a larger number than the total population of these
dependencies at that time. Many thousand of those sent to the West
Indies gradually found their way to this country through the Atlantic
and Gulf ports, but the fact that proscriptive laws against Catholics,
modeled after the English penal laws, were enforced in most of the
colonies, prevented many others from coming here before the Revolution.
It may be remarked in passing that to the feeling excited among the
French colonists on the St. Lawrence by these enactments and by later
mischievous displays of religious intolerance, is due the fact that
Canada still remains subject to Britain, and that the Starry Flag does
not wave over all the territory between the Gulf and the Pole.

After the Revolution, however, and when it became evident that religious
liberty would be allowed by law to all the people of this Republic, the
descendants of the expatriated Irish in the West Indies came to the
United States in considerable numbers to escape the insalubrious
climate, the almost constant turmoil caused by the conflicts waged there
between European powers, the troubles and dangers arising from the
frequent plots and uprisings of the colored population, and especially
to be rid of English rule.

To show the difficulties and dangers to which those living in the West
Indian islands were exposed, an incident which occurred on the island of
Montserrat in 1768 may be briefly mentioned. The negroes of that island
formed a plot to massacre the whites, and decided to carry out their
project on St. Patrick’s day, “which,” we are informed, “the inhabitants
generally assembled together to commemorate”—a fact which proves their
origin. It was arranged that “the negroes allowed within the building
(where the festivities were to be held) were to secure the swords of the
gentlemen participating and those without were to fire into the hall and
put every man to death. They were then to cast lots for the ladies, whom
they intended to carry to Puerto Rico in the vessels that lay in the
harbor.” The plot happily failed, through a warning given by a faithful
servant to one of the intended victims, and several negroes were
executed for complicity in it. The Irish in the West Indies sympathized
warmly with the American Revolutionists, and this made them objects of
distrust and hatred to the English. We are told that “from many letters
found in American prize ships, it was discovered that a traitorous
correspondence had been carried on between British subjects and the
revolted colonies in North America.” The merchandise and stores of those
suspected of sympathy with the Americans were confiscated by the
English.

The vindictive animosity displayed by Admiral Lord Nelson while in the
West Indies against the Americans and their sympathizers excited the
bitterest indignation among the people there. Nelson—whose feeling
toward the Americans, trading with these islands, may be judged from an
expression in one of his letters, “I hate them all,” and his declaration
in another, “I, for one, am determined not to suffer the Yankees to come
where my ship is”—did his utmost to ruin American commerce in that
quarter, and even went so far as to complain to the English government
of his superior officers because they failed to encourage and abet his
malignant efforts. His bitterness against the Irish may be easily
inferred from one of his letters written from the island of St. Kitts,
on March 18, 1785, in which he says: “Yesterday being St. Patrick’s Day,
Irish colors with thirteen stripes on them were hoisted all over town. I
was engaged to dine with the president, but sent an excuse, as he
suffered those colors to fly.” It is not to be wondered at that numbers
of the West Indian Irish sought a home under the flag with the “thirteen
stripes,” to which they had so patriotically shown their attachment.

It may be remarked here that Seaman, referring to the period just before
1790, says that “the proportionately rapid increase of the population of
the Southern states proved that they had received considerable
accessions of immigrants from the West Indies.” The great majority of
these were no doubt descendants of the transported victims of Cromwell’s
despotism. The able historian of South Carolina, Dr. Ramsay, tells us
that in 1791 a number of Catholics, “chiefly natives of Ireland,
associated themselves together for public worship, and put themselves
under the care of Bishop Carroll,” and adds that “The troubles in France
and the West Indian islands soon brought a large accession to their
numbers.”

A considerable number of Irish immigrants arrived here between 1800 and
1815 from the remnant of North American territory still subject to
England, and especially from Newfoundland. From a very early period,
Irish fishermen had been accustomed to visit the shores of that island,
and not seldom did they bring with them proscribed and persecuted
priests, who sought shelter there from the fanatical “priest hunters”
employed in enforcing the English penal laws in Ireland. But even there
were they harassed and hounded and the exercise of their faith
prohibited, and it was not until after the achievement of American
Independence that Catholics were permitted to openly profess the
principles and practice the duties of their religion. In 1784, the then
governor, Vice-Admiral Campbell, issued an order allowing “All persons
inhabiting the island to have full liberty of conscience and free
exercise of all such modes of religious worship as are not prohibited by
law.”

It seems probable that this official acknowledgment of the right of
liberty of conscience was hastened, not only by the triumph of the
American “rebels,” but also by the fact that in 1776 an attempt was made
by the Irish in Newfoundland to aid the Americans by sympathetic
movements, which clearly indicated their disposition to make common
cause with Washington and his compatriots.

The large numbers of Wexford and other insurgents, who had escaped to
Newfoundland after the failure of the insurrection of ’98, and who,
though defeated, had not lost heart or hatred of their oppressors,
became so numerous in 1799 that they formed a plan to expel the English
from the island, resolving in case of failure to “set off for the United
States.” They succeeded in extending the United Irish organization, not
only among a very considerable number of the people, but also among a
large proportion of the soldiers composing the Royal Newfoundland
regiment, then stationed in St. John’s, the capital.

The movement was unsuccessful, owing to the timidity or treachery of
some among the military. Five soldiers were hanged, seven sent to
Halifax to be shot, many others carried to the same place “to be there
dealt with,” and the regiment was removed from St. John’s and replaced
by another. Ogden, the governor, in a letter written in July, 1800,
says, “We do not know, nor was it possible to ascertain how far this
defection and the United (Irish) Oath extended through the regiment.” He
admits that “the defection was very extensive, not only through the
regiment, but through the inhabitants of this and all the out-harbors,
particularly to the southward, where the people almost to a man had
taken the United (Irish) Oath, which is ‘to be true to the old cause,
and to follow their heads of whatsoever denomination.’” He supposes that
the plans “are not given up, but only waiting a proper opportunity to
break through,” and adds that, according to statements made by a United
Irishman, who was only a “novice,” the movement had been undertaken “in
consequence of letters received from Ireland.” He further demands a
reinforcement of troops—1,500 men—which will be needed “while Ireland is
in such a state of ferment as it has been, and is likely to continue,
until the business of the Union is settled, for the events of Ireland
have heretofore, and will henceforth, in a great measure, govern the
sentiments and actions of the far greater majority of the people in this
country.”

The unsatisfactory outcome of this movement caused numbers of the United
Irishmen of Newfoundland to seek shelter in the United States. “American
traders came disguised, sold and bartered their goods in the outports
and stole away the men as usual,” about this time, just as during the
closing years of the 17th century and the first half of the 18th, the
French smugglers carried over to France the “Wild Geese.” It is, of
course, impossible to ascertain the number of those who came here at the
period and under the conditions above referred to, but it is evident
that there were many thousands of them.

In 1804, Irish immigrants to the number of 670 are reported as arriving
at St. John’s on their way to the United States, and for several years
after thousands of their countrymen chose the same route to our shores.
During the war of 1812 many of the Irish who had remained on the island
went to serve on American privateers against the English, and many of
these ships were commanded by Irishmen.

The large number of Irish who entered the United States from British
North America within the period considered is not taken into account by
our authorities on immigration, and their estimates of the direct
immigration from Ireland and Britain are also very evidently far too
low. They do not seem to remember that, there being no supervision of
vessels carrying passengers until a much later period, the ships for
America were crowded to a degree which in our day would hardly be
thought possible.

Wolfe Tone, in his “Memoirs,” gives us an idea of the manner in which
passengers were packed in vessels bound for the United States. Speaking
of his voyage from Belfast to Wilmington, Delaware, in 1795—which
occupied upwards of eight weeks—he says: “The slaves who are carried
from the coast of Africa have much more room allowed them than the
immigrants who pass from Ireland to America, for the avarice of the
captains in that trade is such that they think they never can load their
vessels sufficiently, and they trouble their heads in general no more
about the accommodation and storage of their passengers than of any
other lumber aboard.” There were over 300 immigrants on board the ship
on which he sailed, but when off the banks of Newfoundland, she was
stopped by three English frigates, and fifty of her passengers carried
off by the “press-gangs” to serve in the navy of their persecutors. Tone
narrowly escaped being among the number of those taken.

Many of the captains of emigrant ships at that time were thoroughly
unscrupulous. A few years before the incidents just referred to
occurred, the captain of a vessel, who had undertaken to carry a body of
emigrants from Dunleary (now Kingstown), Ireland, to Charleston, S. C.,
landed eighty of them on the island of Inagua, near Dominica, in the
West Indies, telling them it was well inhabited, and that provisions
were plentiful. When, after having landed, they found that they had been
deceived by the captain, and attempted to get on board the vessel again,
they were fired on and one of them killed. They were, however, rescued a
short time after by a passing American vessel, being, as might be
supposed, “all in a most distressed condition.” It was not only the
poorer people of Ireland who even then sought a free home in this land.
Many persons of means were always to be found among those who came
direct from thence. In 1798, a ship arrived at Norfolk, Va., from that
country “with 426 passengers, chiefly tradesmen and persons of
property.”

In the absence of any authentic records of immigration during the thirty
years preceding 1820, we are justified, when endeavoring to form
anything like an approximately correct estimate of the arrivals from
Ireland during that period, in taking into consideration the strength of
the Irish element here at that time, and the importance attached to the
movements of Irish Americans in aid of their struggling kindred in the
Old Land. Branches of the United Irish Society were established here
soon after the organization of that body in Ireland. “Its headquarters
were in Philadelphia, where Mathew Carey and other good men gave it aid
and impulse. The publications of the Irish society were reprinted in the
city just named as early as 1794, and funds were collected and arms
promised.”

The strength and influence of this organization excited the uneasiness
of the English government, and its minister here, Sir Robert Liston,
used every effort to check the progress of the sympathetic movement. He
was unfortunately enabled to attain his object, to a great extent,
through his close intimacy with the highest officers of our government.
In 1798, the “Alien Act” was passed in Congress, by a small majority. By
this enactment, the president could order any alien he deemed dangerous
to quit the country, others were to be licensed to remain during his
pleasure, and neglect to obtain a license was made an offense punishable
by three years’ imprisonment, and perpetual disqualification for
citizenship. Fourteen years was fixed as the time necessary for an alien
to reside here before he could become a citizen. This law excited deep
indignation, and was strongly denounced by many independent journals. In
order to prevent hostile criticism, the “Sedition Law” was passed, by
which a fine of $2,000 was imposed upon any one who should write or
publish a letter against the government, either house of Congress, or
the president. Many were tried and several punished under these acts,
and some had to fly the country to escape the threatened penalties.

The English minister was jubilant. In a letter to the governor-general
of Canada, written in 1799, he gleefully told how some supporters of the
coercive measures had “taken the law into their own hands, and flogged
one or two of the printers of the newspapers whose comments had offended
them,” and he remarked that this proceeding had “given rise to much
animosity, to threats, and to a commencing of armed associations among
those opposed to these laws, particularly among the United Irishmen,”
adding, “Some apprehend that the affair may lead to a civil war.”

The Alien and Sedition laws were repealed three years later, the bill
for that purpose being introduced by Senator Smilie, a native of
Newtonards, Down county, Ireland, and a veteran of the Revolution. In
1812 he was a member of the foreign affairs committee, and prepared the
bill authorizing President Madison to raise an army to fight the
English.

Among the many prominent United Irishmen who arrived here about this
period were Napper Tandy, Archibald Hamilton Rowan, Mathew Carey, Dr.
Reynolds, Dr. Robert Adrian, who became professor of mathematics and
natural philosophy in Columbia college, and later was made vice-provost
of the University of Pennsylvania. There came at the beginning of the
nineteenth century, Thomas Addis Emmet, afterward attorney-general of
New York state; Dr. William J. Macneven; Counselor Sampson; W. Theobald
Wolfe Tone, a worthy son of his heroic father; Nicholas Grey, who had
been adjutant to General Harvey, commander of the Wexford insurgent army
in ’98; Henry Jackson, John Cormack, and many others. Alexander Porter,
another of these immigrants, was too young in ’98 to become a member of
the organization in Ireland, but his father, Rev. W. Porter, a
Protestant minister of Newtonards, Down, had been hanged at his own door
for his patriotism during the insurrection. Mr. Porter was later chosen
United States senator from the state of Louisiana.

During the war of 1812–’15, large numbers of Irish joined the armies of
the republic and shared in the victories as well as the defeats of that
conflict. When General Scott and his small force was overpowered at
Queenstown Heights by a greatly superior body of English and compelled
to surrender, a number of the Irish prisoners of war were separated from
their comrades and sent in irons to England “in order to be tried and
executed for the crime of high treason.” The United States government,
however, threatened to retaliate, and because of this fact, the men were
ultimately released and allowed to return to this country. Many Irish
also fought under Harrison, one of them (Mason) being credited with
having killed the Indian chief, Tecumseh, at the battle of the Thames,
and among the gallant men who under Andrew Jackson so decisively
defeated the English at New Orleans on January 8, 1815, were numbers who
had been born in his father’s native land, including several veterans of
the insurrection of ’98.

While the war lasted, immigration from Europe was checked, but very soon
after the restoration of peace, immigrants, particularly from Ireland,
began to come here in far greater numbers than ever before. The English,
however, notwithstanding the treaty of Ghent, were still bitterly
hostile to the Americans, and their press indulged in the coarsest abuse
of our institutions and public men. Inflamed by jealousy of this
republic, and anxious to prevent the Irish from emigrating to it, the
English parliament in 1816 passed a law which prohibited British vessels
from carrying more than one passenger for every five tons burden to the
United States, while allowing them to carry one passenger for every two
tons to any other part of the world.

But this law did not produce the desired effect. Professor Smith says
that “from Great Britain (and Ireland) the number of emigrants for the
year 1815 was only 2,081. The next year it rose to 12,510; in 1817 to
20,634; in 1818 to 27,787, and in 1819 to 34,789.”

Holmes says, speaking of the year 1816: “In this and the preceding year
there was a great emigration from Ireland and England to America. This
year 1,192 American and foreign vessels arrived at New York, bringing to
that port alone 7,122 passengers.” From the same authority we learn that
the returns of vessels and passengers at Baltimore showed the arrival at
that port early in October, 1816, of 1,878 passengers; those reported
being estimated at probably three fourths of the whole number that
arrived. From another source we find that “within three weeks, in the
month of September, 1816, about 2,000 immigrants arrived in the United
States.” Similar notices may be frequently found in the newspapers of
those times.

The English authorities, while endeavoring to prevent the Irish from
coming to the United States, exerted themselves vigorously to promote
emigration to Canada. Municipal bodies, local organizations, and various
societies contributed funds to assist those intending to emigrate, and
at the same time liberal grants of land and other inducements were
offered to prospective settlers in Canada. As a result of these efforts,
the immigrants from Ireland and Britain to Canada out-numbered, for many
years, those who came to the United States. The great majority of the
Irish, however, soon found their way to this country, and especially to
New York, where work was progressing at that time on the Erie and
Champlain canals. Of all these, no account was taken by officials or
writers on emigration at the time, and but little by those who wrote
later on the subject, though one writer admits that there was even more
recently “considerable overland immigration, much of which escapes
attention.”

It seems evident, taking all the facts above cited into consideration,
that the estimates of those writers of the number of immigrants, and
particularly of Irish immigrants who arrived here between 1790 and 1820,
are very much too low, and it appears very reasonable to assume that Dr.
Chickering’s estimate of the number of immigrants who came here after
1820—that is 50 per cent. more than the officially reported number of
arrivals—must be largely increased when we are endeavoring to ascertain
how many immigrants landed on our shores before the date just mentioned,
and before any attempt was made to obtain the number of those who
arrived in the United States, even through our Atlantic ports.

In order to reach an approximately correct conclusion as to the
proportion of the immigrants of different nationalities embraced in this
aggregate, we must be guided “by the relations then existing between the
United States and the countries from which persons emigrated,” to quote
the words of the last-named writer when speaking of the number of
immigrants. There is no need to dwell on those relations. The bitter
feeling with which the English had regarded the Americans from the days
of the Revolution, lost none of its intensity during the period under
consideration, and the feeling was frankly and fully reciprocated by the
great mass of the American people. As a consequence, there were but few
English among the immigrants to this country at that time.

The Irish, however, who had always sympathized with our republic in its
struggles, and gloried in its triumphs, came here in large and
constantly increasing numbers all through the thirty years preceding
1820, as well as afterwards. Many thousands of French, Germans, and
others arrived here during the period, but the great majority were
undoubtedly Irish. It seems clear that the immigrants were more than
twice as numerous during the period considered as the commonly received
estimates or conjectures would lead us to believe, and it appears
evident from the facts above cited that at least two thirds of the total
were of Irish birth or blood—including those from the West Indies,
Newfoundland, and Canada.

That number seems very small now, when we think of the enormous
immigration of later years, and our population of 80,000,000. But it
should be remembered that the white population of this country in 1790
was only 3,172,464. Of this total, those between the ages of twenty and
fifty numbered less than two fifths, or 1,268,986. Now the immigrants
who sought our shores in those days were almost all in the prime of
life. Children and aged and weakly people, being unable to undergo the
difficulties and hardships certain to be encountered in a strange and
new land, were left behind. Among the new arrivals marriages took place
in far greater proportion than among the descendants of the earlier
immigrants, and the children of the former were proportionately more
than twice as numerous as those of the latter. This continued to be the
case down to a much later period. During the years 1849, 1850, and 1851,
the marriages among the native born in Massachusetts were at the rate of
220 in 10,000, while those of the foreigners (mostly Irish) were in the
proportion of 450 in 10,000. The children born to native parents in the
same state during the same years numbered 47,982, or 578 in 10,000,
while those of immigrants amounted to 24,523, or 1,491 in 10,000. That
is more than twice and a half as many. It is impossible to determine
accurately how much the population of the United States was increased by
the immigrants who arrived here between 1790 and 1820, and their
descendants, but careful investigators have furnished us with estimates,
which maybe fairly regarded as approximately correct.

Some writers who gravely state that “the mortality among Catholics is
greater than among Protestants,” and who complacently assert that “the
vitality of the Irish is very low,” have, as might be expected from
these expressions, glaringly underestimated the number in 1820 of the
immigrants and their descendants who arrived here during the period
under consideration. Dr. Chickering says that they then numbered
1,430,906 out of a total population of 9,638,131.

But the Hon. F. Kapp, one of the commissioners of immigration for the
state of New York, allowing a yearly increase of 1.38 per cent. for the
descendants of the earlier immigrants, shows that at this rate the
population—excluding slaves because their numbers have no bearing on the
question—of 3,231,930 in 1790, would have only increased to 3,706,674 in
1800, to 4,251,143 in 1810, and to 4,875,600 in 1820, instead of
amounting to 8,100,056, the total population including slaves being
9,638,131. Assuming his estimate to be nearly correct, his declaration
that “immigration has enabled this country to anticipate its natural
growth some forty years’” seems reasonable.

A similar estimate was made by Louis Schade of Washington, D. C., and by
Hon. M. W. Closkey, ex-postmaster of the United States house of
representatives, who shows that the rate of increase of our population
(1.38 per cent.) was greater than that of any European nation, and
proceeds to estimate what the numbers of our people would have been at
each census up to 1850 had immigration been prohibited when the
constitution was adopted in 1789. The estimates just quoted together
with the facts above stated seem to prove that the number of the
immigrants arriving here between 1790 and 1820 were absurdly
underestimated by most of those who wrote on the subject.

The same remark applies to some extent to several writers who have dealt
with the question of immigration after 1820, and even the official
reports and statistics down to a comparatively recent period were
admittedly defective in important respects, and failed to mention or
enumerate a large proportion of the immigrants to this country. This
subject will, however, be dealt with in another paper.


                      THE FIRST IRISH IN ILLINOIS.

                   BY HON. P. T. BARRY, CHICAGO, ILL.

Individual Irishmen appeared early on the scene in Illinois. They came
in a military capacity. Having no government of their own to serve, they
served others. The Irishman who had the distinction of first figuring in
our annals was a Chevalier Macarty, who succeeded LaBussoniere in 1751,
in the command of the first French fortress erected in the Mississippi
valley—that of Chartres. He came from New Orleans with a small military
force, and remained in charge until 1764, when he delivered up that
stronghold to the English, according to the treaty of 1763, by which
France yielded up all her Canadian possessions by right of conquest to
her ancient enemy.

Canada at that time extended to the Ohio river on the south and to the
Mississippi on the west. There was not yet any map bearing the name of
the Empire state of the West. There was only a tribe of Indians
inhabiting a portion of the immense Northwest named the “Illini,” that
had its name given to the territory at the dividing up. Beyond the
Mississippi was Spanish territory.

Under the French and Spanish systems of colonization at that date,
Indian missions, military posts and towns went together. Old Kaskaskia,
in what is now Randolph county, was the first seat of civilization in
the great Mississippi basin, and was for a time the capital of the
territory. Here many stirring events took place for many eventful years.
In addition to a mission and a fort near by, it was made of greater
importance with a legislature.

Pere Marquette, the apostle of several states, laid its foundation in
the year 1675, one hundred years before the breaking out of the war for
American independence. Here savages and whites commingled. Also, the
soldiers of France, Great Britain and America. And wherever there are
soldiers there is to be found the ubiquitous Irishman. There was to be
found French contentment, savage resentment and pioneer endurance.
Vincennes, Pittsburg and Detroit were its nearest neighbors on the great
Western expanse. But, like the sites of Tyre and Sidon, famous in
ancient history, it exists no more, the encroaching waters of the
Mississippi having washed it away and made it a memory.

After the capitulation of Quebec in 1763 the British claimed ownership
of the whole of the French territory known as Canada, and prepared to
garrison all the forts the French had erected, including Detroit,
Peoria, Vincennes, Chartres, Cahokia, Kaskaskia, etc. The last-named
three were situated on the Mississippi river, and somewhat contiguous.

On the 27th day of February, 1764, a Major Loftus of the British army,
then on duty in Florida, was ordered to proceed to Fort Chartres and
take possession of it. His name indicates his Irish origin, but if there
be any mistake in this, there certainly was not in his soldiers. They
were of the Twenty-second British regiment, and were mostly Irishmen.
Here, then, was presented the peculiar spectacle of one Irish commander
in the service of a country not his own being required to evacuate his
command to another Irishman in the service of a different country not
his own. It reminds the writer somewhat of the siege of Quebec by
Richard Montgomery, an Irishman in the service of the United States,
when he asked its British commander, Sir Guy Carleton, another Irishman,
and an old schoolmate, to surrender to the Continental Congress. But
Major Loftus was not fortunate any more than General Montgomery. On the
way he and his command were attacked by the Indians, who killed many of
the soldiers, the remainder escaping down the Mississippi. Thus was the
first Irish blood spilled in the Mississippi valley.

Then another Irish officer, also in the British service, named George
Croghan, was ordered by Governor Murray to go forward and secure the
desired possession. Croghan had been quite a conspicuous figure in the
British interest in those days in America. He ranked as major, and had
been for many years a trader among the Western Indians. Hardly another
white man was in the prairie country before him. In describing the
country afterwards, he said it looked like an ocean. The ground was
exceedingly rich and full of all kinds of game, and at any time, in half
an hour, he could kill all he wanted. He was commanded to go from Fort
Pitt to make the way clear for the British advance to Forts Cahokia and
Chartres. It was not the French alone that were to be considered, but
the Indian chieftains as well. He first sent forward a Lieutenant Fraser
to see the way clear, but the latter received rough treatment at
Kaskaskia and returned unsuccessful.

It was said that Chief Pontiac was egged on to kill him, but he escaped
without serious injury. Then Colonel Croghan, who was also a British
deputy superintendent of Indian affairs, went forward himself. He left
Fort Pitt (now Pittsburg) on May 15, 1765, accompanied by a party of
friendly Indians. His progress was uninterrupted until he arrived at a
small promontory on the Wabash, where he disembarked. On June 8, six
miles below the stream he was suddenly attacked by a band of Kickapoos,
eighty in number. In the fight which followed Croghan lost two white men
and three Indians, while most of his party, including himself, were
wounded. A surrender was unavoidable, and the victorious Kickapoos
plundered the entire party. Subsequently the Indians confessed they had
made a great mistake, and expressed sorrow for what had happened. They
supposed, they said, that the friendly Indians accompanying Croghan were
their deadly enemies, the Cherokees. They brought their prisoners in
safety to Vincennes on the Wabash, where the Indians, many of whom had
friendly acquaintance with Croghan, strongly condemned the Kickapoos,
and the latter in turn expressed deep sorrow for what they persisted in
calling a blunder.

Further on the way he received a message from St. Ange, the late French
commander, cordially inviting him to advance to Fort Chartres. He had
proceeded but a short distance on his way, however, when he was met by a
delegation of chiefs, representing various tribes of Indians, among whom
was the hitherto implacable Pontiac, the great warrior, at the head of a
large band of Ottawa braves, offering their services as an escort. At
this juncture, and under this condition of things, Croghan did not deem
it necessary to proceed further in person, the British claim to the
territory being acknowledged by both French and Indians. This happy
result showed that the Irishman must have used his diplomatic powers to
excellent advantage. He then betook himself to Detroit to attend to
other important business in the interest of his royal master, leaving
his command in charge of another officer.

Accompanied by Pontiac, Croghan crossed to Fort Miami and, descending
the Miami, held conferences with the different tribes dwelling in the
immense forests which sheltered the banks of the stream. Passing thence
up the Detroit, he arrived at the fort on the 17th of August, where he
found a vast concourse of neighboring tribes. The fear of punishment and
the long privations they had suffered from the suspension of their trade
had banished every thought of hostility, and all were anxious for peace
and its attendant blessings. After numerous interviews with the
different tribes in the old town hall where Pontiac first essayed the
execution of his treachery, Croghan called a final meeting on the 27th
of August. Imitating the forest eloquence with which he had long been
familiar, he thus addressed the convention:

“Children, we are very glad to see so many of you present at your
ancient council fire, which has been neglected for some time past. Since
then high winds have blown and raised heavy clouds over your country. I
now by this belt rekindle your ancient fires and throw dry wood upon
them that the blaze may ascend to heaven, so that all nations may see it
and know that you live in peace with your fathers, the English. By this
belt I disperse all the black clouds from over your heads that the sun
may shine clear on your women and children, and that those unborn may
enjoy the blessings of this general peace, now so happily settled
between your fathers, the English, and you and all your younger brethren
toward the sunsetting.”

The following was Pontiac’s reply: “Father, we have all smoked together
out of this peace pipe, and as the great Spirit has brought us together
for good, I declare to all the nations that I have made peace with the
English. In the presence of all the tribes now assembled I take the king
of England for my father and dedicate this to his use that henceforth we
may visit him and smoke together in peace.”

The object of Croghan’s visit being thus accomplished he was prepared to
depart, but before doing so he exacted a promise from Pontiac that the
following spring he would appear at Oswego and enter into a treaty with
Sir William Johnson in behalf of the Western nations associated with him
in the late war.

In September, 1768, came John Wilkins, lieutenant-colonel of “His
Majesty’s Eighteenth or Royal Regiment of Ireland,” and commandant
throughout the Illinois country. Several companies of this regiment came
with him from Philadelphia and occupied quarters at Kaskaskia. The
experience of those troops was not good, but it was common to that of
all new comers in the aguish “American Bottom.” The sickness among them
was not only very great, but very fatal. At one time, out of five
companies only a corporal and six men were found fit for duty.

Capt. Hugh Lord became the next commander of the Royal Irish regiment,
and continued so until the year 1775. The British governor at Kaskaskia
at this time was a Chevalier Rocheblave, strange to say, a Frenchman. It
was at this time that the colonists began to defy George III, and the
Irish soldiers of the old French outposts were persistent in showing
sympathy for them, and their leaning toward the American cause was such
that poor old Rocheblave declared it worried him to see men of British
birth giving him more trouble than the French. After a time most of the
Irish soldiers of Britain were drawn off for service elsewhere, and the
French residents were organized into militia. Their captain was one
Richard McCarty, a resident of Cahokia. There was another McCarty who
built a water mill on the Cahokia creek near Illinoistown at a later
date, who was known as “English McCarty.”

In 1777 Irish-Americans began to appear on the scene, with the invasion
of Gen. George Rogers Clark, the Virginian. What Clark’s ancestry was
remains in some doubt. His biographer, English, thinks his ancestors
came from Albion, but is able to give no particulars. At any rate, he
conquered that portion of British territory that had formerly belonged
to the French, and from which five sovereign states of the Union have
been carved. His army was composed of Virginians and Pennsylvanians,
many of whom were Irish either by birth or by blood. He was materially
assisted by the French settlers, under the leadership of Father Gibault,
the republican priest of Kaskaskia. To the latter and one Col. Francis
Vigo, a native of Sardinia, who was married to an Irish lady (a Miss
Shannon), was the success of the Virginian invasion mostly due, and the
annexation of the prairie country to American territory.

Clark affiliated very closely with the Irish. It is due to him to say
that he was a brave and generous man, whose services to his young
country can never be forgotten. His invasion of this wilderness and its
conquest, it must be remembered, was under the direction of Gov. Patrick
Henry of Virginia, and to him alone he was responsible. The first of his
Irish relatives to deserve notice was William Croghan, a nephew of Maj.
George Croghan, the British officer already alluded to. He cherished no
love in his heart for Great Britain or her monarch. He had resigned the
British for the American service. He left Ireland for America when quite
young, and was long in the employ of the British as an Indian agent,
like his uncle. He joined the American forces at Pittsburg and witnessed
the surrender of Cornwallis at Yorktown. He married Lucy Clark Rogers,
sister of the famous general. When he joined the American forces he was
assigned to Colonel Werder’s Virginia regiment, shortly after the battle
of Long Island, and continued in active service for years.

He was promoted to the rank of major in 1778, and was assigned to Col.
John Neville’s Fourth Virginia regiment and participated in the battle
of Monmouth. He marched with the Virginia troops to Charleston, S. C.,
where the whole American army at that place was compelled to surrender
to the enemy. In 1781 he was paroled and went to Virginia with his
friend, Col. Jonathan Clark, brother of the general, and for a time was
the guest of Colonel Clark’s father in Caroline county. It was there he
met the woman who was destined to be his wife. He was afterwards a
delegate to the Kentucky convention of 1789–’90, and was one of the
commissioners to divide the land allotted to the soldiers engaged in the
conquest of the Northwest. He left six sons and two daughters.

One of his daughters became the wife of Thomas Jessup, adjutant-general,
U. S. A. His son George married a Miss Livingston, of the noted New York
family. This son George greatly distinguished himself at the battle of
Tippecanoe in 1811, and subsequently in the Mexican War. He was a major
at the time of his defense of Fort Stephenson at Lower Sandusky, and
Congress presented him with a medal for his gallantry. A splendid
monument has been erected to his memory at Fremont, Ohio. The elder
Croghan died in 1822, and his widow in 1838.

Frances Eleanor Clark, youngest daughter of the old hero, married Dr.
James O’Fallon, whom the memoir says was a finely-educated Irishman who
came to America shortly before the Revolution. He was an officer during
the War for Independence, and was the founder of the well-known O’Fallon
family of St. Louis, which has been so conspicuous in the history of
that great city. There is also a town named after one of the members of
this family in St. Clair county, this state. To his two grandsons, John
and Benjamin O’Fallon, General Clark willed 3,000 acres of land.

Another nephew and heir of the general was George Rogers Clark Sullivan,
who was honorably identified with Indian affairs during the territorial
period, and who left a long line of prominent descendants, after one of
which is named Sullivan county in that state.

In Gen. George Rogers Clark’s force for the conquest of Kaskaskia,
Cahokia, and Vincennes were many men with Irish names, and when we take
into account the Irish then so very numerous in Pennsylvania and
Virginia, it would not be surprising if one half of it was composed of
Irishmen and Irish-Americans. In this force were 236 privates, besides
officers. Some of the names of the latter are as follows: Major Thomas
Quirk (who was originally a sergeant in Captain McHarrod’s company and
rendered some military service on the frontier before and after the
Illinois campaign). Clark’s biographer says, “Quirk was a brave and a
fine-looking Irishman.” He died in Louisville, Kentucky, in the fall of
1803. He was allotted 4,312 acres of land for his valuable army
services.

Capt. John Montgomery, who is stated in one place to be “an Irishman
full of fight,” was one of Clark’s most valued officers, and had been
one of the celebrated party of “Long Hunters.”

Col. John Campbell, who was one of the commissioners for the allotment
of Clark’s land grant of 149,000 acres, to the men engaged in his
Illinois campaigns, was an Irishman by birth, and a man accredited with
much force of character. He was a member of the Kentucky convention of
1792, and a member of the legislature. He died without issue. After
Campbell came James F. Moore, Alex. Breckenridge, Richard Taylor, and
Robert Breckenridge, as land commissioners. James F. Moore had been a
soldier under Clark, and also, subsequently, a member of the Kentucky
house of representatives.

Here are names that are suggestive of subsequent presidents of the
United States. Richard Taylor was a native of Virginia, of Irish
extraction. He removed in 1785 to Kentucky; was a soldier of the
Revolution, holding the rank of lieutenant-colonel at its close. He was
the father of the hero of the Rio Grande, Gen. Zachary Taylor, twelfth
president of the United States. Robert Breckenridge, also of Irish
extraction, was a member of the Kentucky legislature, and speaker of the
house of representatives several times. He was the ancestor of John C.
Breckenridge, vice-president with James Buchanan, and subsequently a
presidential candidate himself.

Col. Archibald Lochrey was county lieutenant of Westmoreland county,
Pennsylvania, and started with his command from Carnahan’s block-house
August, 1781, to join Gen. Clark’s Illinois forces, with a company of
volunteer riflemen raised by Capt. Robert Orr; two companies of rangers
under Capt. Thomas Stockley, and a company of horse under Capt. William
Campbell, for the reduction of Detroit, then in the possession of the
British. Stockley was met and defeated by Indians in the British
service. In fact, the whole of Col. Lochrey’s expedition was defeated,
forty-one men being killed, and the rest taken prisoners. When certain
facts with regard to the British forces became known at Kaskaskia, it
was determined to raise a small American force and make a raid against
Fort St. Joseph, a British post situated on the St. Joseph river.

The company consisted of only seventeen men and was commanded by Thomas
Brady, a patriotic Irish-American citizen of Cahokia, who had emigrated
thither from Pennsylvania, and who was described as being “both restless
and daring.” He marched across the country in October and succeeded in
eluding the Indian guards and capturing the place, taking a few British
prisoners, together with a large quantity of goods. Being
over-confident, on his return he was attacked by a force of
Pottawattomies and British traders, hastily organized for the purpose,
and while lying encamped on the Calumet river, near Chicago, was
defeated. Two of his men were killed, two wounded, and ten taken
prisoners. Brady, with two others, suceeded in making their escape, and
returned to Cahokia. But he did not rest until he organized another
expedition to rescue his friends and avenge his defeat. He was joined by
a party of Spaniards from the west side of the Mississippi, then Spanish
territory, and retook the place without striking a blow, and the Spanish
flag for a short time replaced the British. The event was a small one,
but Spain had the hardihood to demand the country on account of it.

This Thomas Brady, and one William Arundel (an Irishman from Canada, and
an Indian trader in Cahokia in 1783) and Capt. Richard McCarty, already
mentioned, and a small party of hunters that joined General Clark’s
expedition in 1778, were the only white men in Illinois territory
besides the French Canadians, and a few old soldiers, at the time of
Clark’s conquest. They resided at Cahokia. Brady was afterwards sheriff
of St. Clair county.

Among other names of officers that are likely to have been Irish or
Irish-American in Clark’s army, are those of Col. Benjamin Logan, Capt.
John Baily, Capt. Robert Orr, Capt. William Campbell, Col. William
Davis, Lieut. Martin Carney, Thomas Dalton, and Major Denny.

General Clark wrote a letter to the governor of Virginia (Patrick Henry)
from Kentucky on October 12, 1782, in which he said, “I had the pleasure
of receiving your letter by Major Walls and Mr. Kearney, the 30th of
July past, at which time the gentlemen arrived with stores all safe,
after surmounting uncommon difficulties. They arrived in time to save
troops from deserting.” This shows that the Irish were pretty well in
evidence both in Virginia and the Northwest at that period.

Subjoined is a list of the privates taken from one page only of the
printed roster of Clark’s soldiers of the Illinois expedition, that were
entitled to receive, each, 108 acres of land, as printed in English’s
life of General Clark: Moses Lunsford, Abraham Lusado, Richard Luttrell,
John Lyons, Joseph Lyne, Francis McDermott, David McDonald, John McGar,
Alex. McIntyre, Geo. McMannus, Sr.; John McMannus, Jr., Samuel McMullen,
James McNutt, Florence Mahoney, Jonas Manifee, Patrick Marr, Charles
Martin, Nathaniel Mersham, Abraham Miller, John Montgomery, James
Monroe, John Moore, Thomas Moore, John Murphy, and Edward Murray.

James Curry was the name of one of Clark’s soldiers who proved himself a
rather extraordinary fellow, and a fearless pioneer. A band of Indians
had wounded a comrade of his named Levi Teel, in his own house, when
Curry was present. Seeing the enemy coming he jumped up into the loft of
the house, with the hope of driving them away before Teel could have
time to open the door to admit them. He shot three times and killed an
Indian every time. He then got down to see what had happened to Teel,
and found him transfixed by one of his hands with a spear to the floor.
Curry got up again into the loft and tumbled the whole roof down,
weight-poles and all, on the Indians, who were standing at the door with
spears in their hands. Their chief was killed, and the others ran away.

Curry hurried to Kaskaskia for help, and at last saved himself and
companions from death. He was at the capture of Fort Gage and Sackville,
the names given by the British to the old French forts. Curry was a
great athlete, contending in all sorts of games, and was not unlike
Thomas Higgins, another great Irish Indian-fighter of a later date. In
all desperate and hazardous services, Clark chose him first of all, to
act in places of peril and danger. Curry and Joseph Anderson, who
afterwards lived and died on Nine Mile Creek, Randolph county, went out
hunting, and the Indians, it is supposed, killed Curry, as he went out
from their camp and never returned. This was the sad end of one of our
bravest and most patriotic Irish-American heroes, “the noble-hearted
James Curry,” as he is styled in history, and whose services were so
conspicuous in the conquest of Illinois. His body was never recovered.

Edward Bulger was a private in Capt. Joseph Bowman’s company in the
Illinois campaign. He was afterwards an ensign in Capt. William Harrod’s
expedition against Vincennes, and in General Clark’s first expedition
against the Indians in Ohio. He was mortally wounded in the battle of
Blue Licks, 1782, at which time he had been promoted to the rank of
major. He was one of the early explorers of Kentucky, where he was with
Hite, Bowman, and others in the spring of 1775. These were probably the
first white visitors to what subsequently became Warren county. Hugh
Lynch was another of this party, and William Buchanan another. Daniel
Murray was the name of an Irishman who supplied provisions for Clark’s
Illinois army.

One of the forgotten heroic men who did great service to the republic in
the Revolutionary War was Oliver Pollock, an Irishman born. He performed
the same kind of service in the West that Robert Morris performed in the
East. He financed General Clark’s military campaign in Illinois and
Indiana, and without his aid they must have been failures. He was born
in Ireland in the year 1737 and came to America with his father. On
account of his intimacy with General O’Reilly, who was then governor of
Cuba, he was able to borrow from the royal treasury of Spain the sum of
$70,000, which he lent to the state of Virginia for Clark’s use in the
campaigns mentioned. He was not reimbursed, and consequently was not
able to make good what he had borrowed, which caused his arrest and
imprisonment in Havana. He died in Mississippi in 1823.

In 1777, when Clark was approaching Kaskaskia to surprise the British,
then in possession of the fort, he took two men from a party of American
hunters led by one John Duff, that he met on the way, to act as his
spies. They had left Kaskaskia but a few days before. These men were
James Moore and Thomas Dunn, as to whose nationality, from their names,
there can be no mistake.

General St. Clair, a Scotsman, was afterwards military commander of the
Northwest. He was succeeded by General Anthony (Mad Anthony) Wayne, who
conducted the war with the Indians in 1791. Under St. Clair the battle
of Fort Henry was fought and resulted in a great American disaster. But
General Wayne gained a great victory at the Maumee Rapids on August 20,
1794, which led to the suspension of hostilities.

One of the authorities that we had recourse to in writing these annals
is the “Pioneer History of Illinois,” by ex-Governor John Reynolds, a
man of Irish parentage, born in Pennsylvania, and who filled nearly
every office, legislative, judicial, and administrative, in the state of
Illinois. His place of residence was Cahokia, a short distance north of
St. Louis, on the Illinois side.

John Reynolds in his “Pioneer Days,” described his father as “an
Irishman who hated England with a ten horse-power,” and there is no
surmise in saying that he himself hated her just as much, as he was an
ardent admirer of “Old Hickory.” Neither did he want to be set down as
an Anglo-Saxon. He repulsed the insinuation in the following emphatic
language:

“Our old enemies, the English, and their American friends, give us the
name of new Anglo-Saxons. It is true the most of the Americans are the
descendants of Europeans, but the preponderance of blood is not of the
Anglo-Saxon race. There are more of the descendants of the Irish and
Germans in the United States than of the English.” If that were true
seventy years ago, certainly it is so to a far greater extent now.

We have already alluded, in connection with Curry’s achievements as an
Indian fighter, to the name of Tom Higgins. One of his noted encounters
with Indians is described in Governor Reynolds’ book, with thrilling
effect. This noted Irish-American pioneer resided in Fayette county for
many years, where he raised a large family, and died in 1829. He
received a pension, pursued farming, and at one time was doorkeeper of
the general assembly at Vandalia.

John Edgar was a merchant at Kaskaskia, and at that time the richest man
in the territory. His wife was a lady of rare talents, and presided over
the finest and most hospitable mansion in Kaskaskia. At this house was
entertained General Lafayette, when he visited this country in 1825. Mr.
Edgar’s memory is honored by having an Illinois county named for him.

In Mrs. Robert Morrison, Kaskaskia possessed another lady of Irish
ancestry who was an ornament to Illinois society at that early day. Mrs.
Morrison was reared and educated in the city of Baltimore, and in 1805
she accompanied her brother, Colonel Donaldson, to St. Louis, then in
the far-off wilds of the West, whither he was sent as a commissioner to
investigate the title lands. She was married the following year to
Robert Morrison of Kaskaskia, which place became her residence
thereafter. Well educated, sprightly and energetic, she possessed a mind
gifted with originality, imagination, and romance. Her delight was in
the rosy field of poetry.

Her pen was seldom idle. She composed with a ready facility and her
writings possessed a high degree of merit. Her contributions to the
scientific publications of Philadelphia, and other periodicals of the
period, in both verse and prose, were much admired. Nor did the
political discussions of her day escape her ready pen.

She was a member of the Roman Catholic communion, and shed lustre on her
co-religionists. The Morrison family is one of the best known,
politically and socially, in the state. While Mrs. Edgar entertained
General Lafayette at a grand reception, Mrs. Morrison entertained him
with a grand ball on the occasion referred to.

The territory of Illinois was organized on the 16th day of June, 1809.
Michael Jones and E. Backus were appointed respectively registrar and
receiver of the land office in Kaskaskia. At this time one McCawley, an
Irishman, had penetrated further into the interior of the territory than
any one else—to the crossing of the Little Wabash by the Vincennes road.

The writer cannot resist the temptation to relate an anecdote of Gen.
James Shields, a hero of the Mexican War, who cut so conspicuous a
figure in old Kaskaskia days. The anecdote he related himself, in a
lecture delivered in Chicago shortly before his death. He arrived in
Illinois on foot soon after he left Ireland for America, looking for
employment. On the way, he fell in with a young man engaged in a similar
pursuit, and who was companionable, so they traveled together. Reaching
Kaskaskia, Mr. Shields secured employment there, as a school teacher,
and remained. His companion was not so successful, and went on,
traveling in the direction of St. Louis. Shields rapidly rose from one
position of distinction to another, and when the Mexican War was
declared he was filling the position of a land commissioner at
Washington.

He hastened to Kaskaskia with President Polk’s commission in his pocket,
to raise an Illinois regiment, of which he was to be colonel. He was
successful in this, went to Mexico, and distinguished himself in several
battles, in one of which he was supposed to be mortally wounded, but
recovered. He became a general and a hero. When the war was over and he
returned to the United States he was lionized and invited to a number of
state fairs and cities as an attraction. St. Louis honored him in this
way, and made unusual preparations for his reception. The mayor and
corporation went out to receive him. His reception was most cordial. The
mayor grasped him warmly by the hand and looked him significantly in the
face. “Do you not know me, General?” “I do not, Mr. Mayor, who are you?”
“I am the man who tramped with you to Kaskaskia, many years ago, and
walked on to St. Louis.”

“Good God! I am delighted to see you,” was the exclamation of his
distinguished guest.

The Irish not only made history in those early days, but have also
written it. To the pen of John B. Dillon of Indiana, we are indebted for
the best history of the Northwest; to John Gilmary Shea of New York, we
are under obligation for a complete knowledge of the early Catholic
missions among the Indians, and ex-Governor Reynolds has narrated for us
our own pioneer story, with its varied conditions, its many deprivations
and numerous deeds of daring. For many of the incidents in this essay,
especially those relating to Gen. George Rogers Clark and his men, and
the conquest of the Northwest, I am indebted to the “Life of General
Clark,” by Mr. English of Indiana.

Were it not for the fear of making this essay too long, I might show how
fifteen to twenty names of Illinois counties have Irish associations;
what prominent parts Irishmen and the sons of Irishmen of Illinois took
in the War of 1812, the Black Hawk War, the Mexican War, and the War of
the Rebellion; how they filled gubernatorial chairs, prominent positions
in state and nation, as the representatives of the people; how they have
been foremost in the professions of law, medicine, and divinity. On the
muster roll of famous men they have three Logans, the two Reynolds,
Carlin, Kinney, Ford, Kane, Shields, Ewing, McLaughlin, Mulligan,
Medill, Ryan, and many others too numerous to mention. Not as public and
professional men alone has the Irish contingent been valuable to the
state of Illinois, but also as tillers of the soil, as miners and
manufacturers; for in the infantile condition of our commonwealth the
men of hardest muscle and most exacting toil were our Irish immigrants.
They did the excavating on our canals, and the grading on our first
railroads, and wherever hard work was to be performed, there you were
sure to find Paddy with his spade and pipe. May I not claim that that
herculean form representing “the Digger,” in the statue of Mulligan,
standing at the entrance of the Drainage Canal, near Chicago, answers
for the Irish canaler of former as well as of later days?

Nearly fifty years ago Thomas D’Arcy McGee, an Irish-American poet, and
at the time of his death a leading statesman of Canada, of wide fame and
renowned memory, wrote of the Irish prairie farmer in Illinois as
follows:

                 “’Tis ten long years since Eileen bawn
                   Adventured with her Irish boy
                 Across the seas and settled on
                   A prairie farm in Illinois.

                 “Sweet waves the sea of summer flowers
                   Around our wayside cot so coy,
                 Where Eileen sings away the hours
                   That light my task in Illinois.

                   CHORUS—

                 “The Irish homes of Illinois,
                 The happy homes of Illinois,
                   No landlord there
                   Can cause despair,
                 Nor blight our fields in Illinois!”


                  THE IRISH VANGUARD OF RHODE ISLAND.

                BY THOMAS HAMILTON MURRAY, BOSTON, MASS.

Irish settlers are found in Rhode Island at a very early period. They
were contemporaneous with Roger Williams, John Clark, William
Coddington, and other leading men and proved sturdy, energetic members
of the community.

Some of these Irish pioneers doubtless came to Rhode Island as soldiers
in the Indian wars, and when the latter were over “remained and went not
away.” Others, in all probability, came as settlers from St. Kitts,
Jamaica, Montserrat, and Barbadoes. During Cromwell’s atrocious regime
in Ireland thousands of Irish were transported not only to the continent
of North America but also to the West Indies. Other thousands followed
them, forced from home by the iniquitous English policy of
extermination.

It is not at all unlikely that Rhode Island received many of these hardy
refugees and became to them a land of asylum and a permanent home. Nor
can it reasonably be doubted that Connecticut, Plymouth and “the Bay”
likewise contributed Irish settlers to Rhode Island at early periods and
in goodly numbers. In “Winthrop’s Journal,” under date of 1635, is an
entry indicating that even as early as that a considerable immigration
from Ireland to New England was under way. Thus readeth the entry:

“Another providence was in the voyage of Mr. Winthrop, the younger, and
Mr. Wilson, into England, who, returning in the winter time, in a small
and weak ship, bound for Barnstaple, were driven by foul weather upon
the coast of Ireland, not known by any in the ship, and were brought,
through many desperate dangers, into Galloway[5] [Galway] where they
parted, Mr. Winthrop taking his journey over land to Dublin, and Mr.
Wilson by sea. His ship was forced back by tempest to Kinsale. Mr.
Wilson being in Ireland, gave much satisfaction to the Christians there
about New England. Mr. Winthrop went to Dublin, and from thence to
Antrim in the North and came to the house of Sir John Clotworthy, the
evening before the day when divers godly persons were appointed to meet
at his house, to confer about their voyage to New England, by whom they
were thoroughly informed of all things and received great encouragement
to proceed on their intended course.”

Sometimes immigrants from Ireland were welcomed to New England and at
other times the contrary was the case.

Under date of September 25, 1634, the Massachusetts records have this
entry: “It is ordered that the Scottishe and Irishe gentlemen wch
intends to come hither shall have liberty to sitt down in any place Vpp
Merimacke Ryver, not possessed by any.” In the Massachusetts records
under date of 1640, is another interesting entry, to wit: “It is ordered
that the goods of the persons come from Ireland shallbee free from this
rate [tax].” And a marginal heading reads: “Irish goods now land free
from ye rat[e].”

In the records of Massachusetts, 1652, we find that one David Sellick
having craved pardon “for his offence in bringing some of the Irish men
on shoare, hath his fine remitted, so as the first optunite be taken to
send them out of this jurisdiction.” But where could they be sent? Only
to some place where they would be likely to get a better reception. In
this connection, Rhode Island, the refuge of so many oppressed by “the
Bay,” would naturally suggest itself, at least to a portion of the Irish
immigrants thus proceeded against. The writer inclines to the belief
that numbers of these Irish, being refused permission to reside
elsewhere in New England, finally located in Rhode Island.


                   THE EARLY LARKINS OF RHODE ISLAND.

The historic Irish name of Larkin[6] is found in Rhode Island as early
as 1655. So far as known, Edward Larkin was the first of the name to
locate in the colony.[7] In the year mentioned, he was of Newport, R. I.
In 1661, he had a quarter share of land in what is now Westerly, R. I.
In 1663, he was commissioner from Newport in the “General Court of
Commissioners” held at Providence that year. He was an inhabitant of
Westerly as early as 1669. In 1671, he and John Mackoone were “called on
to see how they stand as to their fidelity to his Majestie and this
Colony.” Perhaps these two Irishmen had not hesitated on occasion to
forcibly express their opinion regarding English tyranny in Ireland.

Edward Larkin had five children, Mehitable, Hannah, Edward, Roger, and
John. The family prospered and in time became very influential
throughout the colony. Mehitable, who was probably named after her
mother or some of the latter’s relatives, married and had five children.
Hannah died without issue, Edward, Jr., married twice and had eleven
children, Roger married twice and had four children, John had one child.
Roger’s estate inventoried £742, 1s., 9d. It included “2 linen wheels.”
In 1755, his widow became an inhabitant of Richmond, R. I. Edward
Larkin, Jr., and wife of Westerly sold 100 acres of land to Samuel Lewis
in 1701.

In 1705–’07–’15, Edward Larkin, Jr., was a deputy to the General
Assembly. His will was proved in 1741. It gives “To wife £100, all
household goods and improvements of homestead and profits of saw mill,
for life, to bring up the young children, and then the said homestead to
go to son Stephen, but the goods and £100 to be free and clear to wife.
To son Stephen, the homestead at death of his mother. To son Nicholas,
£100 and 50 acres, at death of wife, and saw and grist mill. To son
Daniel, a farm at age. To daughter, Elizabeth Babcock, 10 acres where
she lives with house and orchard for life, and then to one of her sons
as she sees fit. To daughter Penelope, £30. To daughters Tabitha and
Lydia, each £50 at eighteen. To son Nicholas, 10 acres of salt marsh. To
son Joseph, 50 acres adjoining land formerly given him. To grandson
Joseph, my son Edward’s son, 5s., his father having had. To sons John
and Samuel, 5s., they having had. To sons, John and Samuel, rest of
estate.” The inventory showed, among other things, books, three beds,
pewter, loom, linen wheel, woolen wheel, card, seven cows, two pairs of
oxen, horse, 37 sheep, etc.

The will of Mary Larkin, widow of Edward, Jr., was proved in 1743. It
gives “To son Nicholas, £50, and bonds against him if he is not able to
pay them. To son David, great bible, and the mortgage to be cleared off
his land, and a house built 16 feet square if he lives to be 21 years of
age. To daughter Tabitha, a horse. To daughter Lydia, a little bible and
£100. To daughters Tabitha and Lydia, all wearing apparel and a double
portion of what is left over the debts. To three sons, the rest
equally.”

Descendants of Edward Larkin, the original immigrant, are still found in
the state. Many of them take a notable pride in their Irish ancestry.
Since the first Edward’s time, other Irish Larkins have come to Rhode
Island and have done their share toward the upbuilding of the state.


               WILLIAM HEFERNAN, AN EARLY RHODE ISLANDER.

William Hefernan, or Heffernan, was another early Rhode Island settler
of whose Irish origin there can be no doubt. He is first heard from at
Newport, but in 1671 was an inhabitant of Pettaquamscutt. In May of the
latter year “His Majestie’s Court of Justices” met at Pettaquamscutt and
“ordered that a warrant bee issued out to William Hefernan, to warne in
the inhabitants of this Plantation to attend tomorrow morning, at six of
the clock, at the house of Mr. Jireh Bull.”

Notwithstanding the early hour and short notice, the people assembled.
“Mr. William Hefernan was chosen and engaged to the office and place of
a Conservator of the Peace in jointe commission with Mr. Samuel Wilson
and Mr. Jireh Bull.” In 1674, Hefernan is found with his three sons
residing in Wickford, R. I. Later he appears to have taken up his
residence in Newport, for on August 25, 1676, he was present as a
witness at a court martial there on Indians charged with being
implicated in King Philip’s designs. A William Hefernan, Jr., was
admitted a freeman of the colony by the general assembly in 1724, and
another of the name in 1746. The name[8] is variously spelled Hefernan
and Heffernan. Now and then it appears as Hefferman and Heffermon, which
forms are evidently derivative. John Heffernan of Newport was admitted a
freeman in 1759. Descendants of William Hefernan, once numerous
throughout Rhode Island, are now believed to be extinct.


               MICHAEL KELLY, OF THE ISLAND OF CONANICUT.

The island of Conanicut is situated in Narragansett bay. It has a total
length of about nine miles and a width of from one to two miles. It is
just within the bay from the Atlantic ocean.

Beaver Tail light on its extreme southern point overlooks the sea, and
that portion of the island’s coast frequently resounds with the thunder
of the breakers. Indeed, most of the island’s shore is exposed more or
less to the billows driven in by old ocean.

The island derives its name from Canonicus, an Indian sachem who
formerly resided there. It is, of course, a part of the state of Rhode
Island and is comprised in the town of Jamestown. The latter was
incorporated in 1678 and named in honor of King James II, then heir to
the throne which he ascended two years later. Conanicut is about midway
in the bay between Newport, Middletown, and Portsmouth on the east, and
North Kingstown and the old District of Narragansett on the west. The
first purchase of land on the island by whites was made of the Indians
in 1657 by Benedict Arnold and William Coddington.

Michael Kelly[9] figures as a freeman in 1667. His wife’s name was
Isabel. In 1669, he had become prominent on the island. Michael has been
especially fortunate in that, so far as known, no one has ever had the
temerity to label him “English” or “Scotch.” In 1669, he and two others
were commissioned by the “Councill” to prepare the inhabitants against
possible surprises or attacks by the Indians. The order for this action
bears date of August 26, and reads thus:

“Whereas, there are severall out plantations in this Colony, which are
not included in any towneship, and they being as lyable or rather more
lyable to danger and invasion than where there is more strengh; and the
Councill seeing it incumbent on them to provide for their safety, doe
heerby order that the Conservators of the Peace at Pettaquomscut,
Narragansett or Acquidneesitt or Block Island, and such persons as the
Councill shall appoint on the Island Quononicutt, [Conanicut], doe
assemble the inhabitants of each of those places and consider among
themselves what may bee most suitable for their defence and preservation
against any mission or insurrection of the Indians, and forthwith to put
it in execution; and that a copie of this order bee sent to the first
Conservator of the Peace in each respective place, and the persons
appointed for Quononicutt.”

Two days later the following entry appears in the records:

“The persons appointed to execute the Councill’s order of the 26th
inst., for the Island of Quononicut, are John Homes, John Remington and
Michaell Kelly.”

The fact that Kelly was one of those selected indicates that he must
have been a man of considerable influence at the time. In the will of
ex-Governor Brenton, probated in 1674, mention is made of “Michael
Kaly,” who was no doubt the same individual here described. The
following extracts are taken from the will:

“To daughter Sarah Brenton, a farm in Conanicut, in possession of
Michael Kaly with house, etc.... To Michael Kaly, 100 acres on
Merrimack.... To Michael Kaly, ⅔ and to his wife, ⅓ of £15 due from land
granted him at Pattacomscott.”

In 1680, Kelly was taxed £5, 18s. 7½d. He died in that year. It is not
known that he left any descendants.


               THOMAS CASEY, A PIONEER OF NEWPORT, R. I.

Thomas Casey, a Rhode Island settler, was born about 1636, and died in
1719. That Ireland was his native land is generally conceded. A
suggestion has been set up in some quarters, however, that he was of
English parentage.

To support this idea, a “tradition” is produced. Yet Casey as a family
name is Irish of the Irish. For centuries it has been prominent in the
east and south of Ireland. It derives from O’Cathasaigh which has been
anglicized O’Casey, Cahasy, Casey, Casie, and Case. Those intent on
making out an English, rather than an Irish, parentage for Thomas Casey,
the immigrant, declare that “By tradition, he was a son of one of the
English planting families in Ulster county, Ireland. His father and
mother and all his family were destroyed in the Irish massacre [1641],
he, a child, being saved by his uncle and carried to his relatives in
Gloucestershire. It is further asserted that he sailed for America from
Plymouth, England.”

The “tradition” here noted is radically defective. In the first place,
there is no Ulster county in Ireland. Perhaps the province of Ulster was
what the writer was aiming at. In the second place, the “Irish massacre”
mentioned never happened. For a long period, writers in the English
interest asserted that on October 23, 1641, the Irish Catholics rose and
slaughtered in cold blood thousands of English and other Protestants
then in the country. But the charge is now rejected as untrue by
impartial historians. W. J. O’Neill Daunt brands the story of such a
massacre as “a thorough and most impudent falsehood,” and as being
another of those “stupendous calumnies” circulated by the enemies of the
Irish people. Other authoritative writers similarly testify.

“It has been represented,” says Prendergast, a Protestant,[10] “that
there was a general massacre [by the Irish], surpassing the horrors of
the Sicilian Vespers, the Parisian Nuptials, and Matins of the
Valtelline, but nothing is more false.”

Consequently, as there was no massacre by the Irish Catholics, then as
charged, Thomas Casey’s “father and mother and all his family” could not
have perished in it. In February, 1642, however, a dreadful massacre was
ordered—not by the Irish Catholics, but by the English lords justices.
The mandate was issued to Lord Ormund, the lords justices signing the
fearful instructions, being Dillon, Rotheram, Loftus, Willoughby,
Temple, and Meredith.

The mandate for the massacre as issued to Ormund was, “That his lordship
do endeavor with his majesty’s forces to wound, kill, slay, and destroy,
by all the ways and means he may, all the said rebels, their adherents,
and relievers; and burn, waste, spoil, consume, destroy, and demolish
all the places, towns, and houses, where the said rebels are, or have
been, relieved or harbored, and all the hay and corn there; and kill and
destroy all the men there inhabiting capable to bear arms.”

The orders were only too well obeyed. Men, women and children perished
alike. The English soldiery made no distinction between age or sex. In
their savage fury they committed massacre after massacre. The English
garrison of Carrickfergus alone murdered 3,000 men, women and children
in that neighborhood. Lord Broghill perpetrated like cruelties in Cork
and Waterford. In County Wicklow Sir Charles Coote was guilty of a
massacre so horrible that after it, to use his own language, “not a
child, were it but a hand high, was left alive.”

It is probable that the family of Thomas Casey, the Rhode Island
settler, were Irish Catholics, and if they perished in a massacre it is
quite possible it was in the one thus inaugurated by the English. It is
quite likely that the author of the “tradition” and “Ulster county” got
matters somewhat mixed. Hosts of Irish Catholics fled the country at the
period mentioned, and if Thomas Casey’s uncle did so, taking the child
with him, it would be entirely in accord with the facts and conditions
here described. The statement that Thomas eventually sailed from
Plymouth, England, if he did so sail, has no particular significance and
proves nothing.

Thomas Casey is first heard of in Rhode Island at Newport. His wife’s
name was Sarah. They had, so far as known, three children, Thomas, Adam
and Samuel. In 1692, the father and his son, Thomas, witnessed a deed
given by James Sweet of East Greenwich, R. I., to Thomas Weaver of
Newport. Adam Casey, another son, was a lieutenant in 1742, and in 1750
purchased 50 acres in Scituate, R. I. In 1760, Adam and his son, Edward
Casey, sold 100 acres to Nathan Brown of Swanzey, Mass., and removed to
Coventry, R. I. Adam Casey’s will was proved in 1765.

Samuel, the third son of Thomas Casey, the immigrant, lived at different
times in Newport, Kings Town and Exeter, R. I. He held various town
offices. At his death, his personal estate inventoried £2,803 18s. 6d.
He had six children; his brother, Thomas, four; and Adam, five. Several
members of this noted family have been distinguished in American civil
and military life. The family is still represented in Rhode Island.


              JOHN DAILEY AND OTHER EARLY RHODE ISLANDERS.

John Dailey, in 1689, bought 90 acres of land in Providence, R. I., and
the year following exchanged certain lands with Ann Pratt. Dailey is an
anglicized form of O’Dalaighe.[11] In Irish history the O’Dalys figure
as powerful chieftains. Some of the name were hereditary poets and
antiquarians to the MacCarthys Mor. John Dailey here mentioned of
Providence had four children, Joseph, Samuel, Elizabeth and one other, a
daughter. In 1703, he deeded to Joseph for “divers good causes,” 40
acres. In 1718, Joseph sold 57½ acres to Peter Ballou with house,
orchard, etc., for £336. Some years previously, Samuel had sold 40 acres
to Zachariah Jones for £20. John Dailey, Sr., died about 1719.

John Macoone was another Irish settler of Rhode Island. In the records
the name is variously written Macoone, Mackoone, McCoon, Mackown, etc.
Late generations have sometimes abbreviated it to Coon or Cooney. It
probably comes from the old Irish MacCoonan. John, the immigrant, was a
resident of Westerly, R. I., as early as 1669. Ten years later he is
recorded as taking the oath of allegience. In 1681, he officiated as a
juryman. He had, at least, two children, Isabel and John. In some
accounts he is said to have had two others, who went from Westerly about
1695 and settled at Oyster Bay, L. I. Isabel married Edward Bliven and
had five children. Her death occurred in 1753. Her brother John received
a grant of 100 acres in 1692 and 100 more in 1709. In 1724, he and his
wife, Ann, deeded land to their sons, John and Daniel.

John Malavery[12] was a resident of Providence as early as 1687. He had
56 acres of land, and other property. In 1704, he had 12 acres laid out
in exchange with the town. He died about 1712. His son John was
executor. The inventory included 18 loads of hay, 14 barrels of cider,
gun, sword, etc. John Malavery, Jr., of Providence died in 1718. In his
will he desires his wife to provide things fit and comfortable for his
mother in her old age, and authorizes his wife to raise £30, which shall
be levied out of his estate. The rest of movable estate to wife and
income of land and use of dwelling house for life, while his widow. To
sons, John and Nathaniel, equally, but if they died before of age, then
the land was to go to Michael Inman, David Phillips and Daniel
Mathewson, “my three sisters’ three sons.” The inventory included “4
guns, 2 swords.” A John Malavery of the third generation married
Susannah Arnold in 1736.

At a session of the general assembly at Providence, in 1685, Joseph
Devett, also spelled Devitt in the records, was a member of a committee
appointed to consider and report concerning a petition for settling a
“Plantation in the Narragansett and Niantick countries.” The difference
between the names Devitt and McDevitt is not great.

Owen Higgins was a resident of Newport, R. I., very early. His wife was
born in 1640. In 1701, his son Richard is recorded as a freeman in
Newport.


         CHARLES MACCARTHY, A FOUNDER OF EAST GREENWICH, R. I.

Charles MacCarthy was a resident of Rhode Island in 1677. When he came
to the colony is unknown. He resided on the island of St. Christopher,
otherwise known as St. Kitts, before arriving in Rhode Island, a fact
mentioned in his will. Some of the recording clerks of those days were
not particularly brilliant in writing proper names, Irish or otherwise.
They appear to have in a way adopted the phonetic idea of spelling, that
is, according to sound. But it frequently happened that some names
sounded differently to different clerks and thus, as in the case of
Charles MacCarthy, we have a variety of spelling. At the same time it
should be said, in justice to the clerks, that there were instances, no
doubt, when they should not be held responsible for variations that
appear. Orthography was not fixed then as now.

The Rhode Island pioneer of whom we are treating has had his name
rendered as Macarte, Macarta, Macarty, Mackarte, and Mecarty. In his
will it is “Macarte,” but whether that was the form authorized by him,
or whether it was the work of the clerk who drew up the will, cannot now
be determined. The same name applied to other early Rhode Island people
is also recorded as Maccartee and McCartie. The style “Mac Carthy,”
used, for the sake of uniformity, in the caption of this paper, and in
the text, is that common to the MacCarthys Mor, the MacCarthys Reagh,
the MacCarthys Glas, and other grand divisions of this great Irish clan.

Charles, the Rhode Island settler, had a brother who went from Ireland
to Spain. This brother had been exiled and may have been among the Irish
troops who, in 1652, after surrendering to Cromwell and Ireton, were
allowed to depart and enlist in the Spanish service. These troops
embarked for Spain at Kinsale, Waterford, Galway, Limerick, and Bantry.
With them also went many of the Irish nobility and gentry who had been
ruthlessly dispossessed of their estates. In more propitious times some
of these exiles returned from Spain. Charles’s brother did so and from
Kinsale wrote to Charles whom he supposed to be still in St.
Christopher, urging him to return to Ireland. But Charles had, in the
meantime, left St. Christopher and was probably then in Rhode Island.
Though long delayed, the letter finally reached its destination, but
Charles never went back nor, it is believed, did he and his brother ever
meet again.

In 1677, Charles was one of a party of forty-eight settlers to whom a
grant of five thousand acres, to be called East Greenwich, was made by
the general assembly of Rhode Island. The grant was awarded largely for
services rendered during King Philip’s War (1675–’76). This would seem
to indicate that Charles MacCarthy had been a participant in that war
and it is quite within the bounds of probability that he had seen
military service, too, in the Old Land. At a session of the general
assembly held at Newport, R. I., May, 1677, it was

  ORDERED that a certain tract of land in some convenient place in the
  Narragansett country, shall be laid forth into one hundred acre
  shares, with the house lots, for the accommodation of so many of the
  inhabitants of this Colony as stand in need of land, and the General
  Assembly shall judge fit to be supplied.

It was likewise enacted that the said tract be laid forth to contain
5,000 acres. Of this, 500 were to be laid in some place near the sea, as
convenient as may be for a town, which said 500 acres “shall be divided
into 50 house lots and the remainder of the 5,000, being 4,500, shall be
divided into 50 equal shares or great divisions.”

It was further decreed that the persons to whom the grant was made have
the rights, liberties, and privileges of a town; also “that they, or so
many of them as shall be then present, not being fewer than twelve, on
the said land, [are] required and empowered to meet together upon the
second Wednesday in April next and constitute a town meeting, by
electing a Moderator and a Town Clerk, with such constables as to them
shall seem requisite; and also to choose two persons their Deputies to
sit in General Assembly, and two persons, one to serve on the Grand
Jury, and one on the Jury of Trials in the General Court of Trials.”

Thus was launched the town of East Greenwich. The founders, no doubt,
included “men from all parts,” and if names may be taken as a criterion
several of them, in addition to Charles MacCarthy, were from Ireland.
The date of the incorporation of the town was October 31, 1677, the year
following the close of King Philip’s War and the overthrow of the
Narragansetts. Later, the boundaries of the town were enlarged by the
addition of 35,000 acres on the western border. Facing a great bay, it
was hoped by the founders that the town might in time equal or surpass
Newport or Providence. In 1741, the town was divided and the western
part incorporated as West Greenwich. Both towns exist to-day, East
Greenwich with a population of about 3,000, and West Greenwich with a
population of between 600 and 700.

The most thickly settled part of East Greenwich is built mainly on a
hillside and fronts Greenwich Bay. The town is a favorite summer resort.
Some of the early settlers engaged in shipbuilding, and when the town
was laid out two locations were set apart for shipyards. The persons
named as incorporators of East Greenwich, including Charles MacCarthy,
were each required to build within a year, on his lot, a house suitable
for habitation, under pain of forfeiture. It was also required that
highways be provided “from the bay up into the country” convenient for
settlement. In addition to MacCarthy, the founders included Philip Long,
Thomas Dungin, and John Strainge—all three names typically Irish. Among
the proprietors in 1700 was Anthony Long. About 1732, the town possessed
stocks and whipping post, pillory, irons for mutilating ears, branding
faces, cropping, etc., and similar appliances rife at that period.

The records of the “General Assembly held at Newport, the 6th of May,
1679,” show that “Charles Mecarte” and two others “being freemen of the
towne of East Greenwich, are admitted freemen of the Collony.” It does
not appear that Charles ever married, at least the writer has met no
record to that effect. Neither wife nor child are mentioned in the copy
of the will extant. It is, of course, possible that he may have had both
wife and children in the Old Land and that he survived them, but of that
nothing definite is known. His will[13] is dated “the 18th day of
February, 1682,” and was witnessed by John Knight and Thomas Fry, Jr. It
was the first will to be recorded in the probate record book of East
Greenwich where it was entered by “John Spenser, Town Clark.” Written
over two hundred years ago, its quaint phraseology is a source of much
interest at the present time. The will thus begins:

  Unto all Christian people unto whome these pents [presents] may com
  know yee that I Charles Macarte now of the towne of Est grenwich in
  the Colony of Rhod Island and providence planteteons Being in
  parfact memory but weake in body doe meake this my lastt will and
  testiment.

First, he requests that all his debts be paid. Then he makes John
Spencer, Jr., his lawful heir and bequeaths him “my house and Land or
Lands in this Towne.” He designates John Spencer, Sr., “father to the
aforesaid Spencer, Guardian to his sonn to teak cere that my will be
parformed.”

One Pasco Whitford owed Charles a debt. This debt the latter cancels
and, in addition, gives Whitford “halfe the sheepe of mine in his
keeping.” The other half he gives to Edward Carter, to whom he likewise
bequeaths his arms, _i. e._, two guns and a sword and also his chest
“with the lock and cea.” To Charles Heseltun, Jr., he bequeaths a young
horse “that will be two yere old next Spring branded with IS on the
shoulder.” To John Andrew is given “my biggest yron poot” [pot] and four
narrow axes. His pewter he bequeaths Susanna Spencer, the same to be
delivered to her when she is of age.

All his carpenter and joiner tools are given by testator to William
Spencer “which shall be resarved for him till hee is capable unto mak
youse of them,” or of age. After disposing of certain clothing and
household goods to Susanna Spencer, Sr., he mentions “one piece of brod
cloth that I had to make mee a wascoat”; this he gives to his heir. Unto
Hannah Long, the younger, is given “one heffer of three yere” old, to be
delivered her at his decease, and to “John Garard,[14] a poor Country
man of mine” he gives “three bushels of corne to be paid him presently
after my desese.” But one of the most striking passages of the entire
will is the following:

  I have a letter that came from my Brother from Kingsile [Kinsale]
  after his return from Spaine Being fersed from home in the war in
  which Letter he sent for mee home; but the troubles in Cristifars at
  that time fersed me from thence to New England and soe hee herd not
  of mee nor I of him.... I will that that letter with another [which]
  within it is, be sent unto him with a letter to signifie unto him
  how it hath been with mee since and when and where I end my dayes.

Charles then provides that Richard Dunn[15] of Newport, R. I., be added
unto John Spencer, Sr., the first mentioned guardian, to carry out the
provisions of the will, and “if aither of these soo Before men’oned
betrusted should die before that my haire is of edge [age]; then he that
doth survive shall heve power; and my will is that hee chuse one to him
it being one that my haire doth approve of.” The will goes on to say
that “My ould mere [mare] I give to Samuel Bennett and hir foule [foal]
or my young mere I give unto Mychell Spenser ... and the rest of my
Chatle Goodes and catten [cattle] I give unto John Spenser Senior and
all the deapts dowe to mee.... As Concaning [concerning] the Land that I
Give unto my haire and the house my will is that the land and house [be]
unto him and his lawful haires forever ... and for the Conformation of
this my will and that it may apere unto all parsons [persons] unto whome
it may come I have sett to my hand and seale this psent 18th day of
February 1682.” Charles died soon after, his will being entered in the
town records in 1683–’84.

The orthography of Charles MacCarthy’s will must not be severely
criticised. It was as correct as that found in the average document of
the period in which he lived. Whether it was written by Charles or by
someone acting for him, due allowance must be made for the times and
conditions and for the fact that educational facilities were very meagre
then as compared with those available at the present day.

It is a source of deep regret that so little is known about this Rhode
Island pioneer. That he was a man of sturdy character, cannot be
questioned. That he was worthy to rank as a founder of a town or a state
must also be admitted. He plainly possessed traits and qualities
entitling him to a place in the front rank of Rhode Island settlers.

And here we may indulge briefly in a retrospective glance at the status
of the MacCarthys[16] in the land of Erin. For from these,
unquestionably, the Rhode Island pioneer was descended. Then we will
touch upon certain “troubles in Cristifars” which may have been the same
as those to which Charles MacCarthy alludes as having forced him to New
England.

Burke, Ulster King of Arms, the great authority on the British and Irish
peerages, declares that “few pedigrees in the British empire can be
traced to a more remote or exalted source than that of the Celtic house
of M’Carty.” The learned Dr. O’Brien says that it was “the most
illustrious of all those families whose names begin with Mac.” It has
also truthfully been declared that “The MacCarthys may proudly defy any
other family in Europe to compete with them in antiquity, or accurate
preservation of the records of their descent.” Their patrimony was
chiefly in Cork and Kerry, where they had strongholds for many
centuries. They built over twenty castles there, many of them
overlooking “the pleasant Bandon crowned with many a wood.”

These castles were massively constructed, the towers and battlements
being equal in grandeur and strength to those elsewhere in Europe. For
generation after generation they defied the attacks of time and the
elements and proudly reared aloft their stately walls. The ruins of some
of them still remain, crowned with ivy, and frequented by appreciative
tourists. The MacCarthys have been Princes of Carbery, Earls of
Clancarthy, Earls of Muskerry, Earls of Mountcashel, Viscounts of
Valentia, and have also held other titles. Their history has been
replete with chivalrous deeds, brave men, handsome women, noted clerics,
generous benefactors, whole-souled hospitality.

The MacCarthys were the dominant family in Desmond (South Munster), at
the period of the Anglo-Norman invasion. The MacCarthy Mor, lord of the
elder branch, was generally inaugurated in Kerry. The O’Sullivan Mor and
the O’Donoghoe Mor presided at the ceremony. The hereditary judges of
the McCarthy Mor were the MacEgans; his captains of war, the O’Rourkes;
and his poets and antiquaries, the O’Dalys and O’Quinns. His feudatories
also included the O’Donovans and O’Hurleys. Charles, who died in 1770,
was styled “the last MacCarthy Mor.” The arms of the family are thus
described: “Arg. a stag trippant, attired and unguled or.” One branch of
the family had as its motto: “_Forti et fideli nihil difficile_,” and
another: “_Ex arduis perpetuum nomen_.” The motto of the MacCarthy Reagh
was: “_Fortis ferox et celer_.” “The MacCarthys were a regal and
princely house,” observes Burke, and he states that at one period the
head of the clan could muster 3,000 men-at-arms. The MacCarthys Reagh
constituted the second sept of the clan in point of importance, while
the MacCarthys Glas were also a strong branch of the family.

Dermot MacCarthy, feudal lord and founder of the house of Muskerry, was
killed in 1367. Cormac MacCarthy, slain in 1494, had been lord of
Muskerry for 40 years. Donoch MacCarthy Mor was, in 1556, created Earl
of Clancare (Clancarthy), and Viscount Valentia. Cormac Oge MacCarthy
became a viscount in 1628. There was a Ceallachan MacCarthy who married
Elizabeth Fitzgerald, daughter of the Earl of Kildare, and died 1676. A
Charles MacCarthy, born about 1721, was a solicitor, seneschal of the
manor of Macroom, recorder of Clonakilty, and clerk of the crown for the
county of Cork. A Donoch MacCarthy, lord viscount Muskerry, was an Irish
officer exiled to the continent in 1641–’42. He had commanded the king’s
forces in Munster against Cromwell. At the restoration of Charles II,
Donoch returned to Ireland and contested the right of Florence and
Charles McCarthy to the title and dignity of “MacCarthy Mor.” He was
created Earl Clancarthy, and died in 1665.

It is to be regretted that we do not know the name of the brother of
Charles MacCarthy, the Rhode Island settler—the one to whom he refers in
his will as having written from Kinsale. Did we have access to that
letter which Charles of Rhode Island received, the desired knowledge
would, no doubt, be obtained. But at this distance of time, all efforts
to locate the letter have failed.

It seems reasonable to conclude that the brother of the Rhode Island
pioneer was a man of some prominence—possibly of much prominence. It has
been suggested that he was Donoch, Earl Clancarthy, just mentioned, but
this could hardly have been so, as the Earl died in 1665 and Charles of
Rhode Island, when he made his will in 1682, speaks of his brother as
still living.

There was another Donoch MacCarthy, descendant of the first named, who
was privately married when but sixteen years of age to Lady Elizabeth
Spencer, daughter of Robert Spencer, Earl of Sunderland. It may be
recalled, purely as a coincidence, that Charles MacCarthy of East
Greenwich, R. I., was an intimate friend of the Spencers of that town
and made one of them his heir. It is quite possible that John
Spenser,[17] the Rhode Island settler, and intimate friend of Charles
MacCarthy, was an Irish officer who, like many other chivalrous spirits
of his time, was obliged by the fortunes of war to leave Ireland and
reside in other parts. On the arrival of James II, in Ireland (1688),
this second Donoch MacCarthy was one of the Irish officers who received
him at Kinsale. At the fall of Cork in 1690, MacCarthy was captured and
imprisoned in the Tower of London. He had succeeded to the title of Earl
Clancarthy and was a man of immense estate. All this was forfeited owing
to his adhesion to the cause of James II. In 1694, he escaped from the
Tower and fled to France. Upon rashly going back to England in 1698 he
was rearrested and exiled. He died in 1704 at a locality in Hamburg. If
Charles MacCarthy of Rhode Island was “forced from home” at the same
time as his brother, it would be interesting to know why one went to
Spain and the other to the island of St. Christopher. The whole matter,
however, is wrapped in mystery. Charles tells us that his brother
returned “from Spaine,” which statement reminds us of a prominent fact.
King Charles II in a famous declaration mentions a large number of Irish
“restorees,” who were to be given back their former estates in Ireland
for having “Continued with Us or served faithfully under Our ensigns
beyond the Seas.” Among these Irish restorees is mentioned Col. Charles
MacCarthy of County Cork, and Capt. Charles MacCarthy, also of Cork. In
another place Charles II mentions Charles James MacCarthy, Viscount
Muskerry.

A fourth Charles MacCarthy is mentioned during the Cromwellian
settlement as a “Papist,” whose property was to be confiscated. These
four Charles MacCarthys were all Irish officers or leading gentlemen,
and the Rhode Island settler may have been one of them.

Yet another point: Charles of Rhode Island tells us that his brother,
who was again in Ireland, had written from Kinsale asking him to return.
Why? It may be that Charles and his brother were both “restorees,” as
defined in the King’s Declaration above mentioned.

At what period Charles MacCarthy left Ireland and located in St.
Christopher, or St. Kitts, is problematical. If we knew the time of his
coming to New England we might be able to approximate the St. Kitts
date. It is assumed, however, that he was in St. Kitts as early as 1650.
In an old French atlas by Sanson, published that year, Montserrat is
described as having been settled by Irish. Rev. Andrew White, S. J., who
accompanied the first colonists to Maryland, in 1634, makes a like
statement. He adds that these Irish Catholics had gone first to
Virginia, but being refused permission to land had taken possession of
Montserrat. Large numbers of Irish are heard from in St. Kitts in 1650.
They were visited by Father John Destriche (also written De Stritch)
disguised as a trader to protect him from persecution, or even death, at
the hands of the English officials who had no tolerance for a priest of
the Church of Rome.

In time he collected on that and the neighboring islands a flock of
3,000 Catholics for whom he conducted religious services in the depths
of the forest. Persecution at the hands of the English, however, soon
broke up this condition of affairs and dispersed the Irish to New
England and other parts along the coast. Were these the “troubles in
Cristifars” that obliged Charles MacCarthy to leave that place? It is
possible. Be that as it may, his coming was of benefit to Rhode Island,
it being at a time when stout hearts, strong arms, and vigorous
characters were especially desired in the colony.


               EARLY MAGUIRES AND BOYDS OF RHODE ISLAND.

Constant Maguire settled in Rhode Island prior to 1750. His first name
as here given was probably an abbreviated form of Constantine. He was a
native of the County Fermanagh, in Ireland, was evidently a man of
education and seems to have taken much interest in matters pertaining to
genealogy.

In one record book he is described as “Constant Maguire, son of John,
son of Constantine, the younger, natives of the County Fermanagh.”

It should here be stated that Fermanagh was the ancient patrimony of the
Maguires. Thomas Maguire, lord of Fermanagh, died in 1430. He was
described by the Irish annalists as “a man of universal hospitality
toward poor and mighty, founder of monasteries and churches, ...
peacemaker for many chiefs and septs, beloved by all conditions for the
excellence of his administration.”

Bryan, another of the Maguires, was made baron of Enniskillen in 1627.
The title was forfeited by his son, Connor, attainted by British law in
1644.

Constantine, or Constant, the Rhode Island settler, located in Warwick,
R. I., but later removed to East Greenwich, R. I. His wife’s name was
Ruth. Among their children were Mary, born February 16, 1750; Mercy,
born March 28, 1753; and John, born April 19, 1755. Mary was born in
Warwick and the others in East Greenwich.

Another numerous family in East Greenwich and vicinity were the Boyds.
Some of them were born in Ireland; all are believed to have been of
Irish blood. Several bore the name Andrew. One Andrew Boyd is mentioned
as having been born in the County Antrim, Ireland, of which his mother,
Sarah (Moore) Boyd, was also a native. Another Andrew, probably of the
same stock, is thus mentioned in the records of the Rhode Island
Assembly, October, 1776:

  In Council was read the return of Andrew Boyd, clerk of the company
  of Kentish Guards, choosing Christopher Greene, of Warwick, son of
  Nathaniel, second lieutenant of said company, in the room of Thomas
  Holden, who refused.

The action of the Guards was approved. The East Greenwich records show
the marriage of Andrew Boyd and Abigail Moor in 1763; Mrs. Sarah Boyd
and a Mr. Weeden in 1783; Andrew Boyd and Elizabeth Spencer in 1788;
William Boyd and Freelove Arnold, daughter of Capt. Thomas Arnold, in
1792; Hannah Boyd and Capt. Michael Spencer in 1805; William Boyd and
Rhoda Andrews in 1819. In the Warwick records is found noted the
marriage, in 1797, of Catherine Boyd and Timothy Bentley. In 1798,
Hannah Boyd and Darius Havens were married.


                A RHODE ISLANDER BECOMES AN IRISH BARON.

A brother of the Baron Kinsale, of Ireland, settled in Newport, R. I.,
about 1720. Some hold that he was married in the old country; others,
that his wife was a Newport woman.

They had a son[18], Thomas, born in Newport, who early displayed a love
for the sea. In due time he was bound an apprentice to Captain Beard.
The latter had command of a Newport merchantman and ranked among the
ablest captains of his day.

Thomas de Courcy, the apprentice, advanced rapidly in nautical
accomplishments and became a general favorite. After serving under
Captain Beard, he enlisted in the navy and participated in the honor of
taking Porto Bello in 1740.

The manner in which he succeeded to the title and estates of his uncle
is thus told by himself. He was serving aboard Admiral Vernon’s
flagship. The latter was returning to England from the West Indies.
While on the voyage they fell in with a merchantman bound from London to
Jamaica. She was spoken and on inquiry, her captain sent aboard the
flagship two late papers for the gratification of the admiral. The
latter read them attentively. Suddenly he exclaimed:

“Ah! the Baron of Kinsale is dead!”

A steward overhearing the remark quickly carried the news to a gallant
young tar in the forecastle whose name was De Courcy.

“Is he dead? Then by the powers! something will come to me,” was the
reply.

The incident was reported to Admiral Vernon who immediately sent for De
Courcy. The following conversation then ensued between the two:

“My lad, what is your name?”

“De Courcy, sir.”

“Where were you born?”

“In Newport, Rhode Island, sir.”

“Are you related to the late Thomas de Courcy, Baron of Kinsale?”

“He was my uncle, sir—he was my father’s eldest brother.”

“What induced your father to leave Ireland and settle at Newport?”

“That reason was my father’s secret, your Honor, and not mine.”

“Well, my lad, return to your station, and whatever may be your change
of condition hereafter, I hope you will continue to do your duty
faithfully till you shall be discharged.”

“Your Honor may rely on that!”

The foregoing anecdote was told by De Courcy, many years after, to
Captain Benjamin Pearce of Rhode Island who dined with him at Kinsale.
The Baron always entertained great affection for Newport, his native
place. It is told of him that no Rhode Islander ever, to his knowledge,
came within fifty miles of his residence without being invited to
partake of his hospitality. To Captain Beard of Newport his former
commander, he annually sent a cask of rare old wine. For years the
people of Newport took a special interest in all that concerned their
distinguished townsman, The Right Honorable Thomas de Courcy, Lord Baron
Kinsale.


              INTERESTING REMINISCENCES OF NEWPORT, R. I.

Edward Thurston writing from Newport, R. I., March 5, 1767, to James
Coggeshall informs the latter that “Mac Gee the baker has failed.” Mac
Gee was, no doubt, quite an important personage in the community.

Under date of November 15, 1764, is recorded at Newport the marriage of
“John Robinson of Ireland and Mary Cawdry of Newport.” Rev. Ezra Stiles
performed the ceremony.

Richard Field, a native of Dublin, Ireland, resided in Newport. He died
in 1769.

Another prominent Newport family were the Dillons. James Dillon was a
native of the County Roscommon. His wife died at Newport in 1799 and was
laid away in Trinity churchyard.

Thomas Green advertised in the Newport _Mercury_, August, 1772, that he
had for sale Irish poplins, sheetings, and other goods. He also
announces “Lately come to hand, a trunk of choice Irish linens.” In May,
1793, Thomas Green & Son advertise in the _Mercury_ that “at the sign of
the buck, near the red market” they have for sale, Irish linens and
muslins “at 14½d. and upward.” In the _Mercury_ of April 27, 1772,
appears a legal notice regarding “the estate of Edward Keeney, late of
Newport, shipwright, deceased.” Students of Irish names will recognize
in Keeney a typical one.

Moses M. Hays, a Hebrew, advertises under date of August 3, 1772, that
he has, among other goods, “a few barrels of Irish beef for sale.” That
is, beef from Ireland.

The name Murphy has figured in Newport from an early period. Frequently
it appears as Murfey. The original comers were, of course, from Ireland.
They, doubtless, arrived directly from the old country, from some of the
colonies adjacent to Rhode Island or by way of the West Indies. Many of
the Newport Murphys have been mariners, and some of them figured
prominently in the Revolution. Edward Murphy died at Newport in 1809,
“in the 62d year of his age.” In March, 1809, the death also occurred at
Newport of “Phœbe Murfey, comfort of Capt. John Murfey, aged 29.” The
Providence _Gazette_ of February 17, 1810, announces the marriage at
Mansfield, Conn., of “Capt. John Murfey of Newport to Miss Adaliza
Southworth, daughter of Capt. Samuel Southworth.”

An entry in Trinity church _Annals_, Newport, states that on “May 1,
1775, Lieut. James Conway died and was buried in the churchyard, aged 45
years.” Conway was lieutenant of marines on the man-of-war _Rose_, which
was then in the bay. He was probably of Irish origin. Another entry in
the same annals informs us that on “October 5, 1783, Gilbert Eames died
and was buried in the churchyard.” He was a native of the County
Limerick, Ireland, and was 54 years of age at the time of his death. For
several years prior to the reduction of Granada by the French in 1779,
Mr. Eames had been a member of the Honorable Council for the island.

Rev. Erasmus Kelly, a native of Pennsylvania, was born in 1748, and came
to Newport about 1771. On the outbreak of hostilities he removed to
Warren, R. I. When the British overran the latter town they burned the
house in which he resided together with its contents. He removed to
Connecticut and later to Pennsylvania. At the close of the Revolution,
he returned to Newport, and died there on November 7, 1784.

In February, 1801, there died in Newport, Mrs. Lucia C. Grattan. She was
the widow of Colonel Grattan, cousin-german to Henry Grattan, the Irish
orator. Her brother was Lord Viscount Falkland. An obituary notice
states that “Her remains were interred with every mark of respect.”

Among the Newport marriages noted in the Trinity church records are the
following: Miles Coursey to Abigail Williams, December 13, 1713; William
Cook to Catherine Fallon, August 20, 1723; John Murphy to Mary Casside,
March 1, 1732; James Gallagher to Bathsheba Fairchild, March 21, 1736;
John Rourk to Ann Drower, January 23, 1742; Patrick Delaney to Margaret
McFarling, October 29, 1742; Patrick Rogers to Eleanor Dowling, October
29, 1742; Edward Murfee to Catherine Fitzgerald, October 25, 1743;
Patrick Durfey to Elizabeth Lacy, January 17, 1748; Patrick Cenfill to
Meriam Powers, October 15, 1752; Edward Pye to Deborah Bourke, January
4, 1756; John Brown to Mary Kelly, March 13, 1756; Thomas Collins to
Margaret Bourke, May 29, 1756; John Dwyer to Elizabeth McDaniel, October
10, 1756; Thomas Holland to Mary Dwyar, June 1, 1775; James Dillon to
Sarah Dupay, October 13, 1778; James O’Brien to Margaret Dunton,
November 23, 1778.

In the records of Newport, the following additional early marriages are
noted. To simplify matters the writer gives only the year in which each
marriage took place: William Mackey and Eliza George, 1737; Ebenezer
Murphy and Mercy Reynolds, 1739; Michael Sullivan and Elizabeth High,
1740; John Lashley and Katherine McKane, 1740; Robert Odlin and Mary
Conner, 1742; Patrick Farrell and Rachel Beere, 1742; John Mulholland
and Elizabeth Hooper, 1742; James Harkins and Amy Higgins, 1743; Timothy
Egan and Hester Wilson, 1745; James Murphy and Margaret Pitman, 1746;
John Vial and Elizabeth Donnelly, 1747; John Donnelly and Jane Mence,
1747; Joseph Tally and Elizabeth Naps, 1747; George Smith and Sarah
Tally, 1747; William Byrn and Jemima Jant, 1747; Daniel McGow (or
McGowan) and Miss Donnelly, 1747; Jeremiah Ross and Mary Brayton, 1749;
Elisha Newcome and Elizabeth O’Brien, 1751; James Hickey and Mary Carr,
1752; Thomas Jones and Mary Higgins, 1753; John Dyer and Mary Hickey,
1754; Jeremiah Heffernan and Elizabeth Mackee, 1755; William Cowdry and
Mary Murphy, 1756; Michael Ryan and Leah Kelly, 1756; John Magee and
Phebe Fairchild, 1758; Mr. Ross and Katherine McGowan, 1758; John Wyatt
and Martha Magrah, 1759; John Fairbanks and Amey Heffernan, 1760;
Alexander Mullen and Mary Chapman, 1760; James Bourk and Eleanor
Whiting, 1761; Edward Kenney and Patience Chadwick, 1762; Nathaniel
Locke and Mary Burk, 1764; Daniel Dennison and Amey Murphy, 1766;
Lawrence Carroll and Susannah Holden, 1768; Daniel Read and Ann McMahon,
1793; Eleazer Read, Jr., and Elizabeth Murphy, 1795.

From which it will be seen that the Irish began coming to Newport, and
were numerous there, at much earlier periods than has been generally
supposed.


             IRISH NAMES IN RHODE ISLAND PREVIOUS TO 1776.

The following is a list of Irish surnames found in the official
records[19] of Rhode Island, and in books, papers, and documents
relating to the history of the latter. The names appear as early as the
year mentioned in each case, but in some instances may have been
represented at even an earlier period:

 Banon, 1766.
 Barret, 1751.
 Baxter, 1751.
 Bennett, 1646.
 Blake, 1675.
 Bourk, 1755.
 Boyd, 1741.
 Boyle, 1675.
 Brandon, 1675.
 Brian, 1675.
 Burg (Burk?), 1667.
 Burk, 1764.
 Burns, 1772.
 Butler, 1670.
 Byrn, 1747.
 Cain (Kane), 1738.
 Carroll, 1768.
 Carty, 1721.
 Cary, 1693.
 Casey, 1663.
 Casside (Cassidy), 1732.
 Cavenaugh, 1752.
 Clinton, 1752.
 Cogin, 1755.
 Coleman, 1702.
 Collins, 1642.
 Conner, 1732.
 Connor, 1742.
 Coursey, 1713.
 Crane, 1775.
 Creman, 1746.
 Cummings, 1739.
 Curley, 1775.
 Dailey, 1689.

 Daley, 1710.
 Daly, 1736.
 Darcey, 1718.
 Day, 1677.
 DeCourcy, 1720–25.
 Delaney, 1742.
 Dempsey, 1743.
 Dermott, 1761.
 Devett, 1685.
 Devitt, 1685.
 Donnelly, 1747.
 Donohoe, 1758.
 Donovan, 1751.
 Dowling, 1742.
 Downer, 1760.
 Downing, 1731.
 Doyle, 1698.
 Driskell (Driscoll), 1774.
 Drury, 1675.
 Dunn, 1682.
 Dwyer, 1756.
 Egan, 1745.
 Farrell, 1742.
 Fitzgerald, 1743.
 Fitzpatrick, 1761.
 Flannagan, 1762.
 Flynn, 1752.
 Ford, 1675.
 Fox, 1704.
 Gallagher, 1736.
 Geery, 1675.
 Gibbons, 1636.
 Glenn, 1756.
 Gorman, 1761.
 Hagerty, 1775.
 Haley, 1719.
 Hanley, 1745.
 Harvey, 1746.
 Harvie, 1665.
 Hartagan, 1753.
 Hayes, 1675.
 Healey, 1675.
 Hearn, 1759.
 Heffernan, 1671.
 Hefernan, 1671.
 Hickey, 1752.
 Higgins, 1699.
 Holland, 1729.
 Hurley, 1740.
 Joyce, 1731.
 Keeny, 1765.
 Kelly, 1669.
 Kenney, 1675.
 Lanahan, 1750 (about).
 Lane, 1675.
 Larkin, 1655.
 Lawless, 1720.
 Linniken, 1690.
 Long, 1677.
 Lyon, 1737.
 Macarte, 1677.
 Macfarline, 1759.
 Mackenny, 1720.
 Mackey, 1737.
 Mackown, 1723.
 Macoone, 1669.
 MacSparran, 1718.
 McCane, 1740.
 McCarty, 1677.
 McClure, 1748.
 McCone, 1740.
 McCorrie, 1765.
 McDonald, 1745.
 McGee, 1767.
 McGonegal, 1742.
 McGoron, 1758.
 McGow, 1747.
 McGowan, 1747.
 McGrath, 1759.
 McKane, 1740.
 McMillen, 1754.
 Magee, 1758.
 Magenis, 1675.
 Magill, 1749.
 Maguire, 1750.
 Mahoney, 1774.
 Malavery, 1687.
 Maloney, 1675.
 Manning, 1762.
 Martin, 1677.
 Mitchell, 1703.
 Moore, 1700.
 Mulholland, 1742.
 Mullen, 1760.
 Mulligan, 1775.
 Murphy, 1675.
 Murray, 1752.
 Neale, 1675.
 Nevill, 1675.
 Nixon, 1722.
 Norton, 1716.
 O’Brien, 1751.
 O’Harra, 1728.
 O’Kelly, 1774.
 O’Neil, 1756.
 Orr, 1695.
 Phelon, 1730.
 Read, 1667.
 Reed, 1727.
 Rily, 1675.
 Ring, 1755.
 Roach, 1773.
 Ross, 1751.
 Russell, 1736.
 Ryan, 1756.
 Shay, 1731.
 Sheehan, 1759.
 Sheen, 1754.
 Stewart, 1724.
 Sullivan, 1740.
 Sullivant (Sullivan?), 1733.
 Tally, 1747
 Tracy, 1675.
 Ward, 1677.
 Watson, 1722.
 Walch, 1703.
 Welch, 1675.
 Welsh, 1738.




                    HISTORICAL PAPERS AND ADDRESSES.


The following is a list of historical papers and addresses, prepared by
members of the Society, or by friends of the organization. Many of these
contributions have been published in the books and pamphlets issued by
the Society, a few have appeared in other publications, while some
remain in the Society’s archives to be published in the future:

   1. The Bacons from Ireland Who Settled at Dedham, Mass., About 1640,
        one of whose Descendants was Killed April 19, 1775, in the Fight
        at West Cambridge, Battle of Lexington. (By Thomas Hamilton
        Murray, Boston, Mass., 1897.)

   2. The Seizure of Powder, Arms, and Stores at Fort William and Mary
        by Major John Sullivan and His Associates, December, 1774. (By
        Hon. John C. Linehan, Concord, N. H., 1897.)

   3. The Battle of Lexington, Concord, and Cambridge, with a List of
        Irish Names Borne by Minute Men or Militia Participating in that
        Conflict. (By Edward J. Brandon, Cambridge, Mass., 1897.)

   4. The Irishman Ethnologically Considered. (By Joseph Smith, Lowell,
        Mass., 1897.)

   5. Irish Settlers in Louisville, Ky., and Vicinity. (By Edward
        Fitzpatrick, Louisville, Ky., 1897.)

   6. Five Irish Colonial Rhode Islanders. (By Thomas Hamilton Murray,
        Providence, R. I., 1897.)

   7. The Irish Element Among the Founders of Lowell, Mass. (By Joseph
        Smith, Lowell, Mass., 1897.)

   8. The Ancestors of Gen. John Sullivan. (By Bernard Corr, Boston,
        Mass., 1898.)

   9. The Family Name Swords in Ireland and America. (By Joseph F.
        Swords, Hartford, Conn., 1898.)

  10. Early Irish Schoolmasters in New Hampshire. (By Hon. John C.
        Linehan, Concord, N. H., 1898.)

  11. Early Irish Schoolmasters in Rhode Island. (By Thomas Hamilton
        Murray, Boston, Mass., 1898.)

  12. Early Irish Settlers in Kentucky. (By Edward Fitzpatrick,
        Louisville, Ky., 1898.)

  13. Some Ways in Which American History is Falsified. (By Joseph
        Smith, Lowell, Mass., 1898.)

  14. The Lost State of Clark, with Mention of Thomas Connolly, a Fifer
        in the Regiment of Col. George Rogers Clark. (By Edward
        Fitzpatrick, Louisville, Ky., 1898.)

  15. The Irish Chapter in the History of Brown University. (By Thomas
        Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass., 1899.)

  16. The Irish Pioneers and Founders of Peterborough, New Hampshire.
        (By Hon. James F. Brennan, Peterborough, N. H., 1899.)

  17. The Work of the American-Irish Historical Society. (By Hon. Thomas
        J. Gargan, Boston, Mass., 1899.)

  18. Some Irish Settlers in Virginia. (By Hon. Joseph T. Lawless,
        Richmond, Va., 1899.)

  19. Irish Immigration During the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries.
        (By Thomas Addis Emmet, M. D., New York city, 1899.)

  20. Some Pre-Revolutionary Irishmen. (By Hon. John C. Linehan,
        Concord, N. H., 1899.)

  21. David Hamilton, an Irish Soldier of the American Revolution. (By
        Daniel M. O’Driscoll, Charleston, S. C., 1899.)

  22. An Early Irishman of Waterbury, Connecticut. (By Martin Scully,
        Waterbury, Conn., 1899.)

  23. The “Scotch-Irish” and “Anglo-Saxon” Fallacies. (By James Jeffrey
        Roche, Boston, Mass., 1899.)

  24. Sketch of an Early Irish Settlement in Rhode Island. (By Thomas
        Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass., 1899.)

  25. The “Anglo-Saxon” Shibboleth Condemned. (By Hon. William McAdoo,
        New York city, 1899.)

  26. Naval Heroes of the Revolutionary War, Including the O’Briens of
        Machias, Me. (By Hon. Thomas J. Gargan, Boston, Mass., 1899.)

  27. Some Irish Settlers in Kentucky. (By Edward Fitzpatrick,
        Louisville, Ky., 1899.)

  28. Irish Pioneers of Texas. (By Hon. John C. Linehan, Concord, N. H.,
        1899)

  29. Russia, the Friend of the Republic. (By Joseph Smith, Lowell,
        Mass., 1899.)

  30. Brigadier-General Thomas W. Sweeny, U. S. A., 1820–1892. (By
        William M. Sweeny, Astoria, L. I., N. Y., 1899.)

  31. The Irish Element in the Second Massachusetts Volunteers in the
        Recent War—with Spain. (By Rev. John J. McCoy, Chicopee, Mass.,
        1899.)

  32. The Battle of Rhode Island, 1778. (By Thomas Hamilton Murray,
        Boston, Mass., 1899.)

  33. The Irish in Rochambeau’s Army During the American Revolution. (By
        Joseph Smith, Lowell, Mass., 1899.)

  34. The Colonial Irish. (By Thomas F. O’Malley, Somerville, Mass.,
        1899.)

  35. The Irish Washingtons at Home and Abroad, together with Some
        Mention of the Ancestry of the American _Pater Patriæ_. (By
        Thomas Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass., and George Washington,
        Dublin, Ireland, 1899.)

  36. The Irish in South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana, and
        Tennessee. (By Hon. Patrick Walsh, Augusta, Ga., 1900.)

  37. The United States Torpedo Boat O’Brien. (Compiled from the daily
        papers, 1900.)

  38. Men of Irish Blood Who Have Attained Distinction in American
        Journalism. (By Michael E. Hennessy, Boston, Mass., 1900.)

  39. Patriots of the American Revolution. (By Hon. Thomas J. Gargan,
        Boston, Mass., 1900.)

  40. Rev. James Caldwell, a Patriot of the American Revolution. (By
        James L. O’Neill, Elizabeth, N. J., 1900.)

  41. Characteristics of the Irish Race. (By G. Stanley Hall, Worcester,
        Mass., 1900.)

  42. The Field, Scope, and Opportunity of the American-Irish Historical
        Society. (By Dennis Harvey Sheahan, Providence, R. I., 1900.)

  43. The Battle of Bunker Hill. (By Thomas F. O’Malley, Somerville,
        Mass., 1900.)

  44. Matthew Watson, an Irish Settler of Barrington, R. I., 1722. (By
        Thomas Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass., 1900.)

  45. The Irish Settlers of Pelham, Mass. (By Miss Mary Lessey Linehan,
        Hartford, Conn., 1900.)

  46. Hugh Cargill, a Friend of Liberty. (By Thomas F. O’Malley,
        Somerville, Mass., 1900.)

  47. Irish Pioneers and Builders of Kentucky. (By Hon. John C. Linehan,
        Concord, N. H., 1900.)

  48. Rev. James MacSparran, Irishman, Scholar, Preacher, and
        Philosopher, 1680–1757; a Rhode Island Pioneer. (By Thomas
        Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass., 1900.)

  49. The Society’s Field in California. (By James Connolly, Coronado,
        Cal., 1900.)

  50. The Historical Place of Irishmen in California. (Address issued by
        the Knights of St. Patrick, San Francisco, Cal., calling
        attention to the work of the American-Irish Historical Society,
        1900.)

  51. My Colleagues of Irish Extraction in New York Journalism. (By
        Thomas J. Cummins, Brooklyn, N. Y., 1900.)

  52. The Irish at the Battle of Bunker Hill, 1775. (By Thomas Hamilton
        Murray, Boston, Mass., 1900.)

  53. Early New Hampshire Irish; Some Pre-Revolutionary Dennises,
        Corneliuses, Patricks, and Michaels. (By Hon. John C. Linehan,
        Concord, N. H., 1900.)

  54. Men of Irish Blood in the Battle of Bunker Hill. (By Hon. John C.
        Linehan, Concord, N. H., 1900.)

  55. Thomas Fawcett, Irish Quaker, American Pioneer. (Forwarded to the
        Society by Thomas Plunkett, East Liverpool, O., 1900. Taken from
        the East Liverpool _Tribune_.)

  56. Irish Settlers, Previous to 1742, in Portsmouth, N. H. (By Thomas
        Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass., 1901.)

  57. Rhode Island Officers of Irish Blood Who Served in the Civil War.
        (By Col. James Moran, Providence, R. I., 1900.)

  58. Irish Pioneers of California,—(1) Martin Murphy, Sr. (By Miss
        Margaret A. Fitzgerald, San Francisco, Cal., 1901.)

  59. Early Irish in the Connecticut Colony. (By Rev. James H.
        O’Donnell, Norwalk, Conn., 1901.)

  60. Early Irish in the Plymouth Colony. (By Thomas Hamilton Murray,
        Boston, Mass., 1901.)

  61. Hon. Thomas Dongan, Governor of New York, 1683–1688. (By Rev.
        Alexander P. Doyle, C. S. P., New York city, 1901.)

  62. General Jackson and the Battle of New Orleans. (By Capt. Laurence
        O’Brien, New Haven, Conn., 1901.)

  63. Charles MacCarthy, a Rhode Island Pioneer, 1677. (By Thomas
        Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass., 1901.)

  64. Thomas Casey of Ireland and Rhode Island, 1636–1719. (By Thomas
        Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass., 1901.)

  65. The Irish Race in America. (By Hon. William McAdoo, New York city,
        1901.)

  66. The Romance of Sarah Alexander, a Native of Ireland—Mother of
        Commodore O. H. Perry. (By Thomas Hamilton Murray, Boston,
        Mass., 1901.)

  67. Ireland in New York. (By James McMahon, New York city, 1901.)

  68. New England Prejudice in 1752–1855; Was it Racial or Religious?
        (By Hon. John C. Linehan, Concord, N. H., 1902.)

  69. The Ancestry of Gen. John Sullivan—General Sullivan and the Battle
        of Rhode Island. (By Asa Bird Gardiner, New York city, 1902.)

  70. Gen. Henry Knox and the Society of the Cincinnati. (By Edward A.
        Moseley, Washington, D. C., 1902.)

  71. Richard Dexter, a Forgotten Irish Pioneer of Boston, 1641. (By
        Thomas Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass., 1902.)

  72. The Term “Scotch-Irish” an Absurdity. (By Hon. Wauhope Lynn, New
        York city, 1902.)

  73. Dennis Maccarty of Warren, R. I., 1757, a Soldier in the Crown
        Point Expedition. (By Miss Virginia Baker, Warren, R. I., 1902.)

  74. St. Patrick’s Day: Its Celebration in New York and Other American
        Places, 1737–1845. (A bound volume of 502 pages, by Hon. John D.
        Crimmins, New York City, 1902.)

  75. Commodore John Barry and the Projected Monument, at Washington, D.
        C., to his Memory. (By Joseph I. C. Clarke, New York city,
        1903.)

  76. A Glance at the Vanguard—Irish Pioneers in Colonial Massachusetts.
        (By Thomas Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass., 1902.)

  77. The Voyage of the _Seaflower_—from Ireland to Boston—1741. (By
        Thomas Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass., 1902.)

  78. Gen. John Sullivan and the Battle of Rhode Island. (By Thomas
        Hamilton Murray, Boston, Mass., 1902.)

  79. Irish Immigration to the United States Since 1790. (By Edward
        O’Meagher Condon, New Orleans, La., 1903.)

  80. Early Irish in old Albany, N. Y., with Special Mention of Jan
        Andriessen “De Iersman van Dublingh.” (By Hon. Franklin M.
        Danaher, Albany, N. Y., 1903.)

  81. The First Irish in Illinois. (By Hon. P. T. Barry, Chicago, Ill.,
        1903.)

  82. The Irish Pioneers of the Connecticut Valley. (By Edward A. Hall,
        Springfield, Mass., 1904.)

  83. The O’Briens of Machias, Me., Patriots of the American Revolution.
        (By Rev. Andrew M. Sherman, Morristown, N. J., 1904.)

  84. Early Irish Settlers in Virginia. (By Hon. John C. Linehan,
        Concord, N. H., 1904.)

  85. A Sketch of the Clan O’Brien. (By Thomas Hamilton Murray, Boston,
        Mass., 1904.)

  86. The Irish Vanguard of Rhode Island. (By Thomas Hamilton Murray,
        Boston, Mass., 1904.)




                  BOOKS AND PAMPHLETS BY THE SOCIETY.


The following is a list of books and pamphlets thus far issued under the
auspices of the society:

   1. The American-Irish Historical Society: What It Is and What Its
        Purposes Are. (Boston, Mass., 1897.)

   2. The American-Irish Historical Society: What It Is and What Its
        Purposes Are; Together with the Names of the Officers and a List
        of the Members. (Boston, Mass., 1898.)

   3. The “Scotch-Irish” Shibboleth Analyzed and Rejected, with Some
        Reference to the Present “Anglo-Saxon” Comedy. (Washington, D.
        C., 1898.)

   4. Irish Schoolmasters in the American Colonies, 1640–1775, with a
        Continuation of the Subject During and After the War of the
        Revolution. (Washington, D. C., 1898.)

   5. The Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Vol. I.
        (Boston, Mass., 1898.)

   6. The Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Vol. II.
        (Boston, Mass., 1899.)

   7. The Irish at Bunker Hill: A List of American Patriots Bearing
        Irish Names who Fought Against the British in the Action of the
        Seventeenth of June, 1775. (Boston, Mass., 1900.)

   8. The Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Vol. III.
        (Boston, Mass., 1900.)

   9. The Recorder. A Monthly Bulletin of the Society. Eight numbers
        issued. (Boston, Mass., 1901.)

  10. Gen. John Sullivan and the Battle of Rhode Island. A Sketch of the
        Former and a Description of the Latter. (Providence, R. I.,
        1902.)

  11. The Irish Scots and the “Scotch-Irish”; An Historical and
        Ethnological Monograph, with some reference to Scotia Major and
        Scotia Minor. To which is added a chapter on How the Irish came
        as Builders of the Nation. (Concord, N. H., 1902.)

  12. Irish Rhode Islanders in the American Revolution; with some
        mention of those serving in the Regiments of Elliott, Lippit,
        Topham, Crary, Angell, Olney, Greene, and other noted
        commanders. (Providence, R. I., 1903.)

  13. Early Irish in Old Albany, N. Y.; with special mention of Jan
        Andriessen, “De Iersman Van Dublingh.” (Boston, Mass., 1903.)

  14. The O’Briens of Machias, Me., Patriots of the American Revolution.
        A paper read before the Society at the annual meeting in
        January, 1904, by Rev. Andrew M. Sherman, Morristown, N. J. To
        which is added A Sketch of the Clan O’Brien, by Thomas Hamilton
        Murray. The expense of publishing this volume was generously
        defrayed by Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York city. (Boston,
        Mass., 1904.)

  15. The Journal of the American-Irish Historical Society, Vol. IV.
        (Boston, Mass., 1904.)




 ALPHABETICAL LIST OF THOSE WHO HAVE CONTRIBUTED PAPERS TO THE SOCIETY,
    OR WHO HAVE MADE ADDRESSES AT MEETINGS HELD UNDER ITS AUSPICES.


 Andrews, E. Benj., president of Brown University, Providence, R. I.

 Baker, Miss Virginia, Warren, R. I.
 Barry, Hon. P. T., Chicago, Ill.
 Belknap, Rear-Admiral, U. S. N. (retired), Brookline, Mass.
 Bodfish, Rev. Joshua P. L., Canton, Mass.
 Boyle, Hon. Patrick J., mayor of Newport, R. I.
 Brady, Cyrus Townsend, Brooklyn, N. Y.
 Brandon, Edward J., city clerk of Cambridge, Mass.
 Brennan, Hon. James F., Peterborough, N. H.; a state library
    commissioner of New Hampshire.
 Brigham, Clarence S., librarian of the Rhode Island Historical Society,
    Providence, R. I.
 Brown, J. Stacy, city attorney of Newport, R. I.

 Capen, Elmer H., president of Tufts College, Mass.
 Carroll, Hon. Hugh J., formerly mayor of Pawtucket, R. I.
 Carter, Hon. Thomas H., United States Senator, Helena, Montana.
 Cassidy, Dr. Patrick, formerly surgeon-general and brigadier-general on
    staff of Governor Morris of Connecticut, Norwich, Conn.
 Chamberlain, Hon. Abiram, governor of Connecticut.
 Clarke, Joseph I. C., New York city.
 Clary, Charles H., Hallowell, Me.
 Coffey, John J., Neponset, Mass.
 Coffey, Rev. Michael J., Cambridge, Mass.
 Collins, Dr. William D., Haverhill, Mass.
 Collins, Hon. Patrick A., now mayor of Boston, Mass.
 Conaty, Rt. Rev. Thomas J., rector of the Catholic University,
    Washington, D. C.
 Condon, Capt. E. O’Meagher, New York city; now of New Orleans, La.
 Connolly, James, Coronado, Cal.
 Corr, Bernard, Boston, Mass.
 Crimmins, Hon. John D., New York city.
 Cummins, Thomas J., Brooklyn, N. Y.
 Cunningham, James, Portland, Me.

 Daly, Hon. Joseph F., New York city.
 Danaher, Hon. Franklin M., Albany, N. Y.
 Deady, Rev. Louis J., Newport, R. I.
 DeCosta, Rev. Dr. B. F., New York city.
 DeCourcy, Charles A., now a judge of the Superior Court of
    Massachusetts, Lawrence, Mass.
 Doogue, William, Boston, Mass.
 Doyle, John F., New York city.
 Doyle, Rev. Alexander P., New York city.
 Driscoll, Hon. C. T., mayor of New Haven, Conn.
 DuChaillu, Paul B., New York city.

 Emmet, Thomas Addis, M. D., grand nephew of the Irish patriot, Robert
    Emmet.
 English, Hon. Thomas Dunn, Newark, N. J.

 Farrelly, Rev. Father, Central Falls, R. I.
 Fitzgerald, Miss Margaret A., San Francisco, Cal.
 Fitzpatrick, Edward, Louisville, Ky.; on staff of the _Times_ of that
    city.
 Flatley, P. J., Boston, Mass.
 Ford, J. D. M., instructor in Romance languages, Harvard College,
    Cambridge, Mass.

 Gardiner, Asa Bird, New York city.
 Gargan, Hon. Thomas J., Boston, Mass.
 Garrettson, Hon. F. P., mayor of Newport, R. I.
 Gorman, Dennis J., Boston, Mass.
 Gorman, Hon. Charles E., Providence, R. I., formerly speaker of the
    Rhode Island house of representatives.
 Gorman, William, Philadelphia, Pa.
 Griffin, John, Portsmouth, N. H.

 Hall, Edward A., Springfield, Mass.
 Hall, G. Stanley, president of Clark University, Worcester, Mass.
 Harbison, Hon. Alexander, mayor of Hartford, Conn.
 Harson, M. Joseph, Providence, R. I.
 Healy, Col. John G., New Haven, Conn.
 Hennessy, M. E., Boston, Mass.; on staff of the _Daily Globe_, that
    city.
 Herrick, Hon. D. Cady, Albany, N. Y., a justice of the New York Supreme
    Court.
 Horigan, Cornelius, Biddeford, Me.
 Howes, Osborne, Boston, Mass.

 Jordan, Michael J., Boston, Mass.

 Kelly, William J., Kittery, Me.
 Kimball, Hon. Charles Deane, governor of Rhode Island.

 Lawler, Thomas B., New York city.
 Lawless, Hon. Joseph T., Norfolk, Va., recently secretary of state,
    Virginia.
 Lee, Hon. Thomas Z., Providence, R. I.
 Linehan, Hon. John C., Concord, N. H., state insurance commissioner of
    New Hampshire.
 Linehan, Miss Mary Lessey, Hartford, Conn.
 Linehan, Rev. Timothy P., Biddeford, Me.
 Lynn, Hon. Wauhope, New York city.
 Lyons, Dr. W. H. H., Portsmouth, N. H.

 MacDonnell, John T. F., Holyoke, Mass.
 Martin, Hon. John B., Boston, Mass.
 McAdoo, Hon. William, New York city.
 McCarthy, Patrick J., Providence, R. I.
 McCoy, Rev. John J., Chicopee, Mass.
 McGlinchey, James H., Portland, Me.
 McKeever, Capt. Samuel, U. S. A. (retired), Somerville, Mass.
 McLaughlin, Edward A., Boston, Mass.
 McNamee, Hon. John H. H., mayor of Cambridge, Mass.
 McSweeny, Rev. Edward, Bangor, Me.
 Mellen, James H., Worcester, Mass.
 Milholland, John E., New York city.
 Monaghan, Prof. J. C., University of Wisconsin.
 Monahan, Michael, New York city.
 Moran, Col. James, Providence, R. I.
 Moseley, Hon. Edward A., secretary of the Interstate Commerce
    Commission, Washington, D. C.
 Moses, George H., Concord, N. H.
 Murray, Thomas Hamilton, Boston, Mass.

 Naphen, Congressman Henry F., Boston, Mass.
 Nelson, Rev. S. Banks, Woonsocket, R. I.

 O’Beirne, Gen. James R., New York city.
 O’Brien, Capt. Laurence, New Haven, Conn.
 O’Brien, Hon. Morgan J., New York city; a justice of the New York
    Supreme Court.
 O’Brien, Very Rev. Michael C., Bangor, Me.
 O’Donnell, Rev. James H., Norwalk, Conn.
 O’Driscoll, Daniel M., Charleston, S. C.
 O’Loughlin, Patrick, Brookline, Mass.
 O’Malley, Thomas F., Somerville, Mass.
 O’Neill, James L., Elizabeth, N. J.

 Patterson, Rev. George J., Boston, Mass.
 Phalen, Rev. Frank L., Worcester, Mass.
 Plunkett, Thomas, East Liverpool, O.

 Robertson, John Mackinnon, London, Eng.
 Roche, James Jeffrey, editor _The Pilot_, Boston, Mass.
 Rooney, John Jerome, New York city.
 Roosevelt, Hon. Theodore, then governor of New York.

 Scully, Martin, Waterbury, Conn.
 Sheahan, Dennis Harvey, Providence, R. I.
 Sherman, Rev. Andrew M., Morristown, N. J.
 Smith, Joseph, Lowell, Mass.
 Sperry, Congressman N. D., New Haven, Conn.
 Studley, Hon. John P., mayor of New Haven, Conn.
 Sullivan, Dr. James E., Providence, R. I.
 Sweeny, William M., Astoria, L. I., N. Y.
 Swords, Joseph F., Hartford, Conn.

 Taylor, Capt. John Shawe, Galway, Ire.
 Teeling, Rev. Arthur J., Lynn, Mass.
 Tierney, Dennis H., Waterbury, Conn.
 Tilson, John Q., New Haven, Conn.
 Tilton, Mayor, Portsmouth, N. H.

 Van Siclen, George E., New York city.

 Waller, Hon. Thomas M., ex-governor of Connecticut.
 Walsh, Hon. Patrick, Augusta, Ga.
 Weadock, Hon. T. A. E., Detroit, Mich.
 Williams, Prof. Alonzo, Brown University, Providence, R. I.


                   PRESIDENTS-GENERAL OF THE SOCIETY.

  1897. Rear-Admiral George W. Meade, U. S. N., (retired), Philadelphia,
          Pa. Died May 4, 1897.

  1897. Hon. Edward A. Moseley, secretary of the Interstate Commerce
          Commission, Washington, D. C.; was elected President-General
          on death of Admiral Meade.

  1898. Hon. Edward A. Moseley, Washington, D. C.

  1899. Hon. Thomas J. Gargan, Boston, Mass.; a prominent lawyer of that
          city; ex-member of the Police Commission; member of the Boston
          Transit Commission.

  1900. Hon. Thomas J. Gargan, Boston, Mass.

  1901. Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York city; prominent capitalist;
          official in banks, trust companies, and other corporations.

  1902. Hon. John D. Crimmins, New York city.

  1903. Hon. William McAdoo, New York city; assistant secretary of the
          U. S. Navy under President Cleveland; prominent lawyer;
          ex-member of Congress.

  1904. Hon. William McAdoo, New York city.




                            MEMBERSHIP ROLL
                                 OF THE
                   AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.

            [For officers of the Society see pages 5 and 6.]


  =Adams, Hon. Samuel=, president and treasurer of the Adams Dry Goods
      Co., 339–355 Sixth Avenue, New York city; director, Garfield
      National Bank, New York; member of the New York Chamber of
      Commerce; an ex-senator of Colorado.

  =Adams, T. Albeus=, president of the Gansevoort Bank, Fourteenth
      Street and Ninth Avenue, New York city; also president of Adams &
      Co; president of the Adams Bros. Co.; president of the Manhattan
      Refrigerating Co.; director, Mercantile National Bank.

  =Ahern, John=, 5 Highland Street, Concord, N. H.

  =Aspell, John= (M. D.), 139 West 77th Street, New York city; member of
      the Academy of Medicine; of the County Medical Association, and of
      the Celtic Medical Society; recently president of the latter;
      visiting surgeon to St. Vincent’s Hospital.

  =Bannin, Michael E.=, of Converse, Stanton & Co., dry goods commission
      merchants, 83 and 85 Worth Street, New York city; member of the
      Merchants Association, New York; director, Merchants Trust Co.;
      director, the Emigrant Industrial Savings Bank; director, the
      Catholic Summer School (Cliff Haven); member of the Merchants and
      Catholic clubs, New York, of the Montauk Club, Brooklyn, and of
      the Brooklyn Arts and Science Institute; director, the Columbian
      National Life Insurance Co.

  =Bannon, Henry G.=, 107 East 55th Street, New York city; president of
      the Irish National Club; secretary, Celtic-American Publishing Co.

  =Barrett, Frank B.=, 254 Fourth Avenue, New York city; with Pierce,
      Butler & Pierce Manufacturing Co.

  =Barrett, Michael F.=, of Barrett Bros., wholesale and retail dealers
      in teas, coffees, etc., 308 Spring Street and 574 Hudson Street,
      New York city.

  =Barry, Hon. Patrick T.=, 87–97 South Jefferson Street, Chicago, Ill.
      (Life member of the Society); advertising manager, Chicago
      Newspaper Union; director, First National Bank of Englewood, Ill.;
      director, The _Chicago Citizen_ Company; has been a member of the
      State Legislature of Illinois; prominently identified with
      educational interests.

  =Barry, Rev. Michael=, Oswego, N. Y.

  =Batters, Henry W.=, educator, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Bennett, Richard=, 206–208 Broadway, New York city.

  =Bodfish, Rev. Joshua P. L.=, Canton, Mass.; formerly chancellor of
      the Roman Catholic archdiocese of Boston; a director of the Bunker
      Hill Monument Association.

  =Boyle, Hon. Patrick J.=, now serving his tenth term as mayor of
      Newport, R. I.

  =Brady, Rev. Cyrus Townsend= (LL. D.), 455 East 17th Street, Flatbush,
      Brooklyn, N. Y.; member of the Society of Colonial Wars, of the
      Sons of the Revolution, of the Military Order of Foreign Wars, and
      of other patriotic organizations; chaplain of the First
      Pennsylvania Volunteer Infantry, war with Spain; formerly
      Protestant Episcopal archdeacon of Pennsylvania; author of _For
      Love of Country_, _For the Freedom of the Sea_, _Stephen Decatur_,
      _Commodore Paul Jones_, _Border Fights and Fighters_, and other
      works.

  =Brady, Owen J.=, The H. B. Claflin Co., 224 Church Street, New York
      city.

  =Brady, Patrick=, 445 Seventh Avenue, New York city.

  =Brandon, Edward J.=, city clerk, Cambridge, Mass.

  =Brann, Rev. Henry A.= (D. D.), 141 East 43d Street, New York city
      (Life member of the Society).

  =Bree, Hon. James P.=, lawyer, 902 Chapel Street, New Haven, Conn.;
      state auditor of Connecticut; recently a senator.

  =Brennan, Hon. James F.=, lawyer, Peterborough, N. H.; a trustee of
      the New Hampshire State Library.

  =Brennan, James F.=, contractor, 2½ Grove Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Brennan, Michael=, Hotel San Remo, Central Park West, New York city.

  =Brennan, P. J.=, 788 West End Avenue, New York city.

  =Breslin, T. J.=, Fries-Breslin Co., Camden, N. J.

  =Britton, Thomas P.=, 1221 Lexington Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio.

  =Broderick, William J.=, 52 Morton Street, New York city.

  =Brosnahan, Rev. Timothy=, rector of St. Mary’s church, Waltham, Mass.

  =Burke, Robert E.=, recently city solicitor, Newburyport, Mass.

  =Burr, William P.=, lawyer, 35 Nassau Street, New York city.

  =Buttimer, Thomas H.=, lawyer, Hingham and Boston, Mass.

  =Byrne, C. E.=, of the C. E. Byrne Piano Co., East 41st Street, New
      York city.

  =Byrne, Major John=, 45 Wall Street, New York city; director, Detroit
      City Gas Co.; president, Shawmut Coal & Coke Co.; chairman Board
      of Directors, Pittsburg, Shawmut & Northern R. R. Co.; president,
      Kersey Mining Co.; president, Kersey R. R. Co.; chairman Board of
      Directors, Shawmut Mining Co.; trustee, Emigrant Industrial
      Savings Bank of New York city.

  =Byrne, Joseph M.=, insurance, 800 Broad Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Byrne, Rt. Rev. William= (V. G., D. D.), rector of St. Cecilia’s
      church, St. Cecilia Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Byrns, John=, 734 Lexington Avenue, New York city.

  =Cahill, John H.=, 15 Dey Street, New York city.

  =Cahill, M. J.=, dry goods merchant, Essex Street, Lawrence, Mass.

  =Cahill, Thomas M.= (M. D.), 60 Edwards Street, New Haven, Conn.; son
      of the late Col. Thomas W. Cahill who commanded the Ninth
      Connecticut Volunteer Infantry (an Irish regiment), in the Civil
      War.

  =Calnin, James=, 101–107 Lakeview Avenue, Lowell, Mass.

  =Campbell, James C.=, post-office, Cleveland, Ohio.

  =Cannon, Thomas H.=, of the law firm Cannon & Poage, Stock Exchange
      Building, Chicago, Ill.

  =Carbray, Hon. Felix=, Benburb Place, Quebec, Canada; member of the
      Royal Irish Academy; Fellow of the Royal Society of Antiquaries,
      Ireland; member of the Quebec Harbor Commission and of the Quebec
      Board of Trade; consul for Portugal at Quebec, and dean of the
      Consular Corps; trustee of St. Patrick’s church, and of St.
      Bridget’s asylum; has represented his district in the parliament
      of the Province of Quebec. He was one of the pioneers in the
      lumber trade between the St. Lawrence and South America; has
      engaged in the general commission and shipping business, and has
      been a member of the successive firms: Carbray & Routh; Carbray,
      Routh & Co.; and Carbray, Son & Co.

  =Carmody, T. F.=, lawyer, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Carney, Michael=, of M. Carney & Co., Lawrence, Mass.

  =Carroll, Edward=, Leavenworth National Bank, Leavenworth, Kansas.

  =Carroll, John L.=, 18 State Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Carter, Hon. Thomas H.=, Helena, Mont.; recently a U. S. senator.

  =Casey, Stephen J.=, Exchange Building, 53 State Street., Boston,
      Mass.; Boston manager of the Empire State Surety Co.

  =Cassidy, John J.=, Inspector of Buildings, Wilmington, Del.

  =Cassidy, Patrick= (M. D.), Norwich, Conn.; was surgeon-general on the
      staff of Gov. Luzon B. Morris of Connecticut, ranking as
      brigadier-general.

  =Chittick, Rev. J. J.=, Hyde Park, Mass.

  =Clancy, Laurence=, dry goods merchant, West Bridge Street, Oswego, N.
      Y.; trustee, Oswego County Savings Bank; director, electric street
      railway; member, Normal school board; has repeatedly declined a
      nomination for mayor of Oswego.

  =Clare, William F.=, lawyer, 149 Broadway, New York city.

  =Clark, Rev. James F.=, New Bedford, Mass.

  =Clarke, James=, of James Clarke & Co., booksellers and publishers, 3,
      5 and 7 West 22d Street, New York city.

  =Clarke, Joseph I. C.=, Sunday editor New York _Herald_, Herald
      Square, New York city.

  =Clarke, Robert=, 27 Harbor Street, Cleveland, O.

  =Clary, Charles H.=, Hallowell, Me.; a descendant of John Clary, “of
      Newcastle, province of New Hampshire,” who married Jane Mahoney,
      of Georgetown, Me., in 1750. Four children were born to them
      before 1760. Mr. Clary of Hallowell, Me., here mentioned, was one
      of the founders of the Clary Reunion Family which meets annually.

  =Cleary, James=, 120 Liberty Street, Cleveland, O.

  =Coffey, John J.=, Neponset (Boston), Mass.; served during the Civil
      war in the Twenty-eighth Massachusetts Infantry (the
      Faugh-a-Ballagh regiment), which formed part of Meagher’s Irish
      Brigade, First Division, Second Corps; participated in the
      valorous charges of the brigade against the Confederates at
      Marye’s Heights; was wounded at Gettysburg and still carries the
      bullet in his body. His brother, Michael J., was color sergeant of
      the Irish flag of the regiment and carried it until he fell
      mortally wounded at the second battle of Bull Run.

  =Coffey, Rev. Michael J.=, East Cambridge, Mass.

  =Coghlan, Rev. Gerald P.=, 2141 North Broad Street, Philadelphia, Pa.

  =Cohalan, Daniel F.=, lawyer, 271 Broadway, New York city.

  =Coleman, Bernard F.=, 38 East 69th Street, New York city.

  =Coleman, James S.=, 38 East 69th Street, New York city; of Coleman,
      Breuchaud & Coleman.

  =Coleman, John=, capitalist, Louisville, Ky.

  =Collins, James M.=, 6 Sexton Avenue, Concord, N. H.

  =Collins, Hon. John S.=, Gilsum, N. H.; manufacturer of woolens; an
      ex-state senator of New Hampshire.

  =Collins, Hon. Patrick A.=, mayor of Boston, Mass.; formerly a member
      of Congress, and later U. S. Consul General at London, England.

  =Collins, William D.= (M. D.), Haverhill, Mass.

  =Conaty, Bernard=, 30 Cypress Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Conaty, Rev. B. S.=, 340 Cambridge Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Conaty, Rt. Rev. Thomas J.= (D. D.), Bishop of the Roman Catholic
      diocese of Los Angeles, Cal.

  =Condon, Edward O’Meagher=, Custom House, New Orleans, La.; connected
      with the office of the U. S. Supervising Architect, Washington, D.
      C., as an inspector of public buildings; served in the Union army
      during the Civil War.

  =Coney, Patrick H.=, lawyer, 316 Kansas Avenue, Topeka, Kan. He
      entered the Union army in 1863, at the age of 15 years, enlisting
      in the One Hundredth and Eleventh New York Infantry. He was
      detailed as dispatch bearer on Gen. McDougall’s staff, promoted as
      an orderly dispatch bearer on Gen. Nelson A. Miles’ staff, served
      in this capacity on to Appomatox and Lee’s surrender, and was
      transferred June 5, 1865, to Company H, Fourth New York Heavy
      Artillery. He served until October 5, 1865, when he was honorably
      discharged at Hart’s Island, N. Y. He was wounded at the battle of
      Peach Orchard in front of Petersburg, Va., on June 16, 1864, and
      rejoined his command from the hospital after sixty days’
      convalescence. In addition to his law practice, he is general
      manager of the American Investment and Development Co., which is
      engaged in the promotion and development of 11,000 acres of
      mineral, gas, and oil lands in Benton county, Mo. Gen. Nelson A.
      Miles is president of the company.

  =Conlon, William L.=, Portsmouth, N. H.

  =Connery, William P.=, Wheeler and Pleasant Streets, Lynn, Mass.;
      recently candidate for mayor of Lynn.

  =Connolly, James=, Coronado, Cal.

  =Connolly, Rev. Arthur T.=, Center and Creighton Streets, Roxbury
      (Boston), Mass.

  =Connor, Michael=, 509 Beech Street, Manchester, N. H.

  =Conway, James L.=, 113 Worth Street, New York city.

  =Cooke, Rev. Michael J.=, Fall River, Mass. (Life member of the
      Society.)

  =Corcoran, John H.=, dry goods merchant, 587 Massachusetts Avenue,
      Cambridge, Mass.

  =Coughlin, John=, 177 Water Street, Augusta, Me.

  =Cox, Michael F.= (M. D., M. R. I. A.), 26 Merrion Square, Dublin,
      Ireland.

  =Cox, Michael H.=, 54 Commerce Street, Boston. Mass.

  =Cox, William T.=, 12 South Second Street, Elizabeth, N. J.; owner of
      Cox’s Towing Line; for three years chairman of the fire
      commissioners of Elizabeth; ex-chief of the Elizabeth Volunteer
      Fire Department.

  =Coyle, Rev. James=, Taunton, Mass.

  =Coyle, Rev. John D.=, 79 Davenport Avenue, New Haven, Conn.

  =Crane, John=, of Crane & MacMahon, Maritime Building, 8–10 Bridge
      Street, New York city; a veteran of the Civil War; member of the
      Military Order of the Loyal Legion.

  =Crimmins, Hon. John D.=, 40 East 68th Street, New York city; a Life
      member of the Society; president-general of the organization in
      1901 and 1902; a member of the New York Municipal Art Commission.
      Mr. Crimmins served as a park commissioner of New York city from
      1883 to 1888, during which time he was treasurer and president of
      the board. He was a member of the Board of Visitors to West Point
      in 1894, and presidential elector (Democratic), in 1892 and 1904.
      He was appointed by President Roosevelt and served as a member of
      the Greater New York Charter Revision Commission. In 1894, he was
      a member of the New York State Constitutional Convention. Mr.
      Crimmins is a member of the New York Chamber of Commerce, and is
      officially connected with many railway, realty, and banking
      corporations. He is president of the Essex and Hudson Land
      Improvement Co.; president of the Port Richmond and Bergen Point
      Ferry Co.; president of the Bergen Point and Staten Island Ferry
      Co.; vice-president of the City Trust Co. of New York;
      vice-president of the Title Insurance Co. of New York;
      vice-president of the New York Mortgage and Security Co.; director
      of the Fifth Avenue Bank of New York, and also a director in the
      following companies: New York City Railway Co., Metropolitan
      Securities Co., the Century Realty Co., and the Chelsea Realty Co.
      He is prominently identified with the charities of the Roman
      Catholic Church as well as with non-sectarian charities. He is
      chairman of the executive committee of the trustees of St.
      Patrick’s Cathedral; member of the board of managers of the Roman
      Catholic Orphan Asylum; member of the board of managers of St.
      Vincent’s Hospital; member of the board of trustees of St. John’s
      Guild, and also of the Provident Loan Society of New York. Mr.
      Crimmins is also a director of the City and Suburban Homes Co. of
      New York, which has for its object to provide model homes at
      reasonable cost for working people. He is a member of the
      following clubs: Catholic, Metropolitan, Lawyers, Democratic,
      Manhattan, and of the Wee Burn Golf Club, of which he was formerly
      president. He is likewise a member of the board of managers of the
      Sevilla Home for Children, a non-sectarian charity, and is also
      one of the managers of the Society for the Reformation of Juvenile
      Delinquents.

  =Crimmins, Lieut. Martin L.=, of the Nineteenth U. S. Infantry; a son
      of Hon. John D. Crimmins, of New York city.

  =Cronin, Capt. William=, Rutland, Vt.

  =Croston, J. F.= (M. D.), Emerson Street, Haverhill, Mass.

  =Cummings, Matthew J.=, Overseer of the Poor, Providence, R. I.

  =Cummins, Rev. John F.=, Rosindale (Boston), Mass.

  =Cunningham, James=, 277 Congress Street, Portland, Me.

  =Curran, James=, of the James Curran Manufacturing Co., 512–514 West
      36th Street, New York city; a veteran of the Civil War.

  =Curry, Capt. P. S.=, contractor and builder, Lynn, Mass.; a veteran
      of the Civil War.

  =Curry, E. J.=, 69–71 East 89th Street, New York city.

  =Curtin, Jeremiah=, Bristol, Vt.; author of _Hero Tales of Ireland_,
      _Myths and Folk-Lore of Ireland_, _Myths and Folk-Tales of the
      Russians_, _Western Slavs and Magyars_; translator of works of
      Henryk Sienkiewicz. Mr. Curtin was acting U. S. Consul-General in
      Russia, 1865–’66; actively connected with the Bureau of Ethnology,
      Smithsonian Institution, 1883–’91. He is one of the greatest of
      living philologists and linguists.

  =Daly, Hon. Joseph F.= (LL. D.), Wall Street, New York city; Chief
      Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, New York, 1890–’96; Justice
      of the New York Supreme Court, 1896–’98; member of the Board of
      Managers, Roman Catholic Orphan Asylum; member of the Advisory
      Board, St. Vincent’s Hospital.

  =Danaher, Hon. Franklin M.=, Albany, N. Y.; member of the State Board
      of Law Examiners; many years Judge of the City Court of Albany.

  =Danvers, Robert E.=, 349–351 West 58th Street (the St. Albans), New
      York city; dealer in iron and steel.

  =Dasey, Charles V.=, Board of Trade Building, Broad Street, Boston,
      Mass.; steamship and insurance agent; general Eastern agent,
      Anchor Line S. S. Co., and of the Italian Royal Mail S. S. Co.;
      general agent, Insular Navigation Co.; general agency for ocean
      travel.

  =Davis, Dr. F. L.=, Biddeford, Me.

  =Davis, Hon. Robert T.= (M. D.), Fall River, Mass. He was born in
      County Down, Ireland, 1823; was a member of the Massachusetts
      State Constitutional Convention, 1853; a state senator, 1858–1861,
      and member of the National Republican Convention that nominated
      Abraham Lincoln for president in 1860. In 1873, Dr. Davis was
      elected mayor of Fall River. In 1882, he was elected to Congress,
      and was reëlected in 1884 and 1886. He has been prominently
      identified with the manufacturing interests of Fall River, has
      been president of the Wampanoag and Stafford mills, and has also
      been officially connected with the Merchants’, Robeson and other
      mills.

  =Day, Joseph P.=, 932 Eighth Avenue, New York city.

  =Deeves, Richard=, of Richard Deeves & Son, builders, 305–309
      Broadway, New York city.

  =Delahanty, Dr. W. J.=, Trumbull Square, Worcester, Mass.

  =Delehanty, Hon. F. B.=, Judges’ Chambers, Court House, City Hall
      Park, New York; a Judge of the City Court.

  =Dempsey, George C.=, Lowell, Mass.

  =Dempsey, William P.=, treasurer and manager, the Dempsey Bleachery
      and Dye Works, Pawtucket, R. I.

  =Devlin, James H.=, 35 Parsons Street, Brighton (Boston), Mass.

  =Dixon, Richard=, insurance, 52–54 William Street, New York city.

  =Donahoe, Col. John P.=, Wilmington, Del.

  =Donahue, Dan A.=, Essex Street, Lawrence, Mass.

  =Donoghoe, D. F.= (M. D.), Holyoke, Mass.

  =Donovan, Daniel=, 21 High Rock Street, Lynn, Mass.; an authority on
      heraldry, armorial bearings, etc., particularly as the same relate
      to Ireland.

  =Donovan, Henry F.=, editor and proprietor _The Chicago Eagle_,
      Teutonic Building, Chicago, Ill.; late colonel and
      inspector-general, Illinois National Guard.

  =Donovan, John W.=, of Larkin, Donovan & Co., real estate, mortgages,
      and insurance, 1228 Amsterdam Avenue, New York city.

  =Donovan, Col. William H.=, Lawrence, Mass.; commander of the Ninth
      Regiment, M. V. M.; served with the regiment in Cuba during the
      recent war with Spain.

  =Doogue, William=, Superintendent of Public Grounds, Boston, Mass.

  =Dooley, Michael F.=, Treasurer of the Union Trust Co., Providence, R.
      I.

  =Doran, Patrick L.=, Salt Lake City, Utah.

  =Dowd, James J.=, insurance, High Street, Holyoke, Mass.

  =Dowling, Hon. M. J.=, Olivia, Minn.

  =Dowling, Rev. Austin=, Warren, R. I.

  =Doyle, Alfred L.=, of John F. Doyle & Sons, real estate agents,
      brokers and appraisers, 45 William Street, New York city.

  =Doyle, James=, 50 Front Street, New York city; present oldest member
      of the flour trade in New York; member of the N. Y. Produce
      Exchange from the beginning; member of the Board of Managers of
      the Exchange, 1897–1901. He and his son, Nathaniel, are associated
      in trade as James Doyle & Company.

  =Doyle, John F.=, of John F. Doyle & Sons, 45 William Street, New York
      city. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Doyle, John F., Jr.=, of John F. Doyle & Sons, 45 William Street, New
      York city.

  =Doyle, John M.=, 14 South Third Street, Philadelphia, Pa.

  =Doyle, Nathaniel=, of James Doyle & Co., flour, etc., 50 Front
      Street, New York city; member of the board of managers, N. Y.
      Produce Exchange; secretary of the exchange; member of the New
      York Club, Fifth Avenue and 35th Street.

  =Drummond, M. J.=, of M. J. Drummond & Co., 182 Broadway, New York
      city.

  =Duggan, John T.= (M. D.), Worcester, Mass.

  =Dunn, Hon. Robert C.=, publisher of _The Union_, Princeton, Minn.;
      candidate in 1904 for governor of Minnesota.

  =Dunne, F. L.=, 328 Washington Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Dyer, Dr. William H.=, Dover, N. H.

  =Editor of “The Rosary Magazine,”= Somerset, O. (Life membership in
      the Society. See page 25 of this volume.)

  =Egan, James T.=, lawyer, Banigan Building, Providence, R. I.

  =Egan, Maurice Francis= (LL. D., J. U. D.), Professor of English
      Language and Literature, Catholic University of America,
      Washington, D. C.

  =Egan, Rev. M. H.=, rector, Church of the Sacred Heart, Lebanon, N. H.

  =Egan, Hon. Patrick=, 271 Broadway, New York city; recently U. S.
      Minister to Chile.

  =Ellard, George W.=, 180 Lisbon Street, Lewiston, Me.

  =Emmet, Dr. J. Duncan=, 91 Madison Avenue, New York city.

  =Emmet, Robert=, 54 West 53d Street, New York city.

  =Emmet, Thomas Addis= (M. D., LL. D.), 89 Madison Avenue, New York
      city (Life member of the Society); grand nephew of the Irish
      patriot, Robert Emmet.

  =Eustace, Hon. Alexander C.=, of the law firm A. C. & J. P. Eustace,
      334 East Water Street, Elmira, N. Y.; during the past fifteen
      years identified, as attorney or counsel, with many of the most
      important litigations before the courts in southern and western
      New York; was for three years, prior to 1893, president of the New
      York State Civil Service Commission.

  =Fallon, Hon. Joseph D.= (LL. D.), 789 Broadway, South Boston, Mass.;
      justice of the South Boston Municipal Court; vice-president, Union
      Institution for Savings.

  =Fallon, Hon. Joseph P.=, 1900 Lexington Avenue, New York city;
      justice of the Ninth District Municipal Court.

  =Farley, Charles J.=, Department of Docks, New York city.

  =Farrell, James P.=, 95th Street and Shore Road, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Farrell, John F.=, Brander-Walsh Co., 89 Worth Street, New York city.

  =Farrell, John P.=, 230 Grove Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Farrell, J. T.= (M. D.), 16 Messer Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Farrelly, Frank T.=, 424 Main Street, Springfield, Mass.

  =Farrelly, Stephen=, American News Co., New York city. (Life member of
      the Society.)

  =Fay, Martin=, 55 Bainbridge Street, Roxbury (Boston), Mass.

  =Feeley, William J.=, treasurer of the W. J. Feeley Co., silversmiths
      and manufacturing jewelers, 185 Eddy Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Ferguson, Hugh=, of Hugh Ferguson & Co., George Street, Charleston,
      S. C.

  =Finen, Rev. J. E.=, Tilton, N. H.

  =Finerty, Hon. John F.=, 69 Dearborn Street, Chicago, Ill.; editor of
      the _Chicago Citizen_; ex-member of Congress.

  =Finn, Rev. Thomas J.=, East Port Chester, Conn. (Hawthorne P. O.)

  =Fitzgerald, Rev. D. W.=, Penacook (Concord), N. H.

  =Fitzgerald, Hon. James=, New York city; a justice of the New York
      Supreme Court.

  =Fitzpatrick, Edward=, on the staff of the Louisville, Ky., _Times_; a
      resident of New Albany, Ind.; member of the committee to select
      books for the New Albany public library; was, from 1878 to 1885,
      Indiana correspondent of the Louisville _Courier-Journal_,
      reporting the legislature two terms, 1883–’85, for that paper, and
      at the same time was assistant to the chief clerk in the House of
      Representatives; was appointed a clerk in the U. S. Q. M. Depot at
      Jeffersonville, Ind., in 1885, but resigned to re-enter the employ
      of the _Courier-Journal_ as political reporter in Louisville; was
      for four years on the Louisville _Post_; returned to the
      _Courier-Journal_; was transferred to the _Times_ (the afternoon
      edition of the _Courier-Journal_), and has been on that paper for
      eleven years past. He is a keen and forceful writer, and is one of
      the ablest men in American journalism.

  =Fitzpatrick, John B.=, real estate, etc., 23 Court Street, Boston,
      Mass.; has been deputy sheriff of Suffolk county, Mass.

  =Fitzpatrick, Thomas B.=, senior member of the firm Brown, Durrell &
      Co., importers and manufacturers, 104 Kingston Street, Boston,
      Mass.; Rand McNally Building, Chicago, Ill., and 11–19 West 19th
      Street, New York city; president of the Union Institution for
      Savings, Boston, and a director in the United States Trust Co. of
      that city.

  =Fitzpatrick, Rev. William H.=, 2221 Dorchester Avenue, Boston, Mass.

  =Flanagan, Andrew J.= (D. D. S.), Main Street, Springfield, Mass.

  =Flannery, Capt. John=, Savannah, Ga.; of John Flannery & Co., cotton
      factors and commission merchants; was a non-commissioned officer
      of the Irish Jasper Greens in garrison at Fort Pulaski, 1861; was
      later lieutenant and captain, C. S. A., serving under Gen. Joe
      Johnston and General Hood; became a partner, 1865, in the cotton
      firm, L. J. Guilmartin & Co., having a line of steamers from
      Charleston, S. C., to Palatka, Fla.; bought out the business in
      1877; founded the house of John Flannery & Co.; became director
      and president of the Southern Bank of the State of Georgia; is
      ex-president of the Southern Cotton Exchange; captain, 1872–’98,
      of the Jasper Greens.

  =Fogarty, James A.=, 264 Blatchley Avenue, New Haven, Conn.; recently
      a police commissioner of New Haven.

  =Fogarty, Jeremiah W.=, Registry of Deeds, Boston, Mass.

  =Ford, Hon. Peter J.=, 501 Rodney Street, Wilmington, Del.

  =Fox, John J.=, 1908–10 Bathgate Avenue, New York city.

  =Foy, Julius L.=, lawyer, Rialto Building, St. Louis, Mo.

  =Franklin, A. H.=, 56 West 33d Street, New York city.

  =Gaffney, Thomas St. John=, lawyer; member of the French Legion of
      Honor; 41 Riverside Drive, New York city.

  =Galligan, Edward F.= (M. D.), Taunton, Mass.

  =Gallagher Patrick=, contractor and builder, 11 East 59th Street, New
      York city. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Gargan, Hon. Thomas J.=, of the law firm Gargan, Keating & Brackett,
      Pemberton Building, Boston, Mass.; Life member of the Society, and
      president-general of the same in 1899 and 1900; member of the
      Boston Transit Commission; director, United States Trust Co.;
      director, the Columbian National Life Insurance Co.

  =Garrigan, Rt. Rev. Philip J.= (D. D.), bishop of the Roman Catholic
      diocese of Sioux City, Iowa.

  =Garvan, Hon. Patrick=, 236 Farmington Avenue, Hartford, Conn. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =Garvey, Patrick J.=, lawyer, Holyoke, Mass.

  =Gavin, Michael=, of M. Gavin & Co., wholesale grocers and cotton
      factors, 232–4 Front Street, Memphis, Tenn.

  =Gavin, Dr. P. F.=, 331 Broadway, South Boston, Mass.

  =Geary, William M.=, headquarters K. of C., New Haven, Conn.

  =Geoghegan, Charles A.=, 537–9 West Broadway, New York city.

  =Geoghegan, Joseph=, Salt Lake City, Utah (Life member of the
      Society); vice-president of the board of education, Salt Lake
      City; director of the Utah National Bank; director of the Utah
      Loan and Building Association; director of the Butler Liberal
      Manufacturing Co.; all three concerns of Salt Lake City; also
      director in many other corporations. He is general agent in Utah
      for Swift & Co., of Chicago; Borden’s Condensed Milk Co., of New
      York; the American Can Co., of New York, and the Pennsylvania Salt
      Mfg. Co., of Philadelphia. He is broker for the following: the
      Western Sugar Refining Co., of San Francisco, Cal.; the Utah Sugar
      Co., of Lehi, Utah; the Amalgamated Sugar Co., of Ogden, Utah; the
      Idaho Sugar Co., of Idaho Falls, Idaho, and the Fremont County
      Sugar Co., of Sugar City, Idaho.

  =Geoghegan, Joseph G.=, 20 East 73d Street, New York city. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =Geoghegan, Walter F.=, 537–539 West Broadway, New York city.

  =Giblin, William=, Mercantile Safe Deposit Co., 120 Broadway, New York
      city.

  =Gillespie, George J.=, of the law firm Gillespie & O’Connor, 56 Pine
      Street, New York city; trustee, Catholic Summer School (Cliff
      Haven); president of the Champlain Club there; member of the board
      of managers of the Catholic Club, New York city; member of the
      board of managers of the Roman Catholic Orphan Asylum;
      vice-president of the Particular Council, Society of St. Vincent
      de Paul, New York city; recently tax commissioner of the city of
      New York. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Gilman, John E.=, 43 Hawkins Street, Boston, Mass.; was recently
      appointed Adjutant-General on the staff of the national
      commander-in-chief, Grand Army of the Republic. In August, 1862,
      Mr. Gilman enlisted in Co. E, Twelfth Massachusetts Infantry
      (Webster Regiment), and participated in the campaigns under
      Generals Pope, McClellan, Burnside, Hooker and Meade up to the
      battle of Gettysburg, Penn., where, on July 2, 1863, his right arm
      was shot off near the shoulder. Securing his discharge from the
      army on September 28, 1863, he returned to Boston. In 1864, he
      entered the service of the state and served in various departments
      until 1883, when he was made Settlement Clerk of the Directors of
      Public Institutions of Boston. He was appointed Soldiers’ Relief
      Commissioner April 2, 1901. He has been a comrade of Posts 15, 7,
      and 26, G. A. R., since 1868, being commander of the latter post
      in 1888. He was Department Inspector of the Massachusetts G. A. R.
      in 1895; Junior Vice-Commander in 1896; Senior Vice-Commander in
      1897; Delegate at Large in 1898; and Department Commander in 1899.

  =Goodwin, John=, of the John Goodwin Co., dressmakers’ supplies, 70–72
      West 23d Street, New York city. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Goff, Hon. John W.=, Recorder, New York city.

  =Gorman, Dennis J.=, assessors’ office, City Hall, Boston, Mass.

  =Gorman, William=, lawyer, Stephen Girard Building, Philadelphia, Pa.;
      member of the Pennsylvania Bar Association, the Pennsylvania
      Academy of Fine Arts, the American Academy of Social and Political
      Science, the Alumni Association of the University of Pennsylvania,
      and other organizations. He is officially connected with the
      Commonwealth Title Insurance and Trust Co., of Philadelphia. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =Gray, Dr. Joseph F.=, 10 North Hammels Avenue, Rockaway Beach, L. I.,
      N. Y.

  =Griffin, Martin I. J.=, 2009 North 12th Street, Philadelphia, Pa.;
      editor and publisher _American Catholic Historical Researches_.

  =Griffin, Rev. P. J.=, Holyoke, Mass.

  =Griffin, Rt. Rev. Mgr. Thomas= (D. D.), St. John’s church, Worcester,
      Mass.

  =Guiney, John=, Biddeford, Me.

  =Haggerty, J. Henry=, of the Haggerty Refining Co., oils, 50 South
      Street, New York city.

  =Haigney, John=, 439 Fifty-eighth Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Hall, Edward A.=, 66 Spring Street, Springfield, Mass.; secretary and
      treasurer of the Automatic Postal and Commercial Service Co.;
      director, Springfield Coöperative Bank; vice-president, Mercy
      Hospital Corporation; chairman of board of directors, Connecticut
      Valley Historical Society; secretary, Good Shepherd Corporation;
      president, Central Council of the St. Vincent de Paul society of
      the Roman Catholic diocese of Springfield, Mass. Mr. Hall has
      devoted close attention to the history of the Irish element in
      western Massachusetts, and has written much and interestingly on
      the subject.

  =Hanlon, Marcus=, P. O. Box 1920, New York city.

  =Hanrahan, John D.= (M. D.), Rutland, Vt.; surgeon in the U. S. Navy
      during the Civil War; ex-postmaster of Rutland; first president of
      the Rutland County Medical and Surgical Society.

  =Harbison, Hon. Alexander=, Hartford, Conn., recently mayor of
      Hartford.

  =Harrington, Rev. J. C.=, rector of St. Joseph’s church, Lynn, Mass.

  =Harrington, Rev. John M.=, Orono, Me.

  =Harrington, William=, Manchester, N. H.

  =Harris, Charles N.=, 89 Madison Avenue, New York city.

  =Harrison, A. J.=, 514 East 23d Street, New York city.

  =Harson, M. Joseph=, Catholic Club, 120 Central Park South, New York
      city; member of the Rhode Island Historical Society.

  =Hart, Frank M.=, 62 Ascension Street, Passaic, N. J.

  =Harty, Rev. John=, rector of the church of the Sacred Heart,
      Pawtucket, R. I.

  =Haverty, Frank=, 361 West 27th Street, New York city.

  =Hayes, John=, Concord Street, Manchester, N. H.

  =Hayes, John F.= (M. D.), 15 South Elm Street, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Hayes, Nicholas J.=, Fire Commissioner, 157–159 East 67th Street, New
      York city.

  =Hayes, Col. Patrick E.=, Pawtucket, R. I.

  =Hayes, Timothy J.=, 688 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Healy, John F.=, general superintendent of the Davis Coal and Coke
      Co., Thomas, Tucker county, West Virginia.

  =Healy, Col. John G.=, insurance, 117 Sherman Avenue, New Haven,
      Conn.; a captain in the Ninth Connecticut Infantry, April, 1862,
      to October, 1864. Upon the consolidation of the regiment, in the
      latter year, into the Ninth battalion he, being the senior
      captain, was given command of the latter. On December 1, 1864, he
      was promoted lieutenant-colonel and as such commanded the
      battalion until the same was mustered out. Since the war he has
      been vice-president of the Nineteenth Army Corps Association. When
      Luzon B. Morris was governor of Connecticut, Col. Healy served on
      his staff as assistant adjutant-general. Col. Healy is a member of
      the Military Order of the Loyal Legion, of the Army and Navy Club
      of Connecticut, and of the Second Company of the Governor’s Foot
      Guard, New Haven.

  =Healy, Richard=, Main Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Hennessy, Dr. Daniel=, Bangor, Me.

  =Hennessy, Michael E.=, on the staff of the _Boston Daily Globe_; a
      newspaper man of wide experience and exceptional ability. One of
      the most highly valued men on the _Globe_, he is regularly
      assigned to “cover” events of national importance and annually
      travels thousands of miles in the service of his paper.

  =Henry, Charles T.=, 120 Liberty Street, New York city.

  =Hickey, James G.=, manager of the United States Hotel, Boston, Mass.
      (Life member of the Society.)

  =Hickey, Michael J.=, manufacturer, Haverhill, Mass.

  =Hickey, Rev. William A.=, Clinton, Mass.

  =Hicks, Michael=, 147 West 121st Street, New York city.

  =Hogan, John W.=, lawyer, Providence, R. I.; recently a candidate for
      Congress.

  =Holland, John P.=, 65 Nelson Place, Newark, N. J.; inventor of the
      submarine torpedo boat.

  =Horigan, Cornelius=, Biddeford, Me.; has been a member of the state
      legislature of Maine.

  =Howes, Osborne=, secretary and treasurer of the Board of Fire
      Underwriters, 55 Kilby Street, Boston, Mass. He is a descendent of
      David O’Killia (O’Kelly), who settled on Cape Cod as early as
      1657, and who is mentioned in the old Yarmouth, Mass., records as
      “the Irishman.” The records show that at the close of King
      Philip’s War, O’Killia was assessed his proportionate part toward
      defraying the expenses of that struggle.

  =Hughes, Rev. Christopher=, Fall River, Mass.

  =Hurley, John E.=, Remington Printing Co., Providence, R. I.

  =Jameson, W. R.=, 1786 Bathgate Avenue, borough of the Bronx, New York
      city.

  =Jenkinson, Richard C.=, 678 High Street, Newark, N. J.; of R. C.
      Jenkinson & Co., manufacturers of metal goods; candidate for mayor
      of Newark in 1901; was president of the Newark Board of Trade in
      1898–’99 and 1900; has been a director in the Newark Gas Co.; was
      president of the New Jersey Commission to the Pan-American
      Exposition, and one of the vice-presidents of the Exposition,
      representing the state of New Jersey by appointment of Governor
      Voorhees.

  =Jennings, Michael J.=, 753 Third Avenue, New York city.

  =Johnson, James G.=, of James G. Johnson & Co., 649, 651, 653 and 655
      Broadway, New York city.

  =Jordan, Michael J.=, lawyer, 42 Court Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Joyce, Bernard J.=, salesman, 82 Devonshire Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Kane, Dr. John=, Lexington, Mass.

  =Keating, Patrick M.=, of the law firm Gargan, Keating & Brackett,
      Pemberton Building, Boston, Mass.

  =Keenan, John J.=, Public Library, Copley Square, Boston, Mass.

  =Kehoe, John F.=, 26 Broadway, New York city; officially connected
      with many corporations. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Kelly, Eugene=, Temple Court Building, New York city.

  =Kelly, John F.=, 284 West Housatonic Avenue, Pittsfield, Mass.

  =Kelly, Michael F.= (M. D.), Fall River, Mass.

  =Kelly, T. P.=, 544 West 22d Street, New York city; of T. P. Kelly &
      Co., manufacturers of black leads, foundry facings, supplies,
      etc.; mills in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Illinois.

  =Kelly, William J.=, 9 Dove Street, Newburyport, Mass.

  =Kelly, William J.=, insurance, Kittery, Me., and Portsmouth, N. H.

  =Kenedy, P. J.=, 3 and 5 Barclay Street, New York city.

  =Kennedy, Charles F.=, Brewer, Me.

  =Kennedy, Daniel=, 197 Berkeley Place, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Kennedy, Roderick J.=, 924 Sixth Avenue, New York city.

  =Kenney, James W.=, Union Brewing Co., Roxbury (Boston), Mass.;
      vice-president and director, Federal Trust Co., Boston.

  =Kent, Daniel V.=, Kansas City, Mo.

  =Kerby, John E.=, architect, 452 Fifth Avenue, New York city.

  =Kiernan, Patrick=, 265 West 43d Street, New York city.

  =Killoren, Hon. Andrew=, Dover, N. H.; recently a senator of New
      Hampshire.

  =Kilroy, Patrick=, lawyer, Main Street, Springfield, Mass.

  =Kilroy, Philip= (M. D.), “Glen Rath,” Springfield, Mass.

  =Kinney, Thomas I.=, Whitney Avenue, New Haven, Conn.; recently
      candidate for mayor of New Haven.

  =Kinsela, John F.=, 509 Gorham Street, Lowell, Mass.

  =Kinsella, James E.=, 1337 St. Clair Street, Cleveland, O.

  =Kivel, Hon. John=, Dover, N. H.

  =Knights of St. Patrick=, San Francisco, Cal. (Life membership.)

  =Lally, Frank=, 161 Saratoga Street, East Boston, Mass.

  =Lamb, Matthew B.=, 516 Main Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Lamson, Col. Daniel S.=, Weston, Mass.; Lieutenant-Colonel commanding
      Sixteenth Regiment (Mass.), 1861; A. A. G., Norfolk, 1862; served
      on staff of General Hooker; is a member of the Society of Colonial
      Wars, Sons of the American Revolution, and Military Order of the
      Loyal Legion; one of his ancestors landed at Ipswich, Mass., in
      1632, and received a grant of 350 acres; another ancestor, Samuel,
      of Reading, Mass., participated in King Philip’s War and had a son
      in the expedition of 1711. Another member of the family, Samuel of
      Weston, commanded a company at Concord, Mass., April 19, 1775, and
      was major and colonel of the Third Middlesex Regiment for many
      years, dying in 1795.

  =Lappin, J. J.=, 7 Grant Street, Portland, Me.

  =Lavelle, John=, Inquiry Division, Post-office, Cleveland, O.

  =Lawler, Thomas B.=, 70 Fifth Avenue, New York city; with Ginn &
      Company, publishers; member of the American Oriental Society and
      of the Archæological Society of America.

  =Lawless, Hon. Joseph T.=, lawyer, Norfolk, Va.; recently Secretary of
      State, Virginia.

  =Leahy, Matthew W.=, 257 Franklin Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Leary, William=, 450 Fifth Avenue, New York city.

  =Lee, Hon. Thomas Z.=, of the law firm Barney & Lee, Industrial Trust
      Building, Providence, R. I.

  =Lenehan, John J.=, of the law firm Lenehan & Dowley, 165 Broadway,
      New York city. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Lenihan, Rev. B. C.=, Fort Dodge, Iowa.

  =Lenihan, Rt. Rev. M. C.=, bishop of the Roman Catholic diocese of
      Great Falls, Mont.

  =Leonard, Peter F.=, 343 Harvard Street, Cambridge, Mass.

  =Linehan, Hon. John C.=, Concord, N. H.; State Insurance Commissioner
      of New Hampshire; Treasurer-General of the Society; has been a
      member of the Council of the Governor of New Hampshire; commander
      of Brown Post, No. 31, G. A. R., for three years; commander of the
      G. A. R., Department of New Hampshire, two years; president of the
      N. H. Veteran Association, two years; Junior Vice
      Commander-in-Chief; member of Pension Committee of the National
      Encampment; director of the Gettysburg Battlefield Association,
      ten years; recently a leading candidate at Buffalo, N. Y., for
      National Commander-in-Chief; president, board of trustees of New
      Hampshire State Industrial School; recipient of an honorary degree
      from Dartmouth College. He is an authority on the early history of
      the Irish in New England, and has written many articles on the
      subject.

  =Linehan, John J.=, manufacturer, Springfield, Mass.

  =Linehan, Rev. T. P.=, Biddeford, Me.

  =Linehan, Timothy P.=, Wolfe Tavern, Newburyport, Mass.

  =Lonergan, Thomas S.=, Hotel Raleigh, Broadway, New York city.

  =Loughlin, Peter J.=, Court House, Chambers Street, New York city.

  =Lovell, David B.= (M. D.), 32 Pearl Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =Luddy, Timothy F.=, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Lyman, William=, 51 East 122d Street, New York city.

  =Lynch, Bernard E.=, lawyer, 42 Church Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Lynch, Eugene=, 24 India Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Lynch, J. H.=, Dyker Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Lynch, John E.=, school principal, Worcester, Mass.

  =Lynch, Thomas J.=, lawyer, Augusta, Me.

  =Lynn, John=, 48 Bond Street, New York city.

  =Lynn, Hon. Wauhope=, 257 Broadway, New York city; recently a judge of
      one of the New York courts.

  =MacDonnell, John T. F.=, paper manufacturer, Holyoke, Mass.

  =Madden, Joseph=, Keene, N. H.

  =Magenis, James P.=, lawyer, 62–65 Chadwick Building, Tremont Street,
      Boston, Mass.

  =Magrane, P. B.=, dry goods merchant, Lynn, Mass.

  =Magrath, P. F.=, 244 Front Street, Binghamton, N. Y.; with the George
      A. Kent Company, Binghamton, wholesale cigar manufacturers. He has
      been connected with this house for the past twenty-six years, for
      nineteen of which he has been its Eastern representative. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =Maguire, P. J.=, 204 Madison Street, New York city.

  =Maher, Stephen J.= (M. D.), 212 Orange Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Mahony, William H.=, dry goods, 844 Eighth Avenue, New York city.
      (Life member of the Society.)

  =Malloy, Gen. A. G.=, El Paso, Texas; a veteran of the Mexican and
      Civil wars; during the latter conflict he was successively major,
      colonel and brigadier-general; has been collector of the port of
      Galveston.

  =Maloney, Cornelius=, publisher of the _Daily Democrat_, Waterbury,
      Conn.

  =Maloney, Dr. Thomas E.=, North Main Street, Fall River, Mass.; state
      commissioner on veterinary medicine.

  =Maneely, John=, 309–311 Arch Street, Philadelphia, Pa.

  =Marshall, Rev. George F.=, rector of St. Paul’s church, Milford, N.
      H.

  =Martin, Hon. John B.=, penal institutions commissioner, 762 Fourth
      Street, South Boston, Mass.

  =McAdoo, Hon. William=, President-General of the society; police
      commissioner of the city of New York; ex-member of Congress;
      ex-assistant secretary of the navy; member of the law firm McAdoo
      & Crosby, 25 Broad Street, New York city.

  =McAleer, Dr. George=, treasurer Bay State Savings Bank, Worcester,
      Mass.

  =McAlevy, John F.=, salesman, 26–50 North Main Street, Pawtucket, R.
      I.

  =McAuliffe, John F.=, care the Livermore & Knight Co., Westminster
      Street, Providence, R. I.

  =McCaffrey, Hugh=, manufacturer, Fifth and Berks Streets,
      Philadelphia, Pa. (Life member of the Society.)

  =McCall, John A.=, president of the New York Life Insurance Co., New
      York city. (Life member of the Society.)

  =McCarrick, James W.=, Clyde’s Steam Lines, Norfolk, Va.

  =McCarthy, Charles, Jr.=, Portland, Me.

  =McCarthy, George W.=, of Dennett & McCarthy, dry goods, Portsmouth,
      N. H.

  =McCarthy, Patrick J.=, lawyer, Industrial Trust Building, Providence,
      R. I.; has been a member of the General Assembly of Rhode Island.

  =McCaughan, Rev. John P.=, Holyoke, Mass.

  =McCaughey, Bernard=, of Bernard McCaughey & Co., house furnishers, 93
      to 105 North Main Street, Pawtucket, R. I.

  =McCauley, Terence=, 116 Birch Street, Cleveland, O.

  =McClean, Rev. Peter H.=, Milford, Conn.

  =McConway, William=, The McConway & Torley Co., Pittsburg, Pa. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =McCormick, Edward R.=, 15 West 38th Street, New York city.

  =McCoy, Rev. John J.=, rector of the Church of the Holy Name,
      Chicopee, Mass.

  =McCreery, Robert=, room 427, Produce Exchange, New York city.

  =McCullough, John=, 55 Maxfield Street, New Bedford, Mass.

  =McDonald, Mitchell C.=, care Navy Department, Washington, D. C.;
      paymaster U. S. N.

  =McDonnell, Robert E.=, lawyer, 206 Broadway, New York city.

  =McDonough, Hon. John J.=, Fall River, Mass.; justice of the second
      district court of Bristol county, Mass.

  =McEldowney, W. A.=, 225 Sixth Street, Ashland, N. J.

  =McElroy, Rev. Charles J.=, rector of St. Mary’s church, Derby, Conn.

  =McEvoy, John W.=, 137 Central Street, Lowell, Mass.

  =McGann, James E.=, real estate, 902 Chapel Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =McGauran, Michael S.= (M. D.), Lawrence, Mass.

  =McGillicuddy, Hon. D. J.=, of the law firm McGillicuddy & Morey,
      Lewiston, Me.; ex-mayor of Lewiston.

  =McGinness, Col. John R.=, ordnance corps, U. S. A.; care War
      Department, Washington, D. C.

  =McGolrick, Rev. E. J.=, 84 Herbert Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =McGolrick, Rt. Rev. James= (D. D.), bishop of the Roman Catholic
      diocese of Duluth, Minn. (Life member of the Society.)

  =McGovern, Joseph P.=, of J. P. McGovern & Bro., fur brokers, 193
      Greene Street, New York city.

  =McGowan, James=, Wall Street, New York city. (Life member of the
      Society.)

  =McGowan, P. F.=, manufacturer, 224 East 12th Street, New York city;
      member of the board of education. (Life member of the Society.)

  =McGuire, Edward J.=, lawyer, 52 Wall Street, New York city.

  =McGurrin, F. E.=, of F. E. McGurrin & Co., investment bankers,
      Security Trust Building, Salt Lake City, Utah; president of the
      Salt Lake Security & Trust Co.

  =McIntyre, John F.=, of the law firm Cantor, Adams & McIntyre, 25
      Broad Street, New York city.

  =McKelleget, George F.=, of the law firm R. J. & G. F. McKelleget,
      Pemberton Building, Boston, Mass.

  =McKelleget, Robert J.=, of the law firm R. J. & G. F. McKelleget,
      Pemberton Building, Boston, Mass.

  =McLaughlin, Edward A.=, lawyer, Tremont Building, Boston, Mass.; was
      for several years clerk of the Massachusetts House of
      Representatives.

  =McLaughlin, Henry V.= (M. D.), Kent Street, Brookline, Mass.

  =McLaughlin, John=, builder, 348 East 81st Street, New York city.

  =McLaughlin, Marcus J.=, 250 West 25th Street, New York city.

  =McLaughlin, Thomas=, Hallowell, Me.

  =McLaughlin, Thomas F.=, 19 East 87th Street, New York city.

  =McMahon, James=, 51 Chambers Street, New York city.

  =McMahon, Rev. John W.= (D. D.), rector of St. Mary’s church,
      Charlestown (Boston), Mass.

  =McManus, Col. John=, clothing merchant, 145–147 Westminster Street,
      Providence, R. I.; served on the staff of Governor Davis, of Rhode
      Island.

  =McManus, Gen. Thomas=, 333 Main Street, Hartford, Conn.; adjutant and
      major of the Twenty-fifth regiment, Connecticut infantry, in the
      Civil War; recently quartermaster-general of Connecticut with the
      rank of brigadier-general.

  =McManus, Michael=, clothing merchant, 670 Washington Street, Boston,
      Mass.

  =McManus, Rev. Michael T.=, rector of St. Mary’s Church of the
      Assumption, Brookline, Mass.

  =McNamee, Hon. John H. H.=, 51 Frost Street, Cambridge, Mass.;
      recently mayor of Cambridge.

  =McOwen, Anthony=, 515 Wales Avenue, borough of the Bronx, New York
      city.

  =McPartland, John E.=, Park Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =McWalters, John P.=, 141 Broadway, New York city.

  =McQuade, E. A.=, 75–77 Market Street, Lowell, Mass.

  =McQuaid, Rev. William P.=, rector of St. James church, Harrison
      Avenue, Boston, Mass.

  =McSweeney, Edward F.=, 4 Liberty Square, Boston, Mass.

  =Meade, Richard W.=, 621 Broadway, New York city; son of the first
      president-general of the society.

  =Mellen, James H.=, 119 Providence Street, Worcester, Mass.; has been
      a member of the Massachusetts legislature.

  =Mellen, Dr. W. M. E.=, Chicopee, Mass.; ex-mayor of Chicopee.

  =Milholland, John E.=, Witherspoon Building, Philadelphia, Pa.;
      president of the Batcheller Pneumatic Tube Co., of Philadelphia;
      president of the Pneumatic Dispatch Manufacturing Co., of
      Pennsylvania; director in the Pearsall Pneumatic Tube and Power
      Co., of New York, and a director in the Pneumatic Transit Co., of
      New Jersey. Under him the successful pneumatic tubes of the large
      diameter have been constructed, and it is largely due to his
      energy and effort that the U. S. post-office department now
      considers a part of its general delivery system the pneumatic tube
      service. He is a member of the Transportation Club of New York,
      the New York Press Club, the Republican Club, The Metropolitan
      Museum of Art, the American Museum of Natural History, and a
      number of other organizations.

  =Molony, Henry A.=, of Molony & Carter, 16 New Street, Charleston, S.
      C.

  =Monaghan, Hon. James Charles=, chief of the Bureau of Statistics of
      the U. S. Department of Commerce and Labor, Washington, D. C.;
      formerly U. S. consul at Mannheim and at Chemnitz; recently
      professor of Commerce, University of Wisconsin.

  =Monaghan, Rt. Rev. John J.= (D. D.), bishop of the Roman Catholic
      diocese of Wilmington, Del.

  =Montfort, Richard=, Louisville, Ky.; chief engineer of the Louisville
      & Nashville R. R.

  =Montgomery, Gen. Phelps=, 39 Church Street, New Haven, Conn.

  =Moore, O’Brien=, president and general manager of The Citizen
      Printing and Publishing Co., Tucson, Ariz. On the breaking out of
      the war with Spain, he entered the service as lieutenant-colonel
      of the Second West Virginia Infantry. After a year’s service, and
      peace being declared with Spain, he became lieutenant-colonel of
      U. S. Volunteers for the operations in the Philippines, where he
      served for eighteen months, until his regiment was mustered out.
      He then settled in Tucson, and is now head of a valuable newspaper
      plant, which issues a daily and a weekly. (Life member of the
      Society.)

  =Moran, Col. James=, Providence, R. I.; a veteran of the Civil War. He
      was appointed second lieutenant in the Third regiment, Rhode
      Island Volunteers, by Special Orders 53, A. G. O., R. I., Aug. 27,
      1861; was commissioned second lieutenant, Fifth Rhode Island Heavy
      Artillery, Nov. 5, 1861; mustered in, Dec. 16, 1861; in command of
      Company A, from Aug. 8, 1862, until Sept. 20, 1862; assumed
      command of Company D, Sept. 26, 1862; was commissioned captain and
      mustered in as such Feb. 14, 1863; on General Court Martial, July,
      1863; in command of Fort Amory, at Newberne, N. C., from Sept. 1,
      1863, until Oct. 15, 1863; assumed command of Post, at Hatteras
      Inlet, N. C., April 21, 1864; in command of Forts Foster and
      Parke, at Roanoke Island, from May 2, 1864, until January, 1865;
      mustered out Jan. 17, 1865. In May, 1873, he was commissioned
      colonel of the Rhode Island Guards regiment, and in June, 1887,
      became colonel of the Second regiment, Brigade of Rhode Island
      Militia.

  =Moran, Dr. James=, 333 West 51st Street, New York city.

  =Morgan, John=, 44 West 46th Street, New York city.

  =Morrissey, Very Rev. Andrew= (C. S. C., LL. D.), president of the
      University of Notre Dame, Indiana.

  =Morrissy, Thomas=, 48–50 West 14th Street, New York city.

  =Moseley, Edward A.=, Washington, D. C.; president-general of the
      Society in 1897 and 1898. He succeeded to the position, in the
      former year, on the death of Admiral Meade, who was the first
      president-general of the organization. Mr. Moseley is secretary of
      the U. S. Interstate Commerce Commission. He is ninth in descent
      from Lieut. Thaddeus Clark, who came from Ireland, and died in
      Portland, Me., May 16, 1690. Clark was lieutenant of a company of
      men engaged in the defence of Falmouth, now Portland, during the
      Indian War. He fell into ambuscade with his company while making a
      reconnoitre, and was killed with twelve of his men. Mr. Moseley is
      also a descendant of Deputy-Governor Cleeves (or Cleaves), a
      founder of Portland, formerly Falmouth, and is sixth in descent
      from Lieut. John Brown, of Belfast, Me., who came with his father
      from Londonderry, Ire., and was one of the settlers of
      Londonderry, N. H.; Brown was chairman of the first Board of
      Selectmen of Belfast, Me., chosen Nov. 11, 1773, ’74 and ’75; he
      removed from Londonderry, N. H. While residing there he had been a
      commissioned officer in the Provincial Army, and had served in the
      French War. Mr. Moseley is also of patriotic Revolutionary stock,
      and is a member of the Society of the Cincinnati.

  =Moynahan, Bartholomew=, lawyer, 120 Broadway, New York city; official
      stenographer to the New York Supreme Court.

  =Mullen, John F.=, 26 Trask Street, Providence, R. I.

  =Murphy, D. P.=, Jr., 31 Barclay Street, New York city.

  =Murphy, Edward J.=, of the Edward J. Murphy Co., real estate brokers,
      Springfield, Mass.

  =Murphy, Frank J.=, 44 Boston Street, Salem, Mass.

  =Murphy, Fred C.=, of the Edward J. Murphy Co., Springfield, Mass.

  =Murphy, James R.=, lawyer, 27 School Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Murphy, Hon. John R.=, lawyer, Boston, Mass.

  =Murray, John F.=, captain of police, Cambridge, Mass.; residence, 9
      Avon Street.

  =Murray, Michael J.=, lawyer, 27 School Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Murray, Thomas Hamilton=, 36 Newbury Street, Boston, Mass.;
      Secretary-General of the Society; a newspaper man of twenty years’
      experience, during which he has been editorially connected with
      journals in Boston and Lawrence, Mass., Providence, R. I., and
      Bridgeport and Meriden, Conn.; has devoted much attention to
      historical research, particularly in relation to the Irish element
      in American history, and has delivered addresses on the subject
      before the New England Historic, Genealogical Society; the Rhode
      Island Historical Society; the Phi Kappa Sigma of Brown
      University; the Boston Charitable Irish Society (founded 1737),
      and other organizations; is the author of a number of papers,
      pamphlets and books.

  =Naphen, Hon. Henry F.=, lawyer, 42 Court Street, Boston, Mass.;
      member of the Boston School Board, 1882–5; state senator, 1885–6;
      member of Congress, 1899–1903.

  =Neagle, Rev. Richard=, Malden, Mass.

  =O’Beirne, Gen. James R.=, 290 Broadway, New York city. In military
      life he has held every commissioned rank up to brevet
      brigadier-general of volunteers; has also been provost marshal,
      District of Columbia; deputy U. S. marshal, District of Columbia;
      register of wills, District of Columbia; editor _Sunday Gazette_,
      Washington, D. C.; special agent U. S. Indian affairs; special
      agent U. S. treasury department; assistant U. S. commissioner of
      immigration at New York city; commissioner of charities, New York
      city; commander U. S. Medal of Honor Legion. In business life has
      been president of Yonkers Electric Light Co.; secretary of
      Flemington Coal and Coke Co. of West Virginia, and treasurer of
      Manhattan Distilling Co. In social life, president of the United
      Irish societies of New York city and vicinity, and member of
      various clubs and other organizations.

  =O’Brien, Hon. C. D.=, lawyer, Globe Building, St. Paul, Minn.;
      prosecuting attorney of Ramsey county, Minn., from 1874 to 1878;
      assistant U. S. district attorney from 1870 to 1873; mayor of St.
      Paul from 1883 to 1885.

  =O’Brien, Rev. James J.=, Somerville, Mass.; a son of the late Mayor
      Hugh O’Brien of Boston, Mass.

  =O’Brien, John D.=, Bank of Minnesota Building, St. Paul, Minn.; of
      the law firm Stevens, O’Brien, Cole & Albrecht.

  =O’Brien, Capt. Laurence=, 70 Beach Street, New Haven, Conn.; a
      veteran of the Civil War. He enlisted in the Ninth Connecticut
      Infantry (an Irish regiment), Aug. 30, 1861; assisted Capt.
      Patrick Garvey in organizing Company B, and was commissioned first
      lieutenant of the company. He was made captain of Company D, Oct.
      15, 1862, and participated with his regiment in all the movements
      of the latter. At one period during the war he was provost marshal
      and military judge of the Parish of St. James, Louisiana. He
      became identified with the Fenian movement, and in 1867 went to
      Ireland, like many other gallant officers, in furtherance of the
      cause of Irish freedom. The Croffut-Morris history of Connecticut
      in the Civil War speaks of Captain O’Brien as “a brave and
      efficient officer, and fertile in expedients.”

  =O’Brien, Hon. Morgan, J.= (LL. D.), 42 West 44th Street, New York
      city; a justice of the New York Supreme Court; trustee of the New
      York Public Library.

  =O’Brien, Patrick=, contractor and builder, 399 South Broadway,
      Lawrence, Mass.

  =O’Brien, Thomas=, real estate and insurance, 155 Main Street,
      Pawtucket, R. I.; an alderman of the city of Pawtucket in 1895,
      1896, 1897 and 1898; member of the General Assembly of Rhode
      Island in 1899–1900 and 1902.

  =O’Byrne, M. A.=, 370 West 118th Street, New York city.

  =O’Callaghan, P. J.=, Lawrence, Mass.

  =O’Callaghan, Rev. Denis= (D. D.), rector of St. Augustine’s church,
      South Boston, Mass.

  =O’Connell, J. C.= (M. D)., Medical Board, U. S. Pension office,
      Washington, D. C.; brother of Col. John J. O’Connell of the
      Thirtieth U. S. Infantry.

  =O’Connell, John=, 302 West End Avenue, New York city.

  =O’Connell, John F.=, 306 Broadway, Providence, R. I.

  =O’Connell, P. A.=, vice-president of the Wm. Filene’s Sons Co., dry
      goods, 453–463 Washington Street, Boston, Mass.

  =O’Connor, Edward=, 302 Broadway, New York city.

  =O’Connor, Hon. J. J.=, 414–416 Carroll Street, Elmira, N. Y. (Life
      member of the Society.)

  =O’Doherty, Rev. James=, Haverhill, Mass. (Life member of the
      Society.)

  =O’Doherty, Hon. Matt.=, Louisville, Ky.; a judge of the Circuit
      Court.

  =O’Donnell, Rev. James H.=, Norwalk, Conn.

  =O’Donnell, Hon. John B.=, lawyer, Northampton, Mass.; ex-mayor of
      Northampton.

  =O’Donovan, Jeremiah= (=Rossa=), editor _The United Irishman_, 15
      Vandewater Street, New York city.

  =O’Dwyer, Hon. E. F.=, 37 West 76th Street, New York city; chief
      justice of the City Court of New York.

  =O’Farrell, P. A.=, Waldorf-Astoria, New York city. (Life member of
      the Society.)

  =O’Flaherty, James=, advertising, 22 North William Street, New York
      city.

  =O’Flaherty, John= (M. D.), Hartford, Conn. (died July 31, 1904);
      served during the Civil War as assistant surgeon One Hundred and
      Seventieth Regiment, New York Volunteers (of Corcoran’s Legion);
      was mustered out June 15, 1865; located in Hartford; was a member
      of the State, County and City medical societies, and was elected
      president of the last named on Jan. 4, 1904. He was one of the
      promoters of St. Francis’ Hospital, Hartford, took a great deal of
      interest in its affairs, and had been president of its staff; was
      also a member of the city board of health. Dr. O’Flaherty leaves a
      wife and three daughters,—Miss Mary P. O’Flaherty, teacher of
      Greek in the Holyoke, Mass., High school; Miss Anna P. O’Flaherty,
      a teacher at the New Park Avenue school; and Dr. Ellen P.
      O’Flaherty of Hartford, who had of late assisted her father in his
      practice. Dr. O’Flaherty was twice married, his first wife, who
      died in 1880, having been Miss Hannah Pembroke, a teacher in the
      South School District. In 1886, Dr. O’Flaherty married Mrs. Ellen
      Duggan of Hartford.

  =O’Gorman, Hon. J. A.=, 312 West 54th Street, New York city; a justice
      of the New York Supreme Court.

  =O’Gorman, Thomas A.=, The O’Gorman Co., dry goods, Providence, R. I.

  =O’Hagan, Thomas= (Ph. D.), 151 Mutual Street, Toronto, Canada.

  =O’Keefe, Edmund=, superintendent of buildings, New Bedford, Mass.

  =O’Keefe, John A.=, lawyer, Lynn, Mass.; formerly Principal of the
      Lynn High school.

  =O’Leary, Jeremiah=, 275 Fifty-eighth Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =O’Leary, P. J.=, 161 West 13th Street, New York city.

  =O’Loughlin, Patrick=, lawyer, 23 Court Street, Boston, Mass.

  =O’Malley, Thomas F.=, lawyer, 21 Dane Street, Somerville, Mass.

  =O’Meara, Maurice=, of the Maurice O’Meara Co., paper manufacturers,
      448 Pearl Street, New York city.

  =O’Neil, Hon. Joseph H.=, president of the Federal Trust Co., Boston,
      Mass.; formerly a member of Congress; was later U. S. Treasurer at
      Boston.

  =O’Neil, Rev. John P.=, Peterborough, N. H.

  =O’Neill, Rev. Daniel H.=, 935 Main Street, Worcester, Mass.

  =O’Neill, Rev. D. P.=, Westchester, N. Y.

  =O’Neill, Francis Q.=, Charleston, S. C., of the firm Bernard O’Neill
      & Sons (house founded in 1845); president of the Hibernia Trust
      and Savings Bank, Charleston; president of the Standard Truck
      Package Co.; president of the Riverside Paper Box Factory;
      director, First National Bank; director, Equitable Fire Insurance
      Co.; an alderman of Charleston, and mayor _pro tem._ of the city;
      president of the Charleston Country Club; member of the Board of
      Trustees of the College of Charleston.

  =O’Neill, James L.=, 220 Franklin Street, Elizabeth, N. J.; connected
      with the Elizabeth post-office for the past fifteen years; has
      been president of the Young Men’s Father Mathew T. A. Society, and
      treasurer of St. Patrick’s Alliance, Elizabeth. He was one of the
      prime movers in the projection and completion of a monument to the
      late Mayor Mack of Elizabeth.

  =O’Rourke, Hon. Jeremiah=, of J. O’Rourke & Sons, architects, 756
      Broad Street, Newark, N. J.; U. S. Supervising Architect under
      President Cleveland. (Life member of the Society.)

  =O’Rourke, John F.=, consulting and contracting engineer, 26 Nassau
      Street, New York city.

  =O’Sullivan, Humphrey=, treasurer of the O’Sullivan Rubber Co.,
      Lowell, Mass.

  =O’Sullivan, James=, president of the O’Sullivan Rubber Co., Lowell,
      Mass.

  =O’Sullivan, John=, with the H. B. Claflin Co., Church Street, New
      York city.

  =O’Sullivan, Sylvester J.=, 66 Liberty Street, New York city, manager
      of the New York office of the United States Fidelity and Guaranty
      Co., of Baltimore, Md.

  =Owens, Joseph E.=, of the law firm Ketcham & Owens, 189 Montague
      Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Patterson, Rev. George J.=, rector of St. Vincent’s church, South
      Boston, Mass.

  =Perry, Dr. Charles J.=, World Building, New York city.

  =Phelan, Hon. James D.=, Phelan Building, San Francisco, Cal.;
      recently mayor of San Francisco.

  =Phelan, James J.=, 16 Exchange Place, New York city; president of the
      Traders’ and Travelers’ Accident Co.; treasurer of the King’s
      County Refrigerating Co., Astoria Cordage Co., and the Pontiac
      Building Co.; director in the Stuyvesant Insurance Co. When
      Ferdinand de Lesseps contracted to build the Panama canal, Mr.
      Phelan became treasurer and manager of the American Contracting
      and Dredging Co., in which he was associated with the late Eugene
      Kelly, H. B. Slaven and others. This company contracted for and
      built fifteen miles of the canal. In 1891, Mr. Phelan was
      appointed treasurer of the Department of Docks of the city of New
      York, which office he held for five years.

  =Phelan, John J.=, lawyer, 7 Wall Street, New York city; graduate of
      Manhattan College, and of the Columbia Law School; member of the
      Xavier Alumni Sodality, the N. Y. Catholic Club, and the Manhattan
      Alumni Society.

  =Phelps, H. Warren=, the Phelps Real Estate Agency, 20 East Broad
      Street, and 88 Pugh Avenue, Columbus, O.; member of the Old
      Northwest Genealogical Society, of Columbus.

  =Philbin, Eugene A.=, of the law firm Philbin, Beekman & Menken, 111
      Broadway, New York city.

  =Piggott, Michael=, 1634 Vermont Street, Quincy, Ill.; a veteran of
      the Civil War. He was made second lieutenant of Company F, Western
      Sharpshooters, in 1861, while at Camp Benton, St. Louis, Mo.; was
      promoted first lieutenant, and while at Fort Donaldson, in the
      spring of 1862, was made captain; lost a leg at Resaca, Ga., in
      May, 1864; was subsequently connected with the U. S. Revenue
      Service; messenger in the National House of Representatives,
      Washington, D. C.; was made postmaster of Quincy, Ill., during
      President Grant’s first term, and held the position for over
      sixteen years; was appointed Special Indian Agent by President
      Harrison, and in that, as in every position held, displayed
      eminent ability.

  =Plunkett, Thomas=, 257 Sixth Street, East Liverpool, O.

  =Power, Rev. James W.=, 47 East 129th Street, New York city.

  =Powers, Patrick H.=, president of the Emerson Piano Co., Boylston
      Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Prendergast, W. A.=, 20 Nassau Street, New York city.

  =Quinlan, Daniel J.=, 53 East 127th Street, New York city.

  =Quinlan, Francis J.= (M. D.), 33 West 38th Street, New York city; was
      for a number of years surgeon in the U. S. Indian Service;
      recently president of the New York Celtic Medical Society.

  =Quinlan, Col. James=, 120 Liberty Street, New York city; a veteran of
      the Civil War; served in the Eighty-eighth New York regiment (of
      Meagher’s Irish Brigade); member of the U. S. Medal of Honor
      Legion.

  =Quinn, John=, lawyer, 120 Broadway, New York city.

  =Quinn, W. Johnson=, manager of the Hotel Empire, New York city.

  =Quinton, Gen. William= (U. S. A., retired), care of U. S. War
      Department, Washington, D. C.

  =Regan, John H.=, lawyer, 422 55th Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

  =Regan, W. P.=, architect, Lawrence, Mass.

  =Reilly, Robert J.=, Cedar Street, Bangor, Me.

  =Richardson, Stephen J.=, 1785 Madison Avenue, New York city; editor
      _The Gael_.

  =Roche, James Jeffrey= (LL. D.), editor of _The Pilot_, 211 Tremont
      Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Rooney, John Jerome=, of Rooney & Spence, customs and insurance
      brokers, forwarding agents, 66, 68 and 70 Beaver Street, New York
      city.

  =Rorke, James=, 40 Barclay Street, New York city.

  =Roosevelt, Hon. Theodore=, president of the United States, White
      House, Washington, D. C.

  =Ryan, Charles V.=, Springfield, Mass.

  =Ryan, Christopher S.=, Lexington, Mass.

  =Ryan, James T.=, 68 William Street, New York city.

  =Ryan, John J.=, 158 East 95th Street, New York city.

  =Ryan, Michael=, 377 Broadway, New York city.

  =Ryan, Michael J.=, Waterbury, Conn.

  =Ryan, Most Rev. Patrick J.= (D. D.), Archbishop of Philadelphia, Pa.;
      the Cathedral, Philadelphia.

  =Ryan, Nicholas W.=, 1444 Boston Road, borough of the Bronx, New York
      city.

  =Ryan, Richard=, Rutland, Vt.

  =Ryan, Hon. William=, of Wm. Ryan & Co., grocers, Port Chester, N. Y.

  =Sanders, Col. C. C.=, Gainesville, Ga.; president of the State
      Banking Co. of Gainesville; alternate commissioner to World’s
      Fair, Chicago, Ill., 1893; vice-president for Georgia, American
      Bankers’ Association. Col. Sanders is of Irish and English
      ancestry. On the maternal side, he is descended from Thomas and
      Theodosia M. Smyth who emigrated from Ireland, in 1793, landing in
      Charleston, S. C. They settled in Jones county, Ga. Thomas died
      Nov. 28, 1799. On the paternal side, Colonel Sanders is a
      descendant of Rev. Moses Sanders who emigrated from England, with
      two brothers, John and David, and arrived in Petersburg, Va.,
      1765. They embraced the Patriotic cause in the Revolution and were
      active in operations against the British. Col. Sanders, the
      subject of this sketch, graduated from the Georgia Military
      Institute, in June, 1861; entered the Confederate service; was
      made lieutenant-colonel of the Twenty-fourth regiment of infantry,
      Georgia volunteers, August, 1861; served under General Lee in the
      Peninsular campaign, in the seven days’ battles around Richmond,
      Va., and was among the bravest of the brave; commanded his
      regiment at Malvern Hill and at Marye’s Heights, Fredericksburg,
      where the Twenty-fourth was a part of the Confederate forces that
      received the valorous charges of Meagher’s Irish Brigade. He also
      commanded the regiment at the battles of Chancellorsville and
      Antietam, at which latter conflict he was placed in command of
      Wofford’s Brigade. While in this position he met a bayonet charge
      from the Federals by a counter bayonet charge, and in the
      desperate fighting that ensued, fifty-eight per cent. of Sanders’
      heroic force was swept away. Colonel Sanders also led the
      Twenty-fourth at Cedar Creek, Chickamauga, Knoxville, the
      Wilderness, Spottsylvania Court House, and Sailor’s Creek. On Apr.
      6, 1865, Ewell’s corps, to which Colonel Sanders’ regiment was
      then attached, was captured, and Colonel Sanders was sent as a
      prisoner of war to Washington, D. C. Writing of Meagher’s Irish
      Brigade, Colonel Sanders says: “I was in command of the
      Twenty-fourth Georgia regiment, with other troops, at the foot of
      Marye’s Heights, receiving the five heroic and gallant charges of
      the Irish Brigade, whose prodigies of valor have filled the
      country with admiration. I saw the devoted Irish charge up to our
      breastworks, to be mowed down by a line of Confederate fire that
      no soldiers could withstand. I saw the Irish battalions cut down
      like grain before the reaper, yet the survivors would
      magnificently close up their ranks only to have huge gaps again
      cut through them. When forced back they rallied and came bravely
      on again, only to be riddled with bullets and torn by artillery.
      Their fifth charge was made with greatly decimated ranks that
      slowly recoiled like the waves of a tempestuous sea. When twilight
      descended upon the scene, a spectacle was presented unequaled in
      warfare. At least three fourths of my command was composed of men
      of Irish descent and knew that the gallant dead in our front were
      our kindred of the land beyond the sea. When, one by one, the
      stars came out that night, many tears were shed by Southern
      Confederate eyes for the heroic Federal Irish dead.” During the
      war Colonel Sanders was offered the rank of brigadier-general but
      declined the same.

  =Sasseen, Robert A.=, 50 Pine Street, New York city; insurance
      investments. (Life member of the Society.)

  =Shahan, Very Rev. Thomas J.= (S. T. D., J. U. L.), professor of
      Church History, Catholic University of America, Washington, D. C.

  =Shanahan, Very Rev. Edmund T.= (Ph. D., S. T. D., J. C. L.),
      professor of Dogmatic Theology, Catholic University of America,
      Washington, D. C.

  =Shanley, John F.=, 17 Washington Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Shanley, Thomas J.=, 344 West 87th Street, New York city.

  =Shea, John B.=, 19 Maiden Lane, New York city.

  =Sheedy, B. D.= (M. D.), 10 West 46th Street, New York city.

  =Sheran, Hugh F.=, 46 Woodbine Street, Roxbury (Boston), Mass.

  =Sheridan, Rev. John A.=, 97 South Street, Jamaica Plain (Boston),
      Mass.

  =Sherman, P. Tecumseh=, of the law firm Taft & Sherman, 15 William
      Street, New York city; member of the Union League Club, and of the
      Military Order of the Loyal Legion; son of the late Gen. William
      T. Sherman.

  =Shine, Jerome=, 137 West Clinton Street, Cleveland, O.

  =Shuman, A.=, merchant clothier, 440 Washington Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Slattery, John J.=, president Todd-Donigan Iron Co., Louisville, Ky.

  =Sligo Social Club=, Roxbury (Boston), Mass. (M. J. Mulroy, secretary,
      24 Faxon Street, Roxbury.)

  =Smith, James=, 26 Broadway, New York city.

  =Smith, Rev. James J.=, 88 Central Street, Norwich, Conn.

  =Smith, Joseph=, secretary of the Police Commission, Lowell, Mass.

  =Smith, Dr. Thomas B.=, Wyman’s Exchange, Lowell, Mass.

  =Smith, Thomas F.=, clerk of the City Court, 32 Chambers Street, New
      York city.

  =Smyth, Rev. Thomas M.=, East Liverpool, O.

  =Smyth, Philip A.=, 11 Pine Street, New York city.

  =Smyth, Rev. Hugh P.=, rector of St. Joseph’s church, Roxbury
      (Boston), Mass.

  =Smyth, Rev. Thomas=, Springfield, Mass.

  =Somers, P. E.=, manufacturer, 17 Hermon Street, Worcester, Mass.
      (Life member the Society.)

  =Spellman, John H.=, 109-111 Park Row, New York city.

  =Spillane, J. B.=, managing editor _Music Trade Review_, Metropolitan
      Life Building, 1 Madison Avenue, New York city.

  =Steele, Hon. John H.=, Phenix Building, Minneapolis, Minn.

  =Storen, William J.=, 232 Calhoun Street, Charleston, S. C.

  =Sullivan, James E.= (M. D.), Vice-President-General of the Society,
      Banigan Building, Providence, R. I.

  =Sullivan, James Mark=, lawyer, Exchange Building, New Haven, Conn.

  =Sullivan, John B.=, contractor, New Bedford, Mass.

  =Sullivan, John J.=, 61-63 Faneuil Hall Market, Boston, Mass.; of Doe,
      Sullivan & Co.

  =Sullivan, Dr. M. B.=, Dover, N. H.; formerly a state senator.

  =Sullivan, M. F.= (M. D.), Oak Street, Lawrence, Mass.

  =Sullivan, Patrick F.=, of Sullivan Bros., 68 Pemberton Square,
      Boston, Mass.

  =Sullivan, Hon. Richard=, lawyer, Hemingway Building, Tremont Street,
      Boston, Mass.; an ex-senator of Massachusetts.

  =Sullivan, Roger G.=, cigar manufacturer, 803 Elm Street, Manchester,
      N. H.

  =Sullivan, Dr. T. P.=, 318 South Main Street, Fall River, Mass.

  =Sullivan, Timothy P.=, Concord, N. H.; furnished granite from his New
      Hampshire quarries for the new National Library Building,
      Washington, D. C.

  =Supple, Rev. James N.=, rector of St. Francis de Sales church,
      Charlestown, (Boston), Mass.

  =Sweeney, Rev. Timothy P.=, St. Patrick’s church, Fall River, Mass.

  =Sweeny, William Montgomery=, 120 Franklin Street, Astoria, L. I., N.
      Y.

  =Swords, Joseph F.=, superintendent U. S. Reservation, Sulphur, Indian
      Territory. He is a descendant of Cornet George Swords, one of the
      A. D. 1649 officers in the service of Kings Charles I and Charles
      II in Ireland. Joseph F. Swords is a member of the Sons of the
      American Revolution. He is of the fourth American Generation from
      Francis Dawson Swords, graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, 1750,
      who was exiled from Ireland, 1760, and who served in the Patriot
      Army throughout the War of the Revolution.

  =Tack, Theodore E.=, 52 Broadway, New York city.

  =Teeling, Rt. Rev. Arthur J.=, rector of St. Mary’s church, Lynn,
      Mass.

  =Thompson, Frank=, 1867 Seventh Avenue, New York city.

  =Thompson, Frank V.=, 116 Princeton Street, East Boston, Mass.

  =Thompson, James=, of James Thompson & Bro., Louisville, Ky.

  =Thompson, Robert Ellis= (Ph. D.), president Central High school,
      Philadelphia, Pa.; recently a professor in the University of
      Pennsylvania.

  =Tierney, Dennis H.=, real estate and insurance, 167 Bank Street,
      Waterbury, Conn.

  =Tierney, Edward M.=, Elmira, N. Y.

  =Tierney, Miles=, 317 Riverside Drive, New York city. (Life member of
      the Society.)

  =Toale, Patrick P.=, Toale P. O., Aiken county, S. C.

  =Toland, M. A.=, 148 West Canton Street, Boston, Mass.

  =Toomey, A. J.=, F11 Produce Exchange, New York city.

  =Travers, Ambrose F.=, vice-president of the Travers Brothers Co.,
      cordage, etc., 41 Worth Street, New York city.

  =Travers, Francis C.=, president of the Travers Brothers Co., 41 Worth
      Street, New York city.

  =Travers, Vincent P.=, treasurer of the Travers Brothers Co., 41 Worth
      Street, New York city.

  =Vail, Roger=, associate editor of the _Irish Standard_, Minneapolis,
      Minn.

  =Ver Planck, William Gordon=, 149 Broadway, New York city; of the law
      firm Young, Ver Planck & Prince.

  =Vincent, John=, lawyer, 45 Cedar Street, New York city; was first
      assistant district attorney under the late Hon. John McKeon for
      two years, and on his death was appointed by the court as his
      successor ad interim.

  =Vredenburgh, Watson, Jr.=, civil engineer, 32 Broadway, New York
      city.

  =Waldron, E. M.=, builder, Newark, N. J.

  =Walker, William O’Brien=, 90 Wall Street, New York city; a descendant
      of the Revolutionary O’Briens of Machias, Me.

  =Wallace, Rev. T. H.=, Lewiston, Me.

  =Waller, Hon. Thomas M.=, ex-governor of Connecticut, 15 Wall Street,
      New York city.

  =Walsh, James A.=, Lewiston, Me.; agent Lewiston Bleachery.

  =Walsh, Philip C.=, 260 Washington Street, Newark, N. J.; of Walsh’s
      Sons & Co., dealers in irons and metals.

  =Walsh, Philip C.=, Jr., 260 Washington Street, Newark, N. J.

  =Walsh, P. J.=, 503 Fifth Avenue, New York city.

  =Walsh, Wm. P.=, 247 Water Street, Augusta, Me.

  =Ward, Edward=, Kennebunk, Me.

  =Ward, John T.=, Kennebunk, Me.

  =Ward, Michael J.=, Brookline, Mass.

  =Wilson, Hon. Thomas= (LL. D.), general counsel for the Chicago, St.
      Paul, Minneapolis & Omaha Railway Co., St. Paul, Minn.; was chief
      justice of the Supreme Court of Minnesota, 1864-9; member of the
      Minnesota House of Representatives, 1880; member of the Minnesota
      Senate, 1883; member of Congress, 1887-9.

  =Woods, John J.=, 54 Federal Street, Newburyport, Mass.

  =Wright, Henry=, 584 East 148th Street, New York city.

  =Zabriskie, George A.=, 123 Produce Exchange, New York city.




  GENERAL INFORMATION REGARDING THE AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY.


The Society was organized on January 20, 1897, and now has members in
twenty-seven states, the District of Columbia, two territories and two
foreign countries.

The first president-general was the late Rear-Admiral R. W. Meade, U. S.
N. (retired).

Briefly stated, the object of the organization is to make better known
the Irish chapter in American history.

There are two classes of members in the organization,—Life and Annual.
The life membership fee is $50 (paid once). The fee for annual members
is $5, paid yearly. In the case of new annual members, the initiation
fee, $5, also pays the membership dues for the first year.

The board of government comprises a president-general, a
vice-president-general, a secretary-general, a treasurer-general, a
librarian and archivist, and an executive council. There are also state
vice-presidents.

The Society has already issued several bound volumes and a number of
other publications. These have been distributed to the members and to
public libraries; also to historical organizations and to universities.
Each member of the Society is entitled, free of charge, to a copy of
every publication issued from the time of his admittance. These
publications are of great interest and value, and are more than an
equivalent for the membership fee.

The Society draws no lines of creed or politics. Being an American
organization in spirit and principle, it welcomes to its ranks Americans
of whatever race descent, and of whatever creed, who take an interest in
the objects for which the Society is organized. Membership application
blanks will be furnished on request.

The membership includes many people of prominence, and has been
addressed by many distinguished men. It occupies a position in the front
rank of American historical organizations.




                            A GENERAL INDEX.


 An Introductory Note, 3.

 Chronology of the Society, 7.

 Early Irish Settlers in Virginia, 30.

 Executive Council of the Society, 5, 6.

 First Irish in Illinois, 95.

 Frontispiece.

 General Information Regarding the Society, 176.

 Irish Immigration to the United States since 1790, 80.

 List of Historical Papers and Addresses, 134.

 Membership Roll of the Society, 146.

 Officers of the Society, 5.

 Papers by Members of the Society, 30.

 Presidents-General of the Society, 145.

 Publications of the Society, 139.

 Some Voices from ye Olden Time, 55.

 State Vice-Presidents of the Society, 6.

 The Irish Pioneers of the Connecticut Valley, 43.

 The Irish Vanguard of Rhode Island, 109.




                          AN ANALYTICAL INDEX.


 A British raid on Warren, R. I., 130.

 A brother of the Baron Kinsale settles in Newport, R. I., 127.

 Absurd claims of the imaginative “Scotch Irish” cult, 23.

 Adams, John, is hospitably treated by Irish merchants in Spain, 34.

 A defective “tradition,” 114, 115.

 “A distinguished officer of dragoons,” 36.

 Adjutant-General Sackett of Rhode Island. 17.

 Admiral Lord Nelson’s animosity towards the Americans, 85.

 A Dublin ship bound to Virginia is lost at sea, 67.

 “A few miles southwest of Fort Hamilton, N. Y.,” 71.

 “A Forecast of Irish Influence on American Life,” 26.

 “After that it went through Chantilly, South Mountain and Antietam,”
    27.

 “Ah, the Baron of Kinsale is dead!” 127.

 Alarm, The Lexington, 50, 53.

 Albany, N. Y., Early Irish in old, 138.

 Albany, N. Y., Irish in an early military organization of, 64.

 A letter from Dr. Lucas of Ireland read at a town meeting in Boston,
    68.

 Alexander, Sarah, The romance of, 137.

 “A liberal mixture of Irish blood,” 31.

 Alien and sedition laws, 89, 90.

 “Allan Mullins, surgeon, son of Dr. Alexander Mullins of Galway,
    Ireland,” 58.

 Allen, Ethan, kindness of people of Cork to, 34.

 Alphabetical list of those who have contributed papers to the Society,
    or who have made addresses under its auspices, 141.

 Ambassador Baron Speck von Sternberg, Letter to the Society from, 24.

 Ambassador Cambon, 15, 19.

 Ambassador Jusserand writes to the Society, 24.

 American Academy of Social and Political Science, 157.

 American colonies, Irish teachers in the, 71.

 American Continental army, 23, 36, 52.

 American-Irish Historical Society, Chronology of the, 7.

 American-Irish Historical Society, General information regarding the,
    176.

 American-Irish Historical Society, Membership roll of the, 146.

 American-Irish Historical Society, Officers of the, 5.

 American-Irish Historical Society, Papers by members of the, 30.

 American-Irish Historical Society, Presidents-General of the, 145.

 American-Irish Historical Society’s papers and addresses, 134.

 American-Irish Historical Society’s publications, 139.

 American Oriental Society, 160.

 American Revolution, Irish Rhode Islanders in the, 22.

 American Revolution, Sons of the, 160, 174.

 Americans take possession of Boston, 64.

 Amory’s _Transfer of Erin_, 122.

 A native of Dublin, Ireland, the first settler of Ashfield, Mass., 49.

 “A native of Ireland who had become a wealthy planter in Virginia,” 53.

 “Ancient County of Albany, N. Y.,” 58-59.

 Ancient patrimony of the Maguires, 126.

 Andrew, Governor, of Massachusetts, 27.

 Andrews, E. Benj., 20.

 An early Irish settler on Cape Cod, Mass., 159.

 “Anglo-Saxon” fallacy, The, 22.

 An “honest and industrious set of people,” 63.

 An Introductory Note, 3.

 An Irish colony of sixteen families, 71.

 An Irish company from Massachusetts in the war with Mexico, 16.

 An Irish immigration took place in 1643 “that far out-numbered the
    Plymouth colony in Massachusetts,” 51.

 An Irish lord exiled to the continent, 124.

 “An Irishman and one of the oldest settlers in this vicinity,” 52.

 “An Irishman from Philadelphia,” William Nugel, 75.

 “An Irishman who hated England with a ten-horse power,” 105.

 An Irish member of the party of “Long Hunters,” 101.

 An Irish Protestant clergyman is hanged at his own door, 90.

 An Irish Quaker, Samuel Neale, visits America, 57.

 _Annals of the Four Masters_, 116.

 _Annals of Trinity Church_, Newport, R. I., 129.

 Anniversary celebration by the Society of the surrender of Cornwallis,
    25.

 Anniversary of the evacuation of Valley Forge, 23.

 Annual meetings and dinners of the Society, 7, 12, 22, 25.

 Antiquarian research, Irish, 17.

 Antiquaries of Ireland, Royal Society of, 148.

 Antietam, Battle of, 10, 27.

 Antrim, Ireland, 33, 71, 110, 126.

 A “plantation in the Narragansett and Niantick countries,” 117.

 Archælogical Society of America, 160.

 Archdiocese of Boston, Mass., Roman Catholic, 147.

 Archdiocese of Philadelphia, Pa., Roman Catholic, 171.

 A real estate deed in 1665 witnessed by Cornelius Conner, 56.

 A Rhode Islander becomes an Irish baron, 127.

 Armagh, Ireland, 83.

 Army and Navy Club of Connecticut, 158.

 Army at Valley Forge, The, 65.

 Army of the Potomac, 28.

 Arnold’s expedition to Quebec, 70.

 Arnold’s _Narragansett Historical Register_, 120.

 Arnold, Susannah, weds John Malavery, 117.

 Arnold’s _Vital Record of Rhode Island_, 131.

 Arrival at Salem, Mass., in 1795, of a brig from Ireland with 89
    emigrants, 63.

 Arrival of the _Charlotte_, in 1774, from Waterford, Ireland, with 100
    passengers, 62.

 Arundel, William, “an Irishman from Canada,” 102.

 A ship from Ireland, with 428 passengers, arrives in 1798 at Norfolk,
    Va., 89.

 “As soldiers in the Indian wars,” 109.

 Assault on Santiago de Cuba, Capt. John Drum killed in the, 22.

 “A thorough and most impudent falsehood,” 114.

 “At length it was proposed that a colony of Irish might be sent over to
    check the growth of this countrey,” 77.

 Attack on Marye’s Heights at Fredericksburg, The, 27, 149, 171, 172.

 Attempt by England to divert emigration from the United States, 91.

 Austin’s _Genealogical Dictionary of Rhode Island_, 110.

 A vessel sent to Ireland from the Massachusetts Bay Colony for
    provisions, 78.

 A vessel with Irish passengers, bound for Virginia, touches at Boston,
    76.

 A “useful and prominent citizen for 60 years,” 62.

 A voyage from Belfast, Ire., to Wilmington, Del., 88.

 “A young lady named Pine, the daughter of an Irish gentleman,” 56, 57.


 Bacon’s rebellion, 39.

 Baker, Miss Virginia, of Warren, R. I., 70, 137.

 Ballard, Rachel, marries Cornelius Merry, an Irishman, 70.

 Bandon, Ireland, 123.

 Bantry, Ireland, 22, 118.

 Barbadoes, Irish in, 32, 67, 70.

 Barrett, David L., Death of, 14.

 Barry, Capt. John B., commands an Irish company in the war with Mexico,
    16.

 Barry, Commodore John, 138.

 Barry, Hon. P. T., A paper by, 95.

 Battery Drum, 22.

 Battery Kearny, 23.

 Battery Sullivan, 23.

 Battle flags of the Irish Brigade, 28.

 Battle monument at Lexington, Mass., The Society places wreaths on the,
    9, 14.

 Battle near Fort George, 55.

 Battle of Antietam, 10, 27, 171.

 Battle of Blue Licks, 104.

 Battle of Brandywine, 62.

 Battle of Bull Run, 10, 27, 34.

 Battle of Bull Run, Second, 149.

 Battle of Bunker Hill, 53, 136.

 Battle of Chancellorsville, 35, 171.

 Battle of Chantilly, 27.

 Battle of Clontarf, 113.

 Battle of Fair Oaks, 10.

 Battle of Fredericksburg, 10, 27, 28.

 Battle of Gaines’ Mill, 10.

 Battle of Gettysburg, 10, 14, 149, 156.

 Battle of Glendale, 10.

 Battle of Guilford Court House, 35.

 Battle of Lexington, Concord and Cambridge, Celebrations by the Society
    of the anniversary of the, 9, 14.

 Battle of Long Island, 100.

 Battle of Malvern Hill, 10, 149, 171.

 Battle of Maumee Rapids, 104.

 Battle of Monmouth, 100.

 Battle of New Orleans, 91, 137.

 Battle of Peach Orchard, 10, 150.

 Battle of Point Pleasant, 37.

 Battle of Princeton, 53, 59.

 Battle of Queenstown Heights, 90.

 Battle of Resaca, 170.

 Battle of Rhode Island, Celebration by the Society of the anniversary
    of the, 11, 17, 18, 19, 20.

 Battle of Saratoga, 53.

 Battle of Savage’s Station, 10.

 Battle of South Mountain, 27.

 Battle of the Thames, 90.

 Battle of Tippecanoe, 39, 100.

 Battle of Trenton, 53.

 Battle of White Oak Swamp, 10.

 Baxter, James Phinney, 20.

 Belfast, Ire., 63, 88.

 Belfast, Ire., to Wilmington, Del., Incidents of a voyage from, 88.

 Bennett, Hon. Charles P., Secretary of State of Rhode Island, 17.

 Berkeley, George, “the Kilkenny scholar,” 74.

 Bequest by Sir William Johnson to Patrick Daly, 63.

 Bethell, Jarvice, “late of Ireland,” locates at Boston (in 1714), 68.

 Black Horse Inn, The, 59, 107.

 Blue Licks, Battle of, 104.

 Bodge’s _Soldiers in King Phillip’s War_, 131.

 Boies family, The, of Blandford, Mass., 47.

 Boies, Hon. Patrick, of Hampden county, Mass., 47.

 Boies, James, writes in 1749-’50, from Cork, Ire., to Samuel Waldo of
    Boston, Mass., 62.

 Boies, Patrick “came up from Hartford,” 47.

 “Bold and hardy actions in ye Indian war,” 76.

 Boone, Daniel, 39.

 Boston _Globe_, 13, 20, 158.

 Boston _Herald_, editorial in the, 9.

 Boston Massacre, The, 68.

 Boston, Mass., Extracts from the Records of, 66, 67, 68, 75.

 Boston, Mass., Supplies brought from Ireland to, 78.

 Boston, Mass., The ship _Lime_ arrives from Ireland at (in 1738), 78.

 Boston _News Letter_, 72, 76.

 Boston _Transcript_, 16, 76.

 Boston University, 7.

 “Bound from Ireland to Philadelphia,” 68.

 Boyd, Andrew, clerk of the company of Kentish Guards, 127.

 Boyds of Rhode Island, Early, 126, 127.

 Boyd, Sarah (Moore), 126.

 Boyle, Mayor, of Newport, R. I., 16, 147.

 Brady, Thomas, Exploits by, 102.

 Brandon, Edward J., Mention of paper by, 134.

 Brandywine, Battle of, 62.

 Breed, Samuel, an immigrant from Ireland, 63.

 Brennan, Hon. James F., Mention of paper by, 135.

 Brennan, Rev. Edward J., is appointed a chaplain in the U. S. navy, 12.

 Brenton, Ex-Governor, 114.

 Brenton, Sarah, 114.

 “Bridget, daughter of James and Bridget Cary,” 60.

 Brig _Eliza_ arrives at Portland, Me., from Ireland, 63.

 Bristol, R. I., Baptisms at, 60.

 British armed vessel _Gaspee_ destroyed, 69.

 British army at Yorktown, Surrender of the, 25.

 British evacuate Boston, 64.

 Brown University, 11, 19, 135, 144, 166.

 Bryant, William Cullen, 45.

 Buchanan, President James, 75.

 “Built the first grist mill,” John Ford, 46.

 Bulkeley, Hon. Morgan G., 23.

 Bull, Congressman, of Rhode Island, 11, 20.

 Bull Run, Battle of, 10, 27, 34.

 Bunker Hill, Battle of, 53, 136.

 Bunker Hill Monument Association, 10, 147.

 Burk, John Daly, 34.

 Burke, Edmund, Death of (Milwaukee, Wis.), 23.

 Burke, Governor of North Carolina, 59, 74.

 Burke, Major John, 46.

 Burns, Thomas, “and Bridget, his wife,” 31.

 “Burn, waste, spoil, consume, destroy, and demolish,” Lord Ormund is
    ordered to, 115.

 Butler, Abigail, of New London, Conn., 58.

 Butler, Thomas, settled in Kittery, Me., (before 1695), 67.


 Caldwell, Rev. James, a patriot of the Revolution, 136.

 California, Irish Pioneers of, 137.

 Callahan, Dorothy, of Barbadoes, 70.

 Cambon, Jules, French Ambassador, 15, 19.

 “Came from Kinsale in Cork,” 33.

 Campbell, Col. John, “an Irishman by birth,” 101.

 Canada, Invasion of, 77.

 Canonicus, an Indian sachem, 113.

 Cape Ann, Mass., Irish survivors of a shipwreck brought to, 71.

 Cape Cod, Mass., Charles Clinton and friends are landed there
    “inadvertently or by design,” 71.

 Cape Breton expedition, 66.

 Capen, President, of Tufts College, 7.

 Capitulation, in 1763, of Quebec, 96.

 Captains of Emigrant ships, Many unscrupulous, 88.

 Capt. Hugg’s Western Company of Artillery, 65.

 Capt. Marsh’s Troop of Light Horse, 65

 Capture of Fort William Henry, 53.

 Capture of Ticonderoga, 69, 70.

 Carey, Mathew, 89, 90.

 Carey, Rev. Patrick P., of New York, nominated by President Roosevelt
    to be a chaplain in the army, 14.

 Cargill, Hugh, a friend of liberty, 136.

 Carleton, Sir Guy, 96.

 Carnsore Point, 110

 Carrickfergus, Ireland, 115.

 Carroll, Bishop, 86.

 Carroll, Hon. John Lee, 7.

 Carroll, Michael, sells land in Hartford, Conn, (in 1728), 53.

 Casey, Col. William, a native of Virginia, 39.

 Casey, John, a participant in King Philip’s war (1675-’76), 61.

 Casey, Thomas, a Rhode Island settler, 114, 115, 116.

 _Catholic Church in Colonial Days, The_, 59.

 Catholic religious confraternities in St. Augustine, Florida (in 1674),
    59.

 “Catholics, Presbyterians, Quakers and Episcopalians were united like a
    band of brothers,” 72.

 Catholic Summer School (Cliff Haven), 146, 156.

 _Catholic Transcript_, Hartford, Conn., 70.

 Catholic University of America, 7, 141, 153.

 Celebration at the Narragansett hotel, Providence, R. I., by the
    society, 17, 18, 19, 20.

 Celtic-American Publishing Co., 146.

 Celtic Medical Society, of New York, 146, 170.

 _Centipede_, The privateer, 67.

 Chadwick, Patience, weds Edward Kenney at Newport, R. I., 131.

 Chamberlain, Governor, of Connecticut, 23.

 Chancellorsville, Battle of, 35, 171.

 Chantilly, Battle of, 27.

 Chapin, Henry, in 1684 sells land to John Riley, 45.

 Chapman, Elizabeth, of New London, Conn., 61.

 Charitable Irish Society, Boston, Mass., 57, 166.

 Charleston, S. C., Sunday _News_, 20.

 Cherokee nation, The, 37.

 Chester, Mass., settled almost entirely by Irish, 48.

 Chevalier Macarty, an officer in the French service, 95.

 Chevalier Rocheblave, 99.

 _Chicago Citizen_, The, 146, 154.

 _Chicago Eagle_, 152.

 Chronology of the Society, 7.

 Cincinnati, Society of the, 18, 60, 137, 166.

 Clancarthy, 123, 124.

 Clan O’Brien, The, 138.

 “Clark affiliated very closely with the Irish,” 99.

 Clarke, Joseph I. C., Mention of address by, 138.

 Clark, Frances Eleanor, 100.

 Clark, George Rogers, 99, 100, 101, 102, 104, 107.

 Clark University, 7, 142.

 Clary, John, “of Newcastle, province of New Hampshire,” 149.

 Clary Family Reunion, The, 149.

 Clifford, Bridget, comes from Ireland, 1635, in the _Primrose_, 51.

 Clinton, George, governor of New York, 71.

 Clonakilty, Ireland, 124.

 Clontarf, Battle of, 113.

 Cloyne, Ireland, 74.

 Cochran, James, an Irish boy, escapes from the Indians, 76.

 Coddington, William, of Rhode Island, 109.

 Codmans, The, descended from William Cod, who came from Ireland, 53.

 Coffey, John J., Letter from, 27.

 Coffey, Michael J., a color sergeant of the Twenty-eighth
    Massachusetts, 27.

 Coleraine, Ireland, 58, 65, 70.

 _Collections of the Georgia Historical Society_, 58.

 Collins, Mayor, of Boston, Mass., 12, 13, 149.

 “Color sergeant of this green flag,” 27.

 Colonial Wars, Society of, 147, 160.

 Colorado state library, 24.

 Colt, Hon. LeBaron B., 20.

 Colony of Connecticut, First regiment of the, 55.

 Columbia College, An Irishman professor at, 90.

 Conanicut, Michael Kelly of the island of, 112, 113, 114.

 Condon, Edward O’Meagher, Paper by, 138.

 Congratulations between the American-Irish Historical Society and the
    Massachusetts Society of the Sons of the Revolution, 9.

 Congressman Henry F. Naphen presides at a celebration by the Society,
    9.

 Congressman Melville Bull, of Rhode Island, writes to the Society, 11.

 Congressman Sperry of Connecticut, 23, 24.

 Congressional Library, The, 28.

 Connaught, Ireland, 113, 116, 124.

 Connecticut, Army and Navy Club of, 158.

 _Connecticut Gazette_, 68.

 Connecticut river, Keeney’s ferry over the, 64, 65.

 Connecticut Valley Historical Society, 157.

 Connecticut valley, Irish pioneers of the, 43, 138.

 Connolly, James, Mention of paper by, 146.

 Connolly, Thomas, “a fifer in the regiment of Col. George Rogers
    Clark,” 135.

 Connor, Philip, of Virginia, 39.

 Continental army, 23, 36, 52.

 Continental Congress, 66, 69, 74, 96.

 Conquest of the Northwest, 100.

 Corcoran, Hon. John W., Death of, 29.

 Corcoran’s Irish Legion, 17, 167.

 Cork, Ireland, 33, 34, 51, 52, 57, 62, 64, 67, 72, 73, 75, 76, 115,
    122, 123, 124, 125.

 “Cornelius, the Irishman,” 52.

 Cornwallis, Surrender of, at Yorktown, 25, 100.

 Corr, Bernard, Mention of paper by, 134.

 _Cosmopolitan_ Magazine, The, 7.

 _Courier-Journal_, Louisville, 154.

 Crane, Governor, of Massachusetts, 19.

 Crimmins, Hon. John D., volume by, 137.

 Croghan, George, 96, 97, 99, 100.

 Crowley, Death of Hon. Jeremiah (Lowell, Mass.), 11.

 Crowninshield, Sally, of Salem, Mass., 65.

 Crown Point, Expedition against, 76.

 _Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland_, Prendergast’s, 115.

 Cromwell’s atrocious regime in Ireland, 109.

 Cruelties of Lord Broghill in Ireland, 115.

 Cruelties of Sir Charles Coote in Ireland, 115.

 Cummins, Thomas J., Mention of paper by, 136.

 Curry, James, “the noble-hearted,” 103.

 Curtis’ _Life of James Buchanan_, 74.

 Cusack’s _History of the City and County of Cork_, 122.

 _Cygnet_, John Sullivan, purser of the, 61.


 Dailey, John, an early Rhode Island settler, 116.

 Dalrymple, James and Sarah, immigrants from Ireland, 63.

 Danaher, Hon. Franklin M., Mention of paper by, 138.

 “Darby ye Son of Darby and Elizabeth Mallonee,” 67.

 “Dark and Bloody ground,” The, 39.

 Dartmouth College, 161.

 Daughters of the American Revolution, 36.

 Daviess, Col. Joseph M., “who fell at Tippecanoe,” 39.

 Deane’s _History of Scituate_, Mass., 60, 71.

 Decatur, Stephen, 56, 57.

 Declaration of Independence, The, 49.

 Declaration of Lord Gosford and thirty magistrates, 83.

 DeCourcy, Thomas, a native of Newport, R. I., becomes an Irish baron,
    127, 128.

 Dedication of the Rochambeau monument, at Washington, D. C., 15.

 Defection in a British regiment, 87.

 Defenders of Hickey’s Fort, 33.

 Derry, Ireland, 74.

 “Descended from old Daniel Cooley from Ireland,” 48.

 “Descendants of those early Irish settlers,” 48.

 Deserted Irish emigrants rescued by an American vessel, 88.

 “Despatched to Boston with a coach and four,” 71.

 Destriche, Father John, visits Irish Catholics in St. Kitts, 125, 126.

 Devereaux, James, of Salem, Mass., 65.

 Dexter, Richard, a pioneer of Boston, Mass., 137.

 _Diary of Rev. Ezra Stiles_, 62, 69.

 Dillons, The, of Newport, R. I., 129.

 Diocese of Duluth, Minn., Roman Catholic, 163.

 Diocese of Great Falls, Mont., Roman Catholic, 160.

 Diocese of Los Angeles, Cal., Roman Catholic, 149.

 Diocese of Sioux City, Ia., Roman Catholic, 155.

 Diocese of Springfield, Mass., Roman Catholic, 157.

 Diocese of Wilmington, Del., Roman Catholic, 164.

 “Direful Swamp fight,” 73.

 Dobbs, Gov. Arthur, of North Carolina, 60.

 Doherty, Rev. Francis B., of California, nominated by President
    Roosevelt to be a chaplain in the army, 14.

 _Dominicana_, San Francisco, Cal., 25.

 Donahoe, Patrick, of Boston, 27.

 Donegal, Ireland, 75.

 Dongan, Gov. Thomas, 62, 137.

 Donnelly, Hon. Ignatius, 7.

 Donohoe, Col. Michael T., of the Tenth New Hampshire, 42.

 Donohoe, Major Thomas, of the Revolution, 60.

 Dorothy Callahan, of Barbadoes, 70.

 Down, Ireland, 90.

 Doyle, Rev. A. P., Mention of paper by, 7.

 Drake’s _American Biography_, 66.

 Drake’s _Boston_, 78.

 Drake’s _French and Indian War_, 66, 69.

 Drake’s _Town of Roxbury, Mass._, 65, 72.

 Driskell, Mary, of Barbadoes, 70.

 Drum, Capt. John, killed, 22.

 “Driven by foul weather upon the coast of Ireland,” 109, 110.

 Dublin, Ireland, 49, 51, 53, 57, 61, 66, 67, 68, 71, 74, 109, 110, 129,
    174.

 Dunlap, Robert, an immigrant from Ireland (in 1736), 71.

 Dunleary, Ireland, 88.


 Eames, Gilbert, dies at Newport, R. I., 129.

 Early Boyds of Rhode Island, 126, 127.

 Early Immigration from Ireland to New England, 109.

 Early Irish settlers in Virginia, 30.

 Early Larkins of Rhode Island, 110, 111.

 Early Maguires of Rhode Island, 126.

 Early records of Springfield, Mass., 45.

 Early Rileys in Connecticut, 51.

 East Greenwich, R. I., Charles MacCarthy a founder of, 57, 117, 118,
    119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126.

 Eaton’s _Annals of Warren, Me._, 73.

 Eighth South Carolina regiment, 34.

 Elder, Samuel and Robert, come from Ireland (about 1730), 55.

 Ellis, Richard, a native of Ireland, the first settler of Ashfield,
    Mass., 49.

 Emmet, Robert, Search for the grave of, 22.

 Emmet, Thomas Addis, attorney-general of New York state, 90.

 Emmet, Thomas Addis (M.D., LL.D), New work by, 25.

 Emmet, Thomas Addis, Mention of paper by, 135.

 England attempts to divert emigration from the United States, 91.

 “England’s failure in Ireland,” 9.

 English are defeated at New Orleans, 91.

 English, Hon. Thomas Dunn, Death of (Newark, N. J.), 14.

 English penal laws in Ireland, 82, 83, 84, 86.

 English policy of extermination, 109.

 Enniskillen, Ireland, 126.

 _Essentials of American History_, Thomas B. Lawler’s, 16.

 _Essex Antiquarian, The_, 56.

 Excursion of the Society to Washington, D. C., 15.

 Executive Council of the Society, 5, 6.

 “Ever green isle,” The, 44.

 “Even worse than being called ‘Scotch-Irish,’” 44.


 Fair Oaks, Battle of, 10.

 “Falls Fight,” The, 46.

 Faneuil Hall, Celebration in, 11.

 Farmer’s _Genealogical Register_, 57, 59, 73.

 Farrelly, Patrick, Death of (New York), 26.

 Faunce, President, of Brown University, 11, 19.

 Fawcett, Thomas, Irish Quaker, American pioneer, 137.

 Fermanagh, Ireland, 126.

 Fellowship Club, The, 59.

 Felt’s _Annals of Salem, Mass._, 56, 57, 62, 63, 67.

 Fenian movement, The, 167.

 Flatley, Death of Patrick J. (Boston, Mass.), 11.

 Flatley, Rev. John, Death of (Cambridge, Mass.), 22.

 Field-day of the Society at New Haven, Conn., 23, 24.

 Field, Richard, of Newport, R. I., 129.

 First Regiment, Massachusetts Volunteers, in the war with Mexico, 16.

 First Regiment of the Pennsylvania line, 61.

 First settlers of Granville, Mass., almost all from Ireland, 48.

 Fitzgerald, Capt. John, 36.

 Fitzgerald, Elizabeth, daughter of the Earl of Kildare, 123.

 Fitzgerald, Miss Margaret A., Mention of paper by, 137.

 Fitzgerald, Richard, “a veteran Latin schoolmaster,” 71.

 Fitzpatrick, Edward, Papers by, 134, 135.

 Fitzsimons, Hon. James M., Death (New York), 26.

 Foreign Wars, Military Order of, 147.

 Forfeiting proprietors in Ireland, 124.

 Fort Amory, 165.

 Fort Cahokia, 96.

 Fort Chartres, 95, 96, 97.

 Fort Foster, 165.

 Fort Gage, 103.

 Fort Miami, 97.

 Fort Parke, 165.

 Fort Pitt, 96, 97.

 Fort Pulaski, 155.

 Fort St. Joseph, 102.

 Fort Stephenson, 100.

 Fort Ticonderoga, The Ruins of, 16.

 Fort William and Mary, 134.

 Fort William Henry, Capture of, 53.

 Fourth Virginia regiment, 100.

 Francis V. Mott (Newport, R. I.), 20.

 Fredericksburg, Battle of, 10, 27, 28.

 French Ambassador Cambon, 15,19.

 French Ambassador Jusserand, 24.

 French and Indian wars, 54.

 French colonists on the St. Lawrence, 84.

 French Embassy, Washington, D. C., The Society attends a reception at
    the, 15.

 French Legion of Honor, 155.

 Frelinghuysen’s Eastern Company of Artillery, 59.

 Friendly Sons of St. Patrick, New York, 72.

 Friendly Sons of St. Patrick, Philadelphia, 72.

 “From Cork in Ireland,” 76.

 “From Dublin, in the brig _Darby_,” 68.

 “From early colonial days the Irish have been one of the great factors
    in our growth as a nation,” 24.

 “From the days of Sullivan in the Revolutionary War to those of
    Sheridan in the Civil War,” 24.

 Frothingham’s _Charlestown_, Mass., 78.

 “Funds were collected and arms promised,” 89.


 Gaines’ Mill, Battle of, 10.

 Galway, Ireland, 35, 56, 58, 78, 109, 110, 118.

 Gardiner, Asa Bird, addresses the Society, 18, 137.

 Gargan, Hon. Thomas J., Papers and addresses by, 135, 136.

 Garret and Miles Riley who came from Ireland in 1634, 51.

 Garretson, Mayor, welcomes the Society to Newport, R. I., 11.

 Garrison, Mary, weds Timothy Murphy, 69.

 _Gaspee_, Destruction of the, 69.

 _Genealogies and Estates of Charlestown, Mass._, Wyman’s, 57, 58, 59,
    62.

 _Gen. John Sullivan and the Battle of Rhode Island_, 16.

 Geoghegan, Stephen J., Death of (New York), 24.

 Georgia Historical Society, 58.

 German Ambassador Baron Speck von Sternberg, 24.

 Gettysburg, Battle of, 10, 14, 149, 156.

 Ghent, Treaty of, 91.

 Gibault, Father, 99.

 Gibbs, Capt. Daniel, brings 381 passengers from Ireland in 1737, in the
    ship _Sagamore_, 67.

 Glendale, Battle of, 10.

 Gookin, Daniel, comes from Ireland (about 1621), 67.

 Governor Andrew of Massachusetts, 27.

 Governor Arthur Dobbs of North Carolina, 60.

 Governor Burke of North Carolina, 59, 74.

 Governor Chamberlain of Connecticut, 23.

 Governor Crane of Massachusetts, 19.

 Governor Gregory of Rhode Island, 11.

 Governor Jefferson of Virginia, 34.

 Governor John Winthrop of the Massachusetts Bay Colony, 78.

 Governor Jordan of New Hampshire, 19.

 Governor Kimball of Rhode Island, 17.

 Governor Thomas Dongan of New York, 62.

 Grace (O’Dea) Riley, 51.

 Granary Burial Ground, Boston, Inscriptions from the, 66.

 Grand Army of the Republic, 156, 161.

 Grant of land in 1663 to Cornelius Merry, an Irishman, 70.

 _Granite Monthly_, The, Concord, N. H., Article in, 23.

 Grannon, Ky., The town of, 8.

 Grant of land to Cornelius, “the Irishman,” 52.

 Grattan, Henry, the Irish orator, 130.

 Grattan, Mrs. Lucia C., widow of Colonel Grattan, 130.

 Greaton, Gen. John, of the Revolution, 76, 77.

 Great Swamp fight, 61.

 Greene, Christopher, of Warwick, R. I., 127.

 Greene, Edward Aborn, 19.

 Gregory, Governor, of Rhode Island, 11.

 Greyhound Tavern, The, 77.

 Griffin, Martin, I. J., 74, 157.

 Griswold, Hon. Edward, 24.

 Guilford Court House, Battle of, 35.


 Hall, Edward A., Springfield, Mass., Paper by, 43.

 Hall, G. Stanley, Address by, 7, 136.

 Hall of Records, New York, 8.

 Hamilton, David, an Irish soldier of the Revolution, 52, 135.

 Harkins, Rt. Rev. Matthew (D. D.), Providence, R. I., 17.

 Harper, President, of the University of Chicago, 7.

 Harvard College, 142.

 Harvey, General, an Irish commander, 90.

 Heath’s regiment, 76.

 Hefernan, William, an early Rhode Islander, 112.

 Heffernan family, The Stem of the, 112.

 Henry, John J., “was with Arnold’s expedition to Quebec,” 70.

 Henry, Patrick, 99, 102.

 Henry, William, from Ireland, establishes a manufactory of arms in
    Pennsylvania, 65.

 “He was an Irishman and had been a member of the parliament of that
    country,” 59.

 Hibernian Institute, New York, 21.

 Hibernia, Regiment of, 113.

 Hickey’s Fort, Defenders of, 33.

 Higgins, Cornelius, buys land in Rhode Island (in 1682), 60.

 Higgins, Owen, an early resident of Newport, R. I., 117.

 Hillhouse, Rev. James, an Irish settler in Connecticut, 69.

 Hillhouse, William, an officer in the Revolution, 69.

 “His father, an Irishman, had been a clothier in Dublin,” 66.

 _History of Springfield, Vt._, 62.

 _History of the City and County of Cork_, Cusack’s, 122.

 _History of the Ninth Regiment, Connecticut Volunteer Infantry_, 24.

 Hoar, U. S. Senator George F., 19.

 Hogan, Very Rev. Abbe John Baptist, Death of, 11.

 Holden, Susannah, weds Lawrence Carroll at Newport, R. I., 131.

 Holland’s _History of Western Massachusetts_, 48.

 Hooper, Elizabeth, weds John Mulholland at Newport, R. I., 130.

 Hopkins, William, Death of, 20.

 Hotel Brunswick, Boston, Dinner of the Society at, 9.

 Hotel Manhattan, New York city, Events of the Society at, 12, 15, 22,
    25.

 Hotten’s _Lists_, 31, 32, 42, 67, 70.

 “How History is Taught in Secular Universities,” 21.

 Humphries, Edward, “from Ireland,” 60.

 Hurley, Hon. John F., ex-mayor of Salem, Mass., 24.

 Hutchinson, Selectman, of Lexington, Mass., welcomes the Society, 14.

 Hyde’s _Literary History of Ireland_, 122.


 Illinois, The first Irish in, 95.

 Immigrants arrive at Portland, Me., from Ireland, 63.

 “Inasmuch as I am myself of part Irish blood,” 24.

 Indians massacre Virginia settlers, 31.

 Infamous mandate issued to Lord Ormund, 115.

 Intentions of marriage posted up “at the meeting-house door,” 64.

 Interesting reminiscences of Newport, R. I., 128, 129.

 Interstate Commerce Commission, 143.

 Invasion of Canada, 77.

 Irlanda, Regiment of, 113.

 Ireland, A letter from Dr. Lucas of, read at a town meeting in Boston,
    68.

 Ireland, An emigrant ship from, is stopped by English frigates, 88.

 Ireland, Bridget, John and Oliver Glifford come from (in 1635), 51.

 Ireland, Cromwell’s atrocious regime in, 109.

 Ireland, Cruelties of Lord Broghill in, 115.

 Ireland, Cruelties of Sir Charles Coote in, 115.

 Ireland, Daniel Gookin comes from (in 1621-22), 67.

 Ireland, Deserted emigrants from, rescued by a passing American vessel,
    88.

 Ireland, Emigrants from, drowned, 67, 70.

 Ireland, First settlers of Granville, Mass., almost all from, 48.

 Ireland, Forfeiting proprietors in, 124.

 _Ireland from the Restoration to the Revolution_, Prendergast’s, 122.

 Ireland, Garret and Miles Riley come from (in 1634), 51.

 Ireland, Harsh treatment shown many emigrants from, 88.

 Ireland, Heavy emigration from, to France, 82.

 Ireland in New York, 137.

 Ireland, Large numbers of people leave, for the United States between
    1790 and 1812, 82.

 Ireland makes a determined effort to shake off English tyranny, 84.

 Ireland, Many estimates regarding direct immigration from, are far too
    low, 88.

 Ireland, Massachusetts towns called after places in, 47.

 Ireland, Over 60,000 people transported from (between 1652 and 1658),
    84.

 “Ireland parish,” 45.

 Ireland, Persecuted Irish leave, for Scotland, 83.

 Ireland, Persons in, meet to confer about their voyage to New England,
    110.

 Ireland, Philip and Mary Connor come from Cork (in 1634), 51.

 Ireland, Presbyterians in, excluded from power and position, 83.

 Ireland, Robert Farrell comes from (in 1720), 52.

 Ireland, Savage fury of English soldiery in, 115.

 Ireland, Ships from, greatly crowded, 88.

 Ireland, Supplies brought to Boston from, 78.

 Ireland, Supplies from, for the Massachusetts Bay Colony, 78.

 Ireland, The Bacons from, 134.

 Ireland, The ship _Lime_ arrives at Boston in 1738 from, 78.

 Ireland, Towns in western Massachusetts settled almost entirely by
    people from, 47.

 _Ireland Under English Rule—A Plea for the Plaintiff_, 25.

 Irish Academy, Royal, 148, 150.

 Irish-American memorials, Loan collection of, 26, 27, 28.

 Irish antiquarian research, 17.

 Irish Brigade, Meagher’s, 10, 27, 149, 170, 171, 172.

 Irish Brigade Association, 27, 28.

 Irish Catholics being refused permission to land in Virginia take
    possession of Monserrat, 125.

 Irish Catholics are falsely accused of a massacre, 114.

 Irish Catholics in St. Kitts visited by Father John Destriche, 123,
    126.

 “Irish Charity,” The, 62.

 Irish colony, An, settles Greenwich, Mass., 45.

 Irish colors displayed at St. Kitts, 85.

 Irish company from Massachusetts in the war with Mexico, An, 16.

 Irish element in the composition of the American people, Tributes to
    the, 9, 10.

 Irish emigrants arrive at Salem, Mass., 63.

 Irish emigrants drowned near Fisher’s Island, 70.

 Irish emigrants meet disaster at the Isle of Sable, 71.

 Irish enlist in the service of France, 82.

 Irish fishermen visit the shores of Newfoundland, 86.

 _Irish Gimlet_, A brig called the, 70.

 Irish historical literature, 17.

 Irish immigrants from British North America, 86, 88.

 Irish immigrants from Newfoundland, 86, 87.

 Irish immigrants from the West Indies, 84, 86.

 Irish immigration in 1643, Large, 51.

 Irish immigration to the United States since 1790, 80.

 Irish in America before the Revolution, The, 21.

 Irish in a New Hampshire regiment (in 1756), 76.

 Irish in a Virginia regiment commanded by Washington, 73.

 Irish influence on American life, 26.

 Irish in Illinois, The first, 95.

 Irish in Montserrat, 85.

 Irish in Newfoundland form a plan to expel the English from the island,
    86, 87.

 Irish in old Albany, N. Y., Early, 138.

 Irish in the West Indies sympathize with the American Revolution, 85.

 Irish Jasper Greens, 155.

 _Irish Landed Gentry when Cromwell Came to Ireland_, 17.

 Irish Legion, Corcoran’s, 17, 167.

 Irish linens, poplins, muslins, sheetings and beef advertised for sale
    at Newport, R. I., 129.

 Irish Lynns of Antrim, The, 33.

 Irishmen of Pelham, Mass., issue a patriotic address in 1773, 49.

 Irish merchants in Spain extend hospitable treatment to John Adams, 34.

 Irish names in Rhode Island (previous to 1776), 131.

 Irish of Lancaster county, Pennsylvania, The, 58.

 Irish passengers are seized and placed aboard English frigates, 88.

 Irish passengers are treacherously landed on the island of Inagua, 88.

 Irish passengers bound for Virginia, 53, 67, 76.

 Irish passengers embark for Barbadoes in the _Alexander_ (1635), 70.

 Irish passengers on the _Welcome_ with William Penn, 73.

 Irish passengers sail for Philadelphia, 71, 75.

 Irish patriots emigrate to Newfoundland, 84, 86.

 _Irish Pedigrees_, O’Hart’s, 17, 112, 116, 122.

 Irish pioneers in Glen, N. Y., return to Ireland, 71.

 Irish pioneers of California, 137.

 Irish pioneers of the Connecticut Valley, 43.

 Irish Presbyterians excluded from power and position, 83.

 Irish Presbyterian settlers of Pelham, Mass., 49.

 Irish Quaker, An, Samuel Neale, 57.

 Irish rebellion of 1798, The, 62.

 Irish regiments in the Spanish service, 113.

 Irish “restorees,” Mention of, 125.

 _Irish Rhode Islanders in the American Revolution_, 22.

 Irish schoolmasters in Warren, Me., 73, 74.

 Irish sentiment in the Royal Newfoundland regiment, 87.

 Irish settlement of Londonderry, N. H., The, 49, 52.

 Irish settle Montserrat, 125.

 Irish settlers in Glen, N. Y., 71.

 Irish settlers in Kittery, Me., 66, 67.

 Irish settlers in Rhode Island, 109.

 Irish settlers in Salem, N. Y., 55.

 Irish settlers in Virginia, 30.

 Irish settlers of Blandford, Mass., 47.

 Irish settlers of Chesterfield, Mass., 49, 50.

 Irish settlers of Chester, Mass., 48.

 Irish settlers of Granville, Mass., 48.

 Irish settlers of Palmer, Mass., 50.

 Irish settlers of Pelham, Mass., 49, 50.

 Irish settlers of Pittston, Me., 62.

 Irish settlers of Rowe, Mass., 48.

 Irish settlers of Shelborne, Mass., 49.

 Irish soldiers in the “Great Swamp fight,” 73.

 “Irish Soldiers in the Union and Confederate Services during the Civil
    War,” 21.

 Irish soldiers of the old French outposts, 99.

 Irish survivors of a shipwreck reach Canso, 71.

 Irish survivors of a shipwreck taken to Cape Ann, Mass., 71.

 Irish teachers in the American colonies, 71.

 Irish transported to Barbadoes, 70.

 Irish transported to the continent of North America, 109.

 Irish transported to the West Indies, 84, 109.

 Irish troops embark for Spain, 118.

 Irish Vanguard of Rhode Island, The, 109.

 Irish voyagers taken by a French privateer, 68.

 Irish Washingtons, The, 136.

 Isle of Sable, Irish emigrants meet disaster at the, 71.

 Isles of Shoals, Roger Kelley of the, 57.


 Jackson, Gen. Andrew, 39, 91, 137.

 Jackson, Hon. Charles, governor of Rhode Island, 57.

 Jackson, Stephen, “a native of Kilkenny, Ireland,” 57.

 Jan Andriessen, “de Iersman van Dublingh,” 22, 138.

 Jasper Greens, The, 155.

 Jefferson, Governor of Virginia, 34.

 Jones, Edward, solicitor-general of North Carolina, a native of
    Ireland, 58.

 John Riley and his wife Grace (who came from Ireland about 1624), 51.

 Johnson, Sir William, an Irishman, “of Johnson Hall, in the County of
    Tryon and Province of New York,” 63, 98.

 Jordan, Governor, of New Hampshire, 19

 “Joseph Doyle from Rhode Island,” 75.

 Judith Carroll, Mention of (in 1775), 75.

 Jusserand, M., French Ambassador, writes to the Society, 24.


 Kansas State Historical Society, 73.

 Kaskaskia, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106.

 Kavanagh, Hon. Edward, of Maine, 58.

 Keeney’s ferry over the Connecticut river, 64, 65.

 Kelley, Mrs. Grace, of Providence, R. I., 61.

 Kelly, Capt. Warren Michael, 42.

 Kelly, Darby, “a soldier, a schoolmaster and a farmer,” 41.

 Kelly, Gen. Benjamin F., 41.

 Kelly, John, who in 1633 settled in Newbury, Mass., 51.

 Kelly, Michael, of the island of Conanicut, 112, 113, 114.

 Kelley, Rev. Erasmus, of Rhode Island, 129, 130.

 Kent, Pierce, Death of (New York), 20.

 Kentish Guards of Rhode Island, The, 127.

 Kentucky, The town of Grannon, 8.

 Kentucky, Death of Dennis H. Mulligan, an old resident of, 8.

 Kentucky, Hon. James H. Mulligan of, 8.

 Kerry, Ireland, 123.

 Kildare, Ireland, 121, 123.

 Kilkenny, Ireland, 57, 74.

 Killybegs, Ireland, 78.

 Kimball, Governor, of Rhode Island, 17, 20.

 Kindness of people of Cork to Ethan Allen, 34.

 King Philip’s War, 62, 118, 119, 131, 159, 160.

 “King Philip’s designs,” 112.

 Kingstown, Ireland, 88.

 Kinsale, Ireland, 33, 109, 118, 121, 124, 125, 127, 128.

 Kittery, Me, Early Irish settlers in, 66, 67.

 Knights of St. Patrick, New Haven, Conn., 23.

 Knights of St. Patrick, San Francisco, Cal., 136.

 Knox, Gen. Henry, of the Revolution, 57, 137.


 LaBussoniere, a French officer in the Mississippi valley, 95.

 Larkin, Edward, a settler as early as 1655 at Newport, R. I., 110, 111.

 Larkin, Edward, of Charlestown, Mass. (1638), 59.

 Larkins Early, of Rhode Island, 110, 111.

 Larrabee, Joanna, 79.

 Las Guasimas, Spanish Trenches of, 8.

 “Launching a Battleship from the Congressional Ways,” 13.

 Lawless, Hon. Joseph T., Mention of paper by, 135.

 “Leading men of the Bay,” Roger Williams the bearer of letters to, 72.

 Lear, Tobias, private secretary to Washington, 33.

 Lee’s surrender, 149.

 Lefferty, Bryan, attorney and private secretary to Sir William Johnson,
    63.

 Letters to the Society from President Theodore Roosevelt, 18, 24.

 Lexington Alarm, The, 50, 53.

 Lexington, Battle of, 9, 134.

 Lexington, Mass., Historical Society, 14.

 Lewis family of Virginia, The, 36, 38.

 Librarian of Congress, The, 28.

 Limerick, Ireland, 61, 82, 113, 118, 129.

 Limerick, Regiment of, 113.

 Limerick, Treaty of, 82.

 Lincoln, Abraham, 10, 152.

 Lincoln’s first call for troops, 10.

 Linehan, Hon. John C., Paper by, 30.
   Mention of other papers by, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138.

 _List of Persons Whose Names Have Been Changed_, 74.

 _Literary History of Ireland_, Hyde’s, 122.

 Loan collection of Irish-American memorials, 26, 27, 28.

 Lochlin, Dennis, of Putney, Vt. (prominent in 1777), 55.

 Lodge’s _Peerage of Ireland_, 122.

 Londonderry, Ire., 165.

 Londonderry, N. H., The Irish settlement of, 49, 52.

 Longford, Ireland, 51, 71.

 Longevity of Irish settlers of Granville, Mass., 48.

 Long Island, Battle of, 100.

 Long, M. D., of O’Neill, Neb., Death of, 16.

 Louisiana Purchase Exposition, at St. Louis, Mo., 26, 27, 28.

 Loyal Legion, Military Order of the, 150, 158, 160.

 Lucretia, daughter of John Downing, 50.

 Lynn, Hon. Wauhope, Mention of paper by, 137.


 McAdoo, Hon. William, Addresses by, 135, 137.

 McCartee, Owen and Charles, Virginia pioneers, 32.

 MacCarthy, Charles, a founder of East Greenwich, R. I., 57, 117.

 MacCarthy, Cormac, “had been lord of Muskerry for 40 years,” 123.

 MacCarthy, Cormac Oge, becomes a viscount, 123.

 MacCarthy, Dermot, feudal lord and founder of the house of Muskerry,
    123.

 MacCarthy, Donogh, is created Earl of Clancarty, 123.

 MacCarthys Glas, The, 118, 123.

 MacCarthys Reagh, The, 118, 123.

 MacCarthys, Many castles built by the, 123.

 MacCarthys Mor, The, 116, 118.

 Maccarty, Dennis, of Warren, R. I., 137.

 Maccarty, Florence, buys land in Roxbury, Mass, (in 1693), 65.

 McCarty, Capt. Page, 33.

 McCarty, Capt. Richard, “a resident of Cahokia,” 99.

 McCormick, Daniel, first president of the New York Friendly Sons of St.
    Patrick, 72.

 McCoy, Rev. John J., mention of paper by, 135.

 McCurtin, Daniel, at the siege of Boston, 68.

 McGee, Thomas D’Arcy, 107, 108.

 McGinnis, Capt. William, killed in battle, 55.

 McGinness, Col. John R., Ordnance Corps, U. S. A., 15.

 McGuinness, Bernard, Death of (Providence, R. I.), 13.

 McGuinness, Hon. Edwin D., Death of (Providence, R. I.), 9, 13.

 McGuire, Capt. Francis, an officer in the Revolution, 35.

 McGuire, Dr. Hunter, of Virginia, 35.

 McGuire, Rev. Francis D., Death of (Albany, N. Y.), 26.

 McKechnie, Rev. J. H., Death of (Worcester, Mass.), 12.

 McKeever, Capt. and Brvt. Lieut.-Col. Samuel, Death of (Somerville,
    Mass.), 15.

 McLaughlin, Thomas, an officer in Stark’s regiment at the battle of
    Bunker Hill, 64.

 “McLaughlin was made captain of the company the morning after the
    battle,” 64.

 McNamee, Mayor, of Cambridge, Mass., 14.

 McNulty, Rev. J. J., Death of (Boston, Mass.), 13.

 McMahon, Capt., an officer under Wayne, 37.

 McQuade, James, killed by Indians, 69.

 MacSparran, Rev. James, an early Irish clergyman of Rhode Island, 136.

 Machias, Me., The O’Briens of, 25.

 Mack, Mayor, of Elizabeth, N. J., 15.

 Macneven, William J., 90.

 Macoone, John, an early Rhode Island settler, 116, 117.

 Macroom, Ire., 124.

 Madison, President, 90.

 Magee, Capt. James, “a convivial, noble-hearted Irishman,” 72.

 Magoon family, The, 50.

 Magoon, Isaac, from Ireland, 50.

 Maguire, Bryan, baron of Enniskillen, 126.

 Maguire, Connor, attainted by British law, 126.

 Maguire, Constant, of Rhode Island, 126.

 Maguire, Thomas, lord of Fermanagh, 126.

 Maguires, Ancient patrimony of the, 126.

 Maguires of Rhode Island, Early, 126.

 Mahone, Gen. William, 42.

 Mahoney, Jane, weds (in 1750) John Clary, 149.

 Maine _Genealogist and Recorder_, 64.

 _Maine Historical and Genealogical Recorder_, 62, 63, 67.

 “Major Burke was clerk of the town for twenty-two years,” 46.

 “Major George Croghan,” 17.

 Malvern Hill, Battle of, 10, 149, 171.

 Malavery, John, an early resident of Providence, R. I., 117.

 Manners, customs and phrases of the mountaineers, 41.

 Many castles built by the MacCarthys, 123.

 “Many of the Prison ship martyrs were Irish,” 16.

 Mark, Patrick, of Charlestown, Mass. (in 1650), 62.

 Marye’s Heights, 27, 149, 171, 172.

 Maryland, First colonists to, 125.

 Maryland line, The, 68.

 “Mary ye Wife of Morgan Murphy,” 67.

 Mason and Dixon’s line, 42.

 Massachusetts Bay Colony, Supplies from Ireland for, 78.

 Massachusetts Historical Society, 74.

 Massachusetts Society of the Sons of the Revolution, 9.

 Massachusetts State Constitutional Convention, 152.

 “Massacre after massacre” by the English soldiery in Ireland, 115.

 Massacre ordered by English lords justices, 115.

 “Master John Sullivan and Family of Somersworth and Berwick,” 15.

 Mather, Increase, 69.

 Mather, Cotton, Sermon by, 77.

 Maumee Rapids, Battle of, 104.

 Maxwell, Benjamin, patriot of the Revolution, 54.

 Maxwell, Col Hugh, of the Revolution, 53, 54.

 Mayor Boyle of Newport, R. I., 16, 147.

 Mayor Collins of Boston, Mass., 12, 13, 149.

 Mayor Garretson of Newport, R. I., 11.

 Mayor Mack of Elizabeth, N. J., 15.

 Mayor McGuinness of Providence, R. I., 9, 13.

 Mayor McNamee of Cambridge, Mass., 14.

 Mayor Studley of New Haven, Conn., 23.

 Mayor Van Wyck of New York city, 8.

 Meagher’s Irish Brigade, 10, 27, 149, 170, 171, 172.

 Meath, Ireland, 116.

 Medal of Honor Legion, 166, 170.

 Membership roll of the American-Irish Historical Society, 146.

 Memorials, Loan collection of Irish-American, 26, 27, 28.

 “Men, women and children perished alike,” 115.

 Mexico, The war with, 17.

 Middletown, Ireland, 45.

 Michael and Bridget Phillips, children of Michael and Bridget, 60.

 Miles, Gen. Nelson A., 19, 150.

 _Military History of New Hampshire, Adjutant-General’s Report_, 66, 76.

 Military Order of Foreign Wars, 147.

 Military Order of the Loyal Legion, 150, 158, 160.

 Minute Men, 50, 53, 66.

 Mississippi valley, The, 95, 96.

 Monaghan, Lieut. David, of Col. Wm. Thomson’s regiment of rangers, 63.

 Monmouth, Battle of, 100.

 Montgomery, Capt. John, 101.

 Montgomery, Gen. Richard, 9, 10, 96.

 Montgomery tablet and monument, St. Paul’s church, Broadway, New York
    city, 10.

 Montserrat settled by Irish, 125.

 Monument unveiled at Elizabeth, N. J., to Hon. W. A. M. Mack, 15.

 Mooney, John A. (LL. D.), Death of (New York), 23.

 Moore, Col. James, of the First regiment, North Carolina Continentals,
    61.

 Moore, Judge Maurice, 61.

 Moore, Roger, famous Irish chieftain, 68.

 Moore’s _History of North Carolina_, 58, 59, 60.

 Moran, Col. James, Mention of paper by, 137.

 Morrell, Lysbell, “an Irish woman,” 56.

 Morrison, Mrs. Robert, 105, 106.

 Mortimer, Capt. Philip, “who came from Ireland,” 71.

 Moseley, Edward A., Mention of paper by, 137.

 “Mostly Irishmen from Pelham and elsewhere,” 50.

 Mountcashel, 123.

 Moylan, John, patriot of the Revolution, 37.

 Moylan, Stephen, of the Revolution, 72.

 “Mr. Mark Lynch, merchant in Nantes,” 34.

 Mulligan, Dennis H., an old resident of Kentucky, 8.

 Mulligan, Hon. James H., of Kentucky, 8.

 Mundy, Death of Rev. John F. (Cambridge, Mass.), 7.

 Munster, Ireland, 123, 124.

 Murfey, Capt. John, of Newport, R. I., 129.

 Murfey, Phœbe, dies at Newport, R. I., 129.

 Murphy, Edward, of Newport, R. I., 129.

 Murphy, James, Death of (Lawrence, Mass.), 9.

 Murphy, John, of Salem, Mass., 65.

 Murphy, Timothy, a patriot of the Revolution, 69.

 Murray, Daniel, “an Irishman who supplied provisions for Clark’s
    Illinois army,” 104.

 Murray, Thomas Hamilton, Papers by, 55, 109, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138.

 Muskerry, 123, 124, 125.

 “My business here is to carry passengers and servants,” 62.

 “My three sisters’ three sons,” 117.


 Narragansett country, The, 117, 119.

 _Narragansett Historical Register_, 120.

 Narragansett Hotel, Providence, R. I., Dr. James E. Sullivan entertains
    the Society at the, 17, 19.

 “Nearly one half of the passengers perished,” 71.

 Nebraska, University of, 15, 20.

 Neil, John, “from Ireland,” 60.

 _New England Historic, Genealogical Register_, 69, 74, 78.

 New England Historic, Genealogical Society, 20.

 Newfoundland Irish serve on American privateers in the War of 1812, 88.

 New Hampshire Historical Society, 15.

 New Hampshire State library, 147.

 New Haven Colony Historical Society, 24.

 New Haven, Conn., The Society holds a field-day at, 23.

 New Jersey, Daniel Neil an artillery officer of, in the Revolution, 59.

 New Orleans, Battle of, 91, 137.

 Newport Historical Society, 20.

 Newport, R. I., marriages, Some, 130.

 Newport, R. I., _Mercury_, 129.

 New Ross, Ireland, 58.

 Newry, Ireland, 62.

 Newtonards, Ireland, 90.

 New Willard Hotel, Washington, D. C., Headquarters of the Society at
    the, 15.

 New York Chamber of Commerce, 146, 150.

 New York Court of Common Pleas, 151.

 New York, Fourth Heavy Artillery of (in the Civil War), 149.

 _New York Genealogical and Biographical Record_, 62, 65.

 New York, Greater, Charter Revision Commission, 150.

 New York _Herald_, 13.

 New York, One Hundred and Eleventh Infantry of (in the Civil War), 149.

 New York, Some marriage licenses issued in the province of, 75.

 New York State Civil Service Commission, 154.

 New York Produce Exchange, 153.

 New York State Constitutional Convention, 150.

 New York State Board of Law Examiners, 152.

 New York _Sun_, 9.

 New York Supreme Court, 18, 142, 143, 151, 167, 168.

 New York Volunteers, The Sixty-ninth, 10, 28, 34.

 Nineteenth Army Corps Association, 158.

 “Ninety-six of the ship’s company had died on the voyage,” 71.

 Ninth Connecticut Infantry (in the Civil War), 23, 24, 148, 158.

 Ninth Massachusetts Infantry in the Civil War, 20.

 _North American Review_, 13.

 North Carolina Foot, Sixth Regiment of, 60.

 North Carolina, Governor Dobbs of, 60.

 North Carolina, Provincial Congress of, 56, 59.

 “Not a child, were it but a hand high, was left alive,” 115.

 “Not a Tory in his town,” 53.

 Nugent, Gen. Robert, Death of, 10.


 O’Bannon, Capt. James H., of Virginia, 12.

 “Obnoxious to the royalists,” 77.

 O’Brien, Captain Laurence, Address by, 137.

 O’Brien, Kennedy, an early resident of Augusta, Ga., 58.

 O’Brien, Lucy Todd, 55.

 O’Brien, Nancy, of New London, Conn., 60.

 O’Briens of Machias, Me., The, 135, 138.

 O’Briens, The, of Machias, Me., 25.

 O’Brien, The Clan, 138.

 O’Brien, Very Rev. Michael C., Death of (Portland, Me.), 12.

 O’Connell, Capt. John, president of the Irish Brigade Association, 28.

 O’Dea, Margaret (who came to this country about 1624), 51.

 O’Donnell, Rev. James H., Norwalk, Conn. (quoted), 65, 69, 70, 71, 137.

 O’Donoghoe Mor, The, 123.

 O’Driscoll, Daniel M., Death of (Charleston, S. C.), 22.

 O’Driscoll, Daniel M., Mention of paper by, 135.

 O’Fallon, Col. John, 39.

 O’Fallon, Dr. James, of Virginia, 38.

 O’Fallon family of St. Louis, Mo., 38, 39, 100.

 O’Farrell, Capt. Patrick, Death of (Washington, D. C.), 22.

 “Of Galway in Ireland,” 56.

 _Official Register of the Officers and Men of New Jersey in the
    Revolutionary War_, 65.

 Officers of the Society, 5, 6.

 O’Flaherty, Dr. John, Death of (Hartford, Conn.), 168.

 O’Hanlon, Canon, of Ireland, 17.

 O’Hart, John, Death of (Dublin, Ire.), 16.

 O’Hart’s _Irish Landed Gentry_, 122.

 O’Hart’s _Irish Pedigrees_, 116, 122.

 O’Kelley, John, an Irish settler of Warren, R. I., 70.

 O’Kellys, The, eminent in Ireland, 113.

 O’Killia (O’Kelly), David, an Irish pioneer of Cape Cod, Mass., 159.

 Old Dominion, The, 30, 31.

 Olson, A. B., Denver, Col., 25.

 O’Mahoney, Rev. D. J., is ordered to the Philippines, 20.

 O’Malley, Thomas F., Papers by, 135, 136.

 O’Neal, Major Ferdinand, 36.

 O’Neil, Rev. James L., Death of (San Francisco, Cal.), 25.

 O’Neils of Maine change their names to Neil, 74.

 O’Neill, Captain “Bucky,” 7.

 O’Neill, James L., Paper by, 136.

 Ordnance Corps, U. S. A., Col. John R. McGinniss of the, 15.

 Ormonde, The house of, 67.

 Ormund, Lord, Mandate issued to, 115.

 O’Reilly, General, 104.

 O’Reilly, Francis C., Death of (Orange, N. J.), 8.

 O’Reilly, Mary Boyle, of Boston, Mass., 27.

 O’Shea, J. Augustus, 14.

 O’Shea, Marion, 14.

 O’Sullivan, Mor, The, 123.

 Over 4,000 acres allotted Major Thomas Quirk, 101.

 “Owned about 1,400 acres of the best land in Ware, Mass.,” 50.

 Oyster Bay, N. Y., 18, 24.


 Pan-American Exposition, 159.

 Papers and Addresses under the auspices of the American-Irish
    Historical Society, 139.

 _Papers Relating chiefly to the Maryland Line During the Revolution_,
    68.

 Parole for the day; “Boston”; countersign; “St. Patrick,” 64.

 “Patrick and Richard Riley come to Windsor and Weathersfield, Conn., in
    1639,” 51.

 “Patrick’s swamp,” 46.

 “Paymaster of the Third Regiment and also of the three companies of
    Light Horse,” 59.

 Peach Orchard, Battle of, 10, 150.

 Pearson’s _Genealogies_, 58.

 _Peerage of Ireland_, Lodge’s, 122.

 Pennsylvania Bar Association, 157.

 Pennsylvania Line, First Regiment of the, 61.

 Penn, William, on the ship _Welcome_, 73.

 “People of Consequence,” 73.

 “People of property,” 73.

 Perry, Commodore O. H., 137.

 Philip’s War, King, 62, 118, 119, 131, 159, 160.

 Pierre de Margerie, French charge d’Affaires, 19.

 Pilgrims and Puritans, 42.

 Pitman, Margaret, weds James Murphy at Newport, R. I., 130.

 Platt, U. S. Senator O. H., 24.

 Plymouth Colony, Early Irish in the, 137.

 Point Pleasant, Battle of, 37.

 Polk, President, 106.

 Pollock, Oliver, an Irishman who financed Clark’s military campaign in
    Illinois and Indiana, 104.

 Pontiac, Chief, 97, 98.

 Portrush, Ireland, 77, 78.

 Prendergast’s _Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland_, 122.

 Prendergast’s _Ireland from the Restoration to the Revolution_, 122.

 Presbyterians, Persecution inflicted upon the Irish, 83.

 Preservation of historic landmarks, 13.

 President Buchanan’s father, a native of County Donegal, Ireland, comes
    to this country in the brig _Providence_, 75.

 President Lincoln’s first call for troops, 10.

 Presidents-General of the American-Irish Historical Society, 145.

 Preston, William, a member of the Virginia House of Burgesses, born in
    Ireland, 63.

 Princeton, Battle of, 53, 59.

 Prison-ship Martyrs, The, 16.

 Proctor, Gen. Thomas, a native of Ireland, 62.

 Proscriptive laws against Catholics, 84.

 Providence, R. I., _Gazette_, 129.

 Providence, R. I., Patriots of, destroy the British armed vessel
    _Gaspee_, 69.

 Provincial Assembly of Virginia, 40.

 Provincial Congress of North Carolina, 56, 59.

 Publications of the American-Irish Historical Society, 139.


 Queenstown, Ireland, 52.

 Quinton, Col. William, is appointed a brigadier-general, 20.

 “Quirk was a brave and a fine-looking Irishman,” 101.


 Randolph, Governor, of Virginia, 37.

 Reception to the Society by Governor Kimball of Rhode Island, 20.

 _Records of the General Assembly_ of Rhode Island, 131.

 _Records of the Town of Providence_, R. I., 62.

 Redding, James F., Death of (Charleston, S. C.), 26.

 Regiment of Rangers, Col. William Thomson’s, 63.

 “Remained and went not away,” 109.

 Revolution, Gen. John Sullivan of the, 11, 18.

 Revolution, Sons of the, 147.

 Reynolds, Ex-Gov. John, 105, 107.

 Rhode Island, Battle of, 11, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 135, 137.

 Rhode Island, Congressman Bull of, writes to the Society, 11, 20.

 Rhode Island, Death of Ex-Secretary of State McGinness of, 9.

 Rhode Island, Early Caseys of, 114, 115, 116.

 Rhode Island, Early Larkins of, 110, 111.

 Rhode Island, Early Murphys of, 129, 133.

 Rhode Island, Gov. Charles Jackson of, 57.

 Rhode Island, Governor Gregory of, writes to the Society, 11.

 Rhode Island Historical Society, 19, 141, 157, 166.

 Rhode Island, Interesting Reminiscences of Newport, 128, 129.

 Rhode Island, Irish names in, previous to 1776, 131.

 Rhode Island Normal School, 20.

 Rhode Island, _Records of the General Assembly_ of, 131.

 Rhode Island Supreme Court, 18, 19, 20.

 Rhode Island, The Irish Vanguard of, 109.

 Riddle, Patrick E., Death of (Boston, Mass.), 13.

 Riley, Garret and Miles, 51.

 Riley, Grace (O’Dea), 51.

 Riley, John, and his wife Grace, 51.

 Riley, John, buys land in 1684 in Springfield, Mass., 45.

 Riley, Patrick and Richard, 51.

 Rileys in Connecticut, Early, 51.

 Roach, John, is given a tract of land in Connecticut, 73.

 Rochambeau’s army, The Irish in, 135.

 Rochambeau Monument, at Washington, D. C., Dedication of the, 15.

 Roche, James Jeffrey, Mention of paper by, 135.

 Rogers, Hon. Horatio, 20.

 Rogers, Lucy Clark, 100.

 Roman Catholic archdiocese of Boston, 147.

 Roman Catholic archdiocese of Philadelphia, 171.

 Roman Catholic diocese of Duluth, 163.

 Roman Catholic diocese of Great Falls, 160.

 Roman Catholic diocese of Los Angeles, 149.

 Roman Catholic diocese of Sioux City, 155.

 Roman Catholic diocese of Springfield, Mass., 157.

 Roman Catholic diocese of Wilmington, Del., 164.

 Roosevelt, Mrs. Robert B., 14.

 Roosevelt, President Theodore, expresses his interest in the work of
    the Society, 12.

 Roosevelt, President Theodore, receives the Society in the East Room of
    the White House, 15.

 Roosevelt, President, writes to the Society, 18, 24.

 _Rosary Magazine_, The, 25, 153.

 Roscommon, Ireland, 129.

 Ross, Rev. Robert, patriot of the Revolution, 77.

 “Roule of ye Freemen of ye colonie of everie Towne,” 56.

 “Rough Riders” regiment, 7.

 Rowan, Archibald Hamilton, 90.

 Rowe, Matthew, “at New Haven, Conn., in 1650,” 59.

 Rowe, Nicholas, “at Portsmouth, N. H., in 1640,” 59.

 Royal Historical and Archæological Society of Ireland, 17.

 Royal Irish Academy, 148, 150.

 Royal Newfoundland regiment, Irish sentiment in the, 87.

 Royal Society of Antiquaries (Ireland), 148.

 Sackett, Adjutant-General, of Rhode Island, 17.

 _Salem _[Mass.]_ Press Historical and Genealogical Record_, 64.

 Sally Crowninshield of Salem, Mass., 65.

 St. Kitts, Charles Mac Carthy a resident of, 117, 125.

 St. Kitts, Irish Catholics in, visited by Father John Destriche, 125,
    126.

 St. Kitts, Irish colors displayed at, 85.

 St. Kitts, Large numbers of Irish in, 125.

 St. Louis, Mo., Louisiana Purchase Exposition, 26, 27, 28.

 “St. Patrick”: American countersign at Boston, March 17, 1776, by
    authority of General Washington, 64.

 St. Patrick’s day, Early celebrations of, 137.

 St. Patrick, Friendly Sons of, New York, 72.

 St. Patrick, Friendly Sons of, Philadelphia, 72.

 St. Patrick, Knights of, San Francisco, Cal., 136.

 St. Patrick’s lodge of Masons, 58.

 St. Vincent de Paul, Society of, 156, 157.

 Savage fury of English soldiery in Ireland, 115.

 Savage’s _Genealogical Dictionary_, 58, 70.

 Savage’s Station, Battle of, 10.

 Scharff-Wescott _History of Philadelphia_, Pa., 73.

 Scituate, Mass., Early residents of, from Ireland, 60.

 Scott, General, 16.

 Scully, Martin, Mention of paper by, 135.

 Scully, Rev. Thomas, Death of (Cambridge, Mass), 20.

 Selectman Hutchinson of Lexington, Mass., welcomes the Society, 14.

 Selectman Taylor of Lexington, Mass., entertains the Society, 14.

 Sellick, David, craves pardon “for his offence in bringing some of the
    Irish men on shoare,” 110.

 “Seneschal of the manor of Macroom,” 124.

 “Sent by his father from Ireland to America,” 69.

 Shahan, Rev. Thomas, Death of (Malden, Mass.), 21.

 Shay’s insurrection, 49.

 Sheahan, Dennis Harvey, Mention of address by, 136.

 Shea, John Gilmary, 59.

 Sheridan, Gen. Michael V., 14.

 Sheridan, Gen. Philip H., 14.

 Sherman, Rev. Andrew M., Mention of paper by, 25, 138.

 Sherry’s, New York city, Gathering of the Society at, 9.

 Simms’ _Frontiersmen of New York_, 63, 71.

 Sixteenth (Mass.) regiment (in the Civil War), 160.

 Sixth Regiment of North Carolina Foot, 60.

 Sixty-ninth New York Volunteers, 10, 28, 34.

 Smilie, Senator, a veteran of the Revolution, 90.

 Smith, Joseph, Mention of papers by, 134, 135.

 Smith, Mary, “great granddaughter of the second landgrave of South
    Carolina,” 68.

 Smithsonian Institution, 151.

 Society of Colonial Wars, 147, 160.

 Society of St. Vincent de Paul, 156, 157.

 Society of the Cincinnati, 18, 60, 137, 166.

 Society, The, welcomed to Newport, R. I., by Mayor Garretson, 11.

 _Soldiers in King Philip’s War_, Bodge’s, 131.

 Some Voices from ye olden time, 55.

 Sons of the American Revolution, 160, 174.

 Sons of the Revolution, 7, 9, 147.

 Southern Cotton Exchange, 155.

 Southern Historical Society, Richmond, Va., 10.

 South Mountain, Battle of, 27.

 Spain, Irish troops embark for, 118.

 Spain, War with, 7, 147, 152, 165.

 Spanish flag replaces the British, 102.

 Spanish service, Irish regiments in the, 113.

 Spanish trenches of Las Guasimas, 8.

 Spencer, Lady Elizabeth, 124.

 Sperry, Congressman, of Connecticut, 23, 24.

 Spottsylvania militia, 33.

 Stackpole’s _History of Durham, Me._, 61, 78.

 State vice-presidents of the Society, 6.

 Sterling, Conn., named in honor of an Irish physician and surgeon, 68.

 Stiles, Rev. Edward, 128.

 Stiness, Chief Justice, of the Rhode Island Supreme Court, writes to
    the Society, 19.

 “Stonewall Brigade,” The, 12.

 Strangers warned to depart according to law, 75.

 “Strongly affected to Popery,” 30.

 Studley, Mayor of New Haven, Conn., 23.

 Sullivan, Captain, “an officer in the Virginia forces,” 36, 37.

 Sullivan, Death of John A. (New York), 14.

 Sullivan, Dr. James E., of Providence, R. I., entertains the Society,
    17, 18, 19, 20.

 Sullivan, Dr. John, a descendant of Gen. John Sullivan, 11, 18.

 Sullivan, Gen. John, of the Revolution, 11, 16, 18, 26, 134, 137, 138.

 Sullivan, George, son of Gen. John Sullivan of the Revolution, 26.

 Sullivan, George Rogers Clark, 100.

 Sullivan, John, purser of the _Cygnet_, 61.

 Sullivan, Miss Margaret, granddaughter of Gen. John Sullivan of the
    Revolution, 26.

 Sullivan, T. Russell, of Revolutionary ancestry, 11.

 Sullivan’s Militia, 37.

 Supreme Court of South Carolina, 68.

 Swedish-Americans purpose forming an historical society, 25.

 Sweeny, William M., Mention of paper by, 135.

 Swords, Cornet George, 173.

 Swords, Francis Dawson, 174.

 Swords, Joseph F., Mention of paper by, 134.

 “Symon Tuchin, master of the _Due Return_,” 30.


 Taft, Hon. Royal C., of Providence, R. I., 18.

 Tandy, Napper, 90.

 Tate’s Academy, Wilmington, N. C., 55.

 Taylor, Gen. Zachary, 16, 101.

 Taylor, Selectman, of Lexington, Mass., entertains the Society, 14.

 Tecumseh, Indian chief, 90.

 Tenth New Hampshire Infantry, 42.

 Tenth U. S. Infantry, 22.

 Thames, Battle of the, 90.

 “The battle flags of the Irish Brigade had become so torn and shattered
    by shot and shell of the many battles,” 28.

 The _Charming Molly_ brings 162 passengers from Ireland, 66.

 “The finest horseman in the American army,” 36.

 “The four other regiments of the Irish Brigade,” 27.

 “The last MacCarthy Mor,” 123.

 “The O’Briens of Machias, Me., patriots of the American Revolution,”
    25.

 “The old Catholic church at Fredericksburg,” 28.

 The “precincts of ye said Towne of Providence,” 60.

 “The record of an Irish regiment in our great war,” 24.

 “The Requiem of the Drums,” 7.

 _The Salem Book_, 55.

 “These battle-scarred relics,” 28.

 The ship _Hope_ arrives from Ireland with 200 passengers, 62.

 The ship _Sagamore_ brings 381 passengers from Ireland, 67.

 The title and dignity of “MacCarthy Mor,” 124.

 “They named one of the principal streets of the town, Ireland street,”
    50.

 “They were a robust set of men,” 52.

 Third Middlesex regiment (Mass.), 160.

 Thirteenth U. S. Infantry, 10, 11.

 Thirtieth Virginia Cavalry, 34.

 “This was an Irish regiment,” 23.

 Three thousand acres willed to John and Benjamin O’Fallon, 100.

 Ticonderoga, Capture of, 69, 70.

 Ticonderoga, The Ruins of Fort, 16.

 Tillinghast, Hon. Pardon E., 18.

 Tippecanoe, Battle of, 39, 100.

 Tipperary, Ireland, 14.

 Tone, Theobald Wolfe, 88, 90.

 “To the memory of the Irishmen in the American Revolution,” 18.

 Towns in western Massachusetts named after places in Ireland, 47.

 “To ye care of mr Winthrop, mercht in Cork,” 62.

 _Transfer of Erin_, Amory’s, 122.

 Treaty of Ghent, 91.

 Treaty of Limerick, 82.

 Trinity Church _Annals_, Newport, R. I., 129.

 Trinity Church, New York city, Records of, 72.

 Trinity College, Dublin, 66, 174.

 Tufts College, 7, 141.

 Twelfth Massachusetts Infantry (in the Civil War), 156.

 “Twelve weeks from London and seven from Cork,” 75.

 Twenty-eighth Massachusetts regiment in the Civil War, 27, 149.


 Ulster, Ireland, 33, 114, 115, 116, 122.

 Ultonia, Regiment of, 113.

 _United Irishman_, The, 168.

 United Irish Society, 83, 87, 89, 90.

 United States Circuit Court, 20.

 United States District Court, 20.

 United States Ordnance Corps, 163.

 United States Navy Department, 162.

 United States Senator George F. Hoar, 19.

 United States Senator O. H. Platt, 24.

 United States Senator Wetmore, 19, 20.

 United States War Department, 22, 23.

 Unscrupulous captains of emigrant ships, 88.

 “Until he fell mortally wounded at the second battle of Bull Run,” 27.

 University of Chicago, 7.

 University of Pennsylvania, 90, 157, 174.

 University of Nebraska, 15, 20.

 University of Wisconsin, 143.


 Valentia, Ireland, 123.

 Valley Forge, Anniversary of the Evacuation of, 23.

 Valorous charges of Meagher’s Irish Brigade, 149, 171, 172.

 Van Bergens “of Catskill and Coxsackie,” 61.

 Van Rensselaer, Sanders, 74.

 Van Rensselaer, Schuyler, 74.

 Van Wyck, Mayor, of New York City, 8.

 Vermont, Rutland County Medical and Surgical Society, 157.

 Vice-presidents of the Society, 6.

 Villanova College, 15.

 Virginia, Brian Kelly sails for, in the _Safety_ (1635), 70.

 Virginia, Capt. James H. O’Bannon of, 12.

 Virginia, Daniel Gookin locates in, 67.

 Virginia, Early Irish Settlers in, 30.

 _Virginia Historical Magazine_, 55, 63, 67, 73.

 Virginia House of Burgesses, 63.

 Virginia, Irish Catholics are refused permission to land in, 125.

 Virginia Legislature, The, 12.

 Virginia, Irish passengers bound for, 53, 67, 76.

 Virginia Line, The, 36.

 Virginia, Provincial Assembly of, 40.

 Virginia settlers massacred by Indians, 31.

 Virginia, The Lewis family of, 36, 38.

 Virginia, The Lynch family of, 35.

 _Vital Record of Rhode Island_, Arnold’s, 131.

 Von Sternberg, Baron Speck, German ambassador, 24.

 Voyage of the _Seaflower_, 138.

 Voyage of the ship _Lime_ from Ireland to Boston, 77, 78.


 Walsh, Hon. Patrick, Mention of paper by, 136.

 Walter, Nehemiah, is “sent by his father from Ireland to America,” 69.

 War Department, U. S., 22, 23.

 War of 1812, 82, 88, 90, 107.

 Warren, President, of Boston University, 7.

 War with Mexico, An Irish Company from Massachusetts in the, 16.

 War with Spain, 7, 147, 152, 165.

 Washington and his compatriots, 86.

 Washington, D. C., Dedication of the Rochambeau monument, 15.

 Washington, D. C., Excursion of the Society to, 15.

 Washington, George, 33, 64, 73, 77.

 Washingtons, The Irish, 136.

 Waterford, Ireland, 62, 115, 118.

 Waters, Major William, patents land in Maryland (as early as 1663), 56.

 Watson, Matthew, an Irish pioneer of Barrington, R. I., 136.

 Wayne, Gen. Anthony, 104.

 Webster Regiment, The, of Massachusetts, 156.

 “Were mostly Irishmen,” 96.

 West Indies, Irish transported to the, 84, 109.

 “West of the Connecticut River and north from the Riley tract,” 45.

 Wetmore, U. S. Senator, 19, 20.

 West Point, 150.

 Wexford, Ireland, 58, 65, 73, 86, 90, 110.

 Wheeler’s _Historical Sketches of North Carolina_, 59, 66, 74.

 “While at Galway, John Cate, the master, died of smallpox,” 78.

 White House, The Society received by President Roosevelt at the, 15.

 White Oak Swamp, Battle of, 10.

 White, Rev. Andrew (S. J.), 125.

 Wicklow, Ireland, 115.

 “Wild Geese,” The, 83, 87.

 Williams, Abigail, weds Miles Coursey at Newport, R. I., 130.

 Williams, Roger, of Rhode Island, 72, 109.

 Wilson, Hester, weds Timothy Egan at Newport, R. I., 130.

 Winthrop, Gov. John, 78.

 Wisconsin, University of, 143.

 “Wound, kill, slay, and destroy,” Lord Ormund is ordered to, 115.

 Wyman’s _Genealogies and Estates of Charlestown, Mass._, 57, 58, 59,
    62.


 Yorktown, Surrender of Cornwallis at, 100.

-----

Footnote 1:

  Treasurer-General of the Society, and State Insurance Commissioner of
  New Hampshire.

Footnote 2:

  This paper deals chiefly with that portion of the Connecticut valley
  within the state of Massachusetts.

Footnote 3:

  Secretary-General of the Society.

Footnote 4:

  This paper recently appeared in the columns of _The Pilot_, Boston,
  Mass. The writer is a member of the American-Irish Historical Society.

Footnote 5:

  Very plainly not Galloway in Scotland.

Footnote 6:

  The O’Larkins were chieftains in the present Irish counties of Wexford
  and Galway. They had a castle and fortress at Carn, now the headland
  called Carnsore Point, Wexford. That and the adjacent territory was at
  one period known as “O’Larkin’s country.”

Footnote 7:

  See Austin’s _Genealogical Dictionary of Rhode Island_, a work of
  great value and interest.

Footnote 8:

  See “The Stem of the Heffernan Family,” in O’Hart’s _Irish Pedigrees_.
  The clan is a very old one in Irish history and has produced many
  people of note.

Footnote 9:

  The O’Kellys, from which come the names Kelly and Kelley, were of
  great eminence in Ireland. An O’Kelly commanded the Connaught division
  at the battle of Clontarf, A. D. 1014. O’Kellys were princes of
  Hy-Maine, Ireland, down to the reign of the English Queen Elizabeth.
  Twelve of the name were distinguished in the Spanish service, between
  1718 and 1788, as officers in the Irish regiments of Irlanda,
  Hibernia, Ultonia, and Limerick.

Footnote 10:

  In his work on the _Cromwellian Settlement of Ireland_.

Footnote 11:

  The form O’Dalaighe has been anglicized O’Daley, O’Daly, Daly, Daley,
  Daily, Dailey, Dayly, etc. The ancestor of the O’Dalys of Meath,
  Ulster and Connaught was Adam, brother of Fargal, monarch of Ireland.
  Fargal was killed in battle, A. D. 718. (See _Annals of the Four
  Masters_, O’Hart’s _Irish Pedigrees_, and similar authoritative
  works.)

Footnote 12:

  This name also appears in Ireland as Lavery and O’Lavery.

Footnote 13:

  The greater part of the will was reproduced in the _Narragansett
  Historical Register_, James N. Arnold, editor, Providence, April,
  1891.

Footnote 14:

  The names Gerard and Gerrard are found in Ireland. This name Garard,
  however, may have been Garratt or Garrett, and therefore derived from
  Garritty or MacGeraghty.

Footnote 15:

  Dunn,—a typical Irish name; from the Irish O’Duin, and anglicized
  O’Dunn, Dun, Dunn, Dunne and Doyne. The sept was prominent, in the
  olden time, in Kildare and Queen’s.

Footnote 16:

  For interesting mention of the MacCarthys, see Burke’s _Dormant,
  Abeyant, Forfeited, and Extinct Peerages_ (London, 1866); O’Hart’s
  _Irish Pedigrees_ (Dublin, 1881); Burke’s _Vicissitudes of Families_
  (London, 1859-60); Lodge’s _Peerage of Ireland_ (Dublin, 1789);
  Burke’s _Landed Gentry_ (London, 1871); Burke’s _General Armory_
  (London, 1884); Washbourne’s _Book of Family Crests_ (London, 1882);
  the _Royal Book of Crests_, London, (Macveigh); O’Hart’s _Irish Landed
  Gentry_ (Dublin, 1877); Howard’s _Miscellanea Genealogica et
  Heraldica_; Nichols’ _Topographer and Genealogist_ (London, 1853); the
  _Complete Peerage_ (edited by G. E. C.), (London, 1893); the _Book of
  Dignities_ (London, 1894); Cusack’s _History of the City and County of
  Cork_ (Dublin and Cork, 1875); Prendergast’s _Ireland from the
  Restoration to the Revolution_ (1660 to 1690), (London, 1887); Amory’s
  _Transfer of Erin_ (Philadelphia, 1877); John O’Kane Murray’s _Prose
  and Poetry of Ireland_ (New York, 1882); Douglas Hyde’s _Literary
  History of Ireland_ (London, 1899); _An Historical Pedigree of the
  McCarthys_, by D. McCarthy (Exeter, Eng., 1880); Lower’s _Patronymica
  Britannica_ (London, 1860).

Footnote 17:

  The Spencer name is found in Ireland for many generations, and appears
  under both spellings. Bearers of the name were among the “Forfeiting
  Proprietors” and other Irish who, during the Cromwellian regime, were
  ordered to migrate “To Hell or to Connaught.”

  Many descendants of English settlers in Ireland became thoroughly
  Irish, some dropped their English surnames and assumed Irish ones,
  wedded Irish wives, were rated as “Papists,” and dressed “after ye
  Irishe fashion.”

Footnote 18:

  The author is indebted for the facts in this sketch mainly to
  Peterson’s _History of Rhode Island_.

Footnote 19:

  Including the _Records of the General Assembly_ and Arnold’s _Vital
  Record of Rhode Island_. Other works consulted include Bodge’s
  _Soldiers in King Philip’s War_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 2. Archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings retained as printed.
 3. Footnotes have been re-indexed using numbers and collected together
      at the end of the last chapter.
 4. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 5. Enclosed bold font in =equals=.
 6. Superscripts are denoted by a caret before a single superscript
      character or a series of superscripted characters enclosed in
      curly braces, e.g. M^r. or M^{ister}.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN-IRISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY, VOL. IV, 1904 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


