The Project Gutenberg eBook of Cadet Life at West Point
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Cadet Life at West Point

Author: Hugh T. Reed

Release date: March 25, 2021 [eBook #64925]

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CADET LIFE AT WEST POINT ***






[Illustration]

United States Military Academy

West Point, New York

                                                       _Jan. 10th, 1911._

_Dear Reed_:

_I have delayed sending back the proof sheets of the third edition of
your “Cadet Life at West Point” because I wanted to read them. This I
have finally found time to accomplish, but I really have not the time
to write out my views on the book as I would like to do for you can
appreciate my situation when I tell you that we leave here on the 17th
inst. and the house is completely torn up._

_I think, however, that in addition to having written a very interesting
book you have given the public one full of valuable information,
particularly useful to young men who contemplate entering this academy.
The book recalls many pleasant incidents of our own cadet life and
conditions now are very little changed from our day, especially as we are
to return to the four-year course with entrance for the new class back to
June again._

_With best wishes for the New Year_,

                              _Sincerely_,

                                                          _Fred H Sibley_

Colonel Sibley was the Commandant of Cadets from February 1, 1909, to
January 17, 1911.




PRESS COMMENTS ON CADET LIFE AT WEST POINT


Dedicated to the dear girls who adore the military.

“Entertaining personal reminiscences.”—_Cleveland Plain Dealer._

“Most charming book.”—_The_ (Philadelphia) _Keystone_.

“Especially entertaining to lads with military aspirations.”—(Boston)
_Waverly Magazine_.

“Parents and sisters too come under its spell.”—(Chicago) _Quarterly Book
Review_.

“The various troubles cadets have are clearly described.”—_Cincinnati
Commercial Tribune._

“The reader soon becomes interested.”—_Richmond_ (Ind.) _Palladium_.

“Complete description of the life of a cadet.”—_The_ (Chicago) _Medical
Standard_.

“Through the trying days of plebedom.”—_Indianapolis Journal._

“Until he finally doffs the cadet gray and dons the army blue.”—_Chicago
Tribune._

“The story is told in a very interesting way.”—(New York) _American
Stationer_.

    “Whether you’re young or old, girl or boy,
    Reed’s ‘Cadet Life’ is a book to enjoy;
    It is full of facts, mixed with fun,
    That gives great pleasure to everyone.”

“A very spirited and interesting book.”—(New York) _Scientific American_.

“Stories, poems and accounts of graduation hops and other
amusements.”—The (New York) _Publishers’ Weekly_.

“Also contains statistics which are of sufficient value alone to warrant
publication.”—_Chicago Journal._

“Charming in its personality.”—_Army and Navy Journal._

“Answers many questions one would like to ask.”—_Chicago Inter-Ocean._

“In such a happy vein as to charm American readers of all ages.”—_Army
and Navy Register._

“A pleasing style.”—(New York) _Review of Reviews_.

“The best description of cadet life and also of the workings of the
academy.”—WM. WARD, _clerk in charge (for the last 60 years) of Cadet
Records at West Point_.

“Nothing quite like it in this country.”—(London, Eng.) _Army and Navy
Gazette_.

“A complete book.”—(Orchard Lake, Mich.) _Adjutant_.

“Interesting reading.”—_Chicago Times-Herald._

“About West Point, how to get there, etc.”—_Indianapolis News._

“Just the thing.”—(Atlanta, Ga.) _Southern Star_.

“Of value to guardsmen.”—_The_ (Columbus, O.) _National Guardsman_.

“Interesting reading even for laymen.”—(New York) _Godey’s Magazine_.

“Should be in both normal school and village libraries.”—_Cortland_ (New
York) _Evening Standard_.

Handsome cloth. 12mo. 315 pages. Illustrated. $1.50




[Illustration: THE AUTHOR]





                        CADET LIFE AT WEST POINT

                                   BY
                  COL. HUGH T. REED, LIEUT. U. S. ARMY,
                  _Late Inspector General of Indiana_.
                                AUTHOR OF
                  _Military Science and Tactics, Etc._

                               ILLUSTRATED

                             THIRD EDITION.

                           RICHMOND, INDIANA:
                            IRVIN REED & SON.

                          ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
               COPYRIGHT, 1896 AND 1911, BY HUGH T. REED.




Dedicated


_TO THE DEAR GIRLS WHO ADORE THE MILITARY, ONE OF WHOM HAVING PAID THE
PENALTY OF HER ADMIRATION, IS NOW MY SUPERIOR OFFICER._




PREFACE


I believe it to be well established that the mental habits are fully
as strong as the physical habits of man. That is, thought moves in
grooves day after day and day after day as walks in life do. The habit
of retrospectant thought fastened itself upon me several years ago, and
the habit confined itself largely and almost irresistibly to my life at
West Point. My reflections became almost realisms; I was to all intents
and purposes oblivious of the intervening years; oblivious of accumulated
griefs and sorrows, of successes and of contemporaneous ambitions—I was
indeed a boy again, and at West Point, living over and over and over
again all the scenes leading up to and creating my life at the Nation’s
Military School.

In one of these moods, it occurred to me, entirely for my own
gratification, and possibly to dispossess myself of the habit of thinking
upon the subject, to write a little sketch of those days. I became
interested in the work, and the pages grew in number as memory served me
with inspiration for my narrative, until I had at last completed what
might be called a volume of reminiscences.

As an amusement for him, I read chapter after chapter, as it was written,
to a favorite nephew, and when the manuscript was written and in a
temporary binding, I loaned it to this young relative, who, in turn,
with my consent, loaned it to friends of his, and it was read by these
youngsters and passed from hand to hand. I could not help but realize
the interest that was taken by these young readers in what I had so
carelessly and indifferently written, but at the same time, I should
never have undertaken the publication of my notes if my nephew had not
attended a military school and bombarded me with appeals to send him the
old manuscript, so that his comrades might read about life at West Point.

The old manuscript wouldn’t do, so I edited what I had written, re-wrote
some of the pages, added a few lines here and there, and finally
concluded to publish it without the least expectation that it will
interest very many persons, or bring me any material reward.

I have tried to write it naturally and without any attempt at literary
excellence, and beg most respectfully to offer it to the public as a
grateful tribute of my happiest years.

For valuable data I am indebted to Colonel Charles W. Larned, Lieutenant
Colonel F. W. Sibley, Commandant of Cadets, Captains W. E. Wilder, F. W.
Coe and O. J. Charles, Adjutants, Lieut. M. B. Stewart, Tactical Officer,
Dr. E. S. Holden, Librarian, and Mr. William Ward, in charge of Cadet
Records from 1851 to 1911, all of the Military Academy, and to Lieutenant
Charles Braden, editor of Cullum’s Biographical Register of West Point
Graduates.




INDEX.


    Chapter.                                            Page.

       I. The Appointment                                 13

      II. The Preparation                                 21

     III. The Candidate                                   27

      IV. The Plebe in Camp                               65

       V. The Plebe in Barracks                           87

      VI. The Yearling                                   125

     VII. The Furloughman                                153

    VIII. The Graduate                                   179

     IX. The United States Military Academy              259

      X. The Appendix                                    287




ILLUSTRATIONS.


    The Author                                  Frontispiece

    Might Be a Cadet                                      15

    Topographical Sketch of West Point                    25

    Setting-up Exercises                                  41

    Hop Invitation—Camp McPherson                         63

    Hop Invitation—I. O. C. B.                            81

    Cadet Warrant                                        111

    Hop Invitation—Camp Geo. H. Thomas                   123

    Hop Invitation—Camp Belknap                          151

    Graduating Hop Invitation—Class of 1872              163

    Cadet Captain’s Chevron                              175

    Bell Button for Civilian Coats                       176

    Badge                                                176

    Hop Invitation—Camp Thayer                           177

    Inaugural Ball Invitation                          198-9

    Graduating Hop Invitation—Class of 1873              203

    Bird’s Eye View of West Point as It May Be in 1912   209

    Diploma                                              211

    Bird’s Eye View of West Point in 1902                213

    West Point in 1848                                   215

    West Point in 1825                                   217

    Guard Mount in Camp                                  219

    Color Line                                           219

    Seal of the United States Military Academy           221

    Cadet Hospital                                       221

    Superintendent’s Quarters                            221

    Battery Knox                                         223

    Sea Coast Battery                                    223

    Siege Battery                                        223

    The Academic Building                                225

    Mess Hall                                            227

    Dining Room                                          227

    South Cadet Barracks                                 227

    Cavalry Drill                                        229

    Battalion Marching from Camp to Barracks             229

    Cadet Tent                                           231

    Group of First Classmen                              233

    Group of Furloughmen                                 233

    The Old Cadet Chapel                                 233

    Cadet Room                                           233

    Professors’ Row                                      235

    Flirtation Walk                                      235

    Kosciuszco’s Garden                                  235

    The Old Riding Hall                                  237

    Battle Monument                                      237

    Ponton Bridge                                        237

    Cadet Camp—World’s Fair, 1893                        239

    Officers’ Quarters Above Old North Gate in 1910      241

    Officers’ Quarters Below Old South Gate in 1910      241

    Bachelor Officers’ Quarters in 1910                  241

    The New Cadet Chapel in 1910                         243

    The North Cadet Barracks in 1910                     243

    The Old Washington Headquarters                      245

    Officers’ Mess in 1910                               245

    Cullum Memorial Hall                                 245

    Coat of Arms of the United States Military Academy   247

    Library                                              247

    Siege Battery Drill in 1910                          249

    Artillery and Cavalry Group in 1910                  249

    The New Gymnasium in 1910                            249

    Proposed Staff Quarters                              251

    Headquarters Building                                251

    Inspection in Camp                                   253

    Light Artillery Drill                                253

    Sedgwick’s Monument                                  255

    Professors’ Row                                      255

    Cadet Monument                                       255

    Looking East from the New Chapel in 1910             257

    Perspective View from River on the East              257

    Interior of New Riding Hall                          315




CADET LIFE AT WEST POINT




CHAPTER I.

THE APPOINTMENT.


I was not more than eight years old when I first heard about West Point,
and then I was told that it was Uncle Sam’s Military School; that the
young men there were called cadets; that they were soldiers, and that
they wore pretty uniforms with brass buttons on them. The impression
made upon me at the time was such that I never tired talking and asking
questions about West Point. I soon learned to indicate the site on the
map, and I longed to go there, that I might be a cadet and wear brass
buttons. I talked about it so much that my good mother made me a coat
generous with brass buttons. I called it my cadet coat, and wore it
constantly. Ah! for the day I should be a big boy and be a real cadet.
With a wooden gun I played soldier, and when the war broke out and the
soldiers camped in our old fair grounds, I was in their camp at every
opportunity. The camp was about half-way between our home farm and
father’s store in town, and many is the time I have been scolded for
being so much at the camp. My only regret at that time was that I was not
old enough to enlist, for I loved to watch the drills and linger around
the camp-fires, listening to stories of the war.

I learned a good deal from the soldiers about West Point. They told me
that I could not go there until I was seventeen years old, and not then
unless I was appointed as a cadet by my congressman. They also told me
that I must be a good boy at school and study hard, for the reason that
after securing the appointment I would have to pass a rigid examination
at West Point before admission. This was bad news to me, because we
farm boys never attended school longer than four or five months in
a year. Fortunately, however, the family moved to “town” when I was
fourteen years old. I was then assured that I would have my wish, and I
never missed a day at school. I was so anxious to learn rapidly that I
overtaxed my eyes, and was in a dark room for nearly a year. Still I did
not give up hope, and when my eyesight permitted I returned to school
again.

I found out that there could be only one cadet at a time at West Point
from the same congressional district, and also that there was then a
young man there from my district; still I had hopes of getting there
myself before I got too old, that is, over twenty-one.[1] Then there was
no book published about West Point, and magazines and newspapers never
described it.

[Illustration: “MIGHT BE A CADET.”]

One day I saw by the paper that the Hon. G. W. Julian was at home on a
short visit, and I knew that he was my congressman; hence I wanted to go
at once to see him. I confided in my mother and obtained her permission
to be absent from school that afternoon. So I saddled old John, my
favorite horse, and rode six miles to Mr. Julian’s house. He was at home,
and was very kind to me. He asked my father’s name, and also my name and
age, and he made a note of my address, saying that he might write to
me from Washington. He also said that there would be a vacancy at West
Point, from his district, the next year in June, and that he would make
the appointment soon; that I was the first young man to apply for the
place, but if any one who had served in the war applied for the cadetship
within the next few weeks he would appoint him—that such a person could
be just under twenty-four years of age. Nevertheless, if no old soldier
applied, he would appoint me, as he knew my father well. He then said
that if he did appoint me I must be a good student the next year, and
prepare for the examination at West Point. Upon my return home I did
not talk about West Point any more, nor did I speak to any one except
my mother about having seen Mr. Julian, and I had five brothers and a
sister, too!

About two months after my visit to Mr. Julian, I received a letter from
him, taking it myself from the postoffice, but alas! the writing was such
that I could not read it, although there were but eight words in it, so
I hastened with it to my mother, but she could not read it, either. Then
as I must confide in another person, I decided to speak to my father, and
ask him to read the letter, under promise that he would not talk about
West Point with any one except my mother and myself. He read the letter
at once, and said that the writing was all right, but that the letter did
not mean anything, as Mr. Julian had probably written the same to other
boys. I did not believe this, and was surer than ever of obtaining the
appointment. Many years have passed since then, but the words of that
letter are still fresh in my memory. They are:

“Please inform me in reply your exact age.”

I wanted my father to write Mr. Julian in my behalf, but he declined to
do so, saying that he did not want me to go to West Point. I then got him
to promise not to write “that” to Mr. Julian, and I myself answered the
letter by return mail.

About ten days after this I received another letter from the congressman,
a great large one, in a long envelope, and all I could read of that was
“I have recommended you”; but that was enough, as the appointment itself
was enclosed, and I could read it, and I was a happy boy. I ran home to
show the appointment to my mother, and then to the store to show it to
my father, and also to get him to read the letter to me, which was as
follows:

    “I have recommended you, and enclose herewith your conditional
    appointment as a cadet to West Point, together with certain
    other papers from the War Department. I shall now expect you to
    prepare yourself for the examination next June, and I hope you
    will graduate with high honors, and that afterwards you will be
    loyal and useful to your country.”


THE APPOINTMENT.

    War Department.[2]

                                         Washington, ________ 1868.

    Sir: You are hereby informed, that the President has
    conditionally selected you for appointment as Cadet of the
    United States Military Academy, at West Point, New York.

    Should you desire the appointment, you will report in person
    to the Superintendent of the Academy on the ____ day of
    ________, 1869, for examination. If it be found that you
    possess the qualifications required by law and set forth in the
    circular[3] herewith, you will be admitted, with pay from date
    of admission, and your warrant of appointment will be delivered
    to you.

    Should you be found deficient in studies at the semi-annual
    or annual examinations, or should your conduct reports be
    unfavorable, you will be discharged from the military service,
    unless otherwise recommended for special reasons by the
    Academic Board, but will receive an allowance for traveling
    expenses to your home.

    Your attention is particularly directed to the accompanying
    circular, and it is to be distinctly understood that this
    notification confers upon you no right to enter the Military
    Academy unless your qualifications agree fully with its
    requirements, and unless you report for examination at the time
    specified.

    You are requested to immediately inform the Department of your
    acceptance or declination of the contemplated appointment upon
    the above conditions.

                        Very respectfully,

                                                  ____________
                                                  Secretary of War.

    To ____________

       *       *       *       *       *


                                                ____________, 1868.

    To the Honorable Secretary of War,[4] Washington, D. C.

    Sir: I hereby respectfully acknowledge the receipt of your
    notification of my contemplated appointment as a Cadet of the
    United States Military Academy, with the appended circular, and
    inform you of my acceptance of the same upon the conditions
    named.

    I certify, on honor, that I was born at ________, in the
    County of ________, State of ________, on the ____ day of
    ________, 18__, and that I have been an actual resident of the
    Congressional District of ________ for __ years and __ months.

                              (Signature of appointee) ____________

    I hereby assent to the acceptance by my ________ of his
    conditional appointment as Cadet in the military service, and
    he has my full permission to sign articles binding himself to
    serve the United States eight years, unless sooner discharged.

    I also certify, on honor, that the above statements are true
    and correct in every particular.

                     (Signature of parent or guardian) ____________




CHAPTER II.

THE PREPARATION.


After examining the papers received from the War Department, I found one
that required my father’s signature before I myself could accept the
appointment. My parents both objected to my leaving home, and therefore
did not wish me to go to West Point. I argued that I wanted to go to
college somewhere, and why not let me go where Uncle Sam paid the bills.
At last I won my mother on my side, and then my father, seeing that my
heart was so fixed, signed the paper requiring his signature, and mailed
it to the Honorable Secretary of War, Washington, D. C. This done, I let
the secret out, and all of my boy friends wanted to know how I had gotten
the appointment. I told part, but I did not tell just how I did get it.

After seeing the kind of examination[5] I would have to pass at West
Point the next year, my father decided to send me to the High School at
Ann Arbor, Mich., and to send my brother Charley there with me to prepare
him for the University of Michigan. We entered the High School early in
September. About two weeks afterward the University of Michigan (also at
Ann Arbor) opened, and we observed that many of the candidates for the
freshman class seemed no farther advanced than we thought ourselves, so
we applied, were examined, and admitted to the University. I thought that
if I failed at West Point I could return and graduate at the University
in three instead of four years.

There was a tall young man from Tennessee, who entered the High School
with us, and afterward entered the University, too. He, like myself, had
an appointment to West Point, and was going there the next June, so we
became friends at once, and he and I agreed to study after Christmas for
the West Point examination. After the sophomores quit hazing, all went
well with us, and the year soon passed. I left Ann Arbor on the last day
of April to return home via Lakes Huron and Michigan, and went to Detroit
to take the first steamer of the season around the lakes to Chicago. Upon
arriving in Detroit, I heard that there was to be a muster and inspection
of a regiment of United States troops out at Fort Wayne, a short ride
from Detroit, and as I was to be a soldier, I went to see the sight. As I
looked at the troops (the First U. S. Infantry), I thought that I would
like to be an officer of that regiment when I graduated from West Point,
and singularly enough my wish was gratified. I remained so long at Fort
Wayne that the boat had departed when I returned to Detroit, so I took
train and overtook the boat at Port Huron. While there I went to see Fort
Gratiot, and strange to say, that was subsequently my first army station.
When the steamer stopped at Mackinaw I visited the fort that was there at
that time.

After my return home I reviewed the studies I was to be examined on in
a few weeks, and then started east. I promised my father if I failed to
pass the examination that I would return home at once. Arriving in the
great city of New York, I took passage on the day steamer “Mary Powell,”
and was charmed with the scenery along the Hudson. The first stop was at
the south landing at West Point. I was on the upper deck at the time,
and after seeing my trunk put ashore, I walked leisurely downstairs to
disembark and to my great surprise the boat was fifty feet or more from
shore when I got down. I thought that all steamers made long stops,
for the only other boat that I had ever been on stopped for many hours
every time she landed. The captain would not let me off, and said that I
could get off at Cornwall and take a down boat the same evening. I was
satisfied and went on the upper deck again and saw the passengers who had
landed get into the West Point Hotel ’bus. All the trunks except mine
were put on the top of the ’bus, and it was then driven up the hill,
leaving my trunk all alone on the dock.

When the steamer stopped at Cornwall I this time promptly stepped ashore.
It was about sunset. There were not more than half a dozen buildings in
sight, and not a soul at the dock, and I was the only passenger landing
at that point. I went to one of the houses and inquired the location of
the hotel, and I was informed that it was not open, as it was too early
for summer visitors. I then asked what time the down boat was due, and
was informed that it would be along soon, but that it would not stop. The
West Shore Railroad was not built at that time, and as there was no stage
line over the mountains nor ferry on the river, I began to fear that I
could not get away by the tenth of June, the last day for me to report.
This bothered me more than the hotel accommodations, but I soon found
obliging people and arranged for my lodging and breakfast, and also to be
rowed to my destination the next day.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Topographical Sketch of WEST POINT]




CHAPTER III.

THE CANDIDATE.


    “As the twig is bent, the tree is inclined.”

It was about ten o’clock in the morning of June 8, 1869, when I stepped
from a rowboat on the dock near the Sea Coast Battery at West Point.
The weather was perfect, and my heart was light and free. As there was
neither any person nor conveyance at the dock, I followed the road
winding up the hill to the plain. I stopped to admire the scenery. In
front I beheld a level green plain of one hundred acres or more with
massive buildings peeping through the large elm trees that fringe two
sides of the plain; on either side were high hills; in my rear rolled the
majestic Hudson between the Highlands, with Siege Battery at my feet. As
I gazed around it was to me then, as it is to me now, the most beautiful
of places.

I found my way to the Adjutant’s office in the Administration Building[6]
and reported. I was courteously received and handed the “Instructions
to Candidates” to read. I stated the fact of my trunk having been put
ashore on the south dock and of the Mary Powell carrying me to Cornwall
the previous evening, and I was told that my trunk had undoubtedly been
taken to the hotel, as there was then (and now is) but one hotel at the
Point. And I was also informed that my trunk would be sent to the Cadet
Barracks. After I had complied with the instructions, an orderly, at the
sound of a bell, entered and was directed to escort me to the barracks.
In going through the area we passed some cadets and I overheard such
remarks as “He’ll learn to button his coat.” At the orderly’s suggestion
I buttoned my coat. He took me into a hall, said “This is the door,”
laid down my valise, and left me. The door was the first one on the
right of the eighth division—how well I remember it! I knocked on the
door, and heard a commanding voice say “Come in!”[7] With valise and
umbrella in one hand and cap in the other, I entered. There were two
cadets in the room, seated near a table, and before I had a chance to
speak, I was greeted about as follows: “Leave your things in the hall.
Don’t you know better than to bring them in here?” I stepped into the
hall, left the door open, and while looking for a suitable place to put
my things (for there was neither a hook nor a table), one of these two
cadets cried out: “Lay them on the floor and come in, and don’t be all
day about it, either. Move lively, I say. Shut the door. Stand there.
Come to attention. Put your heels together, turn out your toes, put your
hands by your side, palms to the front, fingers closed, little fingers
on the seams of the trousers, head up, chin in, shoulders thrown back,
chest out, draw in your belly, and keep your eyes on this tack.” While
one cadet was giving commands with great rapidity, the other one fixed
my feet, hands, head and shoulders. “What’s your name? Put a Mr. before
it. How do you spell it? What’s your first name? Spell it. What’s your
middle name? Have none? What state are you from? What part? Put a sir
on every answer. Where’s your trunk? Don’t know? Didn’t you bring one?
Put on a sir; how often do you want me to speak about it?” I explained
how my trunk and I had arrived at different times. “You’re too slow.
You’ll never get along here. Keep your eyes on that tack; turn the palms
of your hands squarely to the front. Did you bring all of the articles
marked ‘thus’? You don’t know what they are? Put on a sir, I tell you.
Didn’t you get a circular telling what articles you should bring? Didn’t
you read it? Now answer me; did you bring the articles marked ‘thus’?
Well, why didn’t you say so at first? Keep your eyes on that tack.” A
wagon drove up and put a trunk on the porch near the window. “About face!
Turn around the other way. Don’t you know anything? Is that your trunk?
It is, is it? Now, let’s see you ‘about face’ properly. Steady. At the
word ‘about’ turn on the left heel, turning the left toe to the front,
carrying the right foot to the rear, the hollow opposite to and three
inches from the left heel, the feet perpendicular to each other. Don’t
look at your feet. Head up. Stand at ‘attention’ till I give the command.
Now, ‘about’ (one of the cadets fixed my feet); at the word ‘face,’ turn
on both heels, raise the toe a little, face to the rear, when the face
is nearly completed, raise the right foot and replace it by the left.
Now, ‘face.’ Ah! turn on both heels. Fix your eyes on that tack again.
Draw in your belly. Throw back your shoulders and stand up like a man.
Now, ‘left, face.’ Don’t you know your left hand from your right? Face
that door; open it. Ah! why don’t you step off with the left foot first?
Pick up your things, follow me, and move lively.” My back was nearly
broken, and I was glad to get out of that room. After going a few steps
on the broad porch on the area side of barracks, a young man in civilian
clothes came out of the next hallway carrying the palms of his hands to
the front. “Come here, Mr. Howard, and help your room-mate carry his
trunk upstairs; step lively, now.” With that introduction Mr. Howard and
I took hold of the trunk. Just then the tall young Tennesseean, whom I
knew at Ann Arbor, passed, carrying the palms of his hands to the front.
We exchanged knowing winks, but did not venture to speak. “What’s the
matter with you? Don’t be all day carrying that trunk upstairs.” Howard
and I tugged away and finally got the trunk upstairs and into the room
designated. Candidates Howard and Knapp had already been assigned to the
same room. “Stand attention, Mr. Knapp. Don’t you know enough to stand
attention when I enter the room? Palms to the front. Put the trunk over
there. Mr. R⸺d, open your trunk and valise and take out everything and
make a list of all you have. Stand attention, Mr. Howard. Take out your
things first and make a list afterward. Put the small articles on this
part of the clothes-press, hang your clothes on those pegs and put your
bedding over there. Study the regulations. Fold your things properly,
put them in their places, and the next time I come in I want to see
everything in place. What did you bring that umbrella for? You will never
need it here. Mr. R⸺d, post your name over there on the ‘alcove,’ put it
on the ‘Orderly Board’ under Mr. Knapp’s name, and put it there on the
clothes-press. Whenever you hear the command, ‘Candidates, turn out,’
button your coats, hasten downstairs and ‘fall in’ in the Area.” Cadet
Hood left the room then, and we sat down, prostrated. Then we proceeded
to get acquainted with one another, and on comparing notes we found that
each one of us had had about the same reception. As Howard and Knapp had
reported the day before, they gave me many pointers, which I appreciated.

The room was good-sized, with two alcoves at the end opposite the window;
but, oh! how uninviting it seemed. No bed, no carpet, no curtains,
and not even shades. The furniture that was in the room consisted of
a clothes-press, that is, shelving arranged for two cadets, but to be
used by three or four candidates, two small iron tables, a wash stand,
an iron mantel and a steam coil with a marble slab on it. H⸺rd and K⸺p
had already carried from the Commissary certain articles for use by all
occupants of the room, as follows: A looking-glass, a wash basin, a water
bucket, a cocoanut dipper, a slop bucket and a broom. They had also
obtained such other articles as were required for their personal use,
such as a chair and a pillow.

The following extract from the “Blue Book” shows the arrangement of
rooms, etc.

White Helmet.—On the clothes-press.

Dress Hat.—On the gun-rack shelf.

Cartridge Box and Bayonet or Sword.—On pegs near gun-rack.

Caps and Sabres.—On pegs near gun-rack.

Rifle.—In gun-rack.

Spurs.—On peg with sabre.

Bedstead.—In alcove against side wall of room, head against rear wall.

Bedding.—Mattress, folded once; blankets, comforter and sheets, folded
separately, so that the folds shall be the width of the pillow, and all
piled against the head of the bedstead, thus: mattress, sheets, pillow,
blankets and comforter; the end of the pile next to the alcove partition
to be in line with the side of the bedstead; this end and the front of
the pile to be vertical.

Clothes-Press.—Books on top against the wall, backs to the front; hair
and clothes brushes, combs, shaving materials, such small boxes as are
allowed, vials for medicines, etc., on top shelf; belts, collars, gloves,
handkerchiefs, socks, etc., on second shelf from the top; sheets, pillow
cases, shirts, drawers, pants, etc., on the other shelves.

Text-Books.—Those in daily use may be upon the tables, except during
Sunday morning inspection.

Arrangement.—All articles of the same kind to be neatly placed in one
pile, folded edges to the front and even with front edge of the shelves.
Nothing to be between these piles and the back of the press, unless want
of room renders it necessary.

Soiled Clothes.—In clothes bag.

Shoes.—To be kept clean, dusted and arranged in line, toes to the front,
along the side near the foot of the bed. Shoe brush in the fireplace.

Woolen Clothing, Dressing Gown and Clothes Bag.—On pegs in alcove,
arranged as follows: Overcoat, dressing gown, uniform coats, jackets,
gray pants, clothes bag and night clothes.

Broom.—Behind the door.

Candle Box.—In fireplace.

Tables.—Against the wall under gas jet or near the window when the room
is dark.

Chairs.—From 8 a. m. to 10 p. m. against the tables when not in use.

Mirror.—At center of mantel.

Wash Stand.—In front of and against alcove partition.

Wash Basin.—Inverted on top of wash stand.

Water Bucket.—Near to and on side of wash stand opposite the door.

Dipper.—In water bucket.

Slop Bucket.—Near to and on side of wash stand nearest the door.

Curtains.—Regulation only allowed.

Calendar.—A small, plain one may be placed on the wall over the gas
fixture.

Clock.—A small plain one may be kept on the mantel.

Bath Towel.—May be hung in the alcove.

Trunks, Pictures, Splashers, Writing Desks, Etc.—Prohibited. There is a
storeroom for trunks.

Floor.—To be kept clean and free from grease spots or stains.

Heating Apparatus.—To be kept clean and free from scratches.

Windows.—Cadets are forbidden to sit at the windows with feet on
the woodwork, or to appear before windows improperly dressed, or to
communicate through windows, or to raise the lower sash more than four
inches during “call to quarters.”

Names.—Uniformly printed to be posted over gun-rack pegs, alcove,
clothes-press and on orderly board over wash stand.

Hours of Recitation.—To be on the mantel on either side of the mirror.

Academic Regulations, Articles of War and the Blue Book.—To be kept on
the mantel.

Laundry.—All clothes sent to the wash to be plainly marked with owner’s
name.

Room Orderly.—Is responsible for the cleanliness and ventilation of the
room, and that articles for joint use are in place.

After having folded and arranged my possessions according to the Blue
Book, as I understood from a hasty perusal of it, I looked out of the
window down into the Area of Barracks, where I saw old cadets passing to
and fro. They carried themselves so very erect that we could not help
but admire them and wish that we too were as straight and walked as well
as they. We observed what small waists they had, and we wondered if they
laced. Another thing we observed was that the cadets looked so much
alike. I had unbuttoned my coat while arranging my effects, and forgot to
button it again, when I heard a quick walk in the hall and then a sharp,
firm, single rap on the door. We all sprang promptly to attention, palms
to the front. Cadet Hood entered and began: “Button your coat, Mr. R⸺d.”
He moved several piles on the clothes-press and disarranged my bedding,
too, saying, “Not folded properly. Why don’t you study the Blue Book? Mr.
Howard, fill your water bucket the first thing every morning. Get the
water from one of the hydrants[8] in the Area. The floor is very dirty;
sweep it properly, invert your wash bowl, and don’t let me have occasion
to speak about these things again.”

The first call for dinner sounded and then we heard, “Candidates, turn
out promptly.” We hastened downstairs. The old cadets were gathering in
four different groups, while the candidates were being put into another
one. Cadets Hood, Allen and Macfarlan were on the watch for candidates,
and they began thus:

“Button that coat. Get down here lively. ‘Fall in.’ Fall in in the rear;
don’t you know better than to get in front of anybody? Palms to the
front. Fix your eyes on the seam of the coat collar of the man in front
of you, and at the second call, face to the left.” Some of the candidates
faced one way and some another, but we were soon straightened out, and
then, “Eyes to the front! What do you mean gazing about in ranks? Each
candidate, as his name is called, will answer ‘Here’ in a clear and
audible tone of voice.” The roll of the candidates was then called. “Why
don’t you answer, Mr. H⸺? Well, then, speak up so that you can be heard.
Mr. ⸺, don’t shout,” and so on till the last name was called. We were
told how to “count fours,” and after the command came something like
this: “Stop counting. Try it over. Count fours. Steady, Mr. ⸺; wait till
the man on your right counts. Eyes to the front. Why don’t you count,
Mr. ⸺! Speak out. Eyes to the front,” and so on. We were now told how
to “wheel by fours,” and at the command, “March,” to step off with the
left foot first. There was a great time after the command, “Fours right,
march,” was given. The cadets on duty over us were kept busy shouting at
and pulling in place, first one candidate and then another, but after
a fashion we got started and followed the cadets to the Mess Hall, and
those on duty over us were kept busy all the way correcting mistakes made
by the candidates.

While en route to dinner we were directed to remove our caps just before
entering the Mess Hall and to put them on again just after leaving it.
Of course we made blunders, and were gently (?) corrected for them. Upon
entering the hall we were directed to certain tables, but told not to
sit down until the command, “Candidates, take seats,” was given. When
each one found a place behind an iron stool (that in my day resembled an
hour glass in shape), the command, “A Company, take seats,” was given,
and then the members of A Company all sat down promptly; then came “B
Company, take seats,” “C Company, take seats,” “D Company, take seats,”
and then “Candidates, take seats.” Immediately after the last command
something like this came: “Sit down promptly. Do you want to be all day
about it? Eat your dinner, and don’t leave the table until the command,
‘Candidates, rise.’”

Dinner was on the table, and there were a good many tables in the big
hall. Each table had seats for twenty-two persons, ten on a side and
one at either end. There were tablecloths, but no napkins, and one
waiter for every two long tables; the waiters did not pass anything, but
brought water, bread, etc., when needed. The cadets (and candidates) at
the ends of the tables did the carving, while those at the center of
the long tables poured the water. At supper and breakfast there were no
tablecloths. Tablecloths and napkins are now furnished for all meals, and
there are cane seat chairs instead of the old iron stools. The tables
of the cadets were divided crosswise in the center by an imaginary line
into two parts, and each part was called a table. The cadets had seats
according to rank, and they always sat in the same seats. First classmen
sat near the end called the head of the table, second classmen next,
third classmen (except the corporals) next, and then fourth classmen,
the latter being at the center of the long tables. The corporals at the
ends of the tables were the carvers, and the fourth classmen poured the
water.[9]

After dinner we were marched back to barracks, and before being dismissed
the candidates were informed that they could do as they pleased until the
bugle sounded “Call to quarters” at 2 o’clock, and then they must repair
promptly to quarters, that is, to their own rooms in the barracks. All
the time that we were in ranks the usual volleys were fired at us, such
as: “Eyes to the front. Head erect and chin in.” After we were dismissed
we were constantly reminded to “carry palms of the hands to the front,”
notwithstanding the fact that we had been told to go where we pleased
for a whole half hour. Some of the candidates went to the sink (i. e.,
water closet),[10] and some of the old cadets went there, too. A number
of them surrounded a poor candidate, called him a plebe or an animal,
and fired dozens of questions at him at once. The madder the plebe got
the more fun it was for the old cadets. As the candidates were not
acquainted with one another, and as they dreaded to meet the old cadets,
they naturally drifted to their quarters, thinking that the safest place
to be, but, alas! some of the old cadets called upon them there. While
they did not mention their names, something like this generally occurred:
“‘Shun, squad. Come to attention, plebes. Palms to the front. What’s your
name? Spell it; spell it backwards. What state are you from? Who’s your
predecessor?’ Say ‘Mr. ⸺.’ Do you think you can pass the ‘prelim’? Where
is Newburg? Don’t know? How do you expect to get in here if you don’t
know where Newburg is? Climb up on that mantel and be lively about it,
too. Now move your arms and say ‘Caw, caw.’ Stop that laughing. Eyes to
the front.” And so on, till the old cadets would slip out in time to go
to their rooms for “Call to quarters.”

At two o’clock came the call, “Candidates, turn out promptly,” and every
candidate turned out and “fell in.” A number were sent back for towels,
and upon returning to the Area were sent to the bathrooms, then in the
basement of D Company quarters. After bathing, some were sent to the
Cadet Hospital for physical examination, and were there told to strip to
the skin, then called one at a time before three Army Surgeons, in full
uniform, who examined the lungs, eyes, ears, teeth and feet, made the
candidates hop first on one foot, then on the other, raise their hands
high above the head, cough, bend over forward, etc. When my turn came I
did not mention anything about ever having been troubled with my eyes.

Upon returning to the barracks we were sent to the Commissary, where each
candidate was given the articles necessary for his own immediate use.
As near as I now remember, I got a chair, a pillow, a piece of soap, an
arithmetic, a slate, a copybook, a quire of “uniform” paper, a history, a
grammar and a geography. Other candidates who, like myself, had brought
the articles marked “Thus*” received the same as I, while those who had
not brought them got two blankets in addition to what the rest of us got.
The books mentioned above are not now issued to candidates. Cadet H⸺d saw
to it that candidates rooming together were provided with a wash bowl, a
mirror, two buckets, etc. When all were fitted out we took up our loads
and returned with them to Barracks, carrying them in our hands or on our
shoulders, as was most convenient. This trip from the Commissary store
across the grassy plain to Barracks has been described thus:

[Illustration: SETTING UP EXERCISES.

The setting up exercises are now taught by the Instructor of Military
Gymnastics and Physical Culture.]

    “Examinations being completed,
      The ‘found’ having fled evermore,
          Then with fear and a sigh
          And blood in the eye,
      Candidates hasten to the store.

    “‘Give me my things,’ in joy a plebe exclaims,
      Then the storekeeper puts on a smile,
          But dispels the illusion
          And causes confusion
      By throwing his goods in a pile.

    “Slowly he carries them across the plain,
      With buckets and broom in the rear;
          But hard is the task,
          He has reason to ask
      If his future abode is quite clear.

    “The looking-glass breaks, the pails rattle loud,
      And the sound echoes from afar;
          Plebe cries in disgust,
          ‘Let me get up and dust,
      I want to go home to my ma.’”

Upon returning to Barracks we were ordered to our rooms, and then to the
shoeblacks, at that time in the basement of B Company quarters, to have
our shoes cleaned and polished, and told to go there, at certain hours,
as often as necessary to keep our shoes in proper order. Candidates whose
hair was considered too long by Cadet H⸺d were sent to the barber’s, at
that time in the basement of C Company quarters. Candidates who had to
shave were directed to shave themselves, as the barber was not permitted
to do anything but cut hair.

At 4:15 p. m. we were turned out for “Squad Drill.” We “fell in”
promptly and were corrected in the manner indicated when we fell in
for dinner. Even now I seem to hear Cadets A⸺n, H⸺d and M⸺n shouting
themselves hoarse at us poor, stupid candidates. There were about twenty
“yearlings,” classmates of Cadets A⸺n and H⸺d, standing around our line,
waiting to get a chance at the candidates, so as to compete with them
and with one another for “Corporal’s chevrons.” We were separated into
squads of four or five to the squad, and a cadet instructor assigned to
drill each squad. Cadet H⸺d had the squad I was in. After all details
were adjusted, the command, “March off your Squads” was given, and then
Babylon was let loose; the candidates could hear the commands of all of
the instructors, and they did not know the voice of their own, hence
there was much confusion. Some of the instructors acted as if they wanted
to terrorize the candidates in their squads, and shouted: “Eyes to the
front. Pay attention to me. What do you mean by listening to others?
Palms to the front,” and so on, for ten or fifteen minutes, and then we
were given a brief “rest.”

Then we were taught how to march and the instructor began thus: “At the
word ‘forward’ throw the weight of the body upon the right leg, the left
knee straight. At the word ‘march’ move the left leg smartly, without
jerk, carry the left foot forward thirty inches from the right, the sole
near the ground, the toe a little depressed, knee straight and slightly
turned out. At the same time throw the weight of the body forward (eyes
to the front), and plant the foot without shock, weight of the body
resting upon it; next, in like manner, advance the right foot and plant
it as above. Continue to advance without crossing the legs or striking
one against the other, keeping the face direct to the front. Now,
‘forward, common time, march.’ Depress the toe, so that it strikes the
ground at the same time as the heel. (Palms of the hands squarely to the
front. Head up.) When I count ‘one,’ plant the left foot, ‘two,’ plant
the right, ‘three,’ plant the left again, ‘four,’ plant the right again,
and so on. Now, ‘One,’ ‘two,’ ‘three,’ ‘four,’” etc. “Bring your feet
down together. Depress your toes,” and so on.

We were taught many things, such as the facings, the exercises, rests,
etc. “In place, rest,” was the most acceptable, but half the pleasure of
that was taken away from the candidates by being often told to “keep one
heel in place.” That first hour at squad drill is not soon forgotten. My
every muscle was sore and I ached all over. Just before we were dismissed
we were informed that we could go anywhere we pleased on Cadet Limits, so
long as we were back a little before sunset, in time for dress parade.
This seemed a great privilege, but wherever candidates went some old
cadets were already there, and greeted them with “Depress your toes,
plebes. Palms to the front. Are you going to be all summer learning how
to march? Squad halt. Right hand salute. What’s your name? Can you sing,
dance or play on the piano? Come here ‘Dad,’ and see this ‘animal.’” And
a thousand and one other equally pleasant sayings.

Dress parade came and went, but the candidates did not participate in the
ceremony out on the grassy plain. They were kept in the Area, and their
positions alternated between “Attention” and “Parade, Rest.” When the
“Retreat Gun” was fired many of them jumped half out of ranks, and then
were gently (?) informed that they were a fine lot of soldiers. “What do
you mean by leaving ranks before you are dismissed?” When we had half a
chance we enjoyed the music of the band, but it was very hard to hear it
and our instructor’s commands at the same time. Soon after parade we fell
in again and marched to supper. On the way to and from the Mess Hall we
were constantly entertained by our cadet instructors by such commands
as, “Eyes to the front,” “Depress your toes,” and “Palms to the front.”
Before being dismissed after supper we were informed that we had half an
hour before “Call to quarters,” and that during that half hour we could
do as we pleased. But that half hour passed just as the other half hours
had passed, that is, by the candidates furnishing amusement for the old
cadets.

Upon going to our rooms at the signal of “Call to quarters,” Cadet H⸺d
called to say that if we expected to pass our preliminary examination
we had better “bone up” for it; he also informed us that we could not
retire until after “Tattoo.” A cadet’s bed is “made down,” when it is
ready to get into, and it is “made up” when it is piled according to
regulations and not ready for use. We were too tired to talk. At 9:30 we
were turned out to Tattoo. After Tattoo I folded each blanket lengthwise
and laid it on the floor, then spread the sheets and comforter on the
blankets, undressed and got in bed, leaving H⸺rd, the room orderly, to
turn out the gas. Our bones did not fit the hard floor very well, but
we soon fell asleep. “Taps” sounded at 10 p. m., and, oh, how sweet and
soothing it was. In a few moments more our room door was opened (for
they are never locked), a dark lantern flashed in our faces and the door
closed again. The same thing was repeated once more during the night, but
this time by an officer of the army, called by the cadets a “Tactical
Officer.” These inspections were made to make sure that our lights were
out and that we were in bed. We slept in the alcoves, heads near the wall
farthest from the door. H⸺rd, K⸺p and I, when fast asleep, were suddenly
awakened. We had been “yanked,” that is, some old cadets had come into
our room, seized our blankets, and with a quick jerk carried us some
distance from the wall, and then ran out of the room. We fell asleep once
more and slept soundly until we were awakened by the “Reveille Gun” that
is fired at sunrise and followed by the beating off of “Reveille.” This
music was very pretty, too, but we could not half appreciate it, as we
had to get up at once, fall in and begin another day. After reveille we
made up our beds. H⸺rd swept out and brought a bucket of fresh water.
Cadet H⸺d inspected our quarters twenty minutes after reveille, and said,
“Mr. H⸺rd, your wash bowl is not inverted, and your floor not half swept.
Attend to them at once.”

We had another hour’s drill before breakfast (omitted now), which made
us very hungry. Sick call sounded soon after this drill, but while the
candidates were all half sick, it was not medicine they wanted, so none
of them went to the hospital. Breakfast was at seven o’clock, and after
it the candidates furnished the cadets with the customary half-hour’s
entertainment before call to quarters sounded. Cadet H⸺d again cautioned
us to “bone up” when he inspected quarters about nine o’clock, and said:
“The mantel is dusty, and the floor very dirty.” Captain H⸺t, a Tactical
Officer of the Army, also inspected us before noon, but he did not say
anything. While I had then been only a day at West Point, so much had
happened that it seemed an age.

About a week passed with much the same routine as for the first day,
except that we had Saturday afternoon, after inspection, to ourselves,
that is, such part of it as we were not busy entertaining old cadets,
and on Sunday morning we had inspection of quarters, and after this
inspection we were all marched to church. On Sunday afternoon we were
permitted to make down and air, or use, our beds, and to enjoy lying
on the soft side of the boards again. The candidates were all marched
to the Episcopal Church, “the” church there at that day. In due time
the Catholics and Methodists attended their own churches, but all
cadets, except Jewish ones, had to attend some church once a week. After
inspection of quarters on Sunday morning, K⸺p became room orderly for the
next week. It was then his duty to sweep and dust the room and to carry
the water needed for himself, H⸺rd and me. The dirt was swept into the
hall to one side of the door, and left there. A policeman, that is, the
janitor, swept the halls, carried out the waste water and scrubbed room
and hall floors, when necessary. It is wonderful how soon we learned many
things, such as to button our coats and spring to attention, palms to the
front, at the sound of footsteps in our hall. At first we made mistakes,
but we soon learned to distinguish the footsteps of our instructors from
those of our fellow-candidates.

There was a story in my day of a gentleman who went with his son when the
latter reported as a candidate, and that while Cadets H⸺d and A⸺n were
putting the son through his first lesson in the office, the father turned
his palms to the front, put his heels together, and otherwise assumed the
position of the soldier.

At the first opportunity I wrote home, but I was very careful not to
mention the hardships I endured, for the reason that I had gone to West
Point contrary to my parents’ wishes, and consequently I was determined
to get through if I could. This reminds me, there were young men in
my class whose parents had sent them there against the wishes of the
candidates themselves, and many of these young men did not want to stay.
Competitive examinations required by some Congressmen for appointments
were not as common in my day as they are now. Some of my classmates
purposely failed on the preliminary examination and West Point is no
place for a young man unless the young man himself wants to go there.

One day Mr. B⸺dy, my predecessor, sent for me to go to his quarters. I
did not know what new trials were in store for me, as I had never been
in any old cadet’s quarters. Mr. B⸺dy invited me to sit down, which I
did for the first time in an old cadet’s presence. We talked for a few
moments about people we both knew at our native places. He then gave me
his “white pants” (about twenty pairs), and said he hoped I would pass
the “prelim” so as to be able to wear them, and that I would graduate
higher than he would.

The “graduating ball” that year was on the night of June 14th, but as
candidates were not expected to attend it, none were present. The next
day the graduating class received their diplomas, discarded cadet gray,
put on “Cit” clothes, said good-byes and left the Point, to return no
more as cadets. We did not know much of the graduating class, but I now
remember the names of more men in that class than in any other at the
Academy, excepting my own. This I account for from the fact that I was
then so much impressed with the importance of a graduate of West Point.
In my eyes he seemed to be a greater man than the Superintendent, in fact
there was no comparison.

There was a change made on graduating day among the cadet officers. At
the next drill Cadet H⸺d appeared with pretty gold lace chevrons on his
coat. He wore them on the sleeves of his dress coat, below the elbow,
and he was proud to have everybody know that he was a “Corporal” now. I
promptly congratulated him, and he said, “Thank you, Mr. R⸺d,” instead
of reprimanding me for speaking without having been first spoken to. In
a few days more the new second class men put on “Cit” clothes, and left
on furlough. It seemed strange to me that these cadets seemed just as
anxious to take off the cadet gray as the candidates were to put it on.

Before the departure of the graduates and furloughmen the candidates
learned that there were four trunk rooms[11] in the angle of Barracks,
one for the cadets of each company. They learned this by carrying trunks
from there to the rooms of the graduates and furloughmen. I soon learned
that I got along the easiest by saying as little as possible and doing
about as I was told. The candidates who talked much or who bragged on
what they knew, especially about military matters, had the hardest time.
These poor fellows were called “too fresh,” or “rapid,” and, as the
cadets expressed it, they had to be “taken down.”

It was a common thing for old cadets to enjoy a call upon candidates
after supper and on Saturday afternoons. And it was difficult at first
for candidates to become acquainted with one another, as so much of their
leisure (?) time was taken up answering questions, standing on chairs,
tables and mantels, reading press notices about themselves, singing, and
in fact doing almost everything old cadets told them to do. I have heard
many cadets when they were “plebes” or “animals,” declare that they would
not do so and so, but they always did as they were told, and they were
quick about it, too. It is strange what control old cadets have over
“plebes.” They never laid hands on candidates except when they yanked
them.

We soon discovered that the cadets who found especial delight in being
in the society of plebes were generally “yearlings,” that is, those
who had themselves been plebes only the year before. But “yearling”
instructors[12] seldom deviled plebes in their own squads.

Mail arrived every day, and was sorted over, that for the cadets and
plebes in each division was dropped on the floor in the halls near the
entrances and the word mail called out in a loud tone of voice. Every one
expecting mail buttoned up his coat and hastened to get such as might be
for him. Now the policemen deliver mail to the cadets in their rooms.[13]

In a few days more the candidates were sent in sections of about a
dozen to the section for their preliminary or entrance examination. The
section I was in was sent to a room having tables, chairs and writing
materials, and we were here examined in writing and spelling. There was
but one officer present, and after a certain time we put our names on
and handed our papers to him whether we had finished them or not. We
were next sent to another room, where there were about a half a dozen
members of the Academic Board, and as many other army officers.[14]
Each candidate, as his name was called, was assigned a subject and then
sent to a blackboard. The first one called was numbered one, the second
numbered two, and so on, until five or six candidates were sent to
different blackboards. Each was directed to write his name and number at
the upper right hand corner of the board, to put such data or work on
the board as he wished, and when ready to recite to pick up a pointer
in his right hand and face about. While those sent to the blackboard
were getting ready to recite, another candidate was sent to the center
of the room, facing the examiners, and then questioned by one of them.
After finishing with the candidate on questions, No. 1 was called upon
to recite, and after he was through, another candidate was assigned a
subject and sent to the board, and so on. Some of the candidates were
self-possessed, and made good recitations and ready answers to questions,
while others trembled all over and lost control over themselves, their
hearts got up into their throats or went down into their boots. The
examination here was in grammar, history, and geography. We were then
sent to another room before as many other Professors and Army Officers
for examination in arithmetic and reading. I was satisfied with my
examination up to this time. After the assignments to the blackboards I
was called upon to read. I began to tremble, and had much difficulty in
turning to the page designated. I read very poorly, because I could not
hold the book steady, and the words on the page danced so that it was
hard for me to catch them. I was then told to put down the book and was
questioned in arithmetic. Professor C⸺h asked me a number of questions,
the answers to which I knew perfectly well, yet all the answer I could
make was “I don’t know, sir.” Professor C⸺h then talked kindly and said
how important it was to me, that I answer the questions, because if I
did not answer properly that I would be found deficient and sent home.
I then said that the old cadets had told me he would “find” me, and I
believed he would. After having said this I got courage to ask to be
sent to the blackboard. My request was granted, and I had no trouble in
writing answers to every question, or to solve any problem given me, but
for the life of me I could not turn my back to the board and tell what I
had put on it; but fortunately I could point to anything called for. The
preliminary examinations the next year were written, and they have been
written ever since, which is decidedly the best, as some of my class were
so badly frightened that they did not know what they said, and some who
failed were graduates of good schools, or had passed splendid competitive
examinations for their appointments. In a few days the result of the
examination was announced, and I was happy to write home that I was one
of the lucky ones to enter West Point, and be a “new Cadet” instead of a
“Candidate.” Those of us who were fortunate enough to pass were sent to
the Commissary[15] for “plebe-skins,” that is, rubber overcoats, caps and
white gloves, and we were measured for uniform, clothes and shoes, and
for fear perhaps that we might get lazy another hour’s drill, from 11 a.
m. to 12 m., was given us. From now on we wore caps and white gloves at
all infantry drills.

The new cadet whose name comes first in alphabetical order is the
“class-marcher” whenever the class is called out by itself, and it is his
duty to call the roll of the class and to report absentees. After our
preliminary examination Baily became the class-marcher, and he marched us
over to the Library, where we took the oath of allegiance.[16] We were
now assigned to Companies, the tallest were put in A and D and the rest
in B and C Companies, but the new cadets were still drilled by themselves
in small squads, then in larger ones, and later on all in one squad as a
company.

W⸺r of my class wore a plug hat when he reported, and he was sorry for
it many times. He was the left file of Mr. H⸺d’s squad. One day we
were drilling on the Cavalry plain,[17] and there were many ladies and
gentlemen watching the drill. We were marching in line at double time,
and Mr. H⸺d gave the command, “By the right flank, march.” Three of us
marched to the right, but Mr. W⸺r went off to the left all by himself.
Everybody near laughed, even Mr. H⸺d suppressed a grin, and then scolded
the new cadets for laughing in ranks. Mr. W⸺r chewed tobacco, and this,
too, caused him many unhappy moments, but after having been repeatedly
reprimanded for chewing tobacco and told to spit it out he quit the
practice in ranks.

There was a young man who could not keep step, yet he tried hard to do
so. When in front he threw everybody behind him out of step and at other
times he would walk all over the heels of the man in front of him. I do
not remember whether he was found deficient physically or mentally, but
he was not there long. This reminds me of the “Awkward Squad.” It was
composed of those who were particularly slow in doing what they were told
to do. Tired and sore as they were from the frequent drills, I have seen
members of the Awkward Squad practice alone, determined to get out of it,
which, of course, they eventually did.

We studied the Blue Book, but the most of the regulations were learned by
having them beaten into our heads by the old cadets. We did not then have
a copy of the Drill Regulations to study, but we learned them in the same
way that we learned most of the Regulations in the Blue Book.

We were now instructed in many things besides Squad Drill. For instance,
we were informed that we would be reported for all delinquencies, that
is, for all offenses committed against the Regulations, that the reports
would be read out daily after parade, and be posted the next day in a
certain place; that we must go there every day to see the list; that when
there were reports against us we must copy the exact wording of each
report and then write an explanation for it; that we must write as many
explanations as there were reports against us, and further, that for all
official communications we must use “Uniform Paper” (i. e., paper of a
certain size) and no other.

New cadets are taught to use as few words as possible in their
explanations. One evening at Dress Parade, a plebe raised his hand and of
course he was reported for it, and the reason he gave in his explanation
for raising his hand in ranks was, “Bug in ear.”

The following illustrates the character of the reports posted against
cadets, to-wit:

    REPORTS.

    Floor not properly swept at A. M. inspection.

    Bedding not properly folded at police inspection.

    Late at dinner formation.

    Calling for articles of food in an unnecessarily loud tone of
    voice at supper.

    Gloves in clothes-press not neatly arranged at morning
    inspection.

    Appearing in Mathematical Section Room with shoes not properly
    polished.

    Inattention in Mathematical Section Room.

    Shoulder belt too short at inspection.

    Dust in chamber of rifle at inspection.

    In dressing gown at A. M. inspection.

    Shoes at side of bed not dusted at A. M. inspection.

    Hair too long at weekly inspection.

    Absent from formation for gymnasium at 12 M.

    Orderly light in quarters after taps.

    Late at reveille.

    Absent from quarters 9 A. M.

    Wheeling improperly by fours at drill.

    Not seeing to it that a cadet who was late at breakfast was
    reported.

    Coat not buttoned throughout at reveille.

    Cap visor dusty at guard-mounting.

The discipline is very strict, more so by far than in the Army, but the
enforcement of penalties for reports is inflexible rather than severe.
The reports are made by Army Officers, and by certain cadets themselves,
such as file-closers and section-marchers, and the cadets make by far
the greatest number of reports against one another, but no cadet ever
reports another except when it is his duty to do so. If he fails to
report a breach of discipline he himself is reported for the neglect.
Cadets may write explanations for all reports against them, but they
must write an explanation for absence from any duty or from quarters;
for communicating at blackboard in section room; for neglect of study or
duty; for disobedience of orders; for failure to register for a bath, and
for failure to report departure or return on permit where such report is
required.

When the Commandant accepts an explanation as satisfactory he crosses off
the report, and four days after the date of reports, for which either no
explanations or unsatisfactory ones have been received, he forwards them
to the Superintendent, and he causes a certain number of demerits to be
entered against a cadet for each report in a book kept for that purpose,
and which the cadets may see once a week. Any cadet receiving more than
one hundred demerits[18] in six months is dismissed from the Academy for
deficiency in discipline. The result is that cadets invariably write
explanations, and the form now used is as follows:

                                  West Point, N. Y., ____ __, 19__.

    Sir:

    With reference to the report, “Absent from 9:20 A. M. class
    formation,” I have the honor to state that I did not hear the
    call for this formation. I was in my room at the time. The
    offense was unintentional.

                        Very respectfully,

                                                JOHN JONES,
                                     Cadet prt. Co. “B,” 4th class.

For the first few weeks demerits are not counted against new cadets, but
to teach them how to write them, explanations must be submitted for all
reports. Whenever a cadet is reported absent, and he is on Cadet Limits,
he is sure to write an explanation stating this fact and anything
more he may have to say, because if he fails to do so he is tried by
Court-Martial.[19]

A “permit” is a document that grants certain privileges to the cadet
named in it. A map of “Cadet Limits” is posted where all may see it, and
when a cadet desires to visit friends at the hotel or at an Officer’s
quarters, or go to the Dutch Woman’s, i. e., the confectioner’s, or to
the dentist’s, he must write an official letter to the Commandant of
Cadets (or to the Adjutant of the Military Academy, as the case may be),
setting forth what duty, if any, he wishes to be excused from, and the
exact time he wishes. This letter will be returned with an endorsement
granting all, a part or none of his request, and the cadet must govern
himself accordingly.

From now on we had to make out a list of such articles as we wanted or
were instructed to get from the Commissary. An account is kept by the
Treasurer with each cadet, who is credited with his deposit, and also
with his pay,[20] and he is charged for everything furnished him, such as
board, washing, wearing apparel, bedding, books, gas, policing barracks,
polishing shoes, etc. At his option a cadet is also charged for boats,
hops, etc., and when out of debt with such luxuries as new clothes, hop
gloves, hop shoes, or $2.00 per month for confectioneries at the “Dutch
Woman’s.”

As time wore away we felt less fatigue from drill, and found more
pleasure in life, and letters borne were quite cheerful.

    NOTE 1. At present the new 5th classman is received by cadet
    officers under the immediate supervision of an officer of the
    Tactical Department and his reception is strictly in accordance
    with the requirements of military discipline and courtesy.
    The discipline is, of course, of the strictest and is rigidly
    enforced, but the life of the newcomer is so hedged about by
    orders and is so carefully guarded by those who have him in
    charge, that it is doubtful if a young man entering any school
    or college in the country would be subjected to less annoyance
    or embarrassment than would fall to his lot at the Military
    Academy.

    NOTE 2. At present each table seats 10 cadets, and the cadets
    are about equally divided among the different classes. One
    first classman sits at the head of each table; he is officially
    designated “The Commandant of Table,” and is responsible for
    order at his table.

    NOTE 3. The mail is now received and distributed by company in
    the Cadet Guard House, and at a signal on the trumpet a cadet
    private from each division of barracks, detailed for a week
    at a time, reports at the Guard House, gets the mail for his
    division, and distributes it to the proper rooms.

    NOTE 4. In addition to demerits cadets receive other
    punishments for certain classes of offenses; these consist of
    confinement to room during release from quarters for a certain
    number of days, or, of walking (equipped as a sentinel) for a
    certain number of hours on certain days in the area of barracks.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: CAMP McPHERSON

The Pleasure of your company is requested at the hops to be given by the
Corps of Cadets every Monday Wednesday and Friday Evening during the
encampment

MANAGERS

FOR THE FIRST CLASS

P. S. BOMUS. W. S. EDGERLY. S. WARREN FOUNTAIN. F. V. GREENE. OTTO L.
HEIN. DEXTER W. PARKER. CLARENCE A. POSTLEY. W. R. QUINAN. EDWD G.
STEVENS.

FOR THE THIRD CLASS

JAMES ALLEN. W H. CARTER. G. F. ELLIOTT. HARRY A. LANDON. J. A. RUCKER.
W. F. ZEILIN.

West Point

N.Y. 5th July 1869.]




CHAPTER IV.

THE PLEBE IN CAMP.


About two weeks after I reported we were directed to prepare to go to
Camp McPherson, a half mile or so from Barracks, out beyond the Cavalry
plain, near old Fort Clinton. We were told just what articles to take
for use in camp, and that we must put the balance of our effects in our
trunks and carry them to the trunk rooms in the angle. We sorted out
our camp articles, and each cadet made a bundle of his small things,
and used a comforter or a blanket to hold them. D⸺n, M⸺s, and I, having
arranged to tent together, we helped one another store away our trunks.
When the call sounded to “fall in” we fell in with our bundles, brooms
and buckets, and marched over to the camp. There were trees all around
the camp site, with quite a grove at the guard tents. The tents were all
pitched and they looked very pretty through the trees, with the trees and
green parapet of Fort Clinton as a background, which could be seen over
the tops of the white tents as we approached the camp. The tent cords
were not fastened to pegs in the ground, but to pegs in cross-pieces
supported upon posts about four feet high, which brought the Company
tents only four or five feet apart. All of the tents for cadets were
wall tents, and each had a “fly” on it. There was a wooden floor, a gun
rack, and a keyless locker (that is, a four-compartment long box), and
a swinging pole hung about eighteen inches below the ridge pole of the
tent, and nothing else in it. After the assignment, which, of course, was
made according to rank, we proceeded to our respective tents, that were
to be our homes till the 29th of August, the day to return to Barracks.

The “Yearlings” and first classmen, too, began to take a greater interest
in the plebes than ever. They were anxious to teach them how to fix up
their tents, and this is the way they did: “Come here, Plebe, and I’ll
show you how to fix up your tent. Untie those bundles, fold the blankets
once one way then once the other way; that’s it. Now pile them in the
rear corner over there, farthest from the locker; put the folded edges
to the front and inside; that’s not right, turn them the other way; now
that’s right. Lay the pillows on the blankets, closed ends toward the
locker; that’s it; now fold the comforters just like you folded the
blankets, and pile them the same way on top of the pillows; that’s it.
Why, you’re an old soldier, ain’t you? Straighten the pile a little, so
that the edges are vertical; that’s it. Now hang the mirror up there
on the front pole; that’s it. Put the washbowl out there against the
platform, bottom outward; that’s it. Put the candle-box behind the
rear tent pole. Put the white pants, underclothes, etc., in the locker.
Throw the overcoats, gray pants, etc., on the pole. There, that’ll do.
Say, wait a minute. When you go after water, why I want some; just set
the bucket down there by the washbowl when you come back.” After having
been given several lessons the plebes were permitted to fix up their own
tents, and in a very short time every tent was ship-shape. The yearlings
kindly showed the plebes how to clean rifles, too, and this is the way
they did it: “Come here, Plebe, you’ll soon be getting your guns, so I’ll
teach you how to clean yours; just get that gun over there in my rack;
that’s the one; get the cleaning materials in the candle-box, take out
a rag, put oil on it; that’s it. Lay the gun in your lap, muzzle to the
left, half-cock the piece, open the chamber. Why, you’re doing well.
See the rust in the breech block? Well, get a small stick out of the
candle-box, put a bit of the rag over it, pour a little oil on the rag,
now be quick, rub it on the rusty place, rub hard, elbow grease is what
counts most, so don’t be afraid to use plenty of it,” and so on, till
the yearling’s gun showed an improvement. “I’ll call you again soon to
give you another lesson; that’ll do now.” Strange as it may appear, even
the first classmen condescended to teach us some things, and even the
cadet officers showed us how to clean their breast plates. The old cadets
never told us, in so many words, to do anything of a menial character,
but their broad hints and insinuating ways were very persuasive. Every
day the plebes were called to the tents of the Army Officers in charge
of cadet companies, and asked if they had any complaints to make against
upper classmen, and the plebes invariably answered “No, sir.”

We continued to take our meals in the Mess Hall, and we marched to and
fro as usual, but as the distance was a half mile or more we were now
cheered en route (notwithstanding the plebes still carried palms to the
front) by the inspiring music of fifes and drums; and we now sat at
tables with the old cadets, and had the pleasure of pouring water for
them before helping ourselves, no matter how thirsty we might be, but
such is the life of a plebe, and it is a necessary part of his training.

The first day in camp we were initiated in police duty; the other
classmen turned out with us, and, as usual, they did the talking and we
did the work. The detail from each company had a wheelbarrow, a shovel,
and a broom. The grounds, to us plebes, seemed clean when we began, but
we got half a wheelbarrow load of dirt all the same, which we dumped into
“police hollow,”[21] near camp and just west of Fort Clinton. We gathered
up burnt matches, cigar stumps, tobacco quids, bits of paper, etc.
Whenever there was a sign of rain we turned out and loosened tent cords,
and after a rain we turned out and tightened them—always by command, of
course. We dreaded the nights in camp, but we were not yanked often,
unless we got too fresh or rapid, and then, of course, we had to be taken
down.[22]

The parade ground was changed during camp from the grassy plain in front
of Professor’s Row to the space between the guard tents and the west line
of company tents. In fair weather the battalion stacked arms on the camp
parade ground, and the colors were furled and laid on the center stack.
The arms and colors, that is, the United States flag, were left there
from after guard mount till 4 p. m., and a sentinel posted to require
everybody crossing his post, which is known as the “Color Line,” to
salute the colors by lifting the cap.

We plebes were very anxious to get guns, but after we did get them we
wished we did not have them, for we were again put into small squads and
drilled three times a day, notwithstanding the fact that our right arms
were very sore, and each rifle seemed to weigh a ton, and, again, we had
to spend several hours a day, for weeks, cleaning the guns before they
would pass inspection. Each cadet knows his own gun by the number on it.
The upper classmen had already taught us how to clean their guns, so we
knew something about cleaning our own, and they now were considerate
enough to allow us more time to ourselves, and some of the plebes
finished cleaning their guns in less than an hour’s time. But, alas! at
the first drill with arms the cadet instructors told them that their
guns, cartridge boxes, and waist plates were very dirty. After drill
we set to work on them again, but still they were said to be dirty. In
the course of time we were told that our guns were passable, and later
on that they were in fair condition. We soon learned to attend to them
immediately after a rain, as it was easier to clean them then than after
they had stood awhile.

We were kept busy at first complying with requests (?) of upper classmen,
but they were very considerate and dispensed with our services long
enough to let us attend drills three times a day, police service twice a
day, and to other military duties. We were still required, both in and
out of ranks, to carry palms of the hands to the front, but nothing more
was said about depressing the toes.

Cadets are encouraged to be patriotic, and they always celebrate Fourth
of July. This year, as the Fourth fell on Sunday, the exercises were held
on the next day.

    NOTE 1. At my time hazing, or deviling, consisted of little
    more than harmless badgering, which had the effect of reducing
    a possibly conceited or bumptuous youth to a frame of mind more
    consistent with the requirements of military discipline. In
    time, however, it developed into practices which it was deemed
    advisable to discontinue, and hazing has entirely disappeared
    from the Academy.

                  UNITED STATES MILITARY ACADEMY.

                          July 5th, 1869.

                            President,

    Cadet E. E. Wood                                    Pennsylvania

                        Marshal of the Day,

    Cadet J. Rockwell                                       New York

                            PROGRAMME.

                             Overture.

                              Prayer.

                              Music.

            Reading of the Declaration of Independence,

    Cadet E. M. Cobb                                      California

                              Music.

                             Oration,

    Cadet E. S. Chapin                                          Iowa

                              Music.

                           Benediction.

                              Music.

Plebe life was very trying, especially on H⸺e of my class, and he, being
something of a poet, reduced his thoughts to writing, which he showed to
his classmates. They said that he had expressed the situation very well,
indeed. Some of the yearlings heard of H⸺e’s poetry, so he was persuaded
(?) to read it to them, and then to sing it. His poetry was so well
received by the yearlings that the first classmen wanted to hear it, too,
so at their invitation (?) H⸺e both read and sang it for them. And, at
the request of a number of upper classmen, he made copies of his songs
for them. Other plebes were requested (?) to make copies of the copies,
and the following are copies of H⸺e’s copies that were made for me by a
plebe in my yearling camp, viz.:

THE BIG MENAGERIE.

    Attention, all ye forlorn Plebes,
      While the story I relate,
    Of how I came to fall into
      My present lost estate.
    A moment only dry your tears
      And listen unto me,
    And I’ll describe my experience
      In this big menagerie.

    The first day that I reported
      My heart was full of joy,
    And to all intents and purposes,
      I was a bully boy.
    A stunner in my native town,
      I thought I’d easily
    Upon my muscle go right through
      This big menagerie.

    But, ah! full soon that fatal day
      My crest began to fall,
    And my spirits came down mighty fast
      When I got to the Mess Hall.
    My folly and my sauciness,
      They soon took out of me,
    And made me sing a different tune,
      In this big menagerie.

    They put me up in the window,
      Attention made me stand.
    And I had to dance and sing and speak
      At everyone’s command.
    I tried to run, but soon found out
      That my rapidity
    Was not the kind of game to play,
      In this big menagerie.

    The first time that I went on guard,
      The night was dark as pitch,
    They took my gun and then yanked me
      Right in Fort Clinton’s ditch.
    The Corporal I called aloud,
      But not a step came he,
    And then I learned another dodge
      In this big menagerie.

    But after all I’d been through,
      They said I was not tame,
    And that they would complete the cure,
      By giving me another name.
    They called me for some gay old cuss,
      Who’d been dead a century,
    And now I’m known as De la Rive,
      In this big menagerie.

    All day I police, scrub and drill,
      Till my troubles make me weep,
    And when the day, is over,
      I’m denied the boon of sleep,
    But all the night lie trembling,
      From Taps to Reveille,
    For fear I really will be yanked
      In this big menagerie.

    My frolics, joys and amusements,
      Are all knocked into smash,
    And pleasures all concentrated are
      In eating Mess Hall hash.
    And should I meet a lady fair,
      I dare not speak to she,
    That would be too fast for a Plebe,
      In this big menagerie.

    They call me beast and vile reptile,
      And goodness only knows,
    I’d rather be a kangaroo,
      In one of those circus shows,
    For all the real animals
      Are happier far than we,
    For they don’t have any squad drill
      In their menagerie.

    The lions, tigers, bears and wolves
      Can never feel our woes,
    For whoever heard of an elephant
      Depressing his great toes.
    And even the little monkeys
      Are happy, gay and free,
    And carry their hands just as they please
      In their menagerie.

    But soon this camp will end, and then
      My troubles will be o’er,
    I’ll drop the beast from off my name,
      And sing this song no more.
    But where’er I roam in years to come,
      On land or on the sea,
    I’ll ne’er forget my sufferings
      In this big menagerie.

A PLEBE’S LAMENTATION.

      Oh, Lord, will I never get done
      A rubbing on this rusty gun.

    Chorus—
      I wish I was at home,
      I wish I was there, too.

      It makes me sigh, it makes me fret,
      To clean this rusty bayonet.

    Chorus—

      And all day long, in rain or shine,
      We’ve got these darned old tents to line.

    Chorus—

There were a good many more verses to this song, and songs written by
others of my class, but I have forgotten them.

Uniforms were issued to the plebes as fast as they were made, and in a
few weeks all were uniformed. The only pocket in the whole suit was a
watch pocket in the pants. We were permitted to carry a watch, but not
a chain. Our handkerchiefs were tucked in the breasts of our coats.
After getting uniforms we were sent to the trunk rooms to put away our
cit clothes, as we were not allowed to keep them in either our tent or
barrack room. In a few weeks the plebes were admitted to the battalion,
at first to march to and from meals, and then for parades, but they still
had to carry disengaged hands, palms to the front.

After supper we were permitted to bathe in the Hudson at Gee’s Point, and
many of us availed ourselves of the privilege. As I have said, soon after
reporting, I wondered if the old cadets laced. Well, now, when bathing,
I discovered they did not lace. Still, I wondered why old cadets’ waists
were so much smaller than plebes’ waists.

Every day, especially during guard-mount, parades, and band practice,
there used to be many ladies and other visitors under the trees near the
guard tents. The upper classmen seemed to enjoy being with them, but the
plebes were seldom wanted there. The plebes used to hear that there were
hops three times a week during camp, but that is about all they knew of
hops. However, they went to the old fencing room in the Academic Building
and took dancing lessons, and as no ladies were admitted they danced with
one another.

At last the time arrived for us to go on guard, for there was a chain
of cadet sentinels all around the camp. We dreaded our first night on
post, but each plebe had to experience it. Our guns were not loaded,
and we had no cartridges; the rifle with the bayonet on is all we had
to protect ourselves with. It was amusing afterwards to compare notes
of our experiences. Some who had boasted most fared the worst. Some had
had their rifles taken away, some had been tied to a tree, some rolled
down into Fort Clinton ditch[23] alongside of Posts No. 2 and No. 3.
Others had been frightened by ghosts, or confused by numerous parties
approaching at the same time from different directions. Some replies to
the challenge being a band of Indians, a body of armed troops, and the
Prince of Wales. Of course, the plebe would call for the corporal of the
guard, but this official never got around in time to see anyone, except
the sentinel. The poor plebe was then taken to task for allowing himself
to be disarmed, or for not detaining parties till the corporal arrived.
When questioned as to who the parties were the answer invariably was “I
could not recognize any of them.” When the old guard marched off the next
morning each member fired three shots at a target.[24] When it came M⸺s’
time to fire he was badly frightened because he had never fired a gun.
And when asked why he did not close his left eye when aiming he said that
no one had told him to close it.

On the 12th of August we again visited the trunk rooms, and this time to
put away our dress coats, white pants, dress hats, etc., as we were to
go on a campaign. A knapsack and a half of a shelter tent were issued to
each cadet. After packing our knapsacks and getting everything, except
our wall tents, in readiness, we fell in at the sound of the drum. Our
wall tents were left standing with the walls fastened down and the flaps
tied in front. To the time of “The Girl I Left Behind Me” we marched in
a drenching rain about a dozen miles westward up into the mountains;
halted, stacked arms, unslung knapsacks, and unloaded the big six-mule
wagons that had followed us. We then pitched the “A” tents that were
provided for our use now; we then dug a trench around each tent, and
so as not to lie in the mud we cut boughs to sleep on. We then got our
rifles and knapsacks, and were soon at home again, but this time in more
contracted quarters. We were now taught to live at Camp Lookout in
regular army style, and as there is no delinquency book in the army we
had none in this camp. We ate army rations and slept on the ground. We
built camp fires, sang songs, and otherwise enjoyed our freedom, for no
one said anything about palms to the front out there in the mountains.
The camp was in the woods, between Long Pond and Round Pond. We obtained
drinking water from one, and utilized the other to wash and to bathe
in. We remained out there about ten days, and each cadet learned to do
guard duty in the woods. Members of the guard had to cut poles for their
shelter tents, and button two or more pieces together for use at night,
and they were needed, too, as it rained more than half the time we were
in the mountains. Between rains, when not on duty, we roamed through the
woods and over the hills. There were many laurel bushes all about us, and
one day a first classman said that he wanted a nice root to make a pipe,
and that I could get it with a hatchet and spade. I took the hint and dug
about half a dozen good roots. I put the two best ones in the breast of
my gray jacket and gave the others to the first classmen. I afterwards
made myself two fine pipes, and I have one of them now. Years afterwards
that first classman and I met, and the first thing I did was to show him
my pet pipe and thank him for it. He admired the pipe and my cheek, too,
for having kept the best root.

As soon as we returned to Camp McPherson palms of the hands were turned
to the front again and the usual routine there resumed.

Some of the yearlings said that certain of the plebes had become “too
fresh” out in the mountains, and as the ordinary methods would not tame
them down a few fights in Fort Clinton were necessary. Seconds were
chosen, and soon nearly every cadet in camp knew that there would be
a fight in Fort Clinton on a certain day during the supper hour. Fort
Clinton is just across Posts Nos. 2 and 3. Those who desired to witness
a fight assembled at the ice water tank, near which the Posts of Nos. 2
and 3 meet. Then when the two sentinels on these posts were far apart
and their backs toward one another (which is against the rule) across
the posts would dash the Fort Clinton party, and strange to say neither
sentinel would see any unauthorized person or persons cross his post.
When the referee calls time the principals and seconds are in place and
the fight begins. Fists only are used in these fights, and as soon as
either side calls enough, or either principal fails to come to time,
the fight is over. All return to camp, the bruises are bathed, and if
necessary one or both principals go to the hospital, and the sick report
the next morning shows one or two names with “contusions” as the cause
of the disability. Unless the army officers on duty at the Point have
“official knowledge” of a cadet fight no notice is taken of it. When
a dispute arises that only a fight will settle and the parties to the
dispute are unevenly matched the result may be one or two fights. The
offending cadet must fight, and a classmate of the other cadet about
his size and strength is selected to do battle with him. Sometimes the
offended cadet must fight a man of his size, and then there are two
fights.

[Illustration: I. O. C. B.

The pleasure of your company is respectfully solicited at a Hop
Extraordinary, to be given on the evening of July 29th, under the
auspices of the “Confirmed Bachelors” of the Class of 18—.

    F. G. SCHWATKA,
    JAS. E. SHORTELLE,
    U. G. WHITE,
    Managers.

West Point, July 28, 1869.]

We plebes were sent to the river a number of times to assist the first
classmen to build pontoon bridges, and we rendered very valuable
assistance, too, by carrying all heavy timbers used and helping to get
the boats in place for the timbers to be laid upon them.

    NOTE 1. Fort Clinton ditch, then along the north side of the
    camp ground, was filled up and that part of the parapet removed
    long ago, the major part of this fort being now used for an
    extension of the camp.

RETURN OF THE FURLOUGH CLASS.

    There’s a stir in Camp, as all observers may see,
    ’Tis a moment of interest, a moment of glee.

    The “Furloughs” are coming, and now must be near;
    There is dust, there is shouting, the “Furloughs” are here.

    We welcome you back to the Camp and the plain,
    There your favorite “Tac” will drill you again.

The 28th of August is a day every graduate remembers, for it is then
the furloughmen return. I can see them now rushing[25] into camp. That
evening there was a great time out on the color line; we plebes were
turned out for the last time to amuse upper classmen. H⸺e and others sang
their songs. Some of them had been sung so often that everybody knew them
and joined in. The evening was a perfect one, and there were many ladies
under the trees near the guard tents, who heaved a sigh to think that all
gayeties were over at West Point until the next June. The following are
some of the songs that were so often sung during my cadet days, to-wit:

    Old Black Joe,
    Dixie,
    Marching Through Georgia,
    Tramp, Tramp, Tramp,
    Hail Columbia,
    Star Spangled Banner,
    My Country,
    Annie Laurie,
    Red, White and Blue,
    Home, Sweet Home,
    Suanee River,
    Auld Lang Syne.

ARMY BLUE.

      We’ve not much longer here to stay,
        For in a year or two
      We’ll bid farewell to “Cadet Gray,”
        And don the “Army Blue.”

    Chorus—

      Army Blue, Army Blue,
        We’ll don the Army Blue,
      We’ll bid farewell to Cadet Gray,
        And don the Army Blue.

      To the ladies who come up in June,
        We’ll bid a fond adieu,
      And hoping they’ll be married soon,
        We’ll don the Army Blue.

    Chorus—

      Now here’s to the man who wins “the cup,”
        May he be kind and true,
      And may he bring “our godson” up
        To don the Army Blue.

    Chorus—

BENNY HAVENS, OH!

    Come, fill your glasses, fellows, and stand up in a row,
      To singing sentimentally, we’re going for to go;
    In the Army there’s sobriety, promotion’s very slow,
      So we’ll sing our reminiscences of Benny Havens, Oh!

            Oh! Benny Havens, Oh! Oh! Benny Havens, Oh!
          So we’ll sing our reminiscences of Benny Havens, Oh!

    Let us remember, comrades, when to our posts we go,
      The ties that must be cut in twain, as o’er life’s sea we row,
    Hearts that now throb in unison must moulder down below,
      So let us take a parting cup at Benny Havens, Oh!

            Oh! Benny Havens, Oh! etc.

    To our kind old Alma Mater, our rock-bound Highland home,
      We’ll cast back many a fond regret, as o’er life’s sea we roam,
    Until our last battle-field the lights of heaven shall glow,
      We’ll never fail to drink to her and Benny Havens, Oh!

            Oh! Benny Havens, Oh! etc.

    May the army be augmented, promotion be less slow,
      May our Country, in her hour of need, be ready for the foe,
    May we find a soldier’s resting-place beneath a soldier’s blow,
      With space enough beside our graves for Benny Havens, Oh!

            Oh! Benny Havens, Oh! etc.

    Come, fill up to our Generals, God bless the brave heroes,
      They’re an honor to their country, and a terror to her foes;
    May they long rest on their laurels and trouble never know,
      But live to see a thousand years, at Benny Havens, Oh!

            Oh! Benny Havens, Oh! etc.

    When you and I and Benny, and all the others, too,
      Are called before the final board our course of life to view,
    May we never “fess” on any point, but coldly “max” it through,
      And join the Army of the blest, at Benny Havens, Oh!

            Oh! Benny Havens, Oh! etc.

NOTE.—The following verses are from the 1909 Howitzer:

    Then here’s to you, old glory team, that downs the strongest foes.
    Your Benny Haven’s strongest sons, in you our hopes repose,
    On the mountains by old Hudson’s shore, your deeds have been our theme;
    But, victors or defeated men, you’re still the army team.

    The brave old army team, the loyal army team,
    The army’s hearts, the army’s hopes, are with the army team.

    When you meet the rovers of the sea, and struggle hand to hand,
    Remember, in that hour supreme we all behind you stand—
    Let black recall our past defeats, the present struggle gray,
    But victory is brightest gold, that you shall win that day.

    The black, and gray, and gold, the black, and gold, and gray,
    Yea! Victory shall be the prize, the black, and gold, and gray.

    On the world’s rough-trampled gridiron, the battle-field of life,
    Your spirit brave, old rock-bound home, shall nerve us in the strife.
    Before us gleams the future, with manly parts to play,
    While from the dim past stretches the unbroken line of gray.

    Oh! the dear old gray battalion, the loyal line of gray,
    Friend close to friend, firm to the end, shall stand the line of gray.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER V.

THE PLEBE IN BARRACKS.


The next morning we took our bundles, buckets, and brooms to barracks,
and upon returning to camp we unfastened the tent cords and held up the
canvas by the poles, and, at the tap of the drum at 12 o’clock, every
tent was lowered to the ground, and “Camp McPherson” was no more. We then
“fell in,” and to the tune of “The Girl I Left Behind Me” marched to
barracks, leaving the summer visitors standing under the trees near where
the guard tents had been.

There were rooms enough so that every two cadets could have one together.
Roommates having been chosen and rooms selected (according to rank,
of course,) each cadet went to his own room, and there he found two
single iron bedsteads and a double clothes-press. The old cadets got the
balance of their effects (such as cadets are permitted to have in their
rooms) from the trunk rooms, while the plebes got the articles they had
there, and the balance, such as mattresses and tables, they went to the
Commissary for, and carried them across the plain. Every one obtained at
the Commissary the text-books he needed before Christmas, and by night
all rooms were in order. The return to barracks is a great day for
plebes, for then they quit carrying palms to the front.

The “Seps” arrived about this time, and those who were admitted were
assigned to rooms, and they at once became a part of the fourth class.
“Seps” are candidates, who, for some good reason, did not report in June.
(See appendix.) They began recitations with the rest of the plebes, but
for weeks they attended drill in squads by themselves. Notwithstanding
the fact that Seps escape the many trials and tribulations of plebe
camp, in escaping it, they miss one of the most valuable parts of cadet
life, as it is an experience which most old graduates look back upon
with pleasure. After having been through the course of deviling,[26] or
hazing, as practiced in my day, I am a believer in the system, because
I believe it makes young men manly and self-reliant. I never saw bodily
injury inflicted upon a plebe, but I do not call bodily injury deviling.
I call that cruelty, and cruelty should be severely punished. But times
have changed at the Academy since I left it. Now after candidates have
reported at the Adjutant’s office they are sent to the Army Officer in
charge of new cadets. And it is his duty to personally instruct them
respecting their rights and duties in their relations to old cadets and
to the cadets on duty over them. He causes to be read to them the present
regulations pertaining to new cadets and explains to them what is meant
by “Cadet Limits.” Candidates are also informed that they must not
submit to hazing, and that they must promptly report to the Commandant or
to the Army Officer over them any attempt at hazing on the part of old
cadets. But they must be respectful to all and perfectly subordinate and
obedient to the cadets on duty over them.

    No more shall Plebes be deviled,
      And yearlings can’t be seen,
    For there’s now a law against
      Hazing the Plebes so green.

The penalties for hazing are very severe, and several cadets have
been dismissed from the Academy for engaging in it. A recent act of
Congress says: “Any cadet dismissed for hazing shall not be eligible to
reappointment.”

White pants were very pretty for camp, but now that the hops were
over and the visitors gone the cadets had to work, so on the first of
September they appeared in their gray working clothes.

The daily routine from September 1st to about June 20th is as follows:
Reveille at 5:45 A. M. (on Sunday at 6:30); roll call; police call
five minutes after reveille; sick call fifteen minutes after reveille;
then clean arms or study or take physical exercise; breakfast at 6:15;
recreation except for the guard,[27] which is mounted, at 7:15; then
study and recitations from 8:00 A. M. to 1:00 P. M.; dinner at 1:00;
recreation; then study and recitations from 2:00 to 4:00; then generally
military exercises for about an hour; then about half hour recreation,
followed by retreat parade at about 6:00; supper; recreation; then study
from about 7:30 to 9:30; taps at 10:00; then lights out till reveille the
next morning. Rooms are inspected at police call; between 8 and 11 a. m.;
11 a. m. and 1 p. m.; 2 and 4; four times between 7:30 and 9:30; again at
taps, and once more between taps and reveille. In September and May there
are Infantry drills; in October and April there are Artillery drills; in
every month from September first to June first there are Cavalry drills;
from December first to April first there is exercise in the gymnasium or
in dancing. Saturday afternoon is for recreation except between 2 and
2:30 during the weekly inspection of the battalion. On Wednesday after
4 p. m. there are no drills, the time being given for recreation. On
Sundays there are no recitations and no military duties, except guard
and inspection of quarters at 9:45 a. m., and the time for recreation
is a little longer than usual; the cadets march to and from church; all
wear white gloves, white belts and those entitled to do so swords, which
(swords excepted) are not removed during service, some of the cadets are
members of the choir. Visiting between cadets is allowed only during
recreation hours.

The gymnasium is open to cadets daily, except Sundays, from 1:30 to 2 p.
m.; 4:00 to supper mess parade, and on Saturdays afternoons and evenings
until tattoo.

We were arranged into sections of from eight to ten cadets to the
section, the arrangement of upper classmen being made according to
class standing,[28] as determined at the last examination, while the
arrangement of the plebes was alphabetical. The first cadet in each
section was the section-marcher, that is, he marched the section to and
from the section room. The section-marchers were notified what the first
lessons would be, and the hours for recitations, and they then notified
the members of their sections. The studies[29] for the fourth class were
Mathematics and French, and in addition to these we had instruction in
Fencing,[30] and for this the sections were larger than as stated above.
One half the class attended recitations or fencing at a time, and the
other half had to be in their rooms during Call to Quarters. To let the
Inspectors know when cadets are at recitations the following form is used:

HOURS OF RECITATION.

          Cadet __________________________ 4th Class.
    Mathematics             From   8 A. M. to 9:30 A. M.
    Use of the sword, etc.  From  12    M. to 1    P. M.
    Modern Languages        From   3 P. M. to 4    P. M.

Each cadet obtained a blank form (and there is a special form for each
class), put his name on it in block letters, filled in his hours of
recitation and put it on the mantel, and he also put his name in block
letters over his alcove, on the orderly board, on his clothes-press,
and on his gun-rack. Every cadet not in his room at inspection, and not
at recitation at the time, was reported absent, unless his room-mate was
in and could properly account for the absence. We at first thought that
our studies, being so few, would be easy, but when we saw the great long
lessons and had experienced the thoroughness required at recitations, we
changed our opinions, and decided that much hard study was necessary.

Promptly at eight o’clock on the morning of September first, the bugle
was sounded for sections to form. One half of each class “fell in.”
The Cadet Officer of the Day commanded—“Front, Call your rolls.” Line
was formed in the area of barracks, first classmen were nearest the
Academic Building, next to them were sections of the second class, next
third classmen and then the plebes. Each section-marcher facing his
section, called his roll and faced to the front, then beginning with
the ranking section of the first class, the section-marchers reported.
The Officer of the Day then commanded “March off your sections.” If
there were any absentees not excused, he hunted them up and sent them to
their section rooms. The sections marched to the Academic Building, and
each went to the room previously assigned, the members of each section
hung their caps in the hall on hooks near the door and then filed into
the room. The section-marcher took post near the center of the room,
facing the instructor, who was seated on the platform opposite to the
door. The members of the section went one half to the right, and the
other half to the left, in front of two benches. The section-marcher
saluted and reported, “All are present, Sir,” or, “Mr. ⸺ is absent,
sir,” the instructor returned the salute and then the cadets sat down,
the section-marcher taking seat on the right of the first half of his
section. On a blackboard behind the instructor, was written the lesson
for the next day, and each cadet noted it. The instructor then called Mr.
⸺, who took post in the center of the room facing the instructor. The
instructor assigned to him a topic in the lesson, care being required
on the part of the cadet to understand the topic which is called his
“enunciation.” When he understood it, he went to a certain blackboard,
and in the upper right hand corner wrote his name and number thus—Brown
1. The instructor called up another cadet who, after understanding his
enunciation, went to the next board, and wrote his name and number,
thus—Smith 2, and so on. Topics in the lesson of the day were assigned to
the first four, and topics in the lesson of the day before were assigned
to three or four others. Then one was called who took post in the center
of the room, and the instructor questioned him for ten minutes or more
upon such parts of either lesson that he elected, and when through said
“That’ll do,” when this cadet returned to his seat. The cadets at the
boards wrote on them such work as they wished pertaining to their own
subjects and when ready to recite, each took a pointer in his right hand
and stood at ease facing the instructor. Beginning with the cadet who
was ready and had the smallest number, when he was called upon to recite
the cadet, said: “I am required to” and then gave his enunciation, after
which he proceeded in his own words. If the instructor was satisfied
with the recitation, he said, “that’ll do” and the cadet faced about,
laid down his pointer, cleaned his board, and took his seat; but if the
instructor was not satisfied with the recitation, he asked such questions
as he deemed proper to draw out, if possible, further information on the
subject, and when through, said, “That’ll do.” This drawing out process
is necessary with plebes, until they learn what is required of them in
the way of recitations. No communication between cadets is allowed in
the section room. When the time expired the instructor said, “That’ll
do, gentlemen; section’s dismissed.” If the bugle was sounded before all
had recited, those at the board who were ready to recite and had all
necessary work on the board, were marked the same as if they had recited.
The cadets filed out of the room, got their caps and “fell in,” then
marched to the area where the line was formed and there the section was
dismissed. The mark for a perfect recitation is a 3, 2.5 is a good mark,
2 is fair, 1.5 is medium, 1 poor, .5 very poor, and a zero a complete
failure. Recitations go on every day except Saturday afternoons and
Sundays. On Monday the marks of the previous week were posted so that the
cadets could see them. The instructor never told the cadets what marks
he gave them, and he could not excuse a cadet from recitation. A cadet
who was sick enough to require it was taken into the hospital, or by the
surgeon excused from reciting, but a cadet excused from reciting had to
go to and remain in the section room, and there report to the instructor
that he was excused. Nothing is gained by not reciting, because every
cadet must make satisfactory recitations and pass the examinations[31] in
January and June or be found deficient. At the end of the fifth or sixth
week, and at times after that, transfers from one section to another were
made, and some cadets were sent up and others down to other sections. By
Christmas, the plebe class was pretty well dissipated by transfers.

Days, weeks and months passed with a firm, steady grind. In my day up at
5, but now 5:45 a. m., and nothing but study, recitations and drill till
9:30 p. m., except during the short half hour for recreation after each
meal, the welcome half holiday on Saturdays and the change of routine
on Sundays. No visitors at the Point, no hops, no nothing but hard
study and drill to look forward to until the next June. It is true that
Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Year’s are always acceptable days to a
cadet, but he generally eats so much turkey then, that he receives a poor
mark at recitations the next day.

Not long before examination the instructor selects as many topics as
there are cadets in his section and writes each topic on a separate piece
of paper, turns them face down, mixes them, and then numbers them; number
one being for the first cadet in the section, number two for the second,
and so on, or otherwise mixes them so that no partiality be shown on
examination.

Of course we could not study all of the time set apart for study, so we
often devised ways and means to lighten our burdens.

All of our coats buttoned up to the chin and the white collars of my
day were made so that we had to fold them lengthwise and pin them on
the coat. As white shirts were not used to fasten the collar to we quit
wearing them, and pinned our cuffs to the inside of the coat sleeves. We
got the knack of dressing down to a fine point, no cadet wore suspenders
then, so all we had to do for reveille or tattoo, was to jump into our
pants, stick our feet into our oldest shoes, from which the strings had
been removed, and called “reveilles,” put on the coat and cap to be worn
and hustle, buttoning up just before going out of the hall-door. Two
minutes gave us ample time to get from our rooms to the line in the area.
Now the cadets are required to wear white shirts and the style of the
white collar[32] having been changed it requires a white shirt to fasten
it to.

A cadet generally carries his lead pencil stuck into his coat near the
throat, but I made a little pocket on the underside of the tail of my
dress-coat, just big enough for a little pen knife and a pencil an inch
and a half long, and I never got “skinned” for it either. In my day, the
last section was called “the Immortals” but I am told that the “Goats”
have captured the name I once knew so well.

For many years, “Old Bentz” blew the bugle calls for recitations and
mid rain or snow, he never missed a call, he blew it first on the north
side of the Barracks, near the “Sally Port,” and then in the area. Many
a cadet has stood at the blackboard, not ready to recite, praying for
old Bentz to blow; once in a while he would succeed in “bugling it,”
that is, avoid a recitation, but as the instructors have all been cadets
themselves, the poor fellow was generally called upon to recite and got
1.5 or less for his pains.

A day or two after returning to barracks I was on post one evening
in the hall of the old “sixth div.” when D⸺m, of my class, who lived
in that “div.” passed through the hall with his coat unbuttoned. Of
course I reported him for it. The next day the report was on the list
of delinquencies read out to the battalion by the cadet adjutant. After
supper that evening another classmate called on me and asked what I had
against D⸺m, I said I had nothing against him and I wanted to know why
he asked. He replied that D⸺m was very angry with me for having reported
him for “coat unbuttoned in hall of barracks.” I was surprised and said
that I had to report him or tell a lie to the officer or corporal of the
guard. Up to that time D⸺m had not been on guard in barracks and he did
not know the orders, so he consulted an upper classman about the report
and learned that I had done my duty. Then he came to me and said, “I
sent a friend to challenge you but find that you are right and I wrong,
so I want to beg your pardon.” Had I not have reported D⸺m I would have
gotten into serious trouble, because the cadets themselves have no use
for a liar or a thief. As I have said the rooms of barracks are never
locked, hence any cadet will promptly report another for stealing and the
thief[33] is summarily dealt with by the authorities.

In barracks a sentinel is posted in each hall, and he walks post only
during meal hours, evening call to quarters, and Sunday[34] call to
quarters. When a relief is to be taken off post and no new sentinels
are to be posted, such as after meals and at tattoo, the corporal of
the relief on post, beginning at the first division hall, calls, “No.
1 Off,” marches him to the second division and calls, “No. 2 Off,” and
so on until the eight sentinels are off, the relief is then marched to
the guard house, and there dismissed. The spirit of deviltry used to
crop out in the average fourth classman, as soon as his plebe camp was
over, and he often laid awake at night devising ways and means for sweet
revenge upon the next class or even upon the “Seps” of his own class,
before they became acquainted with one another. One night a June plebe
discovered that the sentinels on Posts 1, 2 and 3, were Seps of his own
class, and that they were on guard for their first time. A happy thought
came to this June plebe. He put on his overcoat, turned the collar up to
hide his face, got his rifle, and just before time for the Corporal to
take off his Relief at tattoo, this plebe took off the Relief himself.
The first three sentinels being green Seps “fell in” without a suspicion
of anything wrong, and the older cadets of the Relief knowing that it
was about time to be relieved, also fell in. Just as the June plebe was
approaching the guard house with the Relief, Lieutenant K⸺g saw the
Corporal of this Relief in the guard house watching the clock, hence
he knew that some devilment was up. The plebe saw that the Lieutenant
saw him, so he fled to his room, with the Lieutenant after him and the
members of the Relief ran back to their posts. The plebe was caught
and he walked “extras” for many a Saturday afternoon for his fun; and
the Corporal was reduced to the ranks for allowing his Relief to be
improperly relieved.

Cadets do not salute one another except on occasions of ceremony
prescribed by the regulations. Plebes address one another as Jones or
Smith, but they say[35] Mr. Jones and Mr. Smith in speaking of them to
an officer, or to an upper classman. In speaking to or of an officer,
they use his title, but in speaking to or of an upper classman, they
say[35] Mr. White or Mr. Black. Upper classmen address one another as
White and Black, but they say Mr. White or Mr. Black in speaking of them
to an officer or to a plebe. In speaking to or of an officer they use
his title, but in speaking to or of a plebe, they say Mr. Jones or Mr.
Smith. Officers in speaking to or of a cadet say Mr. Jones or Mr. White.
Cadet titles are used only by the cadets having them, and then only in
their permits and explanations, thus—Cadet Corporal, Cadet Sergeant,
etc. Except officially, officers and cadets rarely speak to one another.
At first it seemed very strange to recite to an officer for months, and
to pass him on the plain without a friendly word being exchanged, the
military salute being the only recognition. It is best that it is that
way, as it avoids intimacy and favoritism.

When the first snow fell, I was greatly amused to see one of my
classmates who had never seen it snow. He ran out into the area
bare-headed (and was reported for being in the area without cap). He held
out his hands and then opened his mouth to catch the flakes; it was a
soft fine snow and melted as soon as it touched anything, so he could not
catch any of the flakes, yet he could see them in the air and he appeared
dumbfounded.

Now that we did not have to carry palms of the hands to the front we used
to walk more about the post. I say walk, because we were not allowed
to ride. We found our way occasionally to the Dutchwoman’s,[36] near
the postoffice[37] (as no permits were needed to go there in my day),
where cadets having a little change, or who, being out of debt, could
get ice cream, cakes, pies, etc. On Saturday afternoons we went down
“Flirtation Walk,” a beautiful stroll along the Hudson, or up to Cro’
Nest, the highest peak for miles around, or to old Fort Putnam, on a hill
west of the Barracks, and once in a while to Kinsley’s orchard.[38] The
only reason I can think of having gone to Kinsley’s is, that it was then
“off limits,” and the Regulations said cadets caught off limits should
be dismissed, or otherwise less severely punished. Christmas season had
much in store for us. We received boxes of sweetmeats from home, we had
a theatrical performance in the Mess Hall, and some of us, and I was
one, had a three days’ “leave” from the Point. This leave was granted
to cadets having not over six demerits for the past six months. But
few cadets obtained leaves, and those who did were envied by the less
fortunate fellows. Everybody enjoyed the boxes from home, because cadets
are proverbially generous, and divide their good things with those who
do not receive boxes. Many were “skinned” and given demerits for grease
upon their floors after the boxes came. The cadets are not now permitted
to receive Christmas boxes. An entertainment was given on New Year’s Eve,
in the Mess Hall. A temporary stage was erected, and all of the actors,
“actresses” and members of the orchestra were cadets.

A PARODY ON HOHENLINDEN.

    At West Point, when the sun was low,
    All spotless lay the untrodden snow,
    And dark as winter was the flow
          Of Hudson rolling rapidly.

    But West Point saw another sight.
    Loud groans were heard at dead of night,
    And plebeians howled with wild affright,
          Whilst dreaming of Geometry.

    ’Twas morn, but on that luckless day
    The morning brought no cheering ray,
    To pierce the mist of Algebra,
          Or clear it of perplexity.

    In glittering armor, bright arrayed,
    Each teacher drew his battle blade,
    And furious each plebeian made,
          To witness such pomposity.

    Then shook the hills with thunder river,
    As each plebe to the blackboard driven
    Despairing of all hopes of Heaven,
          In view of his deficiency

    And fainter still his hopes did grow,
    When he received a big zero;
    His throbbing bosom rent with woe,
          The tears came railing rapidly.

    “Immortals” falter! On! ye brave!
    Who rush to glory or the grave,
    Wave! plebeians; All thy banners wave!
          And charge that Trigonometry.

    The lesson o’er—the hovering cloud
    Hath burst in torrents, wild and loud,
    And buried in one common shroud
          The essence of stupidity.

    The “found” shall part, no more to meet,
    For Math has been their winding sheet,
    And every “hash” they now shall eat
          Brings curses to the memory.

       *       *       *       *       *

                             PROGRAMME

                              OF THE

                    Entertainment Given by the
                      U. S. Corps of Cadets,

                       NEW YEAR’S EVE., 1869
                            WEST POINT.

    Overture                                               Orchestra

                              PART I.

                  PADDY MILES, THE LIMERICK BOY.

                (A drama of Corinthian lightness.)

                        DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

    Paddy Miles                                      Cadet Shortelle

                              (The Greek.)

    Dr. Coates                                            Cadet Wood

                         (Spooney and Fidgety.)

    Henry, his son                                        Cadet Cobb

                             (No joke here.)

    Job, a gardener                                      Cadet Guard

                           (Biles with rage.)

    Reuben                                                Cadet Hall

                            (Randy—O! High.)

    Mrs. Fidget                                        Cadet Paddock

                        (See joke on Dr. Coates.)

    Jane                                              Cadet Fornance

                        (The Girl of the period.)

    Guitar Duet                          Cadets Evans and Harrington

    Music                                                  Orchestra

                                PART II.

              DARK TRAGEDY OF OTHELLO, THE MOOR OF VENICE.

    Othello                                              Cadet Davis

                           (Ye Swarthy Moor.)

    Desdemona                                         Cadet McDonald

                         (As was gone back on.)

    Brabantio                                        Cadet McGinniss

    Duke                                              Cadet “Doylle”

    Senators, Assassins, Collectors of Internal Revenue, etc., by
    the Company.

    Music                                                  Orchestra

                                PART III.

         THE LIGHTSOME FARCE OF GRIMSHAW, BAGSHAW AND BRADSHAW.

    Peter Grimshaw                                    Cadet Williams

                (Christened Peter after his Aunt Sarah.)

    John Bagshaw                                       Cadet Goddard

                           (“Trust him not.”)

    BRADSHAW!!!                                       Cadet Fountain

                 (Bastante dicho—“wich” it is Spanish.)

    Towser                                                Cadet Wood

          (Characteristics: Heart flinty, Conchoidal fracture.)

    Fanny, a milliner                                 Cadet Townsend

                      (A-lass! not a Millionaire.)

    Emily, Towser’s niece                               Cadet Birney

                             (Same at same.)

    Music                                                  Orchestra

                                PART IV.

                             “DARKER HERE.”

                      MINSTRELS, BY THE CADET BAND.

                                   1.

    Overture, “Les Dames de Seville,”                     Cadet Band

    The Bell Goes Ringing for Sarah                  Solo and Chorus

    Linda Polka                                           Cadet Band

    Little Maggie May                                Solo and Chorus

    We Parted by the River Side                              Company

    Selection                                             Cadet Band

    Clog Dance                                         Cadet Bassett

                                   2.

    Selections                                            Cadet Band

    Fairy Moonlight                                        Quartette

    West Point Polka and Selection                        Cadet Band

    My Christmas Leave                                          Solo

    Et Bonde Cryllup                                      Cadet Band

    Rootle Tum Tootle Tum Tay                        Solo and Chorus

    Galop Militaire                                       Cadet Band

       *       *       *       *       *

    NO HURDLES.

    “GENERAL REGULATIONS.”

    Those unable to secure seats will be permitted to visit the
    Guard-house, where they will find amusement during the entire
    entertainment in the perusal of the delinquences posted there.

    In consideration of the almost perfect disguise which may be
    effected through the magic agency of burnt cork, by which even
    the dignified features of our Professors can be effectually
    concealed, we would enjoin upon the audience a respect for
    gravity during the minstrel performance; and the managers would
    take this opportunity of thanking the “Heads of Departments”
    for the very affable manner in which they have consented to
    contribute, by their Terpsichorean and Ethiopian efforts to the
    evening’s amusement.

    Owing to the probability of the hall being inspected by the
    “Officer in charge,” after the Battalion has returned to
    Barracks, the managers earnestly solicit the destruction of all
    vestiges of this “Feast of reason,” as it is not mentioned on
    the “Cadets’ Bill of Fare” for this date. First classmen are
    recommended to preserve the “Flow of soul” for use to-morrow,
    in case the Superintendents may not be pleased to release them
    from “pledge.”

    The managers respectfully call attention to their endeavors
    to produce that long desired “mean” equally removed from
    “Corinthian lightness, and Egyptian massiveness.”

    Should the performers attempt to “consume time,” or the
    enthusiasm of the audience be kindled to such an extent as
    to create apprehension for the safety of the building, the
    services of the Fire Department, under the able management
    of its efficient “Chief Engineer,” will be called into
    requisition—(provided the nozzle can be found.)

    MANAGERS:

        S. W. FOUNTAIN,
        R. A. WILLIAMS,
        E. M. COBB,
        A. H. RUSSELL,
        A. E. WOOD.

The semi-annual examination commenced right after New Years and when
the class standing[39] was announced, about thirty cadets were found
deficient, and discharged. At least half the deficient ones were in my
class, and the balance in the other three classes. Those near the foot
of my class, who passed, but about whom doubts had been entertained as
to their ability to get through, were now furnished with warm cloth
overcoats of the regulation cadet gray. The sections were rearranged
according to the standing determined by the examinations, text books for
the next five months were drawn, lessons assigned and studies resumed.
Shortly after our class standing had been published, the class was sent
to the Library, where we again took the oath of allegiance, and in due
time afterwards each fourth classman received his “cadet warrant.”

The plebes now began to make the best show they could both about their
rooms and in their personal appearance. Those who could do so procured
curtains[40] for the windows, alcoves and clothes presses, all turkey
red, of course, as that was the regulation color. When they got new
clothes, they were particular about the fit, especially of the dress
coats, as their waists had grown more shapely, caused by wearing close
fitting clothes and belts, which required the chest and not the abdomen
to be used for breathing. They had their old dress coats made smaller in
the waist, too.

Cadets having a taste for music were permitted to have such musical
instruments as banjos, guitars and flutes, and during “release from
quarters” they could practice. Musical spirits were soon brought
together, and after the players became proficient they attracted
attention. Aside from those who played upon instruments, there were
some who had very good voices. When pleasant spring evenings came, the
musicians would often assemble on one of the front steps of the Barracks
and their sweet music and songs attracted all other cadets. Often would
the officers, their ladies and the few visitors at the Point at that
season of the year, stroll near the cadet Barracks to hear music and
songs, and even Old Bentz would look at his watch a dozen times and wait
till the last second to sound “Call to Quarters.” One evening, Christine
Nilsson, the famous “Swedish singer,” who was visiting the Point, was so
attracted by the singing of the cadets that she consented to sing for the
whole corps on condition that the cadet quartette would sing for her.
Her proposition was accepted and the Mess Hall was used for the purpose.
Of course we were charmed by her sweet voice and she complimented the
quartette, too, and Cadet W⸺r in particular. Miss Nilsson told him that
he ought to cultivate his voice and that if he would resign she herself
would pay for his musical education in Europe. Cadet W⸺r thanked her
for her generous offer, but declined to accept it. Miss Nilsson then
said that the cadets must pay for her singing, and that she would make
the collection at once. She was promptly informed that cadets were not
allowed to have money, and that they did not even have pockets in their
clothes. She replied every cadet had with him that which she wanted,
namely a bell-button, and she was particular about the one too, and said,
“I want the spooney button, the one from over the heart.” She produced a
string and we filed past her and each cadet gladly paid her price. The
officers present on this occasion neglected their duty for not reporting
every cadet, for “a button off dress coat in Mess Hall.” About once a
month on Saturday evenings during the winter the band gave orchestra
concerts at which cadets could be present.

[Illustration: TO ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:

Know ye, _That the PRESIDENT has been pleased to appoint ________________
a CADET in the Military Service of the UNITED STATES, to rank as such
from the __ day of ________ 18__. He is therefore to be received with all
the consideration attached to such appointment._

Given _under my hand at the WAR DEPARTMENT, this __ day of ________, in
the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and ____, and of the
INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES the ________._

                                                   ____________
                                                _Secretary of War_.]

One day, S⸺s, one of my classmates, took sick with typhoid fever, and
was confined to bed in the hospital for weeks. We took turns sitting
up at night with him. When he became dangerously ill, his parents were
notified, and they came at once and were with him some days before he
died. An order was published announcing his death, and the loss of a
valuable member of the corps, and directed as a mark of respect to his
memory, that all cadets should wear the usual badge of mourning; that is,
a four-inch band of black crape around the left arm, above the elbow, for
a period of thirty days, and that the flag should be at half-staff on
the day of the funeral. The pallbearers were chosen from his class and
the funeral services held in the little chapel. The coffin was carried
from the chapel, arms were presented, the band played an appropriate
air, and then the coffin was laid upon an artillery caisson draped with
the stars and stripes. We marched to solemn music, with “arms reversed,”
to the beautiful little cadet cemetery just outside of the north gate
overlooking the Hudson at the foot of the highest peak of the Highlands.
Upon reaching the grave, line was formed facing it, and the coffin placed
over it; arms were again presented and the band played another solemn
air; the body was then lowered to its last resting place. We stood with
bowed heads at rest on arms, while the Chaplain conducted the services at
the grave. We then fired three rounds of blank cartridges and returned
to barracks. After leaving the cemetery, we came to “right shoulder”
arms, and marched to a quick step. During my day the corps of cadets
attended a great many funerals, and among them were those of three of
our professors, two or more cadets, and a number of old graduates of the
Academy.

We fourth classmen now began to talk of June first, the day on which we
would become yearlings and be admitted to the corps on equality with
the other classmen; of the dropping of the Mr., of the shedding of our
“plebe-skins” and how that great event should be celebrated; of how we
would treat the next class, of which of us would be made corporals, of
the hops, of the ladies who come up in June, and of other topics of vital
interest to fourth classmen. At a class meeting we selected six hop
managers, six being our share for the summer hops, and we selected them
by ballot. There were no nominations, it having been decided that the
six receiving the greatest number of votes should be elected, and I was
not one of the six. About the twenty-fifth of May D Company vacated its
quarters and they were put in order for the candidates, who reported in
my day between the first and tenth of June; then they reported later in
June, after the cadets had gone into camp. Now new cadets report March
1st.

The academic year practically closed on the 31st of May, and on the next
day the battalion was to again appear in its summer clothes; that is, in
white pants and gray coats. White pants are the forerunners of the many
changes to soon occur at the Point; a class to be graduated, another to
go on furlough, and the other two, with a new class added to the corps,
to go into camp; the members of the Board of Visitors[41] and hundreds
of other people to arrive, some to witness the graduating exercises, old
graduates to attend their alumni meeting, others to see relatives in the
corps, and still others to attend the summer hops. But with all these
and other pleasures in store for the cadets about a dozen of the plebes
were not satisfied. They knew that on the morrow candidates would begin
to report, and that then they themselves would shed their plebe-skins,
drop the Mr. and be full-fledged “yearlings.” In order to mark this
great event in the life of a cadet at West Point we had months before
decided upon doing something that no other yearlings had done. Away
back in April, while at light battery drill, we “hived” some powder, by
taking a little from a dozen or more cartridges, and we also “hived” some
friction-primers. The night of May 31st was cloudy and hazy, which just
suited us, and the tactical officers favored us by inspecting every room
before midnight. At about half-past eleven we tied the handle of the
angle door to an upright of the porch and fastened a rope to the posts
at the head of the angle porch stairs, and then went one at a time out
to the “reveille gun” that stood near execution hollow away out on the
plain. We loaded that gun and then put in it all of our old socks and
rammed the charge well. Some of our trusty party got cannon balls at
Trophy Point and joined the others at the gun. We then wheeled the gun
near the gravel walk in front of the barracks, and one of our party went
on the grass to the right and another to the left. These two then made
noises that attracted the attention of the two engineer sentinels posted
at night on the gravel walk, and signaled that our coast was clear. We
then rushed across the walk through the Sally Port and fired that gun in
the area. At the same time the cannon balls were rolled along the porches
in rear of barracks, then we hastened to our rooms, undressed and went
to bed to await developments. Oh, what a dandy report that gun made;
it shook the barracks and other buildings, too, and shattered windows
all around. The cannon balls were also a great success, for they made a
horrible rumbling sound. We awoke everybody. Lieutenant M⸺l was “officer
in charge,” and we soon heard him tugging away at the angle door and then
stumble against the clothesline that we had so thoughtfully put up for
his special benefit. He called the “drummer orderly,” who slept in the
guard-house and had long roll sounded. He questioned the cadet officers,
but, of course, they knew nothing; then, as he himself had been a cadet,
he made the new-born yearlings fall in and told them that the outrage
had been committed by some of them, and that the guilty ones should be
punished. He then said that all who had not taken part in the disgraceful
affair could fall out and go to their quarters; the guilty ones trembled
in their shoes, but soon recovered, for not a man fell out. The night
was raw and chilly, but there the Lieutenant made us stand, first at
attention, then at parade rest and then at attention again. The innocent
were once more told to fall out, but not a man moved. We were then put
into the guard-house and several of us obtained permission to go to our
rooms for overcoats. Line was re-formed and B⸺ly directed to call the
roll. I was in my own room at this time and could see and hear what was
going on in the area. I knew that B⸺ly had not called the class roll for
months, so I staid in my room and listened to the roll-call, and when I
discovered that I was not reported absent I went to bed. Lieutenant M⸺l
then marched the yearlings out on the cavalry plain and drilled them at
double time for several hours. He stood still some times and marched the
class around him, and as he was not always near enough to distinguish
one yearling from another in the dark there were many blunders purposely
made in ranks, and this made him furious. After awhile Colonel B⸺k, the
Commandant, put in his appearance, and then the class behaved all right,
but it was kept at drill till near breakfast time. Before being dismissed
Colonel B⸺k told the innocent ones to fall out, but not a man left the
ranks. The class was then dismissed, and in a few minutes the battalion
was formed for breakfast, and, of course, I fell in then. Before marching
to the Mess Hall an order was published confining all members of the
fourth class, except one who was in the hospital, to the area of the
barracks until further orders. Some of the class had relatives and
friends at the Point, and the confinement was hard on them, because
cadets in confinement cannot see their friends for longer than half an
hour, and then only in the visitors’ room in the guard-house.

A salute of seventeen guns was fired by a detail of cadets in honor of
the arrival of the Board of Visitors. There was much of interest now at
the Point for the Board and others to see. Beginning with guard-mount
now after parade, then oral examinations from 9 to 4 followed infantry,
artillery or cavalry drill, and the day closing with dress parade at
sunset. The rear view of the cadets marching at double time, to or from
dress parade, out on the grassy plain is a beautiful sight, especially
when white pants are worn, for then the wavy motion of the handsome
uniforms with the black shoes alternating against the white pants and
the green grass once seen is a sight never forgotten. In the evening the
cadets, except those in confinement, and their friends could be together
for an hour or two at the hotel or at some of the officers’ quarters,
provided, of course, that the cadets had “permits.” Not to speak of a
handsome display of fireworks on one evening and the graduating hop on
another. During all these festivities, which lasted about three weeks,
the cadets and candidates were undergoing rigid examinations,[42] and
at which many failed. Lists of the successful ones were announced, the
graduates and furloughmen left and the others went into camp. Some of the
“found” were turned back to join the next class, while the others were
discharged.

On the morning after we had fired the gun in the area Colonel Black sent
for me, showed me one of my own slippers and told me that it had been
picked up that morning on the walk in front of the barracks, and as it
had my name in it he wanted me to explain how the slipper got out of my
room. I told him that I didn’t know, as the last time I had worn or seen
it was on the previous evening before taps. He did not ask me if I had
taken part in the “disgraceful” affair. All of his questioning could get
nothing more out of me, because I told the truth. I afterwards learned
how the slipper did get out on the walk. When D Company vacated its
quarters for the new class C⸺y came over to room with L⸺t and me, and
unbeknown to me he had worn my slippers, and as he was one of the two
cadets chased by the engineer sentinels he lost it, and then for fear
that he and I might both be caught he did not mention the fact to me
until after my return from the Commandant’s office.

Three of my class were turned out over new cadets, and others of the
class detailed to help drill them, and when the new list of corporals was
published I had the pleasure of writing home that I was one of the few
yearlings to wear chevrons.

After the publication of the new lists of class standing I called upon
one of the unfortunates to express regret that he had not passed. He
seemed to be very indifferent about having been found, and said that,
after a long search on his “family tree,” he had on that day made the
fortunate discovery that he was the nineteenth cousin of Queen Victoria!

While in confinement Casey wrote a song commemorating the firing of the
gun in the area, and the song was very popular in my day. The following
is my version of it:

WHO FIRED THAT GUN IN THE AREA?

    In eighteen hundred and ⸺ ⸺ ⸺
    Some plebes went out on the plain so free,
    Played the mischief generally,
        And fired the gun in the area.

    They locked them up in the old guard-house,
    And bade them be as still as a mouse;
    They whooped and yelled and kicked about,
        And fired the gun in the area.

    They made them at the attention stand,
    With rifles held all tight in the hand,
    But no one “peached” on any man
        Who fired the gun in the area.

    Then Gussie M. said: “Oh, don’t you see
    There’s no use of your fooling with me?
    I’ll make you stand till ‘Reveille’
        For firing gun in the area.

    “And if you rascals don’t all be still,
    Of punishment you shall have your fill—
    I’ll take you on the plain to drill
        For firing gun in the area.”

    He marched them round at the double time—
    Egad! that drill it was very fine;
    From everything they took the shine,
        And fired the gun in the area.

    This man he got into such a state
    That ev’ry plebe he wanted to ate,
    And said they were insubord’nate,
        And fired the gun in the area.

    Then Harry B. just raves and hollers,
    “Leave them alone, the bad young bothers;
    Confine them till further orders,
        For firing gun in the area.”

    Yearlings the plebes all became that day,
    And paid the price for being so gay
    After midnight the last of May,
        For firing gun in the area.

    NOTE 1. Now only those cadets are examined whose average
    marks fall below a certain figure, which may be different for
    different subjects. For changes and improvements see Chapter
    IX, the articles by Colonels Tillman and Larned.

    NOTE 2. A change has been made since the text was written so
    that the white collar is not buttoned to the shirt, but is
    fastened to the inside of the collar of the coat by means of
    three metal clasps.

    NOTE 3. Such a thing as stealing is rare among the cadets.

    NOTE 4. Sentinels are now posted from shortly after the return
    of the battalion from supper until 9:30 p. m. only.

    NOTE 5. The Dutch woman left the post in 1875, and the
    confectionery or store is now in a brick building about 200
    yards north of the brick cottage she occupied.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: CAMP GEO. H. THOMAS.

The Pleasure of your company is requested at the hops to be given by the
Corps of Cadets every Monday Wednesday and Friday evening during the
encampment.

_Managers._

    FRED D. GRANT
    ANDREW H. RUSSELL
    WALTER S. WYATT
    EDWARD W. CASEY
    HENRY C. LA POINT
    JAMES R. WASSON
    THOS S. MUMFORD
    REID T. STEWART
    QUINCY O. GILLMORE
    WILLIAM T. RUSSELL
    J. BURKE HICKEY
    T. M. WOODRUFF
    CORBIN DAVENPORT
    LOUIS A. CRAIG
    WILLIAM H. COFFIN

West Point N. Y.

22d June, 1870.]




CHAPTER VI.

THE YEARLING.


When we marched into camp again at the old site, which was this year
named “Camp Geo. H. Thomas,” the yearlings were perfectly happy. We
enjoyed the society of the plebes for awhile, but soon tired of that.
We had been under such a strain during the previous year that we needed
a rest, and we had it, too, as there was not much required of us for
the first month. We seemed to need sleep, and we slept in the morning,
again in the afternoon and all night, too. After we were rested we
loitered under the trees near the guard tents during guard-mounts and
band practice and mingled among the numerous summer visitors at the
Point; to get acquainted was not difficult, as some of the visitors had
relatives or friends in the corps, and, moreover, people get acquainted
easier at a resort or a dance than almost anywhere else. Some of the
yearlings never missed a hop, and there were three of them a week, from 8
to 11 p. m. Others of us who were not proficient in the art took dancing
lessons occasionally, but generally found our pleasure in boating and in
being with the ladies, or with one another, listening to the music; in
promenading on “Flirtation Walk,” or calling at the hotel. We idled away
the whole summer, and it did us good, for, when we returned to barracks,
we were ready for study again. I don’t want to be understood that we had
nothing to do during camp, because many hours were spent at drill, at
inspections and on guard, just enough to keep us active and healthy.

On pleasant days when not on duty we often strolled on “Flirtation Walk,”
that beautiful path winding through the trees and rocks between the camp
site and the river to watch passing steamers or to see the objects of
interest along this walk. There are some links of a huge chain on “Trophy
Point” between Professor’s Row and the hotel that was floated on logs
across the Hudson during the Revolutionary War from Gee’s Point at the
big bend of the river to Constitution Island[43] near the village of Cold
Springs on the east side of the Hudson. We used to examine the place near
the lighthouse on Gee’s Point, where one end of this chain was fastened
and wonder what effect such an obstruction would be to the gunboats of
to-day. At other times we would linger about Kosciuszco’s Monument, a
little south of Gee’s Point, and quench our thirst at the same spring
that this noble Pole drank from more than a century ago when he built
Fort Clinton—that is, nearby on the plain—while at the same time General
Putnam constructed the numerous other fortifications on the neighboring
hills. Then we would visit Battery Knox, near Kosciuszco’s garden, to
see the beautiful view down the Hudson that this work commands, or go to
see still another handsome view up the Hudson from Trophy Point or Siege
Battery at the north, or rather the west end of Flirtation Walk. Battery
Knox, and Seacoast, Siege and Mortar batteries are of comparative recent
origin and were built by the cadets. There are many monuments, aside
from those in the little cemetery, that have been erected at salient
points about the grounds to heroes who freely sacrificed their lives in
the cause of freedom. Some of those brave men shed their blood to give
birth to our republic, others to wrest territory from the Indians or from
Mexico, and still others that our Union might live. Then there are cannon
and other relics of war on Trophy Point and in the “museum” that are
silent teachers for all who see them. The very air about this historic
spot teaches love of country, and the cadets absorb much valuable
information that is not taught in the section room.

Cadets who were popular with the ladies often used to pin the “spooney
buttons” on their coats, and when a cadet gave his spooney button to a
young lady this act was equivalent to saying that she was the favored one.

    “The ladies—may Heaven bless their faces!
      They come here in summer sweet,
    Each being loaded with graces,
      And all have cadets at their feet.”

Lieutenant K⸺g was a popular tactical officer and quite a ladies’ man.
He liked music, and at band practice he often requested the leader to
play “Shoo Fly,” and so often that the cadets noticed it, and called him
“Shoo Fly,” not to his face, of course, but among ourselves. Clara G⸺e,
a little six-year-old girl, was a frequent visitor at camp, and she was
a great admirer of Cadet W⸺e. One day he was officer of the guard and
I was corporal of the guard. During dress parade my post was near the
first guard tent facing the battalion, and it was my duty to see that
visitors kept back of a certain line. Little Clara was out to see the
dress parade, and, as Cadet W⸺e was at the guard tents, she was near him.
W⸺e called me, and then told little Clara just when and where to go and
what to say. There were many visitors present that evening. I took my
post, and in a few minutes Lieutenant K⸺g stepped a dozen or so yards in
front of me and of the line of visitors preparatory to taking post as
officer in charge of the parade. Just then little Clara ran out in front
of the visitors’ line, and in a loud voice called: “Lieutenant K⸺g! Oh,
Lieutenant K⸺g!” which, of course, attracted everybody’s attention, and
then she said, “What do they all call you ‘Shoo Fly’ for?”

One day four young ladies came to camp, and four of us yearlings met them
under the trees at the guard tents. The ladies wanted us to take them out
boating, and as they knew cadets had no way of providing refreshments,
they themselves had brought baskets of cake and fruit. Knowing that our
quartette could be absent from camp for several hours we picked up the
baskets and started. Attached to our boathouse[44] there was an inclined
and also a floating dock, all fastened together, so that the two docks
would rise and fall with the water in the river. The floating dock had
been covered with water so often that it was quite slippery, and we
cautioned the young ladies about it. While we were carrying our boat from
its place in the boathouse one of the young ladies ran down the inclined
dock, and the moment she stepped upon the floating dock she slipped and
sat down in a half inch of water. Her sister (for there were two sisters
in the party) ran to her rescue, and she, too, sat down in the water.
We knew nothing of the mishaps until the sisters were just getting upon
their feet; then we suggested another day for the trip, but they said
no, as everything was ready now we must go. All got in the boat and off
we went. We rowed across the river under the bridge and landed (off
limits) in the woods on the east side of the Hudson. The ladies said
that they would prepare lunch, so the yearlings left them to themselves
for a while. Upon our return a dainty lunch was spread upon the grass,
and we all fell to with a relish, and then started upon our return to
the camp. We observed that the ladies insisted upon carrying the baskets
and to hold on to them while in the boat; this, of course, excited our
suspicions, and we found out that the baskets contained the sisters’
laundry.

It was the rule for a corporal to march the sick of his company to the
hospital at sick-call at 6:30 a. m., and as there were not many sick the
custom sprang up in the corps for one corporal to take the sick-report
books of all four companies to the hospital when there were no sick. So
one morning near the close of Yearling Camp, when there were no sick in
my company to go to the hospital, a corporal of another company took my
sick-report book, and as luck would have it I was reported for “Neglect
of duty, not taking sick-report book to the hospital,” and for this I
was reduced to ranks, but soon afterwards I was appointed a “marker”
for battalion drill, a very pleasant duty. The summer soon passed, the
furlough class returned, we struck tents and our yearling camp was over.

Back to barracks we went, donned our gray pants, drew text books,[45]
posted our hours of recitation and began the school work for another year.

Cavalry drill is a part of the course in each of the last three years,
and the yearlings always hailed the day when they could begin cavalry
drill, and at last the time came for us. The class was divided into two
platoons, and a platoon at a time sent to the Riding Hall.[46] When my
platoon marched into the hall we were all disappointed, for, instead
of finding our horses ready saddled, they were not saddled at all. We
were marched in front of the line of horses, which were being held by
cavalry soldiers, the yearling on the right of the line was instructed to
take the first horse, the next yearling to take the next horse, and so
on to the left. The horses were bridled and had blankets on them, held
in place by surcingles. Captain B⸺s explained to us how to mount, and
then ordered us to mount. Some of us had no trouble in mounting, but it
was very amusing to see others who had never been on a horse; it took
them a long time to get on, notwithstanding the drill we had had in the
gymnasium.[47] It was found that a real horse was different from a wooden
horse. After all were mounted the position of the soldier, mounted, was
explained to us, and our faults corrected. We were then dismounted, then
mounted again. So much time was taken up in explaining details and in
mounting and dismounting and correcting errors that the whole hour passed
in that way. The next day we did get to ride, but for only a few minutes,
and at a walk then. As the days came we rode longer each time, but always
at a walk for weeks. Then came the slow trot, and it was fun to see some
of the yearlings fall off, but as we had been so well drilled in mounting
they were soon on again. That first day at the slow trot we all got very
sore. Many of the horses were hard trotters, and many a yearling had
chafed legs. I remember seeing several of my class who suffered a great
deal, so much that for a time the blood ran down on their shoes. We were
taught to saddle and unsaddle, to fold the saddle blanket, to bridle and
unbridle, to ride with saddles, first at a walk, then a trot and then
at a gallop. We were then taught to ride with a sabre and then given
sabre exercises, and then the use of the pistol, then without saddles to
mount and dismount, first at a walk, then at a trot, then at a gallop
and then at the full speed of the horse; then to jump hurdles, then to
jump a hurdle, dismount, mount and jump another hurdle, the horse going
at full speed; then to use the sabre, cutting at leather balls, called
heads, one on a post, one on the ground and another on a post; then to
jump a hurdle and with the sabre to catch a ring at the same time from a
string suspended near the hurdle, then to cut a head on the ground, then
one on a post and then to jump another hurdle, catch another ring and
take another head. We were also taught the various platoon movements, and
occasionally on pleasant days we were taken out for long rides into the
country.

Visitors at the Point often wanted to see how the cadets lived, and
when they went about it right, i. e., made the acquaintance of certain
tactical officers, their requests were sometimes granted. Lieutenant K⸺g
came to my room one morning after he had made his regular inspection and
said that he had wanted to bring some visiting ladies and gentlemen over
to see my room, but from the looks of things he thought it inadvisable. I
replied that all would be in order in a few minutes, and when ready I’d
go to the hall door, where he could see me. To this he assented. My room
at that particular time was in bad order. O’C⸺r and I had our guns apart
and cleaning materials and rags scattered about the floor, and worse, two
of our classmates who lived across the hall from us brought their chairs
to our room, and we four were playing whist, but Lieutenant K⸺g was good
enough not to notice our visitors or cards, and he did not report us. In
a few minutes all was in order, and I went to the hall door as a signal.
In a few minutes more Lieutenant K⸺g arrived with, the visitors; they
wanted to see our guns, but fearing criticism he made an excuse that they
were all alike. O’C⸺r and I at once got our rifles and the Lieutenant was
amazed to see them in fine condition. Afterwards he told us that he did
not know how we put things in shape in such a short time.

One pleasant Saturday afternoon a party of young ladies arrived with
baskets of refreshments to meet a party of yearlings for a trip to “Cro’
Nest.” As I was the only one of the yearlings not “on punishment” or “in
confinement” I met the young ladies, explained the situation and said
that the trip would have to be postponed. They replied that as two of
the young ladies were to leave for New York on Monday next they were
determined to go to Cro’ Nest at once, and that if I would not go that
the ladies would go alone. Seeing that they were determined to go I went
with them. We climbed to the top of the mountain and had a good view, as
Cro’ Nest is near the top of the highest peak around. The mountain is
covered with timber, and after leaving the top it was hard to tell just
where we would find our way down. Unfortunately, we reached the foot of
the mountain at a point on the Hudson where the bank was about vertical,
and so high that we had to climb more than half way up again to get down
on the other side of that ridge. This consumed so much time that when we
reached the Dutchwoman’s it was after 10 o’clock at night. Alfred, the
Dutchwoman’s son, was there, and we sent him for Lieutenant K⸺g to take
the young ladies to Cold Springs, where some of them lived and the others
were visiting. Cold Springs was off cadet limits, hence I could not risk
going there, when I knew I had been reported absent from dress parade
and from quarters, so I bade the young ladies adieu and reported with as
little delay as possible to the cadet officer of the day, who had made
search for me and was about to send a detail to hunt for me. Immediately
after breakfast the next morning I went to the Dutchwoman’s, saw Alfred
and learned that he had found Lieutenant K⸺g in ample time to catch the
last ferryboat at 11 p. m., but that the Lieutenant waited to finish
a game of billiards he was playing at the officers’ mess,[48] and he
arrived with the ladies at the North Landing just in time to see the last
ferryboat beyond call. The party then went to the Engineer Barracks,
a half mile or more distant, got a large engineer boat, and Lieutenant
K⸺g himself rowed the young ladies across the Hudson to Cold Springs,
and did not return until after reveille the following Sunday morning. I
hastened back to my quarters and worked hard on my gun in preparing my
room for inspection (for I was room orderly that week), for I felt that
the Lieutenant would be especially careful with me at inspection, and so
he was, but he could find nothing to report me for. After inspecting my
room he said, “Mr. R⸺d, you had quite an adventure yesterday?” I replied,
“Yes, sir.” He then asked: “Did the young ladies get home safely?” and I
answered, “You ought to know more about that than I do, sir.” He left the
room, banged the door and accepted my explanation for my absence the day
before.

Before we could realize it Thanksgiving came and went, Christmas and the
boxes of sweetmeats arrived, and as no Christmas leaves were granted this
year we took a greater interest than usual in an entertainment that came
off in the Mess Hall on New Year’s Eve.

The January examinations came again, and as is always the case there were
many failures, among them being my tall young friend from Tennessee.
After changing our hours of recitation the steady grind went on as usual.

About 1 o’clock in the morning of the 5th of February “long roll”
sounded, and, of course, this meant for everybody to turn out promptly.
In a few minutes after the call sounded the cadet companies formed in
the area, and in a few minutes more those in the fire department had
our little hand engine out and at work, for the cadet barracks were on
fire. Tony R⸺r held the nozzle and directed the stream on the roof of
the “Fourth Division,” where the flames were the thickest. The bucket
brigade was also soon at work. Some of the plebes in the cock-loft of
the Fourth Division did not awake until after their rooms were filled
with smoke, and when roll was called they were discovered absent, and
formed lines taking hold of hands and went into their rooms that were
filled with smoke and brought them out. We worked until after daylight
the next morning. Engineer and cavalry soldiers soon arrived to help
us, but much damage was done before the fire was put out. Most of the
roof was destroyed and great damage done to the “Dialectic Society Room”
over the Sally Port and to the cock-loft rooms of the Fourth Division.
No one was injured, but some of the cadets lost everything except their
nightclothes, which they had escaped in. The unfortunate ones found
accommodations by doubling-up with their classmates. Recitations begun at
8 a. m. that day as though nothing had happened, and in a few weeks the
damage to the building was repaired, and a little later Congress, which
was then in session, made good all losses.

                             PROGRAMME

                              OF THE

                    Entertainment Given by the
                      U. S. Corps of Cadets,

                       NEW YEAR’S EVE., 1870
                            WEST POINT.

    Overture                                               Orchestra

                              PART I.

                            Handy Andy.

                       (Ye Gladsome Farce.)

    Handy Andy                                       Cadet Shortelle

    Squire Egan                                     Cadet A. E. Wood

    Dick Dawson                                         Cadet Rogers

    Mr. Murphy                                           Cadet Casey

    Squire O’Grady                                     Cadet Goddard

    Mr. Furlong                                        Cadet Mumford

    Edward O’Conner                                     Cadet Hickey

    Simon                                                Cadet Guard

    First Ruffian                                      Cadet “Doyle”

    Second Ruffian                                  Cadet “McGinnis”

    Oonah Rooney                                        Cadet Birney

    Mad Nance                                         Cadet Townsend

    Fanny Dawson                                        Cadet Rowell

       Peasants, Strangers, Citizens, Etc., by the Company.

    Music                                                  Orchestra

                             PART II.

               Ye Soul-Stirring Tragedy of Macbeth.

    Macbeth—Ye vengeful slayer of his King; who is knawed by grim
      remorse.

    Macduff—Ye valiant general; ye loyal nobleman.

    Duncan—King of Scotland.

    Lady Macbeth—Who nightly walketh in her sleep.

    Seyton—Ye officer of Horse Marines, attendant upon Macbeth.

    Guitar Duet                          Cadets Evans and Harrington

                            “Camille.”

                            A Tragedy.

    Camille                                              Cadet Casey

                      (Tries to wheeden it.)

    Armand Duvall                                      Cadet Goddard

                (The histrionic vender of peanuts.)

    Music                                                  Orchestra

                             PART III.

     Dion Bourcicault’s “Speelshakes” Unparalleled Combination
               Overstrung Electro-Plated Tragedy of

             Les Immortelles de la Classe Von-Bonaute.

    As exhibited on the European plan by the world-renowned Pere
    Hyacinthe Troupe at Covent Garden, New Jersey, for over one
    consecutive night, during the rainy season, to an overflowing
    house, and afterwards successfully brought out by the Sheriff
    and Posse Troupe at the Tombs, New York, to a well-secured
    audience.

                            CHARACTERS.

                    (Don’t cut this part off.)

    Cadet Shrimp, Plan and Section Marcher.

    Cadet McDoyle                                          Vesskoldt

    Cadet Ginness                                    Narywacks U. C.

    Cadet Bewkellit                                     Wheet, N. R.

    Cadet Cutit                                              Tanbark

    Cadet Merritt, D.

    Recites at No. 1.5 Cockloft, Cavalry Stables, or in the area of
    Barracks on Saturday, alternating daily as the Professor may
    feel like it, with Courts-Martial from 2 P. M. until Police
    Inspection.

    Music                                                  Orchestra

                                PART IV.

                      Minstrels, by the Cadet Band.

                                   1.

    Overture (Ernani)                                     Cadet Band

    Beautiful Bells                                  Solo and Chorus

    Polka (La tarde del Sabado)                           Cadet Band

    Kaiser, Don’t You Want to Buy a Dog?                     Company

    Riding Hall Galop                                     Cadet Band

    Mary Aileen                                      Solo and Chorus

    Music                                                  Orchestra

                                   2.

    Maltese Boat Song                                      Quartette

    Galop (Dgagdfnp)                                      Cadet Band

    Now I Lay Me Down to Sleep                       Solo and Chorus

    Flirtation Waltz                                      Cadet Band

    Die Wacht am Rhein                                       Company

    Jim Jam Chorus                                           Company

       *       *       *       *       *

    ARTICLES OF WAR.

    ARTICLE I.—The managers wish it to be distinctly understood
    that they have original jurisdiction over all cases of loud and
    unseemly noise, shouting and crying out “Supe,” “Boots,” “Carry
    him out” and the like; and appellate jurisdiction over all
    violations of these Articles of Confederation, including the
    use of peanuts, taffy, pop-corn or other raging strong drink.

    ART. II.—In case of fire, to prevent unnecessary disturbance,
    the audience will be formed in two ranks endwise, the right
    wing resting on the Chapel steps, the left on the Declaration
    of Independence, bayonets fixed and trimmings to be worn on the
    outside of the mess hall. Should the danger be imminent a small
    detail, made by the Superintendent on recommendation of the
    academic board, will be allowed to visit the trunk rooms for
    the purpose of obtaining their white pants.

    AMENDMENT XIV.—Should any one of the audience feel hungry
    during the performance he will make out a statement of the
    fact, showing the color of his eyes and hair, when and where
    he was born, when and where enlisted, how long since he ate
    anything, and why he did not then eat enough to last. He will
    submit it to the Commandant of Cadets, who will, if convenient,
    forward it to the Superintendent. He will forward it to the
    Secretary of War, who will refer it to the Third Auditor of the
    Treasury to ascertain how much of the necessary appropriation
    remains unexpended. It will then be exposed to Brand’s sulphate
    of soda test to ascertain the effect of frost, after which it
    will be covered with several layers of beton, well rammed.
    At the end of ten hundred years, if it still yields to the
    pressure of the finger and remains soluble in hot rum toddy,
    the application will be disapproved. The applicant will
    meanwhile receive napkins, cane-bottomed chairs and plated
    castors to whet his appetite.

    PREAMBLE.—Should any member of the academic staff be so
    overcome by the refining nature of the performance as to feel a
    desire to sign the temperance pledge, he will find one in the
    cupboard of a little room in rear of the dining room of the
    officers’ mess.

When a cadet expected to “cut a meal,” that is, not go to the Mess Hall
for it, or when he wanted a lunch between meals, he would butter a
breakfast roll or two pieces of bread, fold the lunch in his handkerchief
and put it in the breast of his coat, and then throw his shoulders
forward to hide it, so as not to be reported for carrying food from the
Mess Hall. In winter I often carried a roll to my room and put it on the
steam coil under the marble slab. The heat melted the butter and made a
luscious evening lunch. Whenever a cadet had not provided a lunch for
himself and he wished to attend a “fight” at Fort Clinton a classmate
would bring him something from the Mess Hall.

Once in a while some of the cadets would try their hands at cooking;
they would get such articles of food from the Mess Hall as they could
conceal about their clothes and other articles from the Dutch Woman’s,
and after taps put a blanket up to cover the window, attach one end of a
rubber tube to the gas jet and the other to a burner under a pot or pan,
using candles for light. About the time the dainty dish, called “hash,”
was ready the invited guests would arrive, and then such a feast. Once
in a while an unexpected visitor in the form of a tactical officer would
happen around, and then such scampering; the unlucky ones always paying
dearly for the fun by walking “extras” on Saturday afternoons. There were
two of my classmates who lived together, and one of them was a famous
cook, but they were both “found” in January, and the one who was not the
cook told me that he himself would not have been found had he not had a
cook for a room-mate.

The paraphrase, by T⸺n of the class of 18—, gives a good account of “a
cadet hash” and the results following it:

A CADET HASH—(With Apologies to “The Raven.”)

    Once upon a morning dreary,
    Whilst I pondered sad and weary,
    Over the remains of cooking
    And the grease upon the floor,
    Suddenly there came a tapping,
    As of Kent or Piper rapping,
    Rapping at my chamber door;
    Only this and nothing more.

    What I said I will not mention
    When I heard the “stand attention”
    Coming from my chamber door.
    Up I jumped nor word did utter,
    As with many a snuff and splutter,
    Came the giant form of Henry
    Gazing at my greasy floor;
    Only this and nothing more.

    And behind him came a creature,
    Human as to form and feature,
    Whom I recognized as Jakey,
    Gazing, too, upon my floor.
    When I heard this creature vicious
    Putting on a smile malicious,
    Mutter, “You’ve been having cooking,
    That is what has greased your floor.”
    Only this and nothing more.

    “Yes,” said Henry, “I can smell it,
    ’Tis so plain that one can tell it,
    Tell the odor of the cooking,
    And the grease upon the floor.”
    Thus his spirit burned within him,
    And he said to Jacob, “Skin him,
    Skin him for the smell of cooking
    And for grease upon the floor.”
    “Yes,” said Jakey, and something more.

    Then he said, with look aggressive,
    And with twist of head expressive,
    “Put him on as orderly.
    Orderly for one week more!”
    “Yes,” said Jacob, “I will do it;
    This young man shall surely rue it,
    Rue the night that he had cooking,
    Rue the time he greased his floor,
    He shall serve for one week more.”

    Then they left me in my sadness,
    Musing o’er the deed of madness,
    Thinking of the smell of cooking
    And of grease upon my floor.
    All that night was turned to mourning,
    Visions stern of “extras” dawning,
    On my tearful, blinded vision,
    Caused me pain evermore.
    This is all—there’s nothing more.

Among the plebes reporting last June there was a colored youth, and he
was the first colored appointee. He passed the preliminary examinations
and was duly admitted. Without any concert of action we each and every
one let the colored plebe alone. We never spoke to him except officially.
He had a tent or a room all by himself, and he never had cause to
complain of being deviled. However, one day he did complain, and said he
had been tied and had had his ears cut; a great cry was raised against
the hazing at West Point. The case was investigated, but he had no
charges to make against any particular person, and as his injuries were
of a certain kind the cadets were of the opinion that he had inflicted
them upon himself. The army surgeons gave it as their opinion that any
one could tie and injure himself as this colored youth had been tied and
injured. This lad was neither black nor was he a mulatto; his face and
hands were light, with dark spots on them, and these spots were darker
on some occasions than others, which caused us to watch him closely. We
discovered that just before a rain the spots in his cheeks were darker
than at any other time, so we spoke of him as the “Walking Barometer.”
Like many a better man, he was found deficient in a year or two and
discharged. Had he been a white man I do not believe that he would ever
have been admitted to West Point, because, as cadets, we thought him very
dull and stupid.

There were some young ladies living at Cold Springs, who often visited
the Point, and they repeatedly invited certain of the cadets to call
on them some evening after “Taps.” Upon promise of a good supper and
music some of us agreed to “run it” over there on the next Saturday
night, provided, of course, that the tactical officers made their night
inspections in time for us to catch the last ferryboat at 11 p. m. It
so happened that the tactical officers all made early inspections on
a particular Saturday night, and soon after they had gone we went to
the rooms of certain candidates, who had not gotten their uniforms and
whose suits of civilian clothes we decided to wear, unbeknown to them,
of course. We found them asleep, took off our cadet gray and donned the
candidates’ citizen clothes. By “hustling” we were just in time for
the ferry, but as we were going down hill past the Seacoast Battery we
met Professor C⸺h and some other officers, who had just arrived on the
ferry, and as luck went L⸺n, from force of habit, saluted the officers.
Our courage almost failed us then, but on we went. After reaching the
boat landing we hesitated about crossing the Hudson for fear that, after
having been seen, another inspection of quarters would be made that
night, and if it were made we were sure of being reported absent, and
this meant, as we could not make explanation that we were on cadet limits
at the time, that we would have to stand “trial by court-martial,” and
if any witnesses were found to prove us off limits we were certain to
be dismissed. Notwithstanding all this, we went, and reached the house
where all the young ladies had agreed to be at about midnight. We were
not expected, but the young ladies were up and said that they did not
dream of our taking the chances we did of being dismissed. As we were
not expected, there was no supper for us. One of the ladies played the
piano for a little while, and then quit because it was Sunday morning.
Seeing that our trip was a disappointment we left the house and started
on our return to barracks. The boatman was not where he told us to call
for him, and we did not find him till about 4 a. m. In the meantime we
became thoroughly chilled, and we ran across several men who might become
witnesses, thus increasing our chances of being caught. Again it was fast
approaching reveille, we would be absent from roll call, and what would
the candidates whose clothes we had on do? Then there were our clothes
with our names in them in the candidates’ rooms to be used as evidence
against us. Oh, what a pleasant time we had that night! At last we landed
at the same dock that I had first landed at, but I was not then in a
humor to appreciate the scenery. We agreed after we changed clothes again
with the candidates and had gone to our own rooms to see whether or not
we had been “hived absent” to meet at the sink. It was not long till we
met there and found that we had not been caught absent, and that the
candidates never knew we wore their clothes.

We now began to talk of furlough, and as the time drew near we became
the more anxious to see home folks again. Tailors visited the Point with
samples of summer suitings, and the Commissary tailor also had samples to
show. At last each yearling ordered the clothes he wanted to wear when he
went on furlough as a swell second classman, and when the citizen suits
were ready those who ordered at the Commissary could try them on, while
the others had to wait for theirs until after the 1st of June. During the
spring months we held several class meetings to decide upon a furlough
cane, and at last we agreed upon one. It was a small malaca stick with an
L-shaped ivory head, having the last two figures of the year we expected
to graduate in cut into the free end of the L. Our folks when they saw us
with the little canes called us dudes, and they were about right, too,
but that was many years ago, when we were young and charming.

A FURLOUGH DREAM.[49]

Air:—Benny Havens, Oh!

    A few more days and June will come,
      And with her rosy hand
    Will open wide the gate that leads
      Unto the promised land,
    Where dwells the “Cit” in happy ease,
      Without the least regard,
    While he doth have the entire earth
      Enclosed in his front yard.

    He has no fear of any “Tac”
      When he off limits strays,
    No reveille disturbs his ear.
      Oh, joyful are his days;
    He has no fear of Mathy probs,
      Or French to masticate;
    No Spanish grip with outstretched arms
      Awaits to seal his fate.

    He has no bony nag to ride
      In Grant’s or Custer’s style,
    No other animals to fight
      That wear a goaty smile;
    And as the summer days roll by
      The wily hammock holds
    This happy, lazy, lounging “Cit”
      Within its sleepy folds.

    Oh, haste the day when we shall share
      In life’s sweet joys again;
    No hearts on earth will lighter beat
      Than those of furloughmen.
    ’Twill all seem like a happy dream,
      But, oh! how short and sweet,
    This oasis in our four years,
      When friends long parted meet.

    And then once more we will return
      To West Point battle ground,
    To fight again for two years more,
      That is, if we’re not “found;”
    So furloughmen just brace yourselves,
      And keep hopes’ fire ablaze,
    For we, too, shall be jolly “Cits”
      In just a few more days.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: CAMP BELKNAP.

The Pleasure of your company is requested at the hops to be given by the
Corps of Cadets every Monday Wednesday and Friday evening during the
encampment

_MANAGERS._

    STANHOPE E BLUNT
    THOMAS C WOODBURY
    J W WILKINSON
    J LEW WILSON
    ALFRED REYNOLDS
    GEO T T PATTERSON
    ADDIS M HENRY
    HARRY C WYCANT
    CHARLES W ROWELL
    EDMUND K WEBSTER
    HENRY R LEMLY
    HARRY H LANDON
    LEVEN C ALLEN
    C E SCOTT WOOD
    WM L GEARY

West Point

21st June 1871.]




CHAPTER VII.

THE FURLOUGHMAN.


Another June rolled around, the Board of Visitors arrived, the customary
salute was fired and the alumni meeting held. The examinations were
completed, another class was graduated and a new one admitted to the
corps. As usual, at the annual examinations some of the “found” were
turned back to join the next class, while the other unfortunates left the
Point to return no more as cadets. The fortunate graduates and the happy
furloughmen, after drawing the “balances due” from the Treasurer of the
Academy, donned their “cit” clothes and went on furlough; the graduates
to assume the duties of Second Lieutenants in the army at the expiration
of their “graduating leave” on the 30th of the following September, and
the second classmen to return to the Point at the expiration of their
“furlough” on the 28th of August. The amounts due varied according to
the economy practiced by the cadets. Some had nothing due, while others
received as much as two hundred dollars in addition to the “equipment
fund.” Four dollars per month is retained from the pay of each cadet as
his “equipment fund,” and it is given to him when he graduates or leaves
the Academy never to return as a cadet.

Mine was the furlough class this year, and when I reached home my mother
made me open my trunk in the back yard, and she herself was present to
see that I shook and aired everything I had, for the reason, she said,
that, as there were no women to keep things clean about our barracks, she
was sure that we had bedbugs there.

I had not been at home long when an old Quaker called on me and said:
“H⸺, I have been waiting for thee to come home. During the war I noticed
that soldiers always stepped off with the left foot first, and now that
thee has been to the Government’s Military School for two years, thee
probably knows why.” I had to confess my ignorance on the subject then,
and I must confess it now.

One day I received an invitation to visit a battalion of State Militia in
camp, and I was requested to take my uniform. I accepted the invitation,
and wore it in camp. I was able to and did give instruction in many
points of the tactics, which at that time were new to the militia, and at
the same time I learned much at this camp that was new and useful to me.
At the request of the commanding officer of the camp I acted as Adjutant
at parades and guard-mounts. I got along all right after the first dress
parade, where I took post on the wrong side of the commanding officer
after having presented arms to him. However, the militia of my state was
not then as well posted on tactics[50] as it is to-day; my blunder was
not discovered.

During furlough some of my classmates visited me, and I visited some of
them, and we had a jolly good time of course, for all college men enjoy
their vacations. While students of other colleges usually have several
months’ vacation every year, West Point cadets have but one vacation in
their four years. With many pleasures and not a care the summer soon
passed, and as usual most of the furloughmen met in New York to return
together from there.

A warm welcome awaited us in “Camp Belknap,” that being the name of
the camp at the Point this year. Mustaches and side whiskers that we
had grown during the summer all had to come off before we reported our
return to the Adjutant. We soon shaved, visited the trunk rooms, donned
our uniforms and reported for duty. After a gay time on the “color line”
that evening we turned in with the first classmen, who had long been our
friends, although they were once the yearlings who had deviled us in our
plebe camp; so quickly is the deviling forgiven and yet never forgotten.
The next day we “broke camp” and returned to barracks, this time to begin
on the hardest studies[51] of the four years. It did not take us long to
get down to hard study and drill again and to become interested once
more in the few things that afford pleasure to cadets during the Academic
year.

After arriving at the Point and before reporting the return from
furlough, it has long been a custom to have a class picture taken upon
the chapel steps, and when sitting for this picture furloughmen generally
look as “tough” as possible, as may be seen from the picture of the group
of furloughmen.

When marching to and from meals, long before I myself became a second
classman, I observed four members of the then second class who did not
march with the battalion, but who strolled leisurely to and from the Mess
Hall. My first thought was that they had been excused by the Post Surgeon
from marching to and from meals, but upon inquiry I learned that these
four were “Company Clerks,” and that they were detailed on special duty
upon the recommendations of the first sergeants. Hence I promptly secured
the promise of D⸺t that if he obtained the first sergeancy of C Company
I should be the company clerk. He was made the first sergeant and kept
his promise to me, and for more than a year I made out the muster rolls
and guard details of C Company. From that day I have not walked post as a
sentinel; the first year because I was company clerk, and the next year
because first classmen do not do guard duty after the plebes begin to
go on guard. Neither did I march to and from meals any more; the first
year because I was company clerk and the next because I was one of twelve
first classmen who, at that time, took their meals at a private house in
Professor’s Row.

Professor K⸺k was an old bachelor, but he kept open house on Saturday
afternoons, and it was a great pleasure to him to welcome cadet callers.
He always treated them to waffles and maple syrup or to something else
equally as delicious and not found on the Mess Hall bill of fare.

In my day the gas tips in cadet rooms did not give a very good light, so
some of the cadets bought better tips and when caught using them they
were of course reported for tampering with public property. G⸺r, of
my class, had an “Argand burner,” and at first he was very careful to
take it off for inspection of quarters, but one evening he was caught
unawares and reported. For this serious offense he was confined to “light
prison” for several months. Light prisons at that time were rooms in
the angle of barracks, and they were off limits for cadets not there in
confinement. The cadet officer of the day carried the prison keys, and
at certain hours, such as for recitations and drills, he would let out
the prisoners. G⸺r got so tired of being alone that he removed a panel of
his prison door and then often went visiting after taps. But he got out
through the panel once too often, for he was caught and then his prison
door was barred and his stay in prison lengthened many weeks.

One day when Captain B⸺s had my cavalry platoon out for a long ride in
the country, just before passing an orchard filled with luscious ripe
apples, the Captain rode from the head to the rear of the column and said
to the rear guide: “Mr. H⸺s, don’t let anyone go into that orchard,” and
then returned to the head of the column. H⸺s saw to it that none of us
“fell out” of ranks, but he himself treated to apples from that orchard.

Cadets are taught the use of the pencil, pen and brush, the latter in
water colors only. In this work we painted from models of landscapes,
figures, ships, etc., and, as may be expected, some cadets were more
skillful than others. Those near the foot of the class in drawing had
hard work to keep from being found deficient in it. To get better results
in water color work the professor occasionally directed a cadet to wash
out a part of his drawing and begin that part over again. In looking
at Cadet G⸺e’s work one day, Professor W⸺r directed him to wash out
the “hull” of the ship he was at work on. After a while the professor
returned and began to scold, when G⸺e “innocently” said: “Why, professor,
you told me to wash out the ‘whole’ of it.” The topographical sketch
of the most interesting part of West Point given on another page is a
reproduction of a specimen of cadet pen and ink work.

We were kept so busy during this year that the time passed rapidly,
notwithstanding many privileges that we had enjoyed were taken away
from us. For instance, this year we were not allowed to go on Christmas
leave, nor to receive Christmas boxes, nor to give an entertainment on
New Year’s Eve. The fact is a new superintendent had taken charge of
affairs and it did not take us long to find it out. Still we soon became
accustomed to the new order of things and all went well.

As I have said, cadets wore old shoes to reveille, and the accompanying
verses express the kindly feelings they have for them:

MY OLD REVEILLES.

    You may talk of your gaiters as much as you please,
    Their beauty, their elegance, comfort and ease;
      But of all the shoes that e’er shoemaker made,
      Not a word that is better of them can be said
    Than Cadets will say and they’ll not say it to please,
    But for pure, honest love of their old Reveilles.

    Long ages ago, they have seen their best day;
    Tho’ rusty and holey, I’ll not throw them away,
      But fondly will cherish tho’ the uppers wear out,
      And the soles are all ready to sail up the spout,
    For there’s no shoes in the world possess so much ease
    For my poor tired feet as my old Reveilles.

    The worldly may scoff and at sight of them sneer,
    But I’ll cling to them yet for old memories dear;
      They covered my feet when a Plebe in distress,
      And into my Yearling year helped me to press;
    As long as winds whistle and waves roll o’er the seas
    Will I look with kind glance on my old Reveilles.

    At last when the policeman shall come in some day,
    And gather the “rimnants” that I’ve thrown away,
      And bears the old rubbish to the heap down below,
      Along with the rest in the dust and the snow,
    You’ll see them there lying, producers of ease
    Sad, lonely, neglected, my old Reveilles.

    Others and newer may take their old place,
    And with plenteous blacking shine smiles in my face,
      My feet will look smaller and better perhaps,
      But in the sweet slumbers that come after Taps,
    Foremost and fairest of all visions that please,
    Will be happy remembrances of my old Reveilles.

    Let them go while a tear drop in memory flows
    Gently down from my eye-lid and rests on my nose,
      But little they’ll reck of my sorrow or pain,
      Nor of my longing to get them again.
    While over their resting-place cold winds scatter leaves
    Where they peacefully sleep—Farewell, Reveilles!

Artillery drills come in each year of the four. The first year the drill
is on foot at the light battery; the next year with horses at the light
battery; the third year on foot at the siege, mortar and sea-coast
batteries, and the last year first classmen act as assistants to the
instructors. Light battery drill with horses is one that all cadets
thoroughly enjoy. There are six pieces (each with its caisson) in the
battery, and there is great rivalry between the cadets and drivers at
each piece, especially in executing some maneuver that ends with firing.

In my day the target for mortar drill was a barrel on a post, placed
at the foot of Cro’ Nest, 1,000 yards or more from the mortar battery,
near “Trophy Point.” One day I was “gunner” of a piece and was fortunate
enough to knock the barrel from its post, a feat rarely accomplished, as
it is very difficult to strike a small object with a mortar.

One of the guns of the sea-coast battery was a very large one, the
diameter of the bore being twenty inches. One day at drill at this
battery, while at “rest,” one of the cadets, who was a little fellow,
crawled into the bore of this big gun. After getting in a certain
distance the more he tried to get out the farther in he went, hence he
had to be pulled out by the heels. The instructor, appreciating the
situation, threatened to report him for being off limits.

Cadets are taught photography, and on pleasant May days second classmen
can often be seen with cameras taking views of the different buildings
and of the many pretty sights about the Point.

One pleasant afternoon in May a classmate and I were walking along
Professor’s Row, near the north gate, and we saw three pretty young
ladies, daughters of Professor W⸺r, sitting on their porch, so we stopped
for a chat. The ladies said that they would play the piano and sing
for us if we would go in the house. My friend declined the invitation,
because he was too near found on demerits to risk being caught off cadet
limits, and we did not have a permit. Up to that time I had had but few
demerits and had been lucky in never having been caught off limits, so
I decided to accept the invitation. When there was no officer in sight
I went in, and passed a merry hour with the young ladies. But when I
came out an officer saw me, and reported me for being off cadet limits.
I wrote an explanation, stating where I was at the time, and that was
all. “Off Limits” is a serious offense, especially in an old cadet,
and besides receiving five or six demerits, I was given six “extras”
officially designated as “Saturday afternoon punishments.” This I did not
relish at all, especially as I had never had any before, but I learned to
my sorrow what an extra meant, and I had ample time to ponder over the
gravity of my offense as I paced to and fro, across the area of barracks,
carrying my rifle “just so,” from 2 p. m. till ten minutes before dress
parade at sunset. I never till then fully realized the length of the days
in May and June. When it came time to go to camp again I had walked only
four of the six extras, and as there are no “extras” in camp, for the
remaining two I was given two weeks “confinement,” i. e., I had to be
in my tent all the time for the first two weeks in my first class camp,
except, of course, when absent from it on duty or by special permission.

Just before this Academic year closed my class selected its quota of
managers for the coming summer hops, and also all of the managers for
the hop that my class gave to the graduating class. The invitations and
programs for these dances were sent to friends, and they began to arrive
with the Board of Visitors and old graduates who came to attend the
Alumni meeting and dinner in the bachelor officers’ part of the Mess Hall.

Cullum Memorial Hall is now used for all hops and the alumni meetings are
usually held in it, and luncheon is served afterwards from the Officers’
Mess, next door.

[Illustration: TO CLASS OF ’72 FROM ’73.

THE PLEASURE OF YOUR COMPANY IS REQUESTED AT A HOP TO BE GIVEN TO THE
GRADUATING CLASS on June 14th.

_Managers_

    G. F. HARRISON.
    E. W. CASEY.
    E. S. BEACOM.
    J. E. BLOOM.

West Point, N.Y.]

The new buildings now completed or far enough along to be used are the
bachelor officers’ quarters, across the road east and a little south of
old Fort Clinton; Cullum Memorial Hall, a gift accepted by Congress,
a little further south; the officers’ mess, still further south; the
Administration Building, across the road east of and facing the cadet
mess hall; the power plant, a little further east; the cadet hospital,
a little north of the old one that is now used for married officers’
quarters; the Academic, on the site of, but much larger than the old
one; the North Cadet Barracks, in Professors’ Bow, and a little north
of the old, now called the South Cadet Barracks, to which some years
ago two divisions were added to the east end of its west wing; a second
guard house, in rear, i. e., west of the North Cadet Barracks; a Catholic
church, built, with permission of Congress, by Catholics, on high
ground some distance west of the old north gate that was removed years
ago; many married officers’ quarters, some northwesterly of the old
north gate and some south of the old south gate, that was also removed
years ago—these quarters are built facing the river in two tiers; the
artillery and cavalry barracks and stables are upon two sides of a new
artillery and cavalry plain that adjoins the village of Highland Falls;
the Observatory, on the Hill, now called Observatory Hill, near old Fort
Putnam; lastly, the Cadet Chapel, a beautiful cathedral-like building on
Observatory Hill, crowns the group of handsome buildings. The reservoir
on the west slope of Observatory Hill has been enlarged and a filter
plant added to it.

The new gymnasium and riding hall are now well under way. The gymnasium
is west and a little north of the west wing of the north cadet barracks;
the roof of the old (and but a few years ago the new) gymnasium has been
taken to cover the swimming pool part of this large new building. The
riding hall nearly fills the space between the officers’ mess on the
north and the power plant on the south; in fact, the riding hall and
power plant will join, and on the south-east corner of this building
there will be a tower to correspond with that of the Administration
Building.

The following buildings will soon be razed to the ground, to-wit: the old
Cadet Chapel (to be rebuilt in the cadet cemetery); the old, and but a
few years ago the new Administration Building, from a little south of the
old chapel; the old power plant, from the area of the old cadet barracks;
the old, and but a few years ago the new, cadet sink or water closet
building, from the area of the old cadet barracks; the old gymnasium,
from a little west of the angle of the South Cadet Barracks; the old
riding hall, that is now nearly surrounded by the walls of the new one;
and the officers’ quarters in front of the new gymnasium, as the latter
stands well back of but fronts east on Professors’ Row.

While the Military Academy was the first educational institution in this
country to recognize (in 1817) the value of a uniform system of physical
training it was not till 1890 that the Academic Board allowed cadet teams
to play against teams of other institutions. The first contest being a
baseball game with an Annapolis midshipmen team, then came other contests
with teams from other colleges. Now contests are held annually—and since
1908 under official control—with outside teams in baseball, football,
fencing, basketball and hockey. The present system of indoor gymnastics
dates from 1882 and track work, tennis, golf, polo and wrestling are
indulged in. Most of the contests are held at West Point—many of them
being played on the beautiful green infantry parade ground—and seats
arranged in tiers like the bleechers at professional ball games are put
up in sections on the plain to accommodate the thousands of spectators
that now witness these contests. There being no admission fee the seats
are assigned by tickets to the cadets and their friends, and to officers
and friends of the Academy who voluntarily contribute to the financial
support of cadet athletics.

Certain cadets who excel in athletics, i. e., those who have actually
played on an Academy (first) team for a year are entitled to wear a large
A, (the initial of Army) on the sweater, jersey, jacket, cap or other
article of athletic uniform, subject to the following:

    1st. In football they must play in two-thirds of all games
    played with outside teams or in a Navy game.

    2d. In baseball they must play in two-thirds of all games
    played with outside teams or in a Navy game.

    3d. In fencing they must participate in three-fifths of all
    contests fenced with outside teams, or in the Intercollegiate
    contest.

    4th. Any cadet who at an Outdoor Meet breaks an Academy record.

To keep pace with other colleges cadets now have “colors” and “yells.”

For the Class of 1909 the color is gold, and the yell is—

                          SISS! BOOM! AH!
           U. S. M. A.! RAH! RAH! U. S. M. A.! RAH! RAH!
                         HOO RAH! HOO RAH!
                           NAUGHTY-NINE!
                               RAH!

For the Class of 1910 the color is royal purple, and the yell is—

                         R-A-Y! RAH! RAH!
                         R-A-Y! RAH! RAH!
                            U. S. M. A.
                           NINETEEN TEN!

For the Class of 1911 the color is Maroon, and the yell is—

                     HOO-RAH-RAH! HOO-RAH-RAH!
                   HOO-RAH! HOO-RAY! U. S. M. A.
                         1911! 1911! 1911!

For the Class of 1912 the color is royal-blue, and the yell is—

                           U. S. M. A.!
                           U. S. M. A.!
                           U. S. M. A.!
                            1912! RAY!

While the Corps colors are gray, black and gold, and the Corps yell is—

                          Rah, Rah, Ray,
                          Rah, Rah, Ray,
                            West Point
                            West Point
                              AR-MAY!
                          Rah, Rah, Ray.
                Rah, Rah, Rah, Rah, Rah, Rah, Rah!
                            West Point,
                            West Point,
                            West Point!

And for the Charge yell—

                        Rah, Rah, Rah, Rah!
                    Ki-yi, Ki-yi, Ki-yi Ki-yi,
                       Ki-yi, Ki-yi, Ki-yi,
                          Wow, Wow, Wow.
                       Ki-yi, Ki-yi, Ki-yi,
                          Wow, Wow, Wow.
                              CHARGE!

Each class elects one or more “Cheer Leaders,” but a first class Cheer
Leader leads the Corps in Corps yells.

In contests with outside teams the West Point team is called the “Army
Team” and the Annapolis team is called the “Navy Team.”

Imagine the feelings of one who graduated at the Academy prior to
1890 listening to cadet yells and to such songs (copied from the 1909
Howitzer) as the following that are now sung by the Corps in the presence
of the Academic Board and other officers, to wit:

_Air_: “Tipperary.”

    When you see that old veteran Army Team
      Come bounding over the ropes,
    And settle right down to a winning game
      That breaks the Navy’s hopes,
    It makes every genuine soldier’s heart
      Fill up with joy and pride.

    That he’s of the metal that makes the team,
      And that he roots on the Army side.
    Throughout this country far and wide,
      And islands far away,
    Each heart in blue beats hard and beats true
      For the Army.

    Chorus.

    Army, Army, you’re a wonder;
      You will snow the Middies under.
    Win this game without a blunder, for
      You’ve got to win, you’ve got to win,
    And _down_ that Navy, _down_ that Navy;
      It’s for the honor of the Army.

_Air_: “Women.”

    For this season, the old Army Mule
    Has adopted the same sporting rule,
    Which he holds as inherited right;
    And that rule is “fight, fight, fight.”
    So the Tiger of Princeton must fall,
    And the Yale Bulldog taste bitter gall;
    While the beaten Navy Goat
    Must leave land and board a boat,
    To be safe on his sea of tears.

_Air_: “O’Reilly.”

          The Army, The Army,
          The Army’s a team that’s sure stormy,
    So beat it, you sailor lads, run ’fore the wind,
          When our men first blew in here
          Your team was skinned.
          Poor Navy, dear Navy,
          Not even your anchors can save ye,
    Your flukes have all stuck, but your line gave way
          In this terrible cyclone, the Army.

“FIGHT! FIGHT! FIGHT!”

    At the Army-Navy football game, in November, 1908, on Franklin
    Field, Philadelphia, Pa., during a moment of suspense between
    cheers, some one started the refrain—Fight! Fight! Fight!
    Spreading instantaneously through the (West Point) Corps, it
    was promptly adopted as the Army’s watchword, and throughout
    the remainder of the game the stands throbbed with the stirring
    slogan:

    Tense is the strain in the stands to-day,—
      Six to four, and the army leads!
    And, charging in vain ’gainst the line of gray,
      The shattered Navy attack recedes.—
    For the thought that nerves every Army’s son
      Is not the renown of an athlete’s might,
    But the call of the Corps, that swells in one
      Reverberant chorus, Fight! Fight! Fight!

    The bed of the thicket is stained with red,
      So fierce was the Moro ambuscade:
    Half the men down, and the captain dead,
      And each tree shelters a rebel blade.
    But the boy, with never a blush of fear,
      Forms the shattered ranks, drives the foe in flight.
    For the Corps from afar still speaks to him clear,
      And the word that he hears is Fight! Fight! Fight!

    This is the message that evermore,
      While endlessly stretches the firm gray line,
    Each son hears whispered anew by the Corps,
      “Your life no longer is wholly thine.
    Your utmost strength and your fullest meed
      Of service is pledged as the Nation’s right
    And all through life’s battle, this be your creed
      And watchword forever—Fight! Fight! Fight!”

While most of the contests in which a cadet (i. e., the army) team
takes part are played at West Point, some of them are played on other
grounds—notably the annual football game with the Annapolis (i. e., the
Navy) team—it is played on Franklin Field at Philadelphia, Penn., and it
is an event of the year for Washington officials and society folks from
near and from far.


THE WEST POINT HYMN.

[Written by the Reverend Herbert Shipman, a former chaplain at West
Point, and sung by the cadets at the dedication of their new chapel, June
12, 1910.]

THE CORPS! THE CORPS! THE CORPS!

    The Corps! bare-headed, salute it,
      With eyes up, thanking our God—
    That we of the Corps are treading
      Where they of the Corps have trod.
    They are here in ghostly assemblage,
      The men of the Corps long dead,
    And our hearts are standing attention
      While we wait for their passing tread.

    We sons of to-day, we salute you,
      You, sons of an earlier day,
    We follow, close order, behind you,
      Where you have pointed the way;
    The long gray line of us stretches
      Thro’ the years of a century told,
    And the last man feels to his marrow
      The grip of your far-off hold.

    Grip hands with us now though we see not,
      Grip hands with us, strengthen our hearts—
    As the long line stiffens and straightens
      With the thrill that your presence imparts.
    Grip hands, tho’ it be from the shadows,
      While we swear, as you did of yore,
    Or living, or dying to honor
      The Corps, and the Corps, and the Corps.

A few years ago the first class was given permission to have a club and
the First Classmen’s Club was duly organized. At first the club had a
room on the ground floor in the Academic Building, but now it has fine
quarters on the second floor in the new North Cadet Barracks where, when
it does not interfere with duty, members may go at any time between 7:15
a. m. and 9:30 p. m. and until recall from the hop on cadet hop nights.
The club provides, at its own expense, such periodicals, newspapers,
chess, checkers, etc., as may be approved by the superintendent.
Refreshments of all kinds, gambling, cigarette smoking, and deliberations
or discussions having the object of conveying praise or censure or any
mark of approbation or disapprobation toward any one in the military
service, are prohibited. On the week-day immediately preceding the
graduation exercises, the club gives a reception to the members of the
second class to introduce them to the privileges they may soon enjoy.

The transformation that of late has been wrought in the architectural
setting of West Point, the changes made in the method of teaching and in
the disciplinary ideals, and the greater privileges granted to cadets
all tend to bring the Military Academy closer to other educational
institutions of the country.

As a school year closes there is much interest taken in the changes soon
to be announced in orders.

Cadet rank is indicated by chevrons,[52] as follows:

For a Captain,[53] 4 bars.

For the Adjutant,[53] 3 bars and an arc of 3 bars.

For the Quartermaster,[53] 3 bars and a tie of 3 bars.

For a Lieutenant,[53] 3 bars.

For the Sergeant-Major,[54] 2 bars and an arc of 2 bars.

For the Quartermaster-Sergeant,[54] 2 bars and a tie of 2 bars.

For a First Sergeant,[54] 2 bars and a lozenge.

For a Company Quartermaster-Sergeant,[54] 2 bars and a tie of 1 bar.

For a Sergeant,[54] 2 bars.

For a Corporal,[55] 2 bars.

Commissions are not given to the cadet officers, i. e., the captains
and lieutenants, and warrants are not given to cadet non-commissioned
officers, i. e., the sergeants and corporals. Two of the sergeants are
designated as color sergeants, the one carries a United States flag
called the colors, the other marching on his left carries the Corps
banner.

[Illustration: Cadet Captain’s Chevron

(_Rear._) (_Front._)]

Cadets now wear gilt service straps on their coat sleeves as follows,
to wit: Third classmen, one stripe; second classmen, two stripes; first
classmen, three stripes.


BUTTON.

[Illustration]

In June, 1893, the Association of Graduates adopted a miniature bell
button to be worn by members in the upper buttonhole of civilian coats;
the part nearest an observer is a gold plate with the year of graduation
on it, next is a gray stone, then a gold band with the class motto on
it, then a dark blue stone; the date plate being fastened by a shank to
a circular metal base on the under side of which are the owner’s name
and the letters U. S. M. A. In June, 1904, this button was substituted
by another showing the West Point colors, gray, black and gold. In June,
1910, the bell button was re-adopted.


BADGE.

[Illustration]

Badge of the “Association of Graduates of the United States Military
Academy[56],” adopted June 9, 1902. Composed of the Coat of Arms of the
United States Military Academy and a bar pin made of bronze gilt, silver
gilt or gold pierced by the Corps colors, a gray, black and gold ribbon.
The date of graduation is put on the bar. Worn only by members of the
association at graduate re-unions, graduate dinners, class dinners, etc.

[Illustration: CAMP THAYER

THE PLEASURE OF YOUR COMPANY IS REQUESTED AT THE HOPS TO GIVEN BY THE
CORPS OF CADETS EVERY MONDAY WEDNESDAY AND FRIDAY EVENING DURING THE
ENCAMPMENT

_MANAGERS_

    W. G. BIRNEY
    G. F. HARRISON
    A. S. CUMMINS
    E. D. HOYLE
    J. M. BALDWIN
    E. W. CASEY
    E. S. BEACOM
    H. C. LA POINT
    J. J. CRITTENDEN
    J. H. KING
    C. M. O’CONNOR
    J. E. BLOOM
    R. LONDON
    J. R. JEFFERSON
    H. W. ISBELL

_West Point N.Y._

_June 1872._]




CHAPTER VIII.

THE GRADUATE.


After the June examinations were over we went into camp again at the
usual place. This year it was named “Camp Thayer” in honor of a former
superintendent of the Academy, and as first classmen have precedence over
all other cadets, it was “our camp.” Among the young lady visitors were
many who had been to the Point for several summers. They seemed like old
friends and the pleasure of meeting again was mutual. The first thing
of importance for us to do was to arrange for the celebration of the
Fourth of July and for a special hop that evening. We elected officers
to conduct the holiday exercises and to have charge of the special hop.
It was not obligatory upon any one to attend those festivities, but as
the weather was perfect and as there were no other inviting places to go,
everybody who could be present attended the exercises held in the morning
in the pretty little chapel,[57] and in the evening some witnessed the
handsome pyrotechnic display, while others attended the hop, and as usual
the Mess Hall was beautifully decorated and used for the special hop.[58]

In my day, by special dispensation, twelve cadets of the first class were
permitted to take meals at the Misses Thompson, who lived in General
Washington’s old log Headquarter House, in Professor’s Row. These ladies
were quite old when I knew them; the oldest of the three sisters died
of old age shortly before I went there to board. It was not easy to get
a seat at the Misses Thompson’s table, and when a cadet secured one
without any conditions imposed he generally “willed it to his plebe.”
And this is the way I obtained mine. My predecessor had a seat there and
he willed it to me, but as I could not go there until I became a first
classman certain members of the three classes ahead of me had the seat on
condition that it should come to me when I became eligible. But this was
not all, as may be seen from the following (old form) permit:

                               West Point, New York, June 19, 1872.

    Cadet R⸺d, Private 2nd Class “C” Co., has permission to take
    his meals at the Misses Thompson (to have the seat last
    occupied by Cadet R⸺p), his name having been proposed and
    accepted.

        J. F. S⸺h,
        Com’d’g Co. “C.”

        E. U⸺n,
        Comdt. Cadets.

    Approved:

        T. H. R⸺r,
        Superintendent.

                         JULY 4      1872

                            ANNIVERSARY

                              OF THE

                 Independence of the United States

                      CELEBRATION AND HOP BY

                        THE CORPS OF CADETS

                             TO WHICH

      The pleasure of your Company is respectfully requested.
              Ceremonies in the Chapel to commence at
                             Ten A. M.

       Marshall,          Orator,            Reader,
    CADET COFFIN.      CADET TOTTEN.      CADET EATON.

                            President,
                           CADET HOYLE.

                   Hop Commencing at Eight P. M.

                          Floor Managers:

    CADET BIRNEY, CADET O’CONNOR, CADET LA POINT.

             Pyrotechnic Display on the Cavalry Plain.

The father of these old ladies rendered most valuable services to General
Washington during the Revolutionary War, and as his family was left in
humble circumstances they were permitted to live at the Point and board
twelve cadets. We used to think that Miss Amelia was about ninety years
old and that Miss Kate was seventy-five. Miss Kate for months talked of
making a trip to New York, but finally Miss Amelia said: “Catharine could
not go, as she was too young and giddy.”

There was an old saying at the Point in my day that “extras breed
extras,” and I found it so in my case. While I was serving the two weeks
confinement that were given me, in lieu of the last two of the six extras
for “Off Limits,” an old boy friend from home visited the Point, and I
got permission to be with him in rear of the guard tents for half an
hour. We could not talk about everything we wanted to in half an hour,
so I told him just how to run the gauntlet, that is, how to cross the
sentinel’s post and get to my tent, which he did. At that particular
time of day nearly all of my classmates were out of camp; some on permit
visiting friends at the hotel, some boating and others anywhere fancy
took them. I had the walls of my tent down, so that my friend could not
be seen, for it was a violation of the regulations to have a citizen
in the body of the camp. He and I were having a good time talking over
boyhood days. R⸺s, a classmate, was officer of the day, and thinking
that I was lonesome he came around to cheer me up, saying that my two
weeks was nearly over, but, alas, he had no sooner opened my tent than
he saw my friend, and as the officer of the day is “on honor” to report
all violations of the regulations that he sees, he had to report me for
“Citizen in tent,” and to send my friend at once out of camp. I have
never seen that friend since to tell him that I was given two weeks’
confinement for that violation of the regulations.

C⸺s was a Cadet Captain, and one day when walking with a lady between the
camp and the hotel, the lady raised her parasol, and C⸺s, to be polite,
carried it for her. An officer saw him with the parasol and reported him.
For this serious offense he was reduced to the ranks. It was not long
afterward that the young lady saw him carrying a rifle and pacing to and
fro on Post No. 2, but as he did not wish further punishment he did not
speak to her as she crossed his post; he waited until he was relieved and
then told her why.

We spent some time out in Fort Clinton digging trenches and making
fascines, gabions and a sap roller, thus imitating methods used in the
attack and defense of a fortified place. We also spent some time in the
laboratory making rockets, bombs and other articles used at times by the
military in time of war. With the assistance of the plebes we constructed
pontoon bridges some distance out into the Hudson.

In my day we played base ball occasionally, but it was not a very popular
game at the Point, not like football has been of recent years. Boating
was allowed then, and the first, second and third classes each owned
a number of row boats, and during camp and in barracks on Saturday
afternoons the boats were always in demand. But since 1875 boating has
not been allowed.

One evening, when I was officer of the guard, not long after taps, the
sentinel on No. 1 challenged: “Who comes there?” and as I was awake and
in the first guard tent, I heard the reply: “Friend with lemons,” and
also the sentinel’s call, “Halt! Friend with lemons, Corporal of the
Guard, Post No. 1.” As the reply was an unusual one I went out, and
seeing a man in civilian dress, standing alone, I directed the Corporal
to advance the friend with lemons. The man advanced and began to deliver
lemons. He had lemons in every pocket, and he had a good many pockets,
too. There were more lemons than the Corporal and I could carry (for
there are no pockets in cadet uniforms), so I called other members of
the guard to help us carry lemons. The gentleman proved to be an old
army officer who had entered the army from private life and earned a
Brigadier’s star during the war. He said he thought he would treat the
guard that night, and that while I sent to the tank for a bucket of
ice water he would go back to the hotel (not far from camp) for sugar.
About the time two members of the guard returned with ice water No. 1
challenged again, and the answer this time was “Friend with sugar.” It
did not take long to advance the friend with sugar and to disarm him, not
only of sugar, but of a package of cakes, too. We were soon feasting,
and it seemed to please the General to see us enjoying his treat. He
knew that we violated the regulations by admitting him to camp, but he
promised not to report us. He then treated us to cigars, and he and I
sat under the trees for an hour or two discussing topics of interest to
cadets. In speaking of the hops I told the General how B⸺y, C⸺s and I
had taken many lessons in dancing, and that we were too timid to venture
on the floor at a hop, but that we had agreed with one another to attend
our next hop, and to waltz or treat at the Dutch woman’s. The next
evening was the time for the three to dance, and just as I was ready to
start for the hall[59] the General called for me, and we went to the hop
together. As we approached the Academic Building we observed that the hop
room was well filled. We went to a corner of the room, and the General
surprised me by presenting me to his wife, for he had talked as though
he was alone at the Point. His good wife said that she had come to the
hop in the hotel ’bus with other ladies. The music ceased and a classmate
brought a very pretty young lady over near us, thanked her and said that
she was the best dancer in the room. The General again surprised me by
saying: “Mr. R⸺d, this is my daughter.” At that moment the orchestra
struck up a waltz and the young lady said: “Come, Mr. R⸺d, this is our
dance.” I protested that I did not waltz, but she put my arm around her
waist, saying: “Papa has told me of your agreement to waltz to-night or
to treat at the Dutch woman’s, so come on;” and I have waltzed ever
since then. After I got started to waltz I found the hops very attractive
places to be, and I was more than sorry that I had not met Miss S⸺r long
before I did. It was a long way from the hotel to the hop-room, too far
for young ladies who danced much to walk, so they generally rode, but the
cadets could not ride with them, as it was “Off Limits” to get into a
vehicle. There were always plenty of young ladies at the hops, and some
of them traveled several miles to attend; some came from Highland Falls,
some from Cold Springs and others from Garrison’s, besides those from the
West Point Hotel. They may come from greater distances now that there is
the West Shore Railroad to travel on.

At one of the hops I met a New York lady. She was a good dancer and a
good talker, too, but she was not very well posted on the history of
our country. She asked me what state I was from, and when I replied
“Indiana,” she said: “From way out there! You have plenty of buffalo and
other wild animals there, don’t you?”

There is something strange about the partiality young ladies manifest for
the cadets. I have seen many an instance where a young lady would use
all her power to be with a certain cadet, and at his graduating hop and
afterward she would bestow her favors on some member of the next class;
a cadet and an officer, although one and the same man, were different
persons in her eyes. But the young lady, to succeed, had to be very
careful of her conduct toward the cadets in the next class that she
wished to be friendly with after the first class graduated, because if
she had ever been rude to them they would have nothing to do with her.

Our summer hops began at 8 and closed at 11 p. m., but we could stay
later at the Fourth of July hop, the last summer one, and at the
graduating hop in June. The following were the popular dances in my day:

Waltz, Galop, Deux Temps, Trois Temps, Lanciers, Redowa, Polka,
Polka-Redowa, Quadrille, Schottische and Medley.

AT THE HOP.

    “Yes, I’m here, I suppose you’re delighted,
      You’d heard I was not coming down?
    Why I’ve been here a week—rather early—
      I know, but it’s horrid in town.
    At Boston? Most certainly, thank you,
      This music is perfectly sweet;
    Of course I like dancing in summer,
      It’s warm but I don’t mind the heat.
    The clumsy thing! Oh! how he hurt me!
      I really can’t dance any more—
    Let’s walk—see they’re forming a Lanciers;
      These square dances are such a bore,
    My cloak, oh! I really don’t need it,
      Well carry it—so, in the folds,
    I hate it, but Ma made me bring it,
      She’s frightened to death about colds.
    This is rather cooler than dancing,
      They’re lovely piazzas up here;
    Those lanterns look sweet in the bushes,
      It’s lucky the night is so clear.
    I am rather tired of this corner—
      Very well, if you like, I don’t care—
    But you’ll have to sit on the railing—
      You see there is only one chair.
    So long since you’ve seen me!—Oh! ages—
      Let’s see, why it’s ten days ago.
    Seems years—Oh! of course—don’t look spooney,
      It isn’t becoming you know.
    How bright the stars seem to-night, don’t they?
      What was it you said about eyes?
    How sweet!—Why you must be a poet—
      One never can tell till he tries.
    Why can’t you be sensible, Harry?
      I don’t like men’s arms on my chair,
    Be still, if you don’t stop that nonsense
      I’ll get up and leave you, so there!
    Oh! please don’t—I don’t want to hear it—
      A boy like you, talking of love.
    My answer—Well, Sir, you shall have it—
      Just wait till I get off my glove.
    See that? Well you needn’t look tragic,
      Its only a solitaire ring—
    Of course, I am proud of it, very—
      It’s rather an elegant thing.
    Engaged!—yes—why, didn’t you know it?
      I thought the news must have reached here,
    Why, the wedding will be in October,
      The happy man? Charley LeClear.
    Why don’t blame me—I tried to stop you,
      But you would go on like a goose.
    I’m sorry it happened—forget it—
      Don’t think of it—don’t—What’s the use?
    There’s somebody coming—don’t look so—
      Get up on the railing again—
    Can’t you seem as if nothing had happened?
      I never saw such geese as men.
    Ah! Charley, you’ve found me! a galop?
      The ‘Bahn frei’? Yes, take my bouquet,
    And my fan if you will, now I’m ready—
      You’ll excuse me, of course, Mr. Gray.”

One day I received a letter from home, saying that my father, mother and
sister were coming east and would pay me a visit. I wrote at once and
said that I would be delighted to see them any time after the fifteenth
of July, but not before then, as I would be too busy to see much of them.
The fact was I would not get out of confinement before the fifteenth of
July, but I did not tell them. They came the latter part of July, and we
were delighted to be together several hours every day during the visit.
They were charmed with the beauty of the place, and my mother said when
I returned home next year that I need not take my trunk in the back yard
again to open it, for now that she had seen what a sweet and clean place
West Point was she was satisfied there were no bedbugs there.

There is a good deal of cactus, of the prickly pear variety, growing on
the hills about the Point, and one day when B⸺m’s father and mother were
there from Cincinnati they wanted some to take home with them, and Mr.
B⸺m kindly offered to send some to my father, if I wished him to. Of
course I wished it. I expected the folks at home to speak about receiving
the cactus, hence I did not refer to it for a long time, and when I did
my mother told me not to speak of it to my father, as he was very angry
about the cactus. It appeared that Mr. B⸺m put it in a box and sent it
prepaid to my father, and as he supposed that I had written about it, he
did not write. My father opened the box and not knowing anything about
cactus, he took it cautiously in his hands, with the natural painful
results. He dropped the cactus, and, as luck went, he rubbed his hands on
his face and neck, and they too became filled with the stickers.

Just across the south line of cadet limits in my day was Kinsley’s apple
orchard, and many a cadet run it there for apples. One day Mr. Kinsley,
himself an old graduate of the Academy, caught several cadets in his
orchard, so he hitched up at once and drove to the superintendent’s
office to report the case. The superintendent said that if Mr. Kinsley
could identify the cadets they should be punished; he said he could
identify them. So when the battalion was formed Mr. Kinsley passed down
the line, but failed to identify them, for the reason, he said, that all
cadets looked alike.

One Saturday afternoon four of us first classmen stuffed pillow cases in
the breasts of our coats and deliberately went to Kinsley’s for apples,
and we proposed to help ourselves, too. Kinsley’s house was in one corner
of the orchard and there were stone fences around and through the center
of the orchard. We went to different trees and found all the apples we
wanted on the ground, so we set to work filling our pillow cases. B⸺y
filled his, set it by a stone fence on the far side from the house,
and then boldly climbed the fence and ventured to trees nearer to the
house. His approach made the chickens cackle and the ducks quack, thus
attracting a lady’s attention. She came out of the house and spoke to
B⸺y, who had three or four apples in his hands. We heard their voices and
then emptied most of our apples on the ground and ran away, as there was
no use of any more of us getting caught than necessary. After we had been
back in barracks awhile we went over to see how B⸺y had gotten away. He
said that Mrs. Kinsley told him that she did not object to any one taking
two or three apples as he had done, but that she did not want the cadets
to carry them off by the bag full. She then asked him who we were, and
he told her we might be plebes, as older cadets knew better than to do
such a thing. We asked him what he did with his pillow case of apples,
and he said: “You don’t suppose I had the cheek, after my narrow escape,
to bring away a bag full, do you?” Notwithstanding this statement, and
the fact that B⸺y was the first Captain of the Corps, we put our hands up
into his chimney, moved a stick and down fell his pillow case of apples.

Along in December, when we felt confident of graduating the next June,
we began to discuss what we would adopt as our “Class Ring.” Jewelers in
New York, Philadelphia and other cities, knowing that it was customary
for each class at the Point to adopt a certain handsome ring as its class
ring, submitted samples to us. Upon receiving about twenty samples we
held class meetings, and after much discussion part of the class wanted
to adopt one of the designs while the rest wanted to adopt another one.
Finally we agreed to abide by a majority vote, but when the ballots were
counted there was a tie. Then we agreed to take two pieces of paper of
the same size, and to write the maker’s name of one of the two rings on
one paper, and the maker’s name of the other ring on the other paper, to
put the two papers in a cap, shake them up, hold the cap above the head,
and to let T⸺r draw one paper which should decide the case. This was done
and ratified; the ring adopted was a gold ring with a large setting;
there were thirteen stars around the setting, and on one side under the
stars there was an eagle with one wing spread; on the other side under
the stars was a helmet on crossed rifles with the last two figures of
the year of our graduation in the lower angle of the cross, and from
here around to the eagle was a chain. It was agreed that each member
of the class could select his own setting, and some selected amethyst,
some topaz and others blood-stone or onyx. It was also agreed that each
member could use his pleasure about having the “Class Motto” cut into the
setting. A Latin motto was suggested, but many of us opposed it, because
the Academic Board had not made Latin a part of the course of study at
West Point, but after much deliberation, my class, by a close vote,
decided to add Latin to our course, and that “Omnia pro Patria” should
embody the entire course of Latin for our class, and for fear that we
might forget it we adopted it as the motto of our class. We then agreed
that the motto, when cut in the setting of the class ring, should be put
on a ribbon, partially enclosing the last two figures of our graduating
year. I now remember my Latin course better than any other course of
study, for I have never forgotten that “Omnia pro Patria” means “All for
Country.” About this time we also selected the photographer that should
make our Class Albums,[60] but left it to each member to make his own
selection of pictures for it. There is an official photographer now. As
each cadet had to pay for his own ring and album, it was agreed that he
could buy them at his pleasure, but early in January nearly every one
in the class was wearing his class ring and in May the albums began to
arrive.

One day a misunderstanding arose between a yearling and a plebe that
nothing but a fight could settle. Seconds and a referee were chosen, and
they and others wishing to see the fight repaired to old Fort Clinton.
The fight was begun and several rounds fought, when one of those present
heard footsteps, and peeping through the brush he saw a blue uniform and
gave the alarm. A stampede followed, and in a moment the whole party
scaled the parapet, and almost tumbled over one another in their mad
haste down toward Flirtation Walk, where trees and bushes covered their
retreat. The referee declared the fight off. The principals respected one
another’s fighting qualities and afterward became warm friends. The only
one in the party that the officer recognized was B⸺p, the referee and a
captain of my class, and for being present at the fight he was reduced to
the ranks.

                       A PERMIT (OLD FORM).

                                        West Point, March __, 1873.

    Cadet ________, Private 1st Class “B” Co., has permission to
    get a drawing table from the Engineering Drawing Room and keep
    it in his quarters until he finishes his drawing of Noizet’s
    Front, having been in the hospital and excused from attending
    recitations for over a week, he was not able to complete the
    drawing in the Academy.

        _____________,
        Com’d’g Co “B.”

    Respectfully referred to the Professor of Engineering,
    By command of
    Col. _____________

        _____________,
        Adjutant.

    Respectfully returned app’d,

        _____________,
        Prof. of Eng.

    Approved:

        _____________,
        Superintendent.

In January, after the examinations were over, the daily papers informed
us that the Secretary of War had written to the Superintendent saying
that it was his intention to require the presence of the Corps of Cadets
in Washington on March 4th next, on the occasion of the inauguration
of the President-elect, a graduate of the Academy. The secretary did
this because he was gratified by the conduct and marked improvement
and bearing of the young gentlemen at the Academy, and he believed the
duties which a trip of this kind would require them to perform would be
a relaxation from the close confinement to which they were subjected at
the Academy. Furthermore, he desired to show the people gathered at the
Capitol from all parts of the country a body of young military men which
he believed in discipline, drill and orderly appearance and the qualities
that make a military cadet could not be surpassed.

In due time the necessary orders were issued, and with knapsacks on our
backs we arrived in Washington on the 3d of March. We were quartered at
the Ebbitt House, and in the afternoon gave a drill and dress parade
before a large audience in front of the Arlington. In the evening we were
given the freedom of the city, the Delinquency Book having been left at
the Academy. On the 4th we joined the procession and took the post of
honor at the head of the long column. We were without overcoats, and it
was fearfully cold, too. Some of us wore double suits of underclothing,
and as many pairs of white gloves as we could and hold on to our guns.
Bands playing (ours at the head, too), banners and flags waving, bright
eyes beaming upon us, and delicate hands applauding us as we marched on
Pennsylvania avenue, made us forget all about overcoats. We stood in
front of General Grant while the oath as President of the United States
was administered to him. We then marched at the head of the procession
along Pennsylvania avenue and passed General Grant on a reviewing stand
in the White House grounds, where we fell out of the column and saw the
balance of the procession pass. Next to the cadets came some battalions
of U. S. Artillery, then the midshipmen from Annapolis, a battalion of U.
S. Marines, then regiment after regiment of militia, then ex-Presidents
and Vice-Presidents, the U. S. Supreme Court, U. S. Court of Claims,
the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia, the U. S. Senators and
Representatives, Foreign Ministers, Presidential Electors and tens of
thousands more. Of all the military I was especially pleased to see the
Second Connecticut, a magnificent body of well-drilled men, whose lines
were perfect as they passed us, and extended from curb to curb.

                             A CONCERT

                              BY THE

                          ORCHESTRAL BAND

                         WILL BE GIVEN IN

                           THE LIBRARY,
                     THURSDAY, MARCH 27, 1873

                 COMMENCING AT 7:30 O’CLOCK, P. M.

                            PROGRAMME.

                             (No. 7.)

    No. 1. March, Tannhauser                            Wagner

        2. Ouverture, Rui Blas                     Mendelssohn

        3. Reminiscences of Weber                      Godfrey

        4. Reveille Galop                                 Rehm

        5. Selection, Moses in Egypt                   Rossini

        6. Potpourri, Musical Tour Through Europe      Conradi

        8. Potpourri, A Musical Joke                      Sass

[Illustration: _You are respectfully invited to attend the INAUGURATION
BALL on the evening of March 4th 1873_

Managers

    _Roscoe Conkling_
    _H. Hamlin_
    _A. G. Thurman_
    _W. T. Hamilton_
    _Simon Cameron_
    _Z. Chandler_
    _J. W. Stevenson_
    _J. P. Stockton_
    _O. P. Morton_
    _F. A. Sawyer_
    _Eugene Casserly_
    _M. W. Ransom_
    _Jno. A. Logan_
    _H. B. Anthony_
    _T. F. Bayard_
    _H. G. Davis_
    _M. H. Carpenter_
    _J. S. Morrill_
    _J. W. Patterson_
    _J. G. Blaine_
    _H. H. Starkweather_
    _J. A. Garfield_
    _L. P. Poland_
    _Fernando Wood_
    _S. S. Marshall_
    _H. L. Dawes_
    _J. H. Platt Jr._
    _D. C. Giddings_
    _C. A. Eldridge_
    _A. R. Cotton_
    _A. A. Sargent_
    _Thos. Swann_
    _J. B. Chaffee_
    _O. D. Conger_
    _G. A. Halsey_
    _D. W. Voorhees_
    _B. F. Butler_
    _H. Maynard_
    _H. W. Barry_
    _Jas. B. Beck_
    _P. M. B. Young_
    _L. A. Sheldon_
    _Gens. W. T. Sherman & E. D. Townsend_
    _Gen. W. S. Hancock_
    _Gen. M. C. Meigs_
    _A. B. Dyer_
    _R. B. Marcy_
    _J. K. Barnes_
    _A. A. Humphreys_
    _A. B. Eaton_
    _B. Alvard_
    _J. H. Wilson_
    _J. G. Parke_
    _Admirals D. D. Porter & L. M. Goldsborough_
    _Adm. B. F. Sands_
    _J. Zeilin_
    _Dr. J. C. Palmer_
    _E. T. Dunn U.S.N._
    _Com. C. R. P. Rodgers_
    _Ch. Justice Chase_
    _Justices Field, Miller, Bradley & Strong_
    _Ch. Justice Carter_
    _Justices Wylie & McArthur_
    _Alex. R. Sheppard_
    _H. D. Cooke_
    _J. W. Thompson_
    _Col. Amos Webster_
    _Wm. Dickson_
    _John O. Evans_
    _Thos. L. Hume_
    _John B. Blake_
    _A. M. Clapp_
    _B. Perley Poore_
    _G. S. Gideon_
    _H. Kilbourn_
    _W. F. Mattingly_
    _J. H. Brooks_
    _S. R. Bond_
    _A. B. Mullett_
    _S. H. Kauffmann_
    _W. R. Collins_
    _Joshua Riley_
    _A. Cluss_
    _Enoch Totten_
    _N. Wilson_
    _J. F. Olmstead_
    _W. J. Murtagh_
    _B. L. Blackford_
    _Richard Wallach_
    _D. S. Evans_
    _J. W. Boteler_
    _J. G. Berret_
    _Samuel Cross_
    _C. J. Hillyer_
    _H. M. Hutchinson_
    _L. A. Bartlett_
    _Wm. Tindall_
    _John A. Baker_
    _R. T. Auchmuty_
    _E. L. Stanton_
    _W. D. Colt_]

After the review was over we returned to the Ebbitt House, nearly frozen,
but we “thawed out” in time to attend the inaugural ball in the evening,
and here we had to dance or freeze, as it was bitter cold there. The
decorations were beautiful. There were mottos and coats of arms of the
United States, and of all the States and Territories in the Union,
shining among the festoons of the many flags of red, white and blue; then
there were flags and coats of arms of many foreign nations. Everybody at
this grand ball had to present a ticket of admission, except the cadets
and midshipmen, whose uniforms admitted them.

Upon our return we were met at the Battery in New York by the famous
Seventh (New York) Regiment and escorted to its armory for refreshments.
The march up Broadway was amid a continuous line of spectators, who
applauded us all the way. We saw the regiment as it passed us to take
post as our escort, and we were charmed with their faultless alignments
and movements, and were friends at once. The reception was highly
appreciated as a distinguishing feature of our trip. We reached West
Point at 5 p. m. on the 6th of March, and as we marched to the barracks
the band played “When Johnnie Comes Marching Home Again.” The regular
routine was at once resumed.

In speaking of our drill in Washington one paper said: “The drill of
the West Point Cadets on Pennsylvania avenue was certainly splendid.
The whole battalion went through their various and intricate maneuvers
with such precision that they even surprised some of the military
officers who, in company with the Secretary of War, reviewed them. The
sight was grand, almost beyond description. Thousands of persons viewed
their drills from the streets and indoors, and all were of the opinion
expressed above. If there are any better drilled organizations let them
come along.”

After the January examinations were over first classmen and furloughmen
began to count the days until the first of June, and to hold meetings of
rejoicing on the hundredth, fiftieth and twenty-fifth nights. On the
hundredth night there was a special program, and the following was sung
on that night:

THE HUNDREDTH NIGHT.

    Come, fellows, listen to my song,
    A pleasant tale and not too long,
    Of scenes familiar to each one.
    Some have passed and some will come.

    The hundredth night has come at last,
    And first-class course will soon be past,
    Of Cadet gray they’ll take their leave
    And give their white pants to their plebe.

    It really makes the “immortals” laugh,
    To think that they’ll get in the staff.
    When asked where they are going to go,
    In four years Engineers, you know.

    When one more week has had its run,
    The Corps will start for Washington.
    Clean candle-boxes will be worn.
    On us, militia will look with scorn.

    To drink will be the greatest crime,
    The corps will drill by band clock-time.
    Old Emory will march in grand state
    And Murray behind will get a late.

    Now, second classmen, don’t be glum,
    First-class camp quite soon will come.
    And then you bet you’ll cut a swell,
    And spooney “femmes” at the hotel.

    Oh! furlough is a very good thing,
    You wear Cit clothes and have your fling.
    The Cit you stuff with famous lies,
    And if he doubts, you punch his eyes.

    Plebeistic youth, lift up your head,
    Your yearling path you soon will tread,
    Corporal chevrons will grace your arm,
    Which fills the beasts with much alarm.

    And now we’ve done our level best,
    I’ve sung this song by request.
    If you don’t like it ’tis not a sin,
    To say you think it rather thin.

    NOTE 1. The Howitzer, started by the late Colonel Arthur L.
    Wagner, Class of ’75, as a small paper, read on the hundredth
    night, has grown into a large beautifully illustrated book,
    published annually, that now takes the place of Class Albums.

[Illustration: ’73 FROM ’74.

THE PLEASURE OF YOUR COMPANY IS REQUESTED AT THE FAREWELL HOP GIVEN TO
THE GRADUATING CLASS BY THE CLASS OF ’74.

FLOOR MANAGERS

    J HANSELL FRENCH
    LUTHER R. HARE
    WILLIS WITTICH.

Committee.

    J. HANSELL FRENCH
    Wm. H. WHEELER
    LOUIS A CRAIG
    C. E. SCOTT WOOD
    EDGAR B. ROBERTSON
    LOTUS NILES
    WILLIS WITTICH.
    JAS. L. WILSON.
    LUTHER R. HARE.

WEST POINT]

As our days to wear cadet gray could now be counted by two figures,
for the second and last time at the Academy, we selected clothes for
“Cit” suits, and as we had all decided to enter the army as “Second
Lieutenants,” we also selected uniforms and accoutrements for ourselves
as officers of that high rank. Military goods dealers and tailors were
frequent visitors at the Point on Saturday afternoons, each claiming to
give the most for the least money. We had great trouble about the stripes
on the pants, the color of the cloth in the shoulder knots and straps,
the head gear, etc., because all did not know for certain what arm of
service they would be assigned to, and those things are different for
each arm. The result was that some gave conditional orders, while others
guessed at it and ordered all or a part of their outfits. On the first
of June our new clothes began to arrive, and we were permitted to have
trunks in our rooms and from that day we began to feel that our cadet
days were gone. And it was practically so, too, for even the ladies who
came up in June began to show preferences for the coming first classmen,
except, of course, where friendships were strong.

Occasionally cadets were invited to dine at some of the professor’s
quarters, but even then we were required to get a permit before we could
accept invitations. General U⸺n, the Commandant, made it a rule to invite
all of the members of the first class (a few at a time) to dine at his
quarters, as may be seen from the following invitation, to-wit:

    “The Comd’t of Cadets will be pleased to see Cadets London,
    O’Connor, Paddock and Reed, H. T., at tea this evening after
    parade till 8:30 p. m.

    “June—, 18—.”

As every cadet who graduates at the Military Academy may at his option
enter the army as a Second Lieutenant, he can choose his corps or arm of
the service in accordance with his class standing, and after the first of
June he makes application substantially as follows:

                 “United States Military Academy, West Point, N. Y.

                                                      June —, 1873.

    The Adjutant General, U. S. Army, Washington, D. C.

    Sir:—I have the honor to apply for a commission as 2nd
    Lieutenant in the U. S. Army in the Arm and Regiments as
    follows: _______________________________. My address for the
    ensuing month will be ____________________.

             Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

                                      ___________________________
                                      Graduated Cadet, U. S. M. A.”

The “diploma” given to graduates is reproduced on another page, and the
following is the wording on it, to-wit:

    “UNITED STATES MILITARY ACADEMY.

    Be it known that Cadet ________ of the State of ________,
    having been carefully examined on all of the branches of the
    Arts, Science and of Literature taught at the United States
    Military Academy, has been judged worthy to receive the degree
    required by law, preparatory to his advancement in the U. S.
    Army.

    In testimony whereof, and by virtue of authority vested in
    the Academic Staff, we do confer upon him this Diploma, and
    recommend him to the President for promotion in ____.

    Given at West Point in the State of New York, this __ day of
    ____, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
    ____.”

It is signed by the members of the Academic Board in the order of their
rank, and entered in the “Register of Graduates” that is kept at the
Academy.

On the first of June the President of the United States, the Board of
Visitors and others arrived, especially to witness the examinations of
the graduating class. The usual salute, review, drills, fireworks and
hop were on the program. All the members of my class, after having spent
four years at the Academy, fully expected to graduate, but one of the
number was found deficient and discharged on the last day. The weather
on graduating day was perfect, and at the appointed hour my class was
escorted by the Corps of Cadets to the grove in front of the Library,
where a stand had been erected for the President, Secretary of War, Board
of Visitors and invited guests.

While we were under the big elm trees, surrounded by our schoolmates,
professors, instructors and the many others, listening to the Chaplain’s
prayer, to the sweet music of the band we loved so well, and to the
address of the Secretary of War, and receiving diplomas from the
President’s hand, many thoughts flashed through my mind. It seemed like a
dream. I thought of home, of my life since leaving it, and of the future,
wondering what it had in store for me. My cadet life had been all and
more than I had anticipated it to be, not a care and no one but self to
think of for four years, with good food and clothing in plenty, kind
friends and just teachers, cheerful surroundings and the most beautiful
spot on earth, I was loath to say good-bye to my Cadet Home.

    My heart is in the Highlands, shades
      Of night are on my brow;
    Ye pleasant haunts and quiet glades,
      My soul is with you now.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: BIRD’S EYE VIEW OF WEST POINT AS IT MAY BE IN 1912. (FROM
A DRAWING)]

[Illustration: DIPLOMA.]

[Illustration: BIRD’S EYE VIEW OF WEST POINT IN 1902.]

[Illustration: WEST POINT IN 1848.]

[Illustration: WEST POINT IN 1825.]

[Illustration: GUARD MOUNTING IN CAMP.

COLOR LINE.]

[Illustration: SEAL OF UNITED STATES MILITARY ACADEMY. ADOPTED IN 1898.

CADET HOSPITAL.

SUPERINTENDENT’S QUARTERS.]

[Illustration: BATTERY KNOX.

SEA COAST BATTERY.

SIEGE BATTERY.]

[Illustration: THE ACADEMIC.]

[Illustration: MESS HALL.

DINING ROOM.

SOUTH CADET BARRACKS.]

[Illustration: CAVALRY DRILL.

BATTALION MARCHING FROM CAMP TO BARRACKS.]

[Illustration: CADET TENT.]

[Illustration: FIRST CLASSMEN.

FURLOUGHMEN.

THE OLD CHAPEL.

CADET ROOM.]

[Illustration: PROFESSORS’ ROW.

FLIRTATION WALK.

KOSCIUSZCO’S GARDEN.]

[Illustration: THE OLD RIDING HALL.

BATTLE MONUMENT.

PONTON BRIDGE.]

[Illustration: CADETS AT THE WORLD’S FAIR AT CHICAGO, 1893.]

[Illustration: OFFICERS QUARTERS ABOVE THE OLD NORTH GATE IN 1910.

OFFICERS QUARTERS BELOW THE OLD SOUTH GATE IN 1910.

BACHELOR OFFICERS QUARTERS IN 1910.]

[Illustration: THE CADET CHAPEL IN 1910.

NORTH CADET BARRACKS IN 1910.]

[Illustration: THE OLD WASHINGTON HEADQUARTERS.

THE OFFICERS MESS IN 1910.

THE CULLUM MEMORIAL HALL.]

[Illustration: COAT OF ARMS OF THE UNITED STATES MILITARY ACADEMY.
ADOPTED IN 1898.

LIBRARY.]

[Illustration: SIEGE BATTERY DRILL IN 1910.

ARTILLERY AND CAVALRY GROUP IN 1910.

THE NEW GYMNASIUM IN 1910.]

[Illustration: PROPOSED STAFF QUARTERS ON THE SITE OF THE PRESENT HOTEL.
(FROM A DRAWING.)

HEADQUARTERS BUILDING IN 1910.]

[Illustration: INSPECTION IN CAMP.

LIGHT ARTILLERY DRILL.]

[Illustration: SEDGWICK MONUMENT.

CADET MONUMENT.

PROFESSORS’ ROW.]

[Illustration: LOOKING EAST FROM THE NEW CADET CHAPEL IN 1910.

PERSPECTIVE VIEW FROM THE RIVER ON THE EAST. (FROM A DRAWING.)]




CHAPTER IX.

UNITED STATES MILITARY ACADEMY.


    “Where proud and free the Hudson flows,
      Above the Highlands grand,
    And in its placid bosom shows
      The charms of Nature’s hand”

West Point, the seat of the United States Military Academy, is the
property of the United States and situated in the State of New York in
the Highlands on the west bank of the Hudson River, about fifty miles
north of New York City. The grounds comprise 2,550 acres, of which about
200 acres are a plain, some one hundred and sixty feet above the river,
the balance being mountainous.

In May, 1776, Brigadier General Henry Knox, Chief of Artillery, proposed
plans for a military school for the new government, Colonel Alexander
Hamilton seconded them and on October 1, 1776, upon the recommendation of
General George Washington, the Continental Congress passed a resolution
appointing a committee to prepare a plan for “a Military Academy at the
Army” which was followed by the law of June 20, 1777, that provided for
a “Corps of Invalids” to serve as a military school for young gentlemen
previous to their appointment to marching regiments. This corps was
organized the next month in Philadelphia, Penn.

The occupation of West Point as a military post took place January 20,
1778, and has been continuous since then.

On March 30, 1779, the Board of War adopted regulations for the Corps
of Engineers and for the Sappers and Miners: these were promulgated in
Orders, July 30, 1779, by General Washington and provided for a plan
of instruction to be carried into effect after approval by the Board
and by the General-in-Chief. The plan contemplated lectures by engineer
officers, on fortifications, mining, reconnaissance, encampments and the
like, and as early as February, 1780, practical experiments in gunnery
were conducted at West Point, and in 1781, at the request of Washington,
the Corps of Invalids was marched from Philadelphia to West Point,
where an engineer school, a laboratory, and a library had already been
established in three separate buildings.

At Newburgh, N. Y., in 1783, Washington discussed with his officers the
necessity of the government maintaining a military academy as a part
of the regular army and as the first President of the United States he
again referred to it in his message of December 3, 1793, which resulted
in the law of May 9, 1794, authorizing the organization of a “Corps of
Artillerists and Engineers” with two cadets to each company, thereby
creating the new grade of “cadet” in our regular army. The artillerists
and engineers were stationed at West Point that year and a school for
the cadets was opened at once and continued until 1796 when the school
buildings were destroyed by fire.

In his last message to Congress, Washington said: “The institution of a
military academy is also recommended by cogent reasons. However pacific
the general policy of a nation may be, it ought never to be without an
adequate stock of military knowledge for emergencies. The first would
impair the energy of its character, and both would hazard its safety, or
expose it to greater evils when war could not be avoided. Besides that,
war might not often depend upon its own choice. In proportion as the
observance of pacific maxims might exempt a nation from the necessity
of practicing rules of military art, ought to be its care in preserving
and transmitting, by proper establishments, the knowledge of that art.
Whatever argument may be drawn from particular examples superficially
viewed, a thorough examination of the subject will evince that the art
of war is at once comprehensive and complicated; that it demands much
previous study; and that the possession of it in its most approved and
perfect state is always of great moment to the security of a nation.
This, therefore, ought to be a serious care of every Government; and for
this purpose, an academy, where a regular course of instruction is given,
is an obvious expedient, which different nations have successfully
employed.”

In a letter to Colonel Hamilton, Ex-President Washington said: “The
establishment of an Institution of this kind, upon a respectable and
extensive Basis, has ever been considered by me as an object of primary
importance to this Country; and while I was in the Chair of Government, I
omitted no proper opportunity of recommending it, in my public speeches
and other ways, to the attention of the Legislature.... I sincerely hope
that the subject will meet with due attention, and that the reasons for
its establishment which you have so clearly pointed out in your letter
to the Secretary, will prevail upon the Legislature to place it upon a
permanent and respectable footing.”

New buildings were put up at West Point and on July 20, 1801, the
Secretary of War ordered all cadets of the corps of artillerists to
proceed there, and on September 1st of that year the school was reopened
with four army officers and one civilian as instructors.

An act of Congress approved March 16, 1802, authorized the President to
organize a corps of engineers to consist of five officers and ten cadets,
at West Point, to constitute a military academy, which he did and with
the quota present the United States Military Academy was formally opened
on the Fourth of July of that year.

But Congress did not appropriate any money for the Academy until March
3, 1803, and then in the Army Bill it gave only $2,000.00 for both the
Academy and for War Department books and apparatus. The Army Bill of 1804
contained $1,000.00 for the Academy, and that of 1805 gave it $500.00.
Then Congress ignored this institution until the war with England, when
in the Army Bill of 1812 it gave the Academy $25,000.00 and authorized
the erection of a library and other buildings, and the reorganization of
the academic staff.

An Act of Congress in 1808 authorized 40 cadets from the artillery, 16
from the dragoons, 20 from the riflemen, and 100 from the infantry, but
as no provision was made for them at West Point only a few of these were
appointed. In 1810 the Military Academy was deprived of nearly all means
of instruction and both officers and cadets experienced difficulty in
getting their pay. During most of the year 1811, although war was then
imminent, academic instruction was practically abandoned and in March,
1812, it was abandoned when the last instructor was ordered to duty
elsewhere. Up to this time 88 cadets had graduated and they had been
admitted to the academy without mental or physical examinations, at all
ages, from twelve to thirty-four and at any time of the year.

By an Act of Congress approved April 29, 1812, the Military Academy
was reorganized, and the provisions of this Act furnished the general
principles upon which the Academy has since been conducted and
controlled; a more adequate corps of professors was authorized, a maximum
of 250 cadets was fixed, and age and mental requisites for admission of
candidates were prescribed, and in 1817 under the able superintendency of
Major Sylvanus Thayer, a graduate of the West Point class of 1808, the
present era in the Academy’s history began, because he made it a school
for the practical and theoretical training of cadets for the military
service. Since then the requisites for admission have been increased from
time to time by Congress and with its permission by the Secretary of War.

In 1834 an appropriation (of $139,881.45) for the Military Academy was
for the first time made in a separate bill, called the Military Academy
bill.

In 1838 many records and other property were destroyed by fire.

Prior to 1843 a prescribed residence was not a legal qualification for
appointment but the selection of one cadet from each congressional
district became a custom, and in this year Congress prescribed that the
corps of cadets should consist of one cadet (recommended by the member)
from each congressional district, one (recommended by the delegate)
from each Territory, one from the District of Columbia and ten from the
United States at large, to be appointed by the President; the number of
cadets varying as the number of congressmen and delegates increased or
diminished.

The Academic Board now comprises the following, to-wit:

Superintendent.

Commandant of Cadets—Instructor of Tactics.

Professor of Civil and Military Engineering.

Professor of Natural and Experimental Philosophy.

Professor of Mathematics.

Professor of Chemistry, Mineralogy and Geology.

Professor of Drawing.

Professor of Modern Languages.

Professor of Law and History.

Professor of Practical Military Engineering, Military Signaling and
Telegraphy.

Professor of Ordnance and Gunnery.

Professor of Military Hygiene.

Professor of English and History.

Without regard to his rank the Superintendent is the head of the
institution, while the other members of the Board take precedence
according to rank.

These officers have as many assistants detailed from the army as the
Secretary of War deems necessary for the proper instruction of the
cadets, and the senior assistant in each department of instruction is a
member of the Academic Board or of a committee of it, for the purpose of
examining cadets, arranging them in order of merit, and determining their
proficiency or deficiency in every branch of study in that department;
and the instructor of any section under examination or consideration is
a member of a department committee of the Academic Board for the purpose
of examining the section and arranging it in order of merit.

All deliberations of the Academic Board and of its committees, and
expressions of opinions and votes, individual or collective, of members
thereof are confidential. The decisions of the Board are published in
orders.

Since 1812 the Course of Study has been four years, except that for the
classes entering in 1854, ’55 and ’56 it was five years, and for classes
entering in 1908, ’09 and ’10 it was four years and three months, as new
cadets were then admitted March 1.

Cadets of the Fourth Class found deficient at the January examinations
are invariably discharged or permitted to resign, while some of the
unfortunates at the June examination are turned back to the next class.

By virtue of Section 1331, Revised Statutes of the United States, the
supervision and charge of the Academy are in the War Department under
such officer or officers as the Secretary of War may assign to that
duty.[61]

The Act of Congress approved June 23, 1879, provided “That each member
of the graduating classes of the Military Academy of 1879 and 1880,
after graduation, may elect, with the assent of the Secretary of War, to
receive the gross sum of seven hundred and fifty dollars and mileage to
his place of residence[62]; and the acceptance of this gross sum shall
render him ineligible to appointment in the army, except in the event
of war, until two years after his graduation.” And Congress did this
when the Military Academy never graduated enough cadets to keep the army
supplied with second lieutenants.[63]

The Act of Congress approved May 17, 1886, provided “That when any
Cadet of the United States Military Academy has gone through all its
classes and received a regular diploma from the Academic Staff, he may
be promoted and commissioned as a second lieutenant in any arm or corps
of the Army in which there may be a vacancy and the duties of which he
may have been judged competent to perform; and in case there shall not at
the time be a vacancy in such arm or corps, he may, at the discretion of
the President, be promoted and commissioned in it as an additional second
lieutenant, with the usual pay and allowances of a second lieutenant,
until a vacancy shall happen.”

The Act of Congress approved November 4, 1889, provided that “Any cadet
dismissed for hazing shall not be reappointed.”

By Acts of Congress approved June 6, 1900, March 2, 1901, June 28, 1902
(this act alone appropriated $5,500,000.00 for the improvement of a
then fine plant), March 3, 1903, and May 28, 1908, the corps of cadets
was made to consist of one cadet (recommended by the member) from each
congressional district, two (one recommended by each senator) from each
State at large, one (recommended by the delegate) from each Territory,
one (recommended by the Commissioners) from the District of Columbia, one
(recommended by the Resident Commissioner) from Porto Rico, and forty
(appointed by the President) from the United States at large and, with
the exception of the forty from the United States at large, to be actual
residents of the Congressional District, State, Territory, District of
Columbia or Porto Rico, respectively, from which appointed.

Four Filipinos, one for each class, are authorized to receive instruction
as cadets, to be eligible on graduation only to commissions in the
Philippine Scouts.

Under these Acts when in June a cadet finishes three years of his course
at the academy, or sooner if his name is dropped from its rolls before
then, a principal and two alternates may be appointed and the successful
one admitted to the academy (formerly in the following June or September
and now) on the next March 1st. But from July 1, 1910, to July 1, 1916,
under the Act of April 19, 1910, when in June a cadet finishes two years
of his course at the academy, or sooner if his name is dropped from its
rolls before then, a principal and two alternates may be appointed and
the successful one admitted to the academy on the next March 1st.

According to the twelfth census, the maximum number of cadets was fixed
at 533.[64]

It is suggested to all candidates (principals and alternates[65]) that
before leaving their homes for the place designated (either West Point or
their nearest military post) for their official examination, they should
cause themselves to be thoroughly examined by a competent physician, and
by a teacher or instructor in good standing. By such an examination any
serious disqualification or deficiency in mental preparation would be
revealed, and the candidate probably spared the expense and trouble of a
useless journey and the mortification of rejection.

It should be understood that the informal examination herein recommended
is solely for the convenience and benefit of the candidate himself, and
can in no manner affect the decision of the official Examining Boards.

There being no provision whatever for the payment of the traveling
expenses of either accepted or rejected candidates for admission, no
candidate should fail to provide himself in advance with the means of
returning to his home, in case of his rejection before either of the
Examining Boards, as he may otherwise be put to considerable trouble,
inconvenience, and even suffering on account of his destitute condition.
If admitted, the money brought by him to meet such a contingency can be
deposited with the treasurer on account of his equipment as a cadet, or
returned to his friends.

When the official examination is at a military post the questions[66]
for the candidates and surgeons to answer are sent from West Point to
the Board of Officers that conducts the examination. Each candidate is
given a number which he signs to his examination papers and to a letter
containing his autograph; the two are put in separate envelopes and sent
to West Point.

The Act of Congress approved March 2, 1901, provided that “Appointees
shall be examined under regulations to be framed by the Secretary of War
before they shall be admitted to the Academy and shall be well versed in
such subjects as he may from time to time prescribe.”

Special Acts of Congress are sometimes passed that authorize the
education at the Academy of young men from foreign countries. These young
men are not commissioned in the Army and the acts always provide that
all of their expenses shall be defrayed by the countries to which they
belong.

The Cadets are arranged in four distinct classes, corresponding with the
four years of study.

The cadets employed on the first year’s course constitute the fourth
class; those on the second year’s course the third class; those on the
third year’s course the second class; and those on the fourth year’s
course the first class.

There was in 1908, ’09 and ’10 a preliminary course from about March 11
to June 10 for new cadets then admitted March 1, and they constituted the
class of new cadets.

The academic year commences on the 1st of July. On, or before, that date
the result of the examination held in the preceding month is announced
and Cadets are advanced from one class to another. At no other time is a
Cadet advanced from one class to another, unless prevented by sickness,
or authorized absence, from attending the aforesaid examination; in
such a case a special examination is granted; but in no case is a Cadet
advanced from one class to another without having satisfied the Academic
Board of his proficiency in each branch of study pursued by his class.

“No cadet who is reported as deficient in either conduct or studies
and recommended to be discharged from the Academy, shall, unless upon
recommendation of the Academic Board, be returned or reappointed or be
appointed to any place in the Army before his class shall have left the
Academy and received their commissions.”

(Section 1325, Revised Statutes of the United States.)

  =====+========+================================================
       |Names   |                    MERIT IN
       |        +-----------+-------+------+-------+------------+
       |Arranged|           |       |      |       |            |
       |in Order|           |       |      |       |            |
       |  of    |           |       |      |       |  Natural   |
  Class|General |           |       |      |       |    and     |
  Rank | Merit  |           |       |      |       |Experimental|
       |        |Mathematics|English|French|Spanish| Philosophy |
       +--------+-----------+-------+------+-------+------------+
       |Maximum |           |       |      |       |            |
       |in each |   400.00  | 75.00 |150.00| 125.00|   300.00   |
       |branch  |           |       |      |       |            |
  -----+--------+-----------+-------+------+-------+------------+

  =====+========+=======================================================
       |Names   |                    MERIT IN
       |        +----------+------------+----------+-------+-----------+
       |Arranged|Chemistry,|   Drill    |          |       |           |
       |in Order| Chemical |Regulations:|          |       |           |
       |  of    | Physics, |  Cavalry,  |          |       |           |
  Class|General |Mineralogy| Artillery  |          |       | Civil and |
  Rank | Merit  |   and    |    and     | Military |       | Military  |
       |        |Geology   | Infantry   |Efficiency|Drawing|Engineering|
       +--------+----------+------------+----------+-------+-----------+
       |Maximum |          |            |          |       |           |
       |in each |  225.00  |   115.00   |  130.00  |125.00 |  300.00   |
       |branch  |          |            |          |       |           |
  -----+--------+----------+------------+----------+-------+-----------+

  =====+========+========================================================
       |Names   |                    MERIT IN
       |        +------+--------+-----------+----------+--------+-------+
       |Arranged|      |        |           |          |        |       |
       |in Order|      |Ordnance|           |          |        |       |
       |  of    |      |   and  |           |Soldierly |        |       |
  Class|General |      |Science | Practical |Deportment|        |       |
  Rank | Merit  |      |   of   | Military  |   and    |Military| Final |
       |        | Law  |Gunnery |Engineering|Discipline|Hygiene |Conduct|
       +--------+------+--------+-----------+----------+--------+-------+
       |Maximum |      |        |           |          |        |       |
       |in each |150.00| 150.00 |    45.00  |   20.00  |  25.00 |125.00 |
       |branch  |      |        |           |          |        |       |
  -----+--------+------+--------+-----------+----------+--------+-------+

  =====+========+========
       |Names   |
       |        ++-------
       |Arranged||
       |in Order||
       |  of    ||
  Class|General ||
  Rank | Merit  ||General
       |        || Merit
       +--------++-------
       |Maximum ||
       |in each ||2460.00
       |branch  ||
  -----+--------++-------

The count for conduct, based upon the number of demerits received by a
cadet each year, is

    Class of New Cadets   40
    Fourth class year     50
    Third class year      75
    Second class year    100
    First class year     125

The final count in conduct for the graduating merit roll is 125. It is
obtained by adding together the respective proportional parts for each
of the four years and the preliminary course for New Cadets, and then
reducing the sums thus found to equivalent values with a maximum of 125.

Upon completing the prescribed course of study the graduates are eligible
for promotion to the grade of Second Lieutenant in any corps or arm of
the army, the duties of which the Academic Board may judge them competent
to perform.

For instruction in infantry drill regulations and in military police and
discipline, the Corps of Cadets is organized into two battalions, under
the Commandant of Cadets, assisted by two battalion commanders (army
officers), each company being commanded by an army officer. The cadet
officers and non-commissioned officers are selected from those who have
been most studious, soldier-like in the performance of their duties,
and most exemplary in their general deportment. In general, the cadet
officers are taken from the first class, the sergeants from the second,
and the corporals from the third.

In an article in the July-August, 1904, number of The Journal of the
Military Service Institution, Professor Samuel E. Tillman, of the United
States Military Academy said:

“Any one returning to the Academy now after an absence of fifteen years
will observe many striking changes, the most important of which are: The
disappearance in large part of the annual and semi-annual examinations;
the introduction of the intermediate examinations, that is examinations
during the academic term, at the completion of some part of the
term-course; the large increase in written recitations with corresponding
decrease in oral; a great increase in practical and semipractical work
in connection with the descriptive courses; the greater amount of
time permitted for recreation exercises. These changes have greatly
modified methods deemed of much importance for sixty years prior to
1890, yet it can be confidently asserted that the changes have enabled
cadets to acquire a greater amount of information with less effort upon
their part.... Cadet schools should always be training, developing and
character-forming schools, as they control the students at the best
formative period.”

Since 1840 the following changes have been made in the subjects taught,
to-wit:

In 1853 Practical Military Engineering was added.

In 1857 Spanish was added.

In 1873 Ethics and Logic were dropped.

In 1882 General History was added and Physical Training was made a
distinct course.

In 1909 Military Hygiene was added.

Text books have been changed or revised from time to time since the
Academy was founded.

Colonel Charles W. Larned, Professor of Drawing at the Academy, in a
recent article in _Munsey’s Magazine_, said:

“The improvements now in progress at the Military Academy ... include not
only an architectural renewal, but a revision of the entire curriculum,
both of which are undertakings of transcendant importance to the
institution....

“It has been a difficult task to harmonize the various discordant
buildings of other styles, which cannot be sacrificed, with the
prevailing Tudor style; more especially as the topography of the site
restricts the plan within confined limits. The architects have succeeded,
however, in evolving a scheme which, when completed, will have both unity
and coherence, and a picturesqueness unequaled on the continent. The
rugged, climbing masses of semi-medieval Gothic structures that scale
the granite cliffs and rise in towering succession to their crowning
feature, the cathedral-like Chapel on Observatory Hill, will form a group
of buildings in harmony both with their use and their environment, and
worthy of the great institution they house.”

And in speaking of what graduates have done, he said: “At the end of that
tremendous struggle (the Civil War), all the armies in the field on both
sides were commanded by graduates of West Point; nearly all the army
corps, and most of the divisions. Out of sixty of the greatest battles
... in fifty-six the commanders on both sides were graduates; in the
other four a graduate commanded on one side, and three of the four were
won by graduates....

“As explorers, as early as 1820, Long’s expedition containing Bell,
Graham and Swift, explored as far as Pike’s Peak, and first ascended
it; Allen, in 1832, first traced the source of the Mississippi; and
Bonneville’s great exploration, in 1832-1834, penetrated Wyoming, Utah,
California, and the Columbia and Yellowstone regions, and supplied the
first hydrographic maps of the country.

“For half a century West Point was the principal and almost the
only school of science and technology in America. Its graduates not
only furnished presidents and teachers of scientific institutions
as they appeared, but were the pioneer engineers who laid out the
trans-continental routes of the great western railways, besides
surveying and developing as engineers and presidents other systems in
the East.... More than one hundred and seventy-five thousand miles of
routes, lines and marches.” And graduates have had charge of “the Lake
surveys; the Coast and Geodetic survey, reorganized and for twenty-four
years superintended by a graduate; the surveys west of the one hundredth
meridian; the river and harbor improvements of the United States; the
control and building of the Panama Canal; the superintendency and
construction of public buildings in Washington, including the wings and
dome of the Capitol, and the Congressional Library; the rectification and
completion of the Washington Monument; the construction of lighthouses,
including the remarkable one of Minot’s Ledge; besides many other works
of survey and construction, of which the Chicago (drainage) Canal is one
of the most important. The disbursements of public funds for river and
harbor work alone approximate six hundred million dollars and if other
civil and military works are included, the grand total will be not far
from one thousand millions.... Our officers ... have been: Governors of
provinces, mayors of cities, collectors of customs, school commissioners,
sanitary engineers, civil engineers, police commissioners, judges of
courts, architects, superintendents of railroads, heads of departments of
state, and even commanders of vessels....

“Half of the (4,121) graduates in the first century of the academy’s
existence entered civil life, and in the civil career alone their record
shows nineteen per cent of distinguished success—far in excess of that of
any other institution in the land....”

In an article that appeared in 1904 in the New York Sun he gave the
following data for—

    _West Point Graduates Who Have Attained Distinguished Success._

    1 President of the United States.

    1 President of the Confederate States.

    3 Presidential candidates.

    1 Vice-Presidential candidate.

    4 Members of the Cabinet of the United States.

    1 Ambassador.

    14 Ministers from the United States to foreign courts.

    2 Chargés d’Affaires from the United States to foreign courts.

    12 United States Consuls-General and Consuls.

    24 Members of the United States Senate and House of
    Representatives.

    171 United States civil officers of various kinds.

    8 Presidential electors.

    2 Governors of States and Territories.

    77 Members of State Legislatures.

    2 Lieutenant-Governors of States.

    8 Presiding officers of State Senates and Houses of
    Representatives.

    13 Members of conventions to form State constitutions.

    81 State officers of various grades.

    29 Adjutants, Inspectors, and Quartermasters-General and Chief
    Engineers of States and Territories.

    158 Officers of State militia.

    17 Mayors of cities.

    57 City officers.

    46 Presidents of universities, colleges, etc.

    32 Principals of academies and schools.

    14 Regents and chancellors of educational institutions.

    136 Professors and teachers.

    1 Superintendent of Coast Survey.

    11 Surveyors-General of States and Territories.

    14 Chief Engineers of States.

    87 Presidents of railroads and other corporations.

    63 Chief engineers of railroads and other public works.

    62 Superintendents of railroads and other public works.

    24 Treasurers and receivers of railroads and other corporations.

    228 Civil engineers.

    5 Electrical engineers.

    14 Judges.

    200 Attorneys and counsellors at law.

    1 Bishop.

    1 Superior-General of clerical order.

    20 Clergymen.

    14 Physicians.

    122 Merchants.

    77 Manufacturers.

    3 Artists.

    7 Architects.

    230 Farmers and planters.

    18 Bankers.

    8 Bank presidents.

    23 Bank officers.

    30 Editors.

    179 Authors.

In accordance with sections 1327, 1328 and 1329 of the Revised Statutes
of the United States a Board of Visitors, composed of twelve persons,
seven appointed by the President, two by the presiding officer of the
Senate, and three by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, was
for years annually appointed to visit the Military Academy to “inquire
into the actual state of discipline, instruction, police administration,
fiscal affairs, and other concerns of the institution, and reported the
same to the Secretary of War for the information of Congress.” Each
member of the Board received not exceeding eight cents per mile traveled,
by the most direct route, from his residence to West Point and return,
and in addition, five dollars per day for expenses during each day of
his service at West Point. This Board visited and inspected the Academy
during the first two weeks of June.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Act of Congress approved March 4, 1909, among other things says:

“That hereafter the Board of Visitors to the Military Academy shall
consist of five members of the Committee on Military Affairs of the
Senate and seven members of the Committee on Military Affairs of the
House of Representatives, to be appointed by the respective chairman
thereof, who shall annually visit the Military Academy on such date or
dates as may be fixed by the chairman of the said committees; and the
Superintendent of the academy and the members of the Board of Visitors
shall be notified of such date by the chairman of the said committees,
acting jointly, at least fifteen days before the meeting. The expenses
of the members of the board shall be their actual expenses while engaged
upon their duties as members of said board, and their actual expenses for
travel by the shortest mail routes: Provided further, That so much of
sections 1327, 1328 and 1329, Revised Statutes of the United States, as
is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act is hereby repealed.”

The Military Academy, upon which millions of dollars have been expended
on grounds and buildings alone, is maintained by the Government solely
for the practical and theoretical training of young men for commissions
in the army, and that the investment is appreciated by the country is
voiced by its public men, a few quotations being given here.

From his experience in the War of 1812 and service on Indian campaigns,
General Andrew Jackson while President of the United States in a message
to Congress said:

“I recommend to your fostering care, as one of our safest means of
national defense, the Military Academy. This institution has already
exercised the happiest influence upon the moral and intellectual
character of our Army; and such of the graduates from various causes
may not pursue the profession of arms will be scarcely less useful as
citizens. Their knowledge of the military art will be advantageously
employed in the militia service, and in a measure secure to that class of
troops the advantages which in this respect belongs to standing armies.”

After the close of the Mexican war Lieutenant-General Winfield Scott in a
report to the Secretary of War said:

“I give it as my fixed opinion that, but for our graduated cadets, the
war between the United States and Mexico might, and probably would, have
lasted some four or five years, with, in its first half, more defeats
than victories falling to our share; whereas, in less than two campaigns,
we conquered a great country and a peace, without the loss of a single
battle or skirmish.”

Some two score of years later, in speaking of the graduates of the
Military Academy, the Honorable Charles S. Fairchild, of New York, in
an address said: “That roll, which, when told over, excites patriotic
enthusiasm, and calls forth high emotion beyond that of the roll of any
like institution in the world.”

And General William Tecumseh Sherman said:

“The education and manly training imparted to young men at West Point
has repaid the United States a thousand times its cost, and more than
verified the predictions of General Washington. Every cadet at West Point
is an appointee of a member of Congress, every member having a cadet of
his own nomination there, with only ten appointed by the President at
large. The corps of cadets is therefore a youthful counterpart of our
national House of Representatives. The same laws, the same regulations,
the same instruction, books, clothing, and food are common to all, and a
more democratic body never existed on earth than is the corps of cadets.”

In June, 1902, some five hundred graduates and President Roosevelt,
Secretary of War Root, Lieutenant-General Miles, Adjutant-General
Corbin, and scores of other non-graduates, assembled together at West
Point, many with and a few without their wives, and celebrated in a royal
manner the first centennial of the founding of the Military Academy. The
cadets went into camp that year earlier than usual and their barracks
were used by such of the visiting graduates as were not cared for at the
hotel, in Cullum Hall, or by the families on duty at the post, while the
wives and daughters of those of us who slept in barracks were cared for
at Cozzen’s Hotel, now a part of the post.

Colonel Theodore Roosevelt, then President of the United States, in an
address said:

“This institution has completed its first hundred years of life. During
that century no other educational institution in the land has contributed
as many names as West Point has contributed to the honor roll of the
nation’s greatest citizens.”

The Hon. Elihu Root, the Secretary of War, said:

“The foregoing considerations naturally bring to mind the Military
Academy at West Point. I believe that the great service which it has
rendered the country was never more conspicuous than it has been during
the past two years. The faithful and efficient service of its graduates
since the declaration of war with Spain have more than repaid the cost of
the institution since its foundation. They have been too few in number
and most heavily burdened.”

And in his address to the graduating class of 1903 the Honorable
David B. Henderson, of Iowa, a former Speaker of the National House
of Representatives, and then the President of the West Point Board of
Visitors, said: “The Board (of Visitors) have all been here and have
devoted such time as was possible to studying the conditions of West
Point. I can speak for the Board that they have been delighted with what
they have seen, and are unanimously of the opinion, which the world
holds, I may say, that this is the greatest military educational school
on earth.”

Many foreign princes and others interested in the education of young men
for civil as well as for military pursuits visit West Point. Among the
guests at the Academy’s Centennial were two German army officers sent by
the Emperor as his personal representative.

After a careful inspection of the leading educational institutions of the
world Major-General Sir Thomas Frazer of the British Army in a letter
referring to West Point said: “I think the institution is better than any
I have seen.”

And Field Marshal Lord Wolseley in writing about West Point said: “I
have very often had the advantage of meeting men who have qualified at
that best of all military schools and invariably found them interesting
companions, with a thorough knowledge of their profession.”

Colonel Bridges, C. M. G., recently said: “After an exhaustive course
of inquiries into the training of the young idea in military matters,
I have returned to Australia imbued with the idea that the American
methods in vogue at their celebrated institution at West Point are the
best, with, of course, certain modifications for Australia.... It is an
extremely efficient institution for the purpose for which it is intended.”

[Illustration]


TABLE SHOWING DISPOSITION OF CANDIDATES.

  ========+=========+========+===========+=========+=========+
          |         |        |           |         |         |
          |         |        |           |         |         |
          |         |        |Alternates |         |         |
          |         |        |Passed     |         |         |
          |         |        |for Whom no|         |         |
  Year    |         |        |Vacancies  |Admitted |Cadets at|
  Reported|Appointed|Reported|Existed.   |as Cadets|Academy  |
  --------+---------+--------+-----------+---------+---------+
  1800    |Records  |Records |Alternates |     2   |    —    |
     1    |lost     |lost    |first      |     7   |    —    |
     2    |by fire  |by fire |appointed  |     2   |    —    |
     3    |in 1838. |in 1838.|in 1878.   |     8   |    —    |
     4    |         |        |           |     9   |    —    |
     5    |         |        |           |    10   |    —    |
     6    |         |        |           |     9   |    —    |
     7    |         |        |           |    17   |    —    |
     8    |         |        |           |    41   |    —    |
     9    |         |        |           |    10   |    —    |
  1810    |         |        |           |     2   |    —    |
     1    |         |        |           |     0   |    —    |
     2    |         |        |           |    10   |    —    |
     3    |         |        |           |    87   |    —    |
     4    |         |        |           |   148   |    —    |
     5    |         |        |           |    58   |    —    |
     6    |         |        |           |    34   |    —    |
     7    |         |        |           |    55   |    —    |
     8    |         |        |           |   115   |    —    |
     9    |         |        |           |    86   |    —    |
  1820    |         |        |           |    67   |    —    |
     1    |         |        |           |    77   |    —    |
     2    |         |        |           |   108   |    —    |
     3    |         |        |           |   103   |    —    |
     4    |         |        |           |    79   |    —    |
     5    |         |        |           |   105   |    —    |
     6    |         |        |           |    91   |    —    |
     7    |         |        |           |    97   |    —    |
     8    |         |        |           |   106   |    —    |
     9    |         |        |           |   113   |    —    |
  1830    |         |        |           |   102   |    —    |
     1    |         |        |           |    94   |    —    |
     2    |         |        |           |   102   |    —    |
     3    |         |        |           |   112   |    —    |
     4    |         |        |           |    65   |    —    |
     5    |         |        |           |    72   |    —    |
     6    |         |        |           |    97   |    —    |
     7    |         |        |           |   118   |    —    |
     8    |   132   |  114   |           |   111   |    —    |
     9    |    91   |   79   |           |    76   |    —    |
  1840    |   106   |   94   |           |    84   |    —    |
     1    |   131   |  122   |           |   114   |    —    |
     2    |   144   |  135   |           |   109   |    —    |
     3    |    77   |   74   |           |    60   |    —    |
     4    |    96   |   90   |           |    75   |    —    |
     5    |    98   |   91   |           |    81   |    —    |
     6    |   121   |  109   |           |   103   |    —    |
     7    |    84   |   78   |           |    74   |    —    |
     8    |    84   |   83   |           |    81   |    —    |
     9    |    95   |   90   |           |    88   |    —    |
  1850    |    98   |   95   |           |    90   |    —    |
     1    |    81   |   74   |           |    71   |    —    |
     2    |   102   |  100   |           |    90   |    —    |
     3    |    97   |   90   |           |    83   |    —    |
     4    |   120   |  111   |           |   103   |    —    |
     5    |    99   |   94   |           |    80   |    —    |
     6    |   101   |   93   |           |    73   |    —    |
     7    |   132   |  117   |           |    82   |    —    |
     8    |   108   |   98   |           |    75   |    —    |
     9    |    91   |   86   |           |    60   |    —    |
  1860    |    84   |   84   |           |    72   |    —    |
     1    |   148   |  123   |           |   108   |    —    |
     2    |    96   |   92   |           |    81   |    —    |
     3    |   126   |  111   |           |    99   |    —    |
     4    |   101   |   88   |           |    73   |    —    |
     5    |   101   |   94   |           |    74   |    —    |
     6    |    95   |   88   |           |    70   |    —    |
     7    |    84   |   75   |           |    55   |    —    |
     8    |   127   |  113   |           |    76   |    —    |
     9    |   112   |  101   |           |    70   |    —    |
  1870    |   163   |  142   |           |    65   |    —    |
     1    |   131   |  119   |           |    76   |    —    |
     2    |   165   |  150   |           |    95   |    —    |
     3    |   230   |  205   |           |   118   |    —    |
     4    |   175   |  159   |           |    89   |    —    |
     5    |   206   |  195   |           |   121   |    —    |
     6    |   167   |  154   |           |    98   |    —    |
     7    |   200   |  186   |           |    96   |    —    |
     8    |   174   |  152   |     3     |   102   |    —    |
     9    |   146   |  122   |     4     |    88   |    —    |
  1880    |   139   |  115   |     6     |    73   |    —    |
     1    |   200   |  152   |     3     |    85   |    —    |
     2    |   216   |  192   |     8     |   129   |    —    |
     3    |   235   |  209   |     9     |   141   |    —    |
     4    |   178   |  155   |     4     |   100   |    —    |
     5    |   171   |  143   |     6     |    95   |    —    |
     6    |   215   |  190   |    10     |   128   |    —    |
     7    |   256   |  210   |     9     |   127   |    —    |
     8    |   210   |  181   |     6     |   101   |    —    |
     9    |   231   |  196   |     7     |    96   |    —    |
  1890    |   198   |  175   |    11     |    81   |    —    |
     1    |   209   |  161   |     9     |    97   |    —    |
     2    |   302   |  258   |    15     |   114   |    —    |
     3    |   326   |  268   |    10     |   108   |    —    |
     4    |   303   |  258   |    12     |   101   |    —    |
     5    |   327   |  282   |    17     |   105   |    —    |
     6    |   308   |  248   |    18     |   110   |    —    |
     7    |   315   |  285   |    23     |   129   |    —    |
     8    |   311   |  273   |    15     |   101   |    —    |
     9    |   321   |  257   |    21     |   145   |    —    |
  1900    |   379   |  317   |    36     |   170   |    —    |
     1    |   374   |  311   |    47     |   160   |    —    |
     2    |   269   |  211   |    26     |   114   |    —    |
     3    |   425   |  324   |    28     |   163   |    —    |
     4    |   353   |  279   |    42     |   153   |    —    |
     5    |   368   |  289   |    41     |   145   |    1    |
     6    |   315   |  228   |    30     |   123   |    8    |
     7    |   387   |  308   |    34     |   143   |   92    |
     8    |   461   |  351   |     7     |   132   |   88    |
     9    |   482   |  366   |     4     |   128   |  118    |
  1910    |   505   |  391   |     5     |   148   |  111    |
  --------+---------+--------+-----------+---------+---------+
  Total   |     —   |    —   |   526     | 9,742   |  418    |
  --------+---------+--------+-----------+---------+---------+

  +============================================================
  |                   GRADUATED CADETS.
  +----+-----+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+------+-----+-----
  |    |     |     |      |     |     |     |In    |     |Year
  |    |     |     |      |     |     |     |from  |     |or
  |In  |In   |In   | In   |In   |In   |In   |One to|In   |Date
  |One |Two  |Three| Four |Five |Six  |Seven|Seven |Each |of
  |Year|Years|Years| Years|Years|Years|Years|Years |Class|Class
  +----+ ----+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+------+-----+-----
  |  — |  1  |  —  |    — |   — |   1 |   — |    2 |    —|    —
  |  1 |  2  |  1  |    — |   1 |   — |   — |    5 |    —|    —
  |  1 |  —  |  1  |    — |   — |   — |   — |    2 |    2| 1802
  |  1 |  1  |  3  |    — |   1 |   — |   — |    6 |    3|    3
  |  1 |  6  |  —  |    — |   — |   — |   — |    7 |    2|    4
  |  4 |  2  |  1  |    — |   — |   1 |   — |    8 |    3|    5
  |  3 |  4  |  —  |    — |   2 |   — |   — |    9 |   15|    6
  |  9 |  —  |  —  |    1 |   2 |   — |   — |   12 |    5|    7
  |  7 |  —  | 12  |   11 |   — |   — |   — |   30 |   15|    8
  |  — |  3  |  3  |    — |   — |   — |   — |    6 |    7|    9
  |  — |  2  |  —  |    — |   — |   — |   — |    2 |    0| 1810
  |  — |  —  |  —  |    — |   — |   — |   — |    0 |   19|    1
  |  1 |  7  |  —  |    — |   2 |   — |   — |   10 |   18|    2
  | 23 | 31  |  —  |    3 |   2 |   3 |   — |   62 |    1|    3
  |  9 |  —  | 13  |   16 |  15 |  11 |   2 |   66 |   30|    4
  |  — |  1  |  4  |    7 |   8 |   1 |   — |   21 |   40|    5
  |  — |  1  |  2  |    9 |   — |   — |   — |   12 |    0|    6
  |  — |  2  |  2  |   18 |   8 |   — |   — |   30 |   19|    7
  |  — |  —  |  3  |   32 |   9 |   — |   — |   44 |   23|    8
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   26 |   6 |   1 |   — |   33 |   29|    9
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   25 |   7 |   — |   — |   32 |   30| 1820
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   29 |   5 |   — |   — |   34 |   24|    1
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   36 |   7 |   — |   — |   43 |   40|    2
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   31 |   9 |   — |   — |   40 |   35|    3
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   24 |   4 |   — |   — |   28 |   31|    4
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   42 |   8 |   — |   — |   50 |   37|    5
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   34 |   3 |   — |   — |   37 |   41|    6
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   30 |  10 |   — |   — |   40 |   38|    7
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   35 |   8 |   — |   — |   43 |   33|    8
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   35 |  12 |   — |   — |   47 |   46|    9
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   24 |  13 |   — |   — |   37 |   42| 1830
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   43 |   5 |   — |   — |   48 |   33|    1
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   44 |   6 |   — |   — |   50 |   45|    2
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   44 |   9 |   — |   — |   53 |   43|    3
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   36 |   — |   — |   — |   36 |   36|    4
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   31 |   6 |   — |   — |   37 |   56|    5
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   36 |   6 |   — |   — |   42 |   49|    6
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   46 |   2 |   — |   — |   48 |   50|    7
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   54 |   5 |   — |   — |   59 |   45|    8
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   34 |   3 |   1 |   — |   38 |   31|    9
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   22 |   6 |   — |   — |   28 |   42| 1840
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   34 |  12 |   — |   — |   46 |   52|    1
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   47 |   9 |   — |   — |   56 |   56|    2
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   29 |   4 |   — |   — |   33 |   39|    3
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   34 |   3 |   — |   — |   37 |   25|    4
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   40 |   3 |   1 |   — |   44 |   41|    5
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   41 |   6 |   — |   — |   47 |   59|    6
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   35 |   5 |   — |   — |   40 |   38|    7
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   38 |  10 |   — |   — |   48 |   38|    8
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   42 |   6 |   — |   — |   48 |   43|    9
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   40 |   3 |   — |   — |   43 |   44| 1850
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   31 |   4 |   2 |   — |   37 |   42|    1
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   45 |   1 |   — |   — |   46 |   43|    2
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   35 |   7 |   — |   — |   42 |   52|    3
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   20 |  22 |   4 |   — |   46 |   46|    4
  |  — |  —  |  —  |    — |  37 |   1 |   — |   38 |   34|    5
  |  — |  —  |  —  |    — |  44 |   2 |   — |   46 |   49|    6
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   34 |   4 |   — |   — |   38 |   38|    7
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   24 |   5 |   — |   — |   29 |   27|    8
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   20 |   — |   — |   — |   20 |   22|    9
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   27 |   5 |   — |   — |   32 |   41| 1860
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   63 |   2 |   — |   — |   65 |   79|    1
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   39 |   5 |   — |   — |   44 |   28|    2
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   58 |   8 |   — |   1 |   67 |   25|    3
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   46 |   3 |   — |   — |   49 |   27|    4
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   36 |  13 |   — |   — |   49 |   68|    5
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   44 |   7 |   — |   — |   51 |   41|    6
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   34 |   4 |   — |   — |   38 |   63|    7
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   53 |   1 |   — |   — |   54 |   54|    8
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   40 |   4 |   — |   — |   44 |   39|    9
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   37 |   9 |   — |   — |   46 |   58| 1870
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   34 |   3 |   — |   — |   37 |   41|    1
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   45 |   3 |   — |   — |   48 |   57|    2
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   73 |   5 |   — |   — |   78 |   41|    3
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   38 |   3 |   1 |   — |   42 |   41|    4
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   64 |   4 |   — |   — |   68 |   43|    5
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   47 |   8 |   — |   — |   55 |   48|    6
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   45 |  11 |   — |   — |   56 |   76|    7
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   26 |  13 |   — |   — |   39 |   43|    8
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   39 |   3 |   — |   — |   42 |   67|    9
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   34 |   3 |   — |   — |   37 |   52| 1880
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   36 |   7 |   — |   — |   43 |   53|    1
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   70 |   5 |   — |   — |   75 |   37|    2
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   59 |   8 |   — |   — |   67 |   52|    3
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   36 |   6 |   — |   — |   42 |   37|    4
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   43 |   3 |   — |   — |   46 |   39|    5
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   51 |  11 |   — |   — |   62 |   77|    6
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   54 |  11 |   — |   — |   65 |   64|    7
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   51 |   6 |   — |   — |   57 |   44|    8
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   45 |  11 |   1 |   — |   57 |   49|    9
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   43 |   8 |   — |   — |   51 |   54| 1890
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   43 |  12 |   — |   — |   55 |   65|    1
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   61 |   6 |   — |   — |   67 |   62|    2
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   61 |   4 |   2 |   — |   67 |   51|    3
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   55 |   9 |   — |   — |   64 |   54|    4
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   61 |   3 |   2 |   — |   66 |   52|    5
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   51 |   8 |   — |   — |   59 |   73|    6
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   64 |   8 |   2 |   — |   74 |   67|    7
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   46 |  12 |   — |   — |   58 |   59|    8
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   79 |  14 |   3 |   1 |   97 |   72|    9
  |  — |  —  |  —  |  110 |  14 |   1 |   — |  125 |   54| 1900
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   97 |  10 |   — |   — |  107 |   74|    1
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   66 |   9 |   1 |   — |   76 |   54|    2
  |  — |  —  |  —  |  102 |   9 |   — |   — |  111 |   93|    3
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   98 |   6 |   — |   — |  104 |  124|    4
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   97 |  12 |   — |   — |  109 |  114|    5
  |  — |  —  |  —  |   70 |   — |   — |   — |   70 |   78|    6
  |  — |  —  |  —  |    — |   — |   — |   — |    — |  111|    7
  |  — |  —  |  —  |    — |   — |   — |   — |    — |  108|    8
  |  — |  —  |  —  |    — |   — |   — |   — |    — |  103|    9
  |  — |  —  |  —  |    — |   — |   — |   — |    — |   82| 1910
  +----+-----+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+------+-----------
  | 60 | 63  | 45  |4,008 | 714 |  40 |   4 |4,934 |4,934|Total
  +----+-----+-----+------+-----+-----+-----+------+-----------

    In 1817 the Course of Study was fixed at four years.

    One-half of the cadets admitted in 1854 formed the class of
    1858, and, as the Course of Study was then changed to five
    years, the other half constituted the class of 1859.

    Two classes—those admitted in 1856 and 1857—were graduated in
    1861—the former in May and the latter in June—when the Course
    of Study was again fixed at four years.

    Revised to June 30, 1910.


SUPERINTENDENTS OF THE UNITED STATES MILITARY ACADEMY

  ===========================+==================================+
  No.          Name.         |  Army Rank when Appointed.       |
  ---------------------------+----------------------------------+
  1   Jonathan Williams      |Major Corps of Engineers          |
  2   Jonathan Williams      |Lieut. Col. Corps of Engineers    |
  3   Joseph G. Swift        |Colonel Corps of Engineers        |
  4   Alden Partridge        |Captain Corps of Engineers        |
  5   Sylvanus Thayer        |Captain Corps of Engineers        |
  6   Rene E. DeRussy        |Major Corps of Engineers          |
  7   Richard Delafield      |Major Corps of Engineers          |
  8   Henry Brewerton        |Captain Corps of Engineers        |
  9   Robert E. Lee          |Captain Corps of Engineers        |
  10  John G. Garnard        |Captain Corps of Engineers        |
  11  Richard Delafield      |Major Corps of Engineers          |
  12  Peter G. T. Beauregard |Captain Corps of Engineers        |
  13  Richard Delafield      |Major Corps of Engineers          |
  14  Alexander H. Bowman    |Major Corps of Engineers          |
  15  Zealous B. Tower       |Major Corps of Engineers          |
  16  George W. Cullum       |Lieut. Colonel Corps of Engineers |
  17  Thomas G. Pitcher      |Colonel 44th Infantry             |
  18  Thomas H. Ruger        |Colonel 18th Infantry             |
  19  John M. Schofield      |Major General, U. S. A            |
  20  Oliver O. Howard       |Brigadier General, U. S. A        |
  21  Wesley Merritt         |Colonel 5th Cavalry               |
  22  John G. Parke          |Colonel Corps of Engineers        |
  23  John M. Wilson         |Lieut. Colonel Corps of Engineers |
  24  Oswald H. Ernst        |Major Corps of Engineers          |
  25  Albert L. Mills        |1st Lieutenant 1st Cavalry        |
  26  Hugh L. Scott          |Major 14th Cavalry                |
  27  Thomas H. Barry        |Major General U. S. A             |
  ---------------------------+----------------------------------+

  ====+==================+==================+=========
  No. |       From       |        To        | Remarks.
  ----+------------------+------------------+---------
  1   |   April 15, 1802.| † June 20, 1803. | Resigned.
  2   | † April 19, 1805.|   July 31, 1812. | Resigned.
  3   |   July 31, 1812. |   March 24, 1814.| Relieved.
  4   |   Jan’y 3, 1815. |   July 28, 1817. | Relieved.
  5   |   July 28, 1817. |   July 1, 1833.  | Relieved.
  6   |   July 1, 1833.  |   Sept. 1, 1838. | Relieved.
  7   |   Sept. 1, 1838. |   Aug. 15, 1845. | Relieved.
  8   |   Aug. 15, 1845. |   Sept. 1, 1852. | Relieved.
  9   |   Sept. 1, 1852. |   March 31, 1855.| Relieved.
  10  |   March 31, 1855.|   Sept. 8, 1856. | Relieved.
  11  |   Sept. 8, 1856. | § Jan’y 23, 1861.| Relieved.
  12  | § Jan’y 23, 1861.|   Jan’y 28, 1868.| Relieved.
  13  |   Jan’y 28, 1861.|   March 1, 1861. | Relieved.
  14  |   March 1, 1861. |   July 8, 1864.  | Relieved.
  15  |   July 8, 1864.  |   Sept. 3, 1864. | Relieved.
  16  |   Sept. 8, 1864. |   Aug. 28, 1866. | Relieved.
  17  |   Aug. 28, 1866. |   Sept. 1, 1871. | Relieved.
  18  |   Sept. 1, 1871. |   Sept. 1, 1876. | Relieved.
  19  |   Sept. 1, 1876. |   Jan’y 21, 1881.| Relieved.
  20  |   Jan’y 21, 1881.|   Sept. 1, 1882. | Relieved.
  21  |   Sept. 1, 1882. |   July 1, 1887.  | Relieved.
  22  |   Aug. 28, 1887. |   June 24, 1889. | Relieved.
  23  |   Aug. 26, 1889. |   March 31, 1893.| Relieved.
  24  |   March 31, 1893.|   Aug. 21, 1898. | Relieved.
  25  |   Aug. 22, 1898. |   Aug. 31, 1906. | Relieved.
  26  |   Aug. 31, 1906. |   Aug. 31, 1910. | Relieved.
  27  |   Aug. 31, 1910  |                  |
  ----+------------------+------------------+----------

    Note.—The selection of the Superintendents of the Military
    Academy was confined to the Corps of Engineers from the
    establishment of the Institution, March 16, 1802, till the
    passage of the law of July 13, 1866, which opened it to the
    entire Army. By the Act of June 12, 1858, the local rank of
    Colonel was conferred upon the Superintendent.

    † Major Williams resigned June 20, 1803, on a point of command,
    and pending its settlement until April 19, 1805, when he
    again returned to service as Chief Engineer, no permanent
    Superintendent of the Military Academy was appointed, the
    command devolving upon the senior officer of the Corps of
    Engineers present for duty.

    § Bvt. Major P. G. T. Beauregard, Corps of Engineers, by order
    of John B. Floyd, Secretary of War, relieved Colonel Delafield,
    Jan. 23, 1861, from the superintendency of the Military
    Academy, but was himself displaced five days later, Jan. 28,
    1861, by direction of the Succeeding Secretary of War, Joseph
    Holt, the command again devolving upon Colonel Delafield.


COMMANDANTS OF CADETS AT THE UNITED STATES MILITARY ACADEMY

  ===========================+==================================+
  No.          Name.         |  Army Rank when Appointed.       |
  ---------------------------+----------------------------------+
  1   George W. Gardiner     |2d Lieut. Corps of Artillery      |
  2   John Bliss Captain     |6th Infantry                      |
  3   John R. Bell           |Captain Light Artillery           |
  4   William J. Worth       |Captain 2d Infantry               |
  5   Ethan A. Hitchcock     |Captain 1st Infantry              |
  6   John Fowle             |Major 3d Infantry                 |
  7   Charles F. Smith       |1st Lieut. 2d Artillery           |
  8   J. Addison Thomas      |1st Lieut. 3d Artillery           |
  9   Bradford R. Alden      |Captain 4th Infantry              |
  10  Robert S. Garnett      |Captain 7th Infantry              |
  11  William H. T. Walker   |Captain 6th Infantry              |
  12  William J. Hardee      |Major 2d Cavalry                  |
  13  John F. Reynolds       |Captain 3d Artillery              |
  14  Christopher C. Anger   |Major 13th Infantry               |
  15  Kenner Garrard         |Captain 5th Cavalry               |
  16  Henry B. Clitz         |Major 12th Infantry               |
  17  John C. Tidball        |Captain 2d Artillery              |
  18  Henry M. Black         |Major 7th Infantry                |
  19  Emory Upton            |Lieut. Col. 1st Artillery         |
  20  Thomas H. Neill        |Lieut. Col. 8th Cavalry           |
  21  Henry M. Lazelle       |Lieut. Col. 23d Infantry          |
  22  Henry C. Hasbrouck     |Captain 4th Artillery             |
  23  Hamilton S. Hawkins    |Lieut. Col. 23d Infantry          |
  24  Samuel M. Mills        |Captain 5th Artillery             |
  25  Otto L. Hein           |Captain 1st Cavalry               |
  26  Charles G. Treat       |Captain Artillery Corps           |
  27  Robert L. Howze        |Captain 6th Cavalry               |
  28  Frederick W. Sibley    |Lieut. Col. 4th Cavalry           |
  29  Fred W. Sladen         |Capt. 14th Infantry               |
  ---------------------------+----------------------------------+
  ====+==================+==================+=========
  No. |       From       |        To        | Remarks.
  ----+------------------+------------------+----------
  1   |   Sept. 15, 1817 |   April 2, 1818  | Relieved.
  2   |   April 2, 1818  |   Jan. 11, 1819  | Relieved.
  3   |   Feb. 8, 1819   |   March 17, 1820 | Relieved.
  4   |   March 17, 1820 |   Dec. 2, 1828   | Relieved.
  5   |   March 13, 1829 |   June 24, 1833  | Relieved.
  6   |   July 10, 1833  |   March 31, 1838 | Relieved.
  7   |   April 1, 1838  |   Sept. 1, 1842  | Relieved.
  8   |   Sept. 1, 1842  |   Dec. 14, 1845  | Relieved.
  9   |   Dec. 14, 1845  |   Nov. 1, 1852   | Relieved.
  10  |   Nov. 1, 1852   |   July 31, 1854  | Relieved.
  11  |   July 31, 1854  |   May 27, 1856   | Relieved.
  12  |   July 22, 1856  |   Sept. 8, 1860  | Relieved.
  13  |   Sept. 8, 1860  |   June 25, 1861  | Relieved.
  14  |   August 20, 1861|   Dec. 5, 1861   | Relieved.
  15  |   Dec. 5, 1861   |   Sept. 25, 1862 | Relieved.
  16  |   Oct. 23, 1862  |   July 4, 1864   | Relieved.
  17  |   July 10, 1864  |   Sept. 22, 1864 | Relieved.
  18  |   Sept. 22, 1864 |   July 1, 1870   | Relieved.
  19  |   July 1, 1870   |   June 3, 1875   | Relieved.
  20  |   July 1, 1875   |   June 30, 1879  | Relieved.
  21  |   July 1, 1879   |   Aug. 4, 1882   | Relieved.
  22  |   August 22, 1882|   Sept. 1, 1892  | Relieved.
  23  |   Feb. 1, 1888   |   Feb. 1, 1888   | Relieved.
  24  |   Sept. 1, 1892  |   June 15, 1897  | Relieved.
  25  |   June 15, 1897  |   June 15, 1901  | Relieved.
  26  |   June 15, 1901  |   June 15, 1905  | Relieved.
  27  |   June 15, 1905  |   Feb. 1, 1909   | Relieved.
  28  |   Feb. 1, 1909   |   Jan. 17, 1911  | Relieved.
  29  |   Feb. 1, 1911   |                  |
  ----+------------------+------------------+----------

    Notes.—From April 15, 1802, to September 15, 1817, the
    Superintendent performed the duties of Commandant of Cadets in
    addition to his own.

    The Commandant of Cadets has the rank and pay of Lieutenant
    Colonel, under Sections 1310 and 1334, Revised Statutes of the
    United States.

    When the Superintendent is absent from West Point the
    Commandant of Cadets is the Acting Superintendent.




CHAPTER X.

APPENDIX.

WAR DEPARTMENT.

INFORMATION RELATIVE TO THE APPOINTMENT AND ADMISSION OF CADETS TO THE
UNITED STATES MILITARY ACADEMY.

[Communications relating to matters connected with the Military-Academy
should be addressed to The Adjutant-General of the Army, Washington, D.
C.]


APPOINTMENTS.

HOW MADE.—Each Congressional District and Territory—the District of
Columbia and also Porto Rico—is entitled to have one cadet at the
Academy. Each State is also entitled to have two cadets from the State at
large, and forty are allowed from the United States at large. The law,
however, provides that for six years from July 1, 1910, whenever any
cadet shall have finished three years of his course at the Academy his
successor may be admitted. The appointment from a Congressional District
is made upon the recommendation of the Representative in Congress from
that District, and those from a State at large upon the recommendations
of the Senators of the State. Similarly the appointment from a Territory
is made upon the recommendation of the Delegate in Congress. The
appointment from the District of Columbia is made on the recommendation
of the Commissioners of the District. Each person appointed must be
an actual resident of the State, District or Territory from which the
appointment is made.

The appointments from the United States at large are made by the
President of the United States upon his own selection. The cadet from
Porto Rico, who must be a native of that island, is appointed by the
President on the recommendation of the Resident Commissioner.

The Secretary of War is authorized to permit not exceeding four
Filipinos, to be designated, one for each class, by the Philippine
Commission, to receive instruction at the United States Military Academy
at West Point: Provided, That the Filipinos undergoing instruction shall
receive the same pay, allowances, and emoluments as are authorized by law
for cadets at the Military Academy appointed from the United States, to
be paid out of the same appropriations: And provided further, That said
Filipinos undergoing instruction on graduation shall be eligible only to
commissions in the Philippine Scouts. And the provisions of section 1321,
Revised Statutes, are modified in the case of the Filipinos undergoing
instruction, so as to require them to engage to serve for eight years,
unless sooner discharged, in the Philippine Scouts.

DATE OF APPOINTMENTS.—Appointments are required by law to be made _one
year in advance_ of the date of admission, except in cases where, by
reason of death or other cause, a vacancy occurs which cannot be provided
for by such appointment in advance. These vacancies are filled in time
for the next examination.

ALTERNATES.—For each candidate appointed there should be nominated _two
alternates_. The principal and each alternate will receive from the War
Department a letter of appointment, and must appear for examination at
the time and place therein designated.[67] The fitness for admission
to the Academy of the principal and alternates will be determined as
prescribed in paragraphs 19 and 20, Regulations U. S. Military Academy.
If the principal fails to qualify, either mentally or physically, then
the qualifications of the alternates will be considered and if only one
has met the requirements he will be admitted; if both alternates have met
the requirements the better qualified will be admitted. The alternates,
like the principal, should be designated _one year in advance_ of the
date of admission.


EXAMINATION AND ADMISSION OF CANDIDATES.[68]

The following are extracts from the Regulations of the Military Academy
relating to the examination of candidates for admission and will be
strictly adhered to:

19. On the second Tuesday in January of each year candidates selected
for appointment (except the Filipino candidates) shall appear for
mental and physical examination before boards of Army officers to
be convened at such places as the War Department may designate. The
Filipino candidates selected for appointment, unless otherwise notified
by the War Department, shall appear for mental and physical examination
on the second Tuesday in October of each year before a board of Army
officers to be convened at such place in the Philippine Islands as the
Commanding General of the Philippine Division may designate. Candidates
who pass will be admitted to the Academy without further examination upon
reporting in person to the Superintendent before 12 o’clock noon, on the
1st day of March following the examination.

20. Each candidate before admission to the academy must show by
examination as prescribed in paragraph 19, that he is well versed in
algebra, to include quadratic equations and progressions, plane geometry,
English grammar, composition and literature, descriptive and physical
geography, and general and United States history, as explained in the
circulars of notification. No rejected candidate shall be re-examined,
except upon recommendation of the Academic Board.

22. Immediately after reporting to the Superintendent for admission, and
before receiving his warrant of appointment, the candidate is required to
sign an engagement for service in the following form, and in the presence
of the Superintendent, or of some officer deputed by him:

“I, ________, of the State (or Territory) of ____, aged ____ years ____
months, do hereby engage (with the consent of my parent or guardian)
that, from the date of my admission as a Cadet of the United States
Military Academy, I will serve in the Army of the United States for eight
years, unless sooner discharged by competent authority.”

In the presence of ________.

The candidate is then required to take and subscribe an oath or
affirmation in the following form:

“I, ________, do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of
the United States, and bear true allegiance to the National Government:
that I will maintain and defend the sovereignty of the United States,
paramount to any and all allegiance, sovereignty, or fealty I may owe
to any State or country whatsoever; and that I will at all times obey
the legal orders of my superior officers, and the rules and articles
governing the armies of the United States.”

Sworn and subscribed, at ____, this ____ day of ____, nineteen hundred
and ____ before me. ________

QUALIFICATIONS.—No candidate shall be admitted who is under seventeen,
or over twenty-two years of age, or less than five feet four inches in
height at the age of seventeen, or five feet five inches in height at
the age of eighteen and upward, or who is deformed, or afflicted with
any disease or infirmity which would render him unfit for the military
service, or who has, at the time of presenting himself, any disorder of
an infectious or immoral character. Candidates must be unmarried.

Each candidate must on reporting at West Point present a certificate
showing successful vaccination within one year; or a certificate of two
vaccinations, made at least a month apart, within three months.

NOTE.—Candidates are eligible for admission from the day they are
seventeen until the day they become twenty-two years of age, on which
latter day they are not eligible.

It is suggested to all candidates for admission to the Military Academy
that, before leaving their places of residence for the place of
examination, they should cause themselves to be thoroughly examined by a
competent physician, and by a teacher or instructor in good standing. By
such examinations any _serious_ physical disqualification or deficiency
in mental preparation would be revealed.

It should be understood that the informal examination herein recommended
is solely for the convenience and benefit of the candidate himself,
and can in no manner affect the decision of the Academic and Medical
Examining Boards.


CHARACTER OF EXAMINATIONS.


PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.

Upon the completion of the mental examination all candidates will be
thoroughly examined physically by the medical officers of the board,
under the following instructions prepared by the Surgeon General of the
Army:

Hearing must be normal in both ears.

Vision, as determined by the official test types, must not fall below
20/40 in either eye, and not below 20/20 unless the defect is a simple
refractive error not hyperopia, is not due to ocular disease, and is
entirely corrected by proper glasses.

In the record of all examinations the acuity of vision without glasses,
and also with glasses when the acuity is less than 20/20, will be given
for each eye separately; in the latter case the correction will also be
noted.

Hyperopia requiring any spherical correction, anisometropia, squint, or
muscular insufficiency, if marked, are causes for rejection.

Color blindness, red, green, or violet, is cause for rejection.

The following are causes of disqualification if found to exist to such
a degree as would immediately or at no very distant period impair the
efficiency of the candidate:

    1.—Feeble constitution; unsound health from whatever cause;
    indications of former disease, glandular swellings, or other
    symptoms of scrofula.

    2.—Chronic cutaneous affections, especially of the scalp.

    3.—Severe injuries of the bones of the head; convulsions.

    4.—Impaired vision, from whatever cause; inflammatory
    affections of the eyelids; immobility or irregularity of the
    iris; fistula lachrymalis, &c., &c.

    5.—Deafness; copious discharge from the ears.

    6.—loss of many teeth, or the teeth generally unsound.

    7.—Impediment of speech.

    8.—Want of due capacity of the chest, and any other indication
    of a liability to a pulmonic disease.

    9.—Impaired or inadequate efficiency of one or both of the
    superior extremities on account of fractures, especially of the
    clavicle, contraction of a joint, deformity, &c.

    10.—An unusual excurvature or incurvature of the spine.

    11.—Hernia.

    12.—A varicose state of the veins of the scrotum or spermatic
    cord (when large), hydrocele, hemorrhoids, fistulas.

    13.—Impaired or inadequate efficiency of one or both of the
    inferior extremities on account of varicose veins, fractures,
    malformation (flat feet, &c.), lameness, contraction, unequal
    length, bunions, overlying or supernumerary toes, &c., &c.

    14.—Ulcers, or unsound cicatrices of ulcers likely to break out
    afresh.

The requirements of the following tables of physical proportions are
_minimum for growing youths_ and are for the guidance of medical officers
in connection with the other data of the examination, a consideration of
all of which should determine the candidate’s physical eligibility. Mere
fulfillment of the requirements of the standard tables does not determine
eligibility, while on the other hand no departure below the standard
should be allowed unless upon the unanimous recommendation of the medical
examining board for excellent reasons clearly stated in each case.

The physical requirements should be those of the age at the birthday
nearest the time of the examination. Fractions greater than ½ inch will
be considered as an additional inch of height, but candidates 17 years
old must be at least 64 inches, and those 18 years and upward at least 65
inches in height.


_Table of physical proportion for height, weight, and chest measurement._

                               Chest
                               measurement—  Chest
             Height,  Weight,  expiration,    mobility,
    Age.     inches.  pounds.  inches.        inches.

    17 yrs.    64       110        29          2
               65       112        29¼         2
               66       114        29½         2
               67       116        29¾         2
               68       119        30          2½
               69       122        30¼         2½
               70       125        30½         2½
               71       128        30¾         2½

    18 yrs.    65       117        30¼         2
               66       119        30½         2
               67       121        30¾         2
               68       124        31          2½
               69       127        31¼         2½
               70       130        31½         2½
               71       133        31¾         2½
               72       136        32          3

    19 yrs.    65       121        30¾         2
               66       123        31          2
               67       125        31¼         2
               68       129        31½         2½
               69       133        31¼         2½
               70       137        32          2½
               71       141        32¼         2½
               72       145        32½         3
               73       149        32¾         3

    20 yrs.    65       122        31          2
               66       124        31¼         2
               67       126        31½         2
               68       130        31¾         2½
               69       134        32          2½
               70       138        32¼         2½
               71       142        32½         2½
               72       146        32¾         3
               73       150        33          3
               74       154        33¼         3½

    21 yrs.    65       123        31½         2
               66       125        31½         2
               67       127        31¾         2
               68       132        32          2½
               69       137        32¼         2½
               70       142        32½         2½
               71       147        32¾         2½
               72       152        33          3
               73       157        33¼         3
               74       162        33½         3½
               75       167        33¾         3½

    22 yrs.    65       125        31½         2
               66       127        31¾         2
               67       129        32          2
               68       134        32¼         2½
               69       139        32½         2½
               70       144        32¾         2½
               71       149        33          2½
               72       154        33¼         3
               73       159        33½         3
               74       164        33¾         3½
               75       169        34          3½
               76       174        34¼         4


MENTAL EXAMINATION.

ALGEBRA.—Candidates will be required to pass a satisfactory examination
in that portion of _algebra_ which includes the following range of
subjects: definitions and notation; the fundamental laws; the fundamental
operations, viz.: addition, subtraction, multiplication and division;
factoring; highest common factor; lowest common multiple; fractions,
simple and complex; simple, or linear, equations with one unknown
quantity; simultaneous simple, or linear, equations with two or more
unknown quantities; involution, including the formation of the squares
and cubes of polynomials; binomial theorem with positive integral
exponents; evolution, including the extraction of the square and cube
roots of polynomials and of numbers: theory of exponents; radicals,
including reduction and fundamental operations, rationalization,
equations involving radicals, operations with imaginary numbers,
quadratic equations; equations of quadratic form; simultaneous
quadratic equations; ratio and proportion; arithmetical and geometrical
progressions. Candidates will be required to solve problems involving any
of the principles or methods contained in the foregoing subjects.

The following questions were used at a recent examination:

Substitute _y_ + 3 for _x_ in _x_⁴-_x_³ + 2x²-3 and arrange the result in
descending powers of _y_.

On the eve of a battle one army had 5 men to every 6 men in the other.
The first army lost 14,000 men and the second 6,000 men. The first army
then had 2 men to every 3 men in the other. How many men were there
originally in each army?

    Solve 1.2_x_ - (.18_x_ - .05)/.5 = .4_w_ + 8.9

Find the lowest common multiple of 1-_x_, _x_²-1, _x_-2, and _x_²-4.

    Solve √_x_ + 9 = 2 √_x_ - 3.

    Solve (2_x_ - 3)² = 8_x_.

Expand (_m_-3/4-_m_(4/3))⁴ by the Binominal Theorem.

Find all the values of _a_ for which the roots of _ax_² + 2(_a_ + 3)_x_ +
16 = 0 are equal.

    Solve

    ((_x_ + _y_)/2) - ((_x_ - _y_)/3) = 8

    and

    ((_x_ + _y_)/3) + ((_x_ - _y_)/4) = 11.

    Solve _x_² - 4_y_² = 9, _xy_ + 2_y_² = 3.

A certain article of consumption is subject to a duty of $1.50 per cwt.
In consequence of a reduction in duty the consumption increases one half,
but the revenue falls off one third. Find the duty per cwt. after the
reduction.

A and B run a mile. First A gives B a start of 44 yards and beats him
by 51 seconds; at the second heat A gives B a start of 1 minute and 15
seconds and is beaten by 88 yards. Find the time in which A and B can run
a mile separately.

Sum to infinity the progression 3 + 2 + 4/3....

A servant agrees for certain wages the first month, on the understanding
that they are to be raised a dollar every subsequent month until they
reach $60 a month. At the end of the first of the months for which he
receives $60 he finds that his wages during his time of service have
averaged $48 per month. How long has he served?

PLANE GEOMETRY.—Candidates will be required to give accurate definitions
of the terms used in _plane geometry_, to demonstrate any proposition of
plane geometry as given in the ordinary text-books and to solve simple
geometrical problems either by a construction or by an application of
algebra.

The following questions were used at a recent examination:

Define the following:

1°. Rhombus. 2°. A mean proportional. 3°. Similar triangles. 4°. A
segment of a circle. 5°. The apothem of a regular polygon.

Theorem: The perpendicular is the shortest line between a point and a
straight line.

Theorem: In the same circle or equal circles, the less of two chords is
at the greater distance from the centre; conversely, the chord at the
greater distance from the centre is the less.

Construction: Divide a given straight line internally in extreme and mean
ratio.

Theorem: The areas of two triangles which have an angle of one equal to
the angle of the other are to each other as the products of the sides
including those angles.

Problem: Given a circle of unit diameter and the side of a regular
inscribed polygon, find the side of a regular inscribed polygon of double
the number of sides.

Theorem: The four bisectors of the four angles of a quadrilateral form a
second quadrilateral, the opposite angles of which are supplementary.

Theorem: If on the diameter of a circle two points be taken equally
distant from the centre, the sum of the squares of the distances of any
point of the circumference from these two points is constant.

Problem: Find the locus of the point of intersection of the three
altitudes of a triangle, given a fixed base, and constant angle at the
vertex.

ENGLISH GRAMMAR.—Candidates must have a good knowledge of _English
grammar_; they must be able to define the terms used therein; to
define the parts of speech; to give inflections, including declension,
conjugation and comparison; to give the corresponding masculine and
feminine gender nouns; to give and apply the ordinary rules of syntax.

They must be able to parse correctly any ordinary sentence; giving the
subject of each verb, the governing word of each objective case, the
word for which each pronoun stands or to which it refers, the words
between which each preposition shows the relation, precisely what each
conjunction and each relative pronoun connects, what each adjective and
adverb qualifies or limits, the construction of each infinitive, and
generally to show a good knowledge of the function of each word in the
sentence.

They must be able to correct in sentences or extracts any ordinary
grammatical errors.

It is not required that any particular text-book shall be followed: but
the definitions, parsing, and corrections must be in accordance with good
usage and common sense.

The examinations may include questions similar to the following:

    1. Define and give examples of: _a._ infinitive; _b._ indirect
    object; _c._ simple sentence.

    2. Give the principal parts of: _a._ choose; _b._ crow; _c._
    freeze; _d._ fly; _e._ burst.

    3. (i). Give the plurals of: _a._ motto: _b._ fairy; _c._
    money: _d._ belief; _e._ axis. (ii). Indicate which of the
    following words are singular, which are plural, and which may
    be either: _a._ cherubim; _b._ mathematic; _c._ species; _d._
    basis; _e._ news.

    4. (i). Give the feminine of: _a._ hero; _b._ gander; _c._
    duke; _d._ priest; _e._ Englishman. (ii). Indicate the gender
    of: _a._ songster; _b._ spinster; _c._ goose; _d._ mouse; _e._
    book.

    5. (i). Give the possessive case singular of: _a._ it; _b._
    princes; _c._ Kings of Italy; _d._ Henry the Fourth; _e._
    man-of-war. (ii). Give the possessive case plural of: _a._
    brother-in-law; _b._ Jones; _c._ I; _d._ who; _e._ Musselman.

    6. Give the comparison of: _a._ mournful; _b._ little; _c._
    great; _d._ old; _e._ angry.

    7. Parse the _italicized_ words in the following sentence:
    Other _things being equal, it_ is _obvious that_ the writer who
    has most words _to choose from_ is _most likely_ to find in
    _his_ assortment _just_ the word _which_ he needs _at_ a given
    moment.

    8. Correct all words in the following sentences. Of words in
    brackets {} draw a line through the incorrect word or words:

                                  {your }
    1. Have either of you brought {their} umbrellas?
                                  {his  }

    2. The river had overflown its banks.

    3. John thinks he will be able to come and that James shall come also.
                      shall                               will

    4. Men are in the plural number because they mean more than one.

    5. That is neither a squirrel or rabbit’s track.

    6. I believe he dont know its here.

    7. Him dying at this time led to the attempt being given up.

ENGLISH COMPOSITION AND ENGLISH LITERATURE.—Candidates will be required:

1. By the writing of short themes on subjects chosen by themselves
within limits set by the examination paper, to prove (_a_) their
ability to spell, capitalize, and punctuate, and (_b_) their mastery of
the elementary principles of composition, including paragraphing and
sentence-structure.

2. To give evidence of intelligent acquaintance with three plays of
Shakespeare: one comedy, one history, and one tragedy,—_The Merchant of
Venice_, _Henry V._, and _Macbeth_ being especially recommended.

3. To exhibit a fair knowledge of the names of the most prominent English
and American authors, and of the names of their principal works.

The general character and scope of the examination are indicated by the
following specimen:

    A. Write a composition of about two hundred and fifty words, on
    each of four subjects selected from the following list. (Of two
    or more subjects in brackets choose but one.)

    1. The Story of the Three Caskets in _The Merchant of Venice_.
    A Character-Sketch of Antonio.

    2. The Influences that Caused Macbeth’s Moral Downfall.
    The Story of Macduff.

    3. { The English Army at Agincourt (in _Henry V._)
       { A Brief Narrative of the Historical Events of _Henry V._ Previous
           to Agincourt.

    4. { A Description of a Building.
       { A Character-Sketch of a Dog.
       { A Narrative of an Interesting Journey.
       { Reasons for Liking a Favorite Book.
       { How to Make a Squirrel-Trap (or a Kite, or an Ice-Boat, etc.)

    B. 1. What author wrote _The Ancient Mariner_? _Comus_? _The
    Marble Faun_? _Rasselas_? _Barbara Frietchie_?

    2. Name two works of each of the following authors: Goldsmith,
    Emerson, Burke, Macaulay.

    3. Give the names of two principal works of a great American
    novelist; a great English Puritan poet of the seventeenth
    century; an English woman novelist of the last century; a
    living American novelist.

GEOGRAPHY.—Candidates will be required to pass a satisfactory examination
in _descriptive geography_ and the elements of _physical geography_. A
preponderance of weight is attached to a knowledge of the geography of
the United States.

In descriptive geography of the United States, candidates should be
thoroughly informed as to its general features and boundaries; adjacent
oceans, seas, bays, gulfs, sounds, straits, and islands; lakes, the
location and extent of mountain ranges; the sources, directions, and
terminations of the important rivers, the names of their principal
tributaries, and at what points, if any, these rivers break through
highlands on their way to the ocean; the water routes of communication
from one part of the country to another; the location and termination
of important railroad lines; the boundaries of the several states and
territories and their order along the coasts, frontiers and principal
rivers; the locations and boundaries of the island possessions; and the
names and locations of the capitals and other important cities of the
several states, territories and island possessions.

In short, the knowledge should be so complete that a clear mental picture
of the whole of the United States is impressed on the mind of the
candidate.

In descriptive geography of other countries, candidates should be
familiar with the continental areas and grand divisions of water; the
earth’s surface; the large bodies of water which in part or wholly
surround the grand divisions of the land; the capes, from what parts they
project and into what waters, the principal peninsulas, location, and by
what waters embraced; the parts connected by an isthmus; the principal
islands, location and surrounding waters; the seas, gulfs, and bays,
the coasts they indent, and the waters to which they are subordinate;
the straits, the lands they separate, and the waters they connect; the
location of the principal lakes: the locations, boundaries, capitals and
principal cities of the political divisions of the world.

In physical geography, candidates should be familiar with the relief
of the earth’s surface; the principal mountain systems, the river
systems and watersheds; the coastal and lake plains, and the influence
of climate, soil, mineral deposits and other physical features on the
resources, industries, commercial relations and development of a country
and its people, especially of the United States.

The following questions were used at a recent examination:

    1. Name the bodies of water surrounding Europe.

    2. Where is 1. Cape St. Vincent, 2. Cape Corrientes, 3. Cape
    Matapan, 4. Cape Lopez, 5. Cape Comorin, 6. Cape York.

    3. Name in order the political divisions of South America which
    border on the Pacific Ocean and the capital of each.

    4. Locate definitely the following islands: 1. Mauritius, 2.
    Tasmania, 3. Formosa, 4. New Zealand, 5. Madeira, 6. Falkland;
    to what country does each belong?

    5. Where are the gulfs of 1. Bothnia, 2. Guinea, 3. Paria, 4.
    Salonica, 5. Pechili?

    6. What lands are separated and what waters connected by 1.
    Torres Strait, 2. Hudson Strait, 3. Strait of Malacca?

    7. Bound Italy; name its capital, largest river and principal
    mountain range.

    8. Locate definitely the following cities: 1. Vienna, 2.
    Nankin, 3. Cork, 4. Tunis, 5. Montevideo, 6. Batavia, 7. Suez,
    8. Pretoria.

    9. Name in order the waters traversed in sailing from
    Liverpool, England, to Hong Kong, China.

    10. A considerable portion of the boundary line of the United
    States is along what parallel?

    11. Locate definitely the following: 1. Flathead Lake, 2.
    Sabine Pass, 3. Black Hills, 4. Sebago Lake, 5. Cape Lookout,
    6. Montauk Point, 7. Wichita Mountains, 8. Lingayen Bay.

    12. The meridian of Minneapolis passes through what states?

    13. Name the principal rivers that drain Pennsylvania; where do
    they rise, at what points do they leave the state and at what
    points, if any, do they break through highlands?

    14. Name all the waters traversed in going by the two
    commercial water routes from Duluth to the Atlantic Ocean.

    15. Name the principal ranges of mountains crossed in going
    by rail from New York to San Francisco; state the rail route
    assumed to be traveled.

    16. Bound precisely the following states and territories:
    1. Montana, 2. Arizona, 3. Arkansas, 4. Wisconsin, 5.
    Pennsylvania, 6. Georgia. (In bounding, all contiguous states
    must be mentioned as well as rivers, mountain ranges, etc.)

    17. Name the states west of the Mississippi River, drained
    wholly or in part by it or its tributaries, and give the
    capital of each.

    18. Locate accurately the following cities: 1. Austin, 2.
    Pensacola, 3. Ashville, 4. Winchester, 5. Allegheny, 6. Iloilo,
    7. Oswego, 8. Pasadena, 9. Guthrie, 10. Detroit.

    19. Going by water from New Orleans, La., to Pittsburgh, Pa.,
    what states would you pass on the left?

    20. How many large islands are there in the Hawaiian group?
    Which is the largest? Which is the most important?

    21. Going westward on the 35th parallel of north latitude, from
    near Newberne, N. C., what states and large rivers would be
    crossed?

    22. Describe the chief mountain system of the eastern
    hemisphere, and state what island chains of Asia abound in
    volcanoes.

    23. What are the great river systems of South America? Where
    are the principal coastal plains?

    24. What are the qualifications of a good harbor? Name three
    of the best harbors on the Atlantic coast; one on the Pacific
    coast.

    25. What has made the Middle Atlantic states the principal
    commercial section of the United States?

HISTORY.—Candidates must be thoroughly familiar with so much of the
History of the United States, and of Ancient Greece and Rome as is
contained in good high school text-books on these subjects, and must have
a good knowledge of the important facts in General Ancient History and in
the History of Medieval Europe to the end of the fifteenth century.

In History of the United States, the examination will include questions
concerning early discoveries and settlements; the forms of government in
the colonies; the causes, leading events, and results of wars; important
events in the political and economic history of the nation since its
foundation; and the elementary principles of civil government, with
special reference to the federal congress, executive and judiciary.

In Ancient History, the examination will include questions on important
persons and events in the legendary and authentic history of Greece and
Rome, and on general important facts in the history of other ancient
peoples, taking some account also of Greek art, of Greek and Roman
literature, and especially of Roman government.

In History of Medieval Europe, the greater emphasis will be laid on the
period from Charlemagne to the end of the Middle Ages, particularly on
events connected with the political and social development of England.

Questions similar to the following in character and scope are likely to
be asked:

    1. What explorations or discoveries did each of the following
    named persons make? Give the date in each case. _a._ Narvaez.
    _b._ Coronado. _c._ Marquette. _d._ La Salle.

    2. Name three colonies that were founded for religious reasons
    and give the sect or denomination by which each was colonized.

    3. Who were the Pilgrims? Explain the difference between
    “Pilgrim” and “Puritan.”

    4. When, and under what circumstances was Delaware separated
    from Pennsylvania?

    5. Give an account of Bacon’s Rebellion?

    6. When and where did each of the following events occur?
    _a._ Meeting of the first Colonial Congress. _b._ Burgoyne’s
    surrender. _c._ Arnold’s treason.

    7. Name some important results of each of the following battles
    of the Revolutionary War: _a._ Long Island. _b._ Trenton. _c._
    Brandywine.

    8. Name four additions to the territory of the United States
    since the Revolutionary War, and give the way each has been
    acquired.

    9. Bound the territory of the United States at the close of the
    Revolutionary War.

    10. What was the “Massacre of Wyoming”?

    11. When, where, and for what purpose, did the Constitutional
    Convention meet? What resulted from its deliberations?

    12. What was the “Whiskey Insurrection”?

    13. What were the “Alien and Sedition” laws? What was their
    effect?

    14. When and where was the last battle of the War of 1812
    fought? Name the commanders on each side.

    15. What were the two principal political parties in 1860?
    Their candidates for the Presidency? Their leading doctrines
    on the slavery question? Parties. Candidates, Principles.

    16. With what foreign nations had the United States unfriendly
    relations during and at the close of the Civil War? Give the
    cause in each case.

    17. Name, with date, three important military events of 1865.

    18. What Vice-Presidents have become President? Name the
    predecessor in each case.

    19. Give an account of the “Virginius affair.”

    20. In what war were the following battles fought? What were
    the opposing forces? Which side won? _a._ Ticonderoga. _b._
    Monterey. _c._ Saratoga. _d._ Stony Point. _e._ Spottsylvania.
    _f_. Lundy’s Lane.

    21. By what authority could Lincoln proclaim the emancipation
    of the slaves? What states were immediately affected by the
    Emancipation Proclamation? How was emancipation legally
    completed later?

    22. How may the Constitution of the United States be amended?
    Name two important constitutional amendments.

    23. Name three offices in the cabinet of the President of the
    United States, and state the chief duties that belong to each.

    24. Explain as briefly as possible how a minority of actual
    votes might defeat a majority at a presidential election.

    25. Define Electoral College; Spoils System; Primary; Supreme
    Court.

       *       *       *       *       *

    1. Into what general periods is the history of Egypt divided?
    What did Egypt contribute to Greek civilization?

    2. Name one of the great kings of Assyria. Mention two
    important facts concerning the city of Nineveh.

    3. Mention the principal events of the reign of Darius I., and
    the most noteworthy feature of his government. Of what nation
    was he ruler?

    4. Mention three important facts in connection with the
    Phœnicians as traders and colonizers in the West.

    5. Who were: Agamemnon? Achilles? Hercules? Homer?

    6. Mention two ways in which the physical geography of Greece
    influenced the national life and character.

    7. What was the nature of the government of Athens after the
    expulsion of the Tyrants?

    8. Name four great battles of the Græco-Persian War, and give
    the date of any two of them.

    9. What states were leaders in the great war between the states
    of Greece? What caused the war? What were its chief results?

    10. Outline the career of conquest of Alexander the Great.
    About when did he die? How would his undertaking have been more
    difficult if he had turned west instead of east?

    11. In Greek History what is the significance of the following
    names and phrases: Aristides? The Olympian Games? Solon? The
    Confederacy of Delos? Delphi? Sophocles? Praxiteles?

    12. Give the main points in the Greek colonial system. How did
    the Roman colonial system differ most conspicuously from the
    Greek?

    13. Give the titles of the principal officers of the Roman
    Republic and describe their functions.

    14. What were the Punic Wars? How many in number? Name two
    great generals on each side.

    15. Mention four causes that led to the fall of the Roman
    Republic. Discuss briefly the operation of two of them toward
    this result.

    16. Why did the Emperors persecute the Christians? State the
    attitude of Diocletian and Constantine respectively toward the
    Christians.

    17. For what is each of the following emperors most famous:
    Marcus Aurelius? Justinian? Nero?

    18. In Roman History what is the significance of: The Gracchi?
    Horace? The Comitia Curiata? Verres? The Battle of Chalons? A
    Pyrrhian Victory? Æneas? Alaric?

    19. What do the following dates mean to you: 800? 1066? 1215?
    1453?

    20. What do you know of Joan of Arc?

    21. How did the Feudal System originate? Define Suzerain,
    Vassal, Serf.

    22. What was The Renaissance? By what inventions and
    discoveries was it quickened? Through what channel was ancient
    science transmitted to modern times?

    23. Who was Simon de Montfort?

    24. What changes took place in the condition of the English
    peasantry in the fourteenth century? Due to what causes?

    25. Toward the close of the fifteenth century in England was
    the power of Parliament becoming greater or less than it had
    been previously? By what right was Henry IV. King of England?
    What was the earliest form of parliamentary assembly in English
    history?


ACADEMIC DUTIES.

The academic duties of new cadets commence on the 11th day of March. The
academic duties and exercises of the other cadets commence on the 1st
day of September and continue until about the 5th of June. Examinations
of the several classes are held in December and June. At the December
examination cadets, who are found to be proficient in their studies, are
arranged according to merit in each subject. At the June examination they
are similarly arranged and they are also assigned general standing in
the class as determined by their standings in the various subjects. When
a subject of study is completed during a term an examination concluding
the work in that subject is sometimes held. Cadets deficient in studies
at any examination are discharged from the Academy unless for special
reasons the Academic Board recommends otherwise. Cadets exceeding at
any time the maximum number of demerits allowed for six months are
immediately reported to the Academic Board as deficient in conduct and
are discharged.


PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.

All cadets are examined physically in June of each year, and those found
physically disqualified to continue with the course or, in case of the
first class, for commission in the Army, are discharged.


VACATIONS AND LEAVES OF ABSENCE.

Academic duties are suspended from the completion of the June
examinations until the end of August. During this period cadets live in
camp and are engaged in military duties and exercises and in receiving
practical instruction in military and other subjects. Academic duties
are also suspended from the close of the semi-annual examinations,
about December 23rd, until January 2nd, and on the Friday and Saturday
preceding the last Sunday in March. All duties and exercises, as far as
practicable, are suspended on New Year’s Day, February 22nd, May 30th,
July 4th, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.

Cadets of the first, second and third classes are allowed short leaves of
from four to six days at Christmas, if their conduct during the preceding
six months has been satisfactory. Cadets of the first class, having
satisfactory conduct records, are allowed leaves, not to exceed 75 hours,
at the beginning of the summer encampment and leaves not to exceed 27
hours at Thanksgiving. Excepting these short leaves for good conduct,
cadets are allowed but one leave of absence during the four years’
course. As a rule this leave is granted at the end of the first two years
and extends from the middle of June to the 28th of August.


PAY OF CADETS.

The pay of a cadet is $600 per year and one ration per day, or
commutation therefor, at thirty cents per day. The total is $709.50, to
commence with his admission to the Academy. The actual and necessary
traveling expenses of candidates from their homes to the Military Academy
are credited to their accounts _after_ their admission as cadets.

No cadet is permitted to receive money, or any other supplies, from
his parents, or from any person whomsoever, without the sanction of the
Superintendent. A _most rigid_ observance of this regulation is urged
upon all parents and guardians, as its violations would make distinctions
between cadets which it is the especial desire to avoid; the pay of a
cadet is sufficient, with proper economy, for his support.

Each cadet must keep himself supplied with the following mentioned
articles, viz.:

Eight white shirts; two gray shirts; *eight summer undershirts; *six
winter undershirts; *four night shirts; twelve white linen collars;
twelve pairs of white linen cuffs; *eight pairs of summer drawers;
*six pairs of winter drawers; *eight pairs of socks; *twelve pocket
handkerchiefs; one black tie; *twelve towels; two clothes bags, made of
ticking; two pairs of uniform shoes; six pairs of uniform white gloves;
two sets of white belts; *one clothes brush; *one hair-brush; *one
tooth-brush; *one comb; one mattress; one pillow; four pillowcases; six
sheets; two blankets; one quilted bed cover; one chair; one tumbler; *one
trunk; one account book; one wash basin.

Candidates are authorized to bring with them the articles marked *.

Cadets are required to wear the prescribed uniform. All articles of their
uniform are of a designated pattern, and are sold to cadets at West Point
at regulated prices.


DEPOSIT PRIOR TO ADMISSION.

Immediately after admission candidates must be provided with an outfit
of uniform, etc., the cost of which is about $160. This sum, or at least
$100 thereof, _must be deposited with the treasurer of the Academy
before the candidate is admitted_. It is best for the candidate to take
with him no more money than he needs for traveling expenses and for his
parents to send the required deposit by draft, payable to the Treasurer,
U. S. Military Academy. The deposit is credited at once to the cadet’s
account. Upon graduation a cadet who has exercised proper economy will
have sufficient money to his credit with the Treasurer of the Academy to
purchase his uniform and equipment as an officer.


PROMOTION AFTER GRADUATION.

The attention of applicants and candidates is called to the provisions of
an Act of Congress approved May 17, 1886, given in the chapter entitled
United States Military Academy.


RECITATION SCHEDULE.

On another page is shown the recitation schedule adopted by the Academic
Board, June 23, 1907, and approved by the War Department, August 10, 1907.

This schedule was put in effect with the class entering March 1, 1908.
The other classes in the academy on that date continue the old schedule,
with some modifications adopted to facilitate administration of the
departments during the period of transition from the old course of
studies to the new.

The preliminary term is March 11 to June 10. New cadets are advanced to
the 4th class after passing the June examinations.

The first term of the regular academic year is September 1 to December
18, inclusive.

The second term of the regular academic year is January 2 to June 4,
inclusive.


DEPARTMENT OF TACTICS.


ALL CLASSES.

New cadets, upon reporting for duty, are given infantry recruit
instruction, with gymnastic and calisthenic exercises, until they join
the battalion.

Practical instruction is given during the summer encampment, and from
September 1st to November 1st, and from March 15th to June 1st, in
cavalry, artillery and infantry drill regulations, in target practice
with the rifle, revolver, mountain gun and field gun, and in Military
Engineering.

During the summer encampment, cadets of the third and fourth classes
are also taught swimming and dancing, and those of the first class, the
service of sea-coast artillery and submarine defense at Fort Wright,
N. Y.; all classes participate in exercises in minor tactics, practice
marches, problems and practical field work, in which the employment of
all arms is exemplified.

Practical instruction in fencing and gymnastic exercises and in boxing
and wrestling is given to the fourth class from October 1st to June 1st,
and to the other classes from November 1st to March 15th.

Instruction in riding is given to the first class during the encampment
and from September 1st to June 1st, excepting the month of February;
to the second class, from November 1st to March 31st, and to the third
class from November 1st to March 15th and during the summer encampment.
Instruction with English pad saddles is given to the first class, and in
polo to the first and second classes.

During the winter months map problems for the purpose of instruction
in writing orders, selecting positions from the map, both offensive
and defensive, making dispositions of small forces, selecting best
route for advance and retreat, and for practice of map reading in
general; also lectures upon the methods pursued in company, post and
staff administration as required by Army Regulations, upon uniforms and
equipments, and upon etiquette and customs of the service are given
cadets of the first class.


TEXT BOOKS.

    Light Artillery Drill Regulations. U. S.
    Cavalry Drill Regulations. U. S.
    Infantry Drill Regulations. U. S.
    Coast Artillery Drill Regulations. U. S.
    A Military Primer of the Service of Security and Information.
      Marshall and Simonds.
    Elements of Hippology. Marshall.
    Coast Artillery Drill Regulations: Position-finding service.


BOOKS OF REFERENCE.

    Army Regulations. U.S.
    Small Arms Firing Regulations. U. S.
    Manual of Instruction in Mountain Guns, etc. U. S. M. A.
    Manual of Guard Duty. U. S.
    Manual of Pack Transportation. U. S. M. A.
    Regulations. U. S. M. A.
    Blue Book. U. S.M. A.
    Manual of Gymnastic Exercises. Koehler.
    Field Service Regulations. U. S.
    Horses, Saddles and Bridles. Carter.


ISSUED TO FIRST CLASS BEFORE GRADUATION.

    Army Regulations. U. S.
    Manual of the Subsistence Department. U. S.
    Manual of Quartermaster’s Department. U. S.
    Paymaster’s Manual. U. S.
    Regulations for the Post Exchange.
    Manual of Medical Department. U. S.
    Drill Regulations of the Hospital Corps. U. S.
    Manual of Courts-Martial. U. S.
    Army Register. U. S.
    General Orders, No. 169, War Department, series of 1907.
    (Uniform Order) with all amendments.


DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL AND MILITARY ENGINEERING.


FIRST CLASS.

The course in civil and military engineering and the art of war is
confined to the first class year.

The course in civil engineering begins September 1st and is completed
during the first term, which closes with the Christmas holidays. It
comprises brief treatises on the mechanics of civil engineering, framed
and masonry structures, the materials of engineering, water supply and
sewerage.


RECITATION SCHEDULE

  ======+=======+====================+====================+================
  Class.| Term. |Periods of Recitat’n|      Department.   | Subjects and
        |       |                    |                    |    Remarks.
  ------+-------+--------+-------+---+--------------------+----------------
   New  |Prelim-|        |       |   |                    |
  Cadets| inary |A.M. *80|†3 to 6|‡39|Mathematics         |Algebra.
        |       |A.M.  80| 3 to 6| 37|English and History |Geometry.
        |       |P.M.  60|   3   | 38|   ”     ”     ”    |English.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(Saturdays
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  A. M.)
        |       |P.M.  60|   3   | 38|   ”     ”     ”    |History.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(Saturdays
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  A. M.)
  Fourth| First |A.M.  80| 3 to 6| 45|Mathematics         |Algebra.
        |   ”   |A.M.  80| 3 to 6| 31|     ”              |Trigonometry.
        |   ”   |A.M.  80| 3 to 6| 17|     ”              |Conic Sections.
        |   ”   |P.M.  60| 2 to 3| 38|English and History |English.
        |   ”   |P.M.  60| 2 to 3| 38|   ”     ”     ”    |History.
        |   ”   |A.M.  60|   1   | 13|Tactics             |Infantry and
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Artillery
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Drill
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  regulations.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(Saturdays.)
        | Second|A.M.  80| 3 to 6| 39|Mathematics         |Conic Sections.
        |   ”   |A.M.  80| 3 to 6| 22|     ”              |Solid Analytical
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Geometry.
        |   ”   |A.M.  80| 3 to 6| 62|     ”              |Descriptive
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Geometry.
        |   ”   |P.M.  60| 2 to 3| 11|English and History |English.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(January
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  only.)
        |   ”   |P.M.  60| 2 to 3| 11|   ”     ”     ”    |History.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(January
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  only.)
        |   ”   |P.M.  60|   5   | 20|Practical Military  |Surveying.
        |       |        |       |   |  Eng.              |  —(February
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  only.)
        |   ”   |P.M.  60|   5   | 76|Modern Languages    |French.—(March
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  1-June 4,
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  inclusive.)
        |   ”   |A.M.  60|   1   | 15|Tactics             |Security and
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Information.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(February 1
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  -May 15.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Saturdays.)
  Third | First |A.M.  80| 3 to 6| 71|Mathematics         |Calculus.—(Has 6
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  per week in
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Sept. and
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Oct., and 3
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  per week in
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Nov. and Dec.)
        |   ”   |P.M. 120| 2 to 3| 21|Philosophy          |Mechanics.—(The
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  periods of 120
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  minutes in
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Mechanics are
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  laboratory
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  periods,
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  September and
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  October.)
        |   ”   |A.M.  80|   3   | 20|    ”               |Mechanics.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(November and
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  December.)
        |   ”   |A.M.  60|   6   | 91|Modern Languages    |French.
        |   ”   |P.M. 120| 2 to 3| 38|Drawing             |Freehand; Plane
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Geometrical.
        | Second|A.M.  80|   3   | 24|Mathematics         |Calculus.
        |   ”   |A.M.  80|   3   | 63|Philosophy          |Mechanics.
        |   ”   |A.M.  60|   6   | 49|Modern Languages    |French.—(January
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  2-February 28,
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  inclusive.)
        |   ”   |A.M.  80| 1 to 2| 20|  ”       ”         |French.—(March 1
        |       |        |       |   |                    | -June 4,
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  inclusive.)
        |   ”   |A.M.  70|   6   | 76|Chemistry           |Chemistry;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Heat.—(March 1
        |       |        |       |   |                    | -June 4,
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  inclusive.)
        |   ”   |P.M. 120|2, 3, 5| 81|Drawing             |Descriptive
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Geometry;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Topography;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Field Work.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(5 per week
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  after March
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  15.)
        |   ”   |A.M.  80| 1 to 2| 20|   ”                |Descriptive
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Geometry;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Topography;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Field Work.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(5 per week
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  after March
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  15.)
  Second| First |A.M.  80|   3   | 45|Philosophy          |Sound; Light.
        |   ”   |A.M.  70|   6   | 91|Chemistry           |Heat;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Mineralogy;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Geology;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Electricity.
        |   ”   |A.M.  60| 2 to 3| 45|Ordnance and Gunnery|Ordnance and
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Gunnery.
        |   ”   |P.M. 120| 2 to 3| 38|Drawing             |Field Sketching;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Building
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Construction;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Projective
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Geometry.
        | Second|A.M.  80|   3   | 63|Philosophy          |Light;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Astronomy.
        |   ”   |A.M.  70|   6   | 49|Chemistry           |Electricity.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(January 2-
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  February 28,
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  inclusive.)
        |   ”   |A.M.  60|   3   | 49|Ordnance and Gunnery|Ordnance and
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Gunnery.—(To
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  May 4.)
        |   ”   |A.M.  60|   3   | 38|Modern Languages    |Spanish.—(March
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  1-June 4,
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  inclusive.)
        |   ”   |P.M.  60|   3   | 13|Hygiene             |Principles of
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Hygiene.—(Also
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  6 lectures,
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  P. M.)
        |   ”   |A.M.  60|   3   | 38|Tactics             |Cavalry,
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Artillery, and
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Infantry Drill
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Regulations.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(March 1-June
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  4, inclusive.)
        |   ”   |P.M. 120| 2 to 3| 50|Drawing             |Building
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Construction;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Mechanical and
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Engineering
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Drawing.
  First | First |A.M.  80|   6   | 91|Engineering         |Civil and
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Military.
        |   ”   |      60| 2 to 3| 45|Law                 |Elementary;
        |       |        |       |   |                    | Constitutional.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(39 in A. M.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  & 2 P. M.’S
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  per week for
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  6 weeks for
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  half class.)
        |   ”   |P.M.  60|   5   | 70|Modern Languages    |Spanish.—(5 per
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  week, except
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  half class 2
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  P. M.’S per
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  week for 6
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  weeks.)
        | Second|A.M.  80|   6   |126|Engineering         |Military
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Engineering;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Art of War.
        |   ”   |      60| 2 to 3| 73|Law                 |International;
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Military.—(58
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  in A. M. & 2
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  P. M.’S per
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  week for 15
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  weeks for half
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  class.)
        |   ”   |P.M.  60| 3 to 4| 75|Modern Languages    |Spanish.
        |   ”   |A.M.  60|   3   | 12|Tactics             |Hippology.
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  —(February.)
        |   ”   |P.M. 120|   1   | 15|Tactics             |Lectures and
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Tactical Map
        |       |        |       |   |                    |  Problems.
  ------+-------+--------+-------+---+--------------------+----------------

    * Length in minutes.

    † Number per week.

    ‡ Total number.

The course in military engineering and the art of war begins on January
2nd and closes on the 3rd of June. Military engineering embraces the
study of field and permanent fortifications and siege works. The art of
war embraces the study of the organization of armies, employment of the
different arms in combination, logistics and strategy. To familiarize the
students with its principles, lectures are delivered on military subjects
and the principal operations of about twenty selected campaigns are
studied. During this course the students are taken to the battle-field
of Gettysburg to familiarize them with the effects of topography on the
employment of troops in the field.


TEXT BOOKS.

    Civil Engineering. Fiebeger.
    Field Fortifications. Fiebeger.
    Permanent Fortifications. Fiebeger.
    Elements of Strategy. Fiebeger.
    Siege Works. Mercur.
    Organization and Tactics. Wagner.
    Field Service Regulations. U. S.
    Campaign of Gettysburg. Fiebeger.


BOOKS OF REFERENCE.

    Campaigns and Battles. Department.
    Story of Civil War. Ropes. Cambria Steel.

The department has a well-selected reference library on civil
engineering, military engineering and the art of war.


DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL AND EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY.


THIRD AND SECOND CLASSES.

The course in natural and experimental philosophy begins with the
third academic year. Mechanics is studied during this year, the class
alternating daily by halves. The text used is Gordon’s “Mechanics.”
Many of the principles are illustrated by apparatus in the lecture and
section rooms, and the students are required to repeat and explain these
experiments. The course aims to be as complete as possible with the
limitation that it can be properly covered in a term of about 100 days by
students having a proficient knowledge of the calculus; the treatment is
sufficiently mathematical to furnish a confident basis for advanced work
in the technical staff corps after graduation.

During the second class year about 100 lessons are allotted to this
department. The first half of this time is devoted to the subjects of
sound and light. The authorized text-book is Gordon’s “Sound and Light.”

Astronomy is studied in the remainder of the second class year. The texts
used are Young’s “General Astronomy” and Michie and Harlow’s “Practical
Astronomy.” The principal aim of this course, in addition to its
important value in educational development, is to furnish an ample basis
for the establishment of stations in explorations and surveys.

The class alternates daily by halves throughout the year.


TEXT-BOOKS.

    Sound and Light. Gordon.
    Mechanics. Gordon.
    General Astronomy. Young.
    Practical Astronomy. Michie and Harlow.

Numerous standard works on the general subjects covered by the course are
available for reference.


DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS.


NEW CADETS, FOURTH AND THIRD CLASSES.

The course in mathematics begins with the new cadet class upon entrance
in March, and extends through two years.

In the new cadet class year algebra and geometry are taken on alternate
days for three months. In both these subjects the matter covered by
the entrance examination is reviewed rapidly and, in the case of plane
geometry, very briefly before proceeding with the regular course. An
examination is held in June upon which the class is graded according to
mathematical capacity.

In the fourth-class year algebra is completed in alternation with
trigonometry. Plane and solid analytical geometry and descriptive
geometry follow.

In the third-class year a course in the differential and integral
calculus is taken, alternating during the latter portion with the subject
of mechanics in the department of philosophy. The most advanced students
take also a brief course in the theory of errors and method of least
squares.

The course in algebra covers the entire subject as generally taught in
colleges, but the student is expected to have already mastered elementary
algebra to include the progressions and the solution of the quadratic
equation. The course in elementary geometry includes the books that
relate to the plane and those that relate to space, but the student is
expected to have mastered the former. Plane and spherical trigonometry
includes the complete solution of the plane and spherical triangles. The
course in analytical geometry includes the discussion of the general
equation of the second degree in the plane and in space.

Descriptive geometry includes, in orthographic projections, the right
line, the plane, ruled surfaces and surfaces of revolution, tangent
planes and intersections of surfaces. It also covers shades and shadows,
perspective, isometric projections and, for the upper part of the class,
spherical projections.

The course in differential and integral calculus covers the ground of
the usual college text-book, including briefly the subject of ordinary
differential equations.


TEXT BOOKS.


NEW CADET CLASS.

    Advanced Course in Algebra. Wells.
    Elements of Geometry. Phillips and Fisher.


FOURTH CLASS.

    Advanced Course in Algebra. Wells.
    Quadratics and Beyond. Fisher and Schwatt.
    Elements of Plane and Spherical Trigonometry. Crockett.
    Logarithmic Tables. Newcomb.
    Conic Sections. C. Smith.
    Elements of Analytical Geometry (Solid). Smith and Gale.
    Descriptive Geometry. Church.


THIRD CLASS.

    Differential and Integral Calculus. Granville.
    Integral Calculus. D. A. Murray.
    Method of Least Squares. Johnson.


DEPARTMENT OF CHEMISTRY, MINERALOGY AND GEOLOGY.


THIRD AND SECOND CLASSES.

This department embraces two branches of physics not included in its
title, namely, heat and electricity.

The course begins March 1 of the second academic year and extends to
March 1 of the third academic year; exercises, recitations, laboratory
work or lectures take place on all week-days.

Commencing March 1, the subjects of heat and general chemistry alternate
daily until the completion of the first six chapters of heat, about March
20, after which the chemistry exercises are held daily until the close of
the term, June 1.

During this term all members of the class whose progress, as shown
by their recitations, warrants it, are given laboratory practice in
chemistry. This practice begins with chemical manipulations and proceeds
in the usual general order of elementary laboratory work. The laboratory
exercises are one hour and fifty minutes long. It is generally possible
to give all parts of the class some laboratory experience: the amount of
this work, however, varies with the aptitude of the student from a few
hours to fifty-five or sixty hours.

This term closes with an examination upon the essential parts of
the entire course, which all cadets who have not shown a prescribed
proficiency in daily work must take.

In chemistry the course is a descriptive general one, based upon a
concise statement of the more essential principles of chemistry,
and includes that class of information deemed most important to
nonspecialists, together with an accurate and logical treatment of many
useful applications of chemistry.

Beginning September 1, the daily exercises alternate between heat and
mineralogy until these subjects are completed, then the daily exercises
alternate between geology and electricity, the geology being completed
by the close of the term, December 23. This term also closes with an
examination, covering the essential parts of the subjects studied during
the term, which all cadets who have not shown a prescribed proficiency in
daily work are required to take.

Beginning January 1, the remainder of the course in electricity is
completed by the end of February. This mid-winter term involves an
examination, if necessary, as prescribed for the terms ending June 1 and
December 23.

The course in heat is short, but it is a comprehensive elementary course
intended to embrace what is most applicable to subsequent work at the
Academy and what is most useful in general education.

The course in geology is a brief but scientific presentation of the
essential elements of this branch of science.

The mineralogy is an eminently practical course consisting of the
descriptive study and the practical determination of the important
minerals. The lithological and palæontological part of geology is
accompanied in study by the continued practical examination of the
objects described.

The course in electricity is a brief exposition of the leading electrical
phenomena and their relations to each other. It includes a study of
the general principles of the subject and of the typical machines,
generators, motors and transformers, together with the more important
uses of electricity. The laboratory exercises give experience with a
number of the machines and in the use of a great variety of apparatus
employed in the numerous forms of electric measurements. In this term the
laboratory work is a part of the electrical course and all cadets enter
the laboratory. All laboratory work is performed under the immediate
supervision of an instructor.


TEXT BOOKS.

    Elementary Lessons in Heat. Tillman.
    Descriptive General Chemistry. Tillman.
    Practical Chemistry. (Laboratory Guide.) Clowes.
    Elements of Geology. Le Conte.
    Important Minerals and Rocks. Tillman.
    Elementary Lessons in Electricity and Magnetism. S. P. Thompson.

During all terms standard works on the respective subjects are available
for reference both to cadets and instructors.


DEPARTMENT OF DRAWING.


THIRD AND SECOND CLASSES.

The course in drawing is carried on through the third class and second
class years.

It begins in the first year course with elementary freehand work from
blocks and objects for the training of the eye and hand, and is followed
by instruction in the nature and use of drawing instruments, papers and
material, construction of practical problems in plane geometry used in
constructive and mechanical drawing. This is followed by the construction
of problems in descriptive geometry covering the theoretical course in
mathematics; the lower part of the class being confined to the practical
problems most useful in mechanical and building construction drawing.
A short course of lettering and handling of flat washes precedes
the general study of topography and map making in which theoretical
instruction is coupled with the execution of conventional signs,
platting, the construction and lettering of a finished map, and practice
in the field in the various elements of military topographical field
sketching. This completes the first year’s course.

Text-book pamphlets:

    Drawing Instruments and Papers.
    The Use of Drawing Instruments, and Geometrical Problems.
    Elementary Exercises in Water-color Washes.
    Military Topography—Map Reading and Map Making.
    Book of Letters and Lettering.
    Descriptive Geometry Problems.

The work of the second year begins with freehand military landscape
sketching in the field; and is followed by memory drawing for the
training of the formal memory, and freehand mechanical and projective
drawing. Practical projective geometry, including axonometric projection,
is then resumed preparatory of the plan, section, and elevation drawing
of a building construction project. In this the student learns the
structural elements of a house and of building construction methods
and design, and the ability to read working drawings. Following this a
mechanical drawing of the plan, section, and elevation of a portion of
a steam engine is constructed, in connection with instruction in the
structure and function of the parts of a steam engine. Finally the class
is separated into groups corresponding to the corps in the Army in which
the standing of cadets indicates that they will graduate, and subjects
of engineering, ordnance, and service building construction drawing are
assigned in accordance therewith. The course concludes with a short
series of lectures on the art and architecture of the world, and a trip
to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City, upon which a thesis
is written by each member of the class.

Text-book pamphlets:

    Framing.
    The Steam Engine.
    Notes on Building Construction.


DEPARTMENT OF MODERN LANGUAGES.


FOURTH, THIRD, SECOND, AND FIRST CLASSES.

The course in modern languages comprises instruction in the French and
Spanish languages.


THE FRENCH LANGUAGE.


FOURTH AND THIRD CLASSES.

The requirements of this course are as follows:

Construction of the language; reading and writing French; dictation:
military terms; translation (written and oral) of English into French and
French into English; conversation; themes.

Instruction in the French language begins March 1 of the fourth-class
year and is completed June 4 of the third-class year. Examinations
thereon will be held at the June examination, fourth-class year, and at
the December and June examinations of the third-class year. The course
comprises about two hundred and twenty-one lessons.


THE SPANISH LANGUAGE.


SECOND AND FIRST CLASSES.

The requirements of this course are as follows:

Construction of the language; reading and writing Spanish; dictation;
translation (written and oral) of English into Spanish and Spanish into
English; oral recitations and conversation; themes.

Instruction in the Spanish language begins March 1 of the second-class
year and is completed June 4 of the first-class year. Examinations
thereon will be held at the June examination, second-class year, and at
the December and June examinations of the first-class year. The course
comprises about one hundred and eighty-three lessons.

The present text-books are:


FOURTH CLASS.

French:

    French Pronunciation. De Peiffer.
    Treatise on the Conjugation of French Verbs. Castarède.
    Elementary French. Aldrich and Foster.
    La Langue Française. Première Partie. Bercy.
    Le Petit Parisien. Kron.


THIRD CLASS.

French:

    Martin’s French Verbs.
    Elementary French. Aldrich and Foster.
    Introductory French Composition, Francois. Guerlac’s Standard French
      Authors.
    Advanced French Prose Composition, Francois. Potter’s Dix Contes
      Modernes.
    French Verbs and Prepositions, Idioms, Letters. Cameron’s Tales of
      France.
    Marchand’s French Idioms. Revue Militaire des Armées Étrangères.
    Labiche and Martin’s Voyage de M. Perrichon. Courrier des Etats-Unis
      (Sunday edition).
    Le Petit Parisien. Kron.


SECOND AND FIRST CLASSES.

Spanish:

    Spanish Verb and Spanish Pronunciation. Traub.
    Spanish Grammar. Monsanto and Languellier.
    Spanish Grammar. Garner.
    El Castellano Actual. Román y Salamero.
    Las Novedades.
    First Spanish Book. Worman.
    Elementary Spanish Reader. Ramsey.


BOOKS OF REFERENCE.

French:

    French Pronouncing Dictionary. Spiers and Surenne.
    Military Technical Dictionary. Willcox.

Spanish:

    New Spanish-English and English-Spanish Dictionary, by Cuyás. Appleton.


DEPARTMENT OF LAW.


FIRST CLASS.

The course in law covers the following subjects:

    1. The elements of law.
    2. Constitutional law.
    3. International law.
    4. Military law.

To illustrate principles in the text-books cadets are required to recite
on numerous cases from reports. Lectures are also given upon the subjects
taught, so far as the limits of time allotted to this course permit.


TEXT BOOKS.

    The Elements of Law. Davis, G. B.
    Constitutional Law. Davis, E. G.
    International Law. Davis, G. B.
    Military Law. Dudley.


BOOKS OF REFERENCE.

There is a reference library in the department of about 2,500 volumes,
accessible to the cadets.


DEPARTMENT OF PRACTICAL MILITARY ENGINEERING.


FOURTH, THIRD, SECOND AND FIRST CLASSES.

Cadets of the fourth class receive an elementary course in theoretical
surveying during the month of February.

During the summer encampment, cadets of the third class receive practical
instruction in the use and adjustment of surveying instruments and in
surveying methods. In this course they apply in the field what has
been taught them in their theoretical course of the preceding spring.
The course includes tie line surveys, made by use of the tape or chain
alone, surveys made with the compass and with the transit, and running
differential level circuits.

Cadets of the second class receive, during the fall drill season,
instruction in visual signaling, using the flag and the heliograph for
sending and receiving messages. They are also taught to set up and adjust
the heliograph and the acetylene lantern. During the spring period, this
class is instructed in the field methods of electrical communication, and
is given practice in establishing and using buzzer lines under, as nearly
as possible, service conditions. The course also comprises setting up and
operating field wireless telegraph outfits.

During the summer encampment, cadets of the first class are instructed in
building pile, trestle, and pontoon bridges, in improvising methods of
crossing streams, in making road sketches, both mounted and dismounted,
and in combined position sketching. During the fall course, this class
is given instruction in the construction and operation of appliances
used in field engineering, in the erection of spar and trestle bridges,
and in the use of explosives in military demolitions. The spring course
is devoted to field fortification work, including the construction of
trenches, revetments, obstacles, bomb proofs, and gun pits; posting and
distribution of working parties in the construction of saps, trenches,
parallels, and approaches; and tracing and profiling siege works.


TEXT BOOK.

    Theory and Practice of Surveying. Johnson.


BOOKS OF REFERENCE.

    The Engineer Field Manual.
    Survey Manual. Pence and Ketchum.


DEPARTMENT OF ORDNANCE AND GUNNERY.


FIRST CLASS.

The subject of ordnance and gunnery is studied by the cadets of the first
class throughout the academic year.

The course of instruction covers the principles involved in the
construction and use of war material. It is broadly divided into
three parts: the theoretical, the descriptive, and the practical. The
theoretical part includes the study of the action of explosives, the
study of interior and exterior ballistics, the theories of gun and
carriage construction, and the principles of gunnery. The theoretical
part of the course is not the same for all cadets, those showing the
necessary proficiency taking a special course of 21 lessons in the time
devoted by the remainder of the class to review work.

The descriptive part of the course covers the processes of manufacture
of powders, guns, projectiles and armor; and describes the small arms,
cannon, machine and rapid-fire guns in use in the United States service,
with the carriages, ammunition and accessory appliances required for
their service. The department is well supplied with models, which are
used in conjunction with the text.

The practical part of the course covers work with ballistic instruments,
and the operation of machines and appliances used in the fabrication of
modern ordnance, the latter work being in effect a short but valuable
course in manual training.

In connection with the course, visits are made to Watervliet Arsenal,
where the processes of gun construction are observed, and to the Ordnance
Proving Ground at Sandy Hook, where actual firings from the several
classes of guns are observed, including usually one or more shots against
armor, and where the latest developments in war material are seen.


TEXT BOOKS.

    Ordnance and Gunnery. Lissak.
    Exterior Ballistics. O’Hern.
    Stresses in Wire-Wrapped Guns and in Gun Carriages. Ruggles.


BOOKS OF REFERENCE.

    Ballistic Tables. Ingalls.
    Mathematical Tables. Newcomb.
    Publications of Ordnance Department. U. S. Army.


DEPARTMENT OF MILITARY HYGIENE.


SECOND CLASS.

The course in military hygiene for the second class begins on or about
the 15th of April and continues into June. It consists of 6 lectures and
13 recitations for each half of the class, given on alternate days and
ending by a written examination on the subjects treated.

The course covers the essential points in military hygiene, particular
attention being paid to the following:

Personal hygiene with special reference to the soldier and his
environment: the hygiene and sanitation of military commands in garrison
and in the field; and the causes and prevention of infectious diseases
and control of epidemics. Also the nature of alcoholic drinks and
narcotics, and special instruction as to their effects upon the human
system.

During the summer camp, 5 lectures with exercises are given to the first
class on the use of the first aid packet and the treatment of medical and
surgical emergencies. While on the practice march, at the end of each
day, the medical officer on duty with the corps discusses the advantages
and disadvantages of the camp site from the view point of the military
sanitarian and also camp cooking, the water supply, and various other
matters pertaining to camp hygiene and sanitation.


TEXT BOOKS.

    The Elements of Military Hygiene. Ashburn.
    Anatomy, Physiology and Hygiene. Tracy.


REFERENCE BOOKS.

    Military Hygiene. Harvard.
    Theory and Practice of Military Hygiene. Munson.
    Notes on Military Hygiene. Woodhull.
    Practical Hygiene. Harrington.


DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH AND HISTORY.


NEW CADETS AND FOURTH CLASS.

English: Essential principles of rhetoric; frequent practice in
various forms of written and oral composition, including personal and
official correspondence and official forms; study of selected literary
masterpieces, and of essentials in the history of English literature and
language.

History: Political, social and economic history from the end of the
Middle Ages to the present day; study of typical forms of modern national
and municipal governments; fundamental principles of civil government,
historically considered, with special reference to the United States.


TEXT BOOKS—ENGLISH.

    English Composition. Henry S. Canby and others.
    Golden Treasury, Everyman’s Library Edition. Palgrave.
    Shakespeare’s Works.
    Tennyson’s Idylls of the King.
    Selections from Addison, selections from Macaulay, selections from
      Stevenson, and Carlyle’s Heroes and Hero-Worship.


TEXT-BOOKS—HISTORY.

    A Political History of Modern Europe. F. Schwill.
    The Development of Modern Europe. J. H. Robinson and C. A. Beard.
    Readings in Modern European History, Vol. II. Robinson and Beard.
    The Development of the State. Dealey.


THE LIBRARY.

Cadets and officers have free access to the library, which comprises some
80,000 books, maps and manuscripts. The collection contains substantially
all standard books on the subjects taught in the Academy and is
especially complete in military subjects. Its card catalogues (about
272,000 cards) are arranged with the special object of saving the time of
the cadets. The library is open on week-days from 8 A. M. to 9:30 P. M.;
on Sundays and holidays from 2 to 6 P. M.

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF NEW RIDING HALL]




FOOTNOTES


[1] See Appendix.

[2] This is to be presented to the Adjutant of the Military Academy on
arrival of the appointee, i. e., the candidate, at West Point.

[3] See Appendix for the circular now used.

[4] This is to be filled out and mailed to the Secretary of War soon
after its receipt by the candidate.

[5] See Appendix for the kind used now.

[6] Then the west end of the present Library Building. A fine stone
Administration Building was later built just south of the old Chapel,
but it is to be torn down and a very fine and large new Administration
Building has been put up still further south.

[7] See page 62, Note 1.

[8] Now there is water on the first floor of each division.

[9] See page 62, Note 2.

[10] The sink was a low building east of the old guard house, now there
are water closets and bath tubs in the basement of each division.

[11] Now there is a trunk room in the basement of each division.

[12] The plebe instructors, or drill masters, are now first-class men.

[13] See page 62, Note 3.

[14] In full uniform.

[15] Then some distance west of Siege Battery and north of the turn in
Professors’ Row.

[16] See Appendix.

[17] Now the east end of the grassed plain. The new artillery and cavalry
plain adjoins the village of Highland Falls.

[18] See page 62, Note 4.

[19] Cadets are court-martialed for serious offenses only.

[20] See Appendix.

[21] Filled up long ago.

[22] See page 70, Note 1.

[23] See page 81, Note 1.

[24] The cadets now have a fine rifle range.

[25] Rushing into camp was prohibited long ago.

[26] See page 70, Note 1.

[27] Now mounted after dress parade.

[28] See Appendix.

[29] See Appendix.

[30] Then taught in the north ground floor room of the old Academic
Building. This room was also used to practice dancing in and for band
concerts on winter evenings.

[31] See page 122, Note 1.

[32] See page 122, Note 2.

[33] See page 122, Note 3.

[34] See page 122, Note 4.

[35] They now say “Cadet” instead of “Mister.”

[36] See page 122, Note 5.

[37] Now in the new Administration Building.

[38] Kinsley’s farm is now a part of the post.

[39] See Appendix and also page 122, Note 1.

[40] Curtains are now allowed.

[41] They now come at any time of the year.

[42] See page 122, Note 1, and for candidates see Appendix.

[43] Now part of the post—a gift from Mrs. Russell Sage and Mrs. Anna B.
Warner.

[44] Then just east of Seacoast Battery.

[45] See Appendix.

[46] Soon to be torn down to give way to a giant new one now partly built.

[47] Then a part of the ground floor room of the old Academic Building.

[48] Then in the south end of the Mess Hall. Mr. Bratt, then caterer of
the Cadet Mess, lived in the north end.

[49] From songs by the Class of 1897.

[50] Now called Drill Regulations.

[51] See Appendix.

[52] Chevrons are made of gold lace ⅜ inch wide; sewed on dark blue cloth
with ⅜ inch intervals between the bars.

[53] Worn above the elbows, points up.

[54] Worn above the elbow, points up.

[55] Worn below the elbows, points up.

[56] A life membership costs only ten dollars. Address Secretary of the
Association of Graduates, West Point, N. Y.

[57] The new Chapel and Chaplain’s quarters on the hill near old Fort
Putnam are now in one large beautiful building that was dedicated in
June, 1910. Graduates have contributed for a handsome memorial window and
Professor Weir’s grand painting, now in the old Chapel, will be put over
this window in the new Chapel.

[58] Cullum Memorial Hall is now used for hops.

[59] In the old Academic Building.

[60] See page 202, Note 1.

[61] In conformity with the provisions of this section, the Chief of
Staff is now, by direction of the Secretary, charged with the supervision
of matters in the War Department pertaining to the Academy.

[62] Four of the class of 1880 accepted this offer, and, as there were
not then vacancies enough for the balance, some were first appointed
brevet second lieutenants, and as vacancies occurred they were
commissioned second lieutenants.

[63] The army is supplied with second lieutenants from four sources,
viz.: First, the Military Academy; second, graduates from other military
schools; third, from meritorious enlisted men, and fourth, from civil
life.

[64] The Act of 1910 increased this number 25% for six years. The total
number of graduates from 1802 to August 31, 1910, is 4,935.

[65] Alternates have been appointed since 1877.

[66] See Appendix.

[67] The Board before which a candidate is directed to appear will be,
without exception, the one convened at the nearest or most convenient to
his home, or to the school at which he is in regular attendance at the
time of appointment.

[68] On December 8, 1910, the Adjutant General of the Army wrote to the
author saying “that while it has been decided to admit the next class of
cadets into the Military Academy on the 14th day of June instead of on
the 1st day of March, no change has been made in the date and places of
examination of cadet candidates.”



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CADET LIFE AT WEST POINT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


