The Project Gutenberg eBook of Essays, or discourses, vol. 3 (of 4)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Essays, or discourses, vol. 3 (of 4)
        Selected from the works of Feyjoo, and translated from the Spanish

Author: Benito Jerónimo Feijoo

Translator: John Brett

Release date: June 5, 2025 [eBook #76228]

Language: English

Original publication: London: H. Payne, 1780

Credits: Josep Cols Canals and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESSAYS, OR DISCOURSES, VOL. 3 (OF 4) ***





                                 ESSAYS,
                                    OR
                               DISCOURSES,

                              SELECTED FROM
                           THE WORKS OF FEYJOO,
                                   AND
                       TRANSLATED FROM THE SPANISH,
                                    BY
                             JOHN BRETT, ESQ.

                            VOLUME THE THIRD.

                                 LONDON,
                       Printed for the TRANSLATOR:

              Sold by H. PAYNE, Pall-Mall; C. DILLY, in the
                  Poultry; and T. EVANS, in the Strand.

                                MDCCLXXX.




REFLEXIONS UPON HISTORY.


SECT. I.

I. There is the same common error prevalent among the vulgar, with
respect to History, that there is with regard to Jurisprudence. I mean,
that they suppose the attainment of those two faculties depends solely
upon application and memory. It is commonly thought, that a man is made
a great lawyer, by treasuring up in his remembrance great numbers of law
texts and maxims; and a great historian, by reading and retaining many
historical relations. I won’t dispute, if we speak only of men learned
in conversation, and historians for table talk, that any thing more is
necessary. But to become a historian of the pen, good Lord! nothing
less than the pens of the Phœnix are equal to the undertaking. The most
prudent and learned bishop of Cambray, in his letter on this subject to
the French Academy, said very justly, _that an excellent historian is
perhaps more rare than a great poet_.

II. In fact, the critics have not been so difficult to please on the
part of poetry as on the part of history; for, with the exception of one
or two exquisitely nice ones, they all agree, that Homer, Virgil, and
Horace, were most excellent poets, and in whom there could be found no
striking defect; and they would not have scrupled to concede the same
honour to Ovid, Catullus, and Propertius, if the lascivious impurity of
their expressions had not tarnished the lustre of their verses. But how
difficult and severe have they shewn themselves with the historians,
even when they have criticised the works of the most eminent of them!
The same prelate we have just quoted, observes a want of unity and order
in Herodotus, and thinks Xenophon more of a novelist than a historian;
and it is a general received opinion, that in his history of Cyrus he
did not so much attend to relating the true actions of that prince, as
to painting his own idea of a perfect king. He admits, that Polybius
reasons admirably on political and military matters; but observes, that
he reasons too much. He celebrates the fine harangues of Thucydides and
Titus Livius, but objects to their being too numerous, and seeming more
like the works of their own invention, than the speeches of those, in
whose mouths they put them. He blames Sallust, for having in two very
short histories entered into too large a description of persons and
customs. He censures Tacitus for an affected brevity, and for having had
the audacity to pretend to discern and point out the political springs
and causes of all kinds of events; which is also a defect he reprehends
in Henricus Catherinus.

III. In these same great historians, other critics find out other faults.
Plutarch observes, that Herodotus is inviduous and spiteful against
Greece. It is a general opinion, that he mixed many fables with his
history, which he carried to such a length, that there have been some,
who, instead of bestowing on him the magnificent epithet of the Father of
History, have called him the inventor of fable. Dionysius Halicarnassus
denies the language of Xenophon to be splendid or majestic, adding, that
whenever he attempts to elevate his stile, he instantly falls off, and
shews himself unable to support it. Vossius remarks, that the stile of
Polybius is inaccurate; and Father Rapin, that he frequently interrupts
the thread of his narration with moral reflections. The same Vossius
arraigns the stile of Thucydides, as harsh and full of hyperboles.
Erasmus points out some contradictions in Titus Livius; and Asinius
Pollio remarks some Patavinian or provincial expressions in his Latin.
Many, and with great reason, blame him as a multiplier of prodigies.
Aulus Gellius called Sallust _a coiner of words_[1]; and the illustrious
Cæno blames him for suffering himself to be warped by his prejudices
and dislikes, and for having concealed many of the glorious actions of
Cicero, because he was upon ill terms with him. Charles Sigonius thinks
the language of Tacitus was trite; and father Causinus says the same
thing in other words; father Bayle also detects Henricus Catherinus, in
giving certain relations that were contrary to truth.

IV. Who, upon the sight of all this, would, without a trembling hand,
take up the pen to write a history? Who, upon seeing all these celebrated
historians so arraigned, could think himself qualified to escape censure?


SECT. II.

V. But what happened to Quintus Curtius is more extraordinary than any
thing we have hitherto mentioned. This author’s history of Alexander
made its first appearance about three centuries ago; the manuscript
having been found in the library of Saint Victor. It is not yet known
with any certainty who Quintus Curtius was, nor in what time he lived.
Some believe he was contemporary with Augustus, others with Claudius,
others with Vespasian, and others with Trajan; according as his stile
appears to them to approach nearer to, or differ more from, the antient
purity of the Latin idiom; and there are not wanting those, who think
that such a man as Quintus Curtius never existed, and that this was a
fictitious name, under which some modern author had concealed himself,
in hopes that his history would be better received by annexing to it a
name resembling that of an antient writer; and some again have attributed
this work to Petrarch. One of the strongest foundations on which they
build this conjecture, is, that you cannot find Quintus Curtius quoted by
any author, who has wrote within the fourteen hundred years immediately
posterior to the reign of Augustus. Notwithstanding this, the purity of
the stile has such weight with others, as to make them judge that it is
full that time since any one could write so pure Latin as is contained
in the language of that book; and therefore they suppose the author of
this history was contemporary with some of the first Cæsars. But be this
as it may, the history, which goes under the title of Quintus Curtius,
continued to be universally applauded for the space of three centuries;
when at length a modern critic set himself to scrutinize and examine it
attentively, and found it to be full of substantial defects.

VI. This was the famous John Le Clerc, who weaves into the end of his
second volume on the Art of Criticism, a long examination of Quintus
Curtius, and arraigns and charges him, proving the accusation at the
same time, with having been deficient in the following requisites:
that he was very ignorant of astronomy and geography: that, for the
sake of accumulating in his history many marvellous relations, he
wrote many fables: that he described some things ill, and fell into
manifest contradictions: that he inserted useless accounts, and omitted
necessary ones: that, in order to display his eloquence, he incurred the
impropriety of putting excellent harangues into the mouths of men, who
had but little pretensions to oratory: that he gave Greek names to the
most remote rivers of Asia: that he omitted the circumstance of dates
or time in his relations of events: that he had chosen a stile which
was better suited to a declaimer or an orator than an historian: that,
finally, he had been more the panegyrist than the historian of Alexander,
and had celebrated his damnable ambition, as if it had been an heroic
virtue.

VII. Truly, these are many and grave defects, to be imputed to a man
of the supreme credit of Curtius, and would even be thought such, if
they were charged on a writer of the middle class. But all that we can
infer from hence is, that either the critics have been very severe in
their censure, or else, that the task of writing a history free from
defects is an exceeding arduous one. But it appearing to me, that the
accusation of Le Clerc is well supported, and just in every part of it, I
am inclined to think, that the most elevated genius who applies himself
to the occupation of an historian, can never be secure from falling into
considerable defects; and to confirm this sentiment, I have quoted the
example of Quintus Curtius.


SECT. III.

VIII. I believe, that it fares with the most excellent writings, as it
happens to the greatest men, that they appear much less upon nearer and
more frequent intercourse with them. There is no entity in nature totally
perfect; but at first sight, or at certain distances, and in certain
points of view, the splendor of excellencies conceal some defects, which,
by approaching nearer to the objects, and upon closer examination, are
discovered.

IX. It is also certain, that elevated geniuses are more exposed and
liable to some particular defects than middling ones. The first, carried
away either by the vivacity of their imaginations, or the force and
impetuosity of their spirit, are addicted not to attend to some of
those requisites and regulations which people of inferior capacities
scrupulously observe; and, for that reason, these last are much more
likely to compile a work that is strictly conformable to rule, than the
others; for, as they never attempt to rise to any considerable height,
their fall cannot be great. They always pursue an humble path, never
lose sight of the precepts, and are content to move on, controlled by,
and in subjection to, the rules. The others, suffering themselves to be
transported by a generous flight to a greater degree of altitude, are apt
not to discern things below, they being at a considerable distance from
them. The departing sometimes from rules, in order to pursue a course
superior to ordinary precepts, has this effect, that it makes a work
appear with a better grace.

X. But this is not the predicament in which we at present find ourselves,
either with respect to the defects of Quintus Curtius, or with regard to
the dangers of writing history. I should esteem as a phœnix, not only
him who could steer clear of every kind of fault, for this appears to me
next to impossible, but the person who should avoid falling into one or
other of the most remarkable ones; and he, who adverts with attention to
the multitude of difficulties which present themselves in the course of
writing a history, will not hesitate to be of my opinion.


SECT. IV.

XI. Let us begin with the stile, which at first sight seems the most
easy part of all: how difficult and arduous is it, to hit upon that
precise medium which is suitable to, and required for history? It should
neither be vulgar nor poetic, although if a writer will content himself
with only avoiding those two extremes, he may without much difficulty
hit upon one, (especially if he is of the numerous set which nature has
limited, and does not permit to go beyond a middling stile) that neither
borders on the vulgar, nor is tinged with the poetic, and is equally
distant from the croaking of the raven, and the chant of the swan. But
by being contented with this, the narrative would be left without grace,
and the history without attraction. This medium is not reprehensible,
but it is insipid. Some of those who undertake to write histories are
incapable of arriving so far as this degree of excellence; and they are
very few, who can go beyond it. These few have many dangerous rocks
and shoals in their way; and it is extremely difficult now and then to
avoid striking upon one or other of them. Affectation is the most common
fault that is incurred, and also the worst; for a barbarous expression
is less disgusting to me than an affected one; as a clown cloathed in
his ordinary habit, set off with rustic trappings, is less unpleasing
in my eye, than a person finely dressed in a gay suit, bedecked with
jewels, which are ill chosen, and aukwardly disposed. The first dresses
himself humbly and in character; the second is adorned fantastically and
ridiculously. All in the stile, which is not natural, is contemptible;
and although a natural colour gives beauty to the face; whenever
we perceive it is imitated with artificial ingredients, it appears
disgusting to us.

XII. To the danger of running into an affected stile, there is annexed
another, which is, the hazard of that appearing affectation to the
reader, which is not so. Some judge so grossly in this matter, as to
think, that whatever does not appear natural to them, seems unnatural to
every body else. Sometimes envy excites an illiberal censurer to call a
stile affected, when he does not think it so; and occasions him, like an
ill-tempered woman, who has a bad skin, to exclaim that all those who
have better complexions have created them by means of artificial paints
and washes. But, after all, the hazards that an author is exposed to from
the quarter of ignorance, and the envy of readers, are unavoidable; and,
if he was to be discouraged by this, there are none but ignorant and dull
writers who would venture to take pen in hand. Let him who deserves some
applause content himself with having deserved it; and make himself happy
with this reflection, that there will not be wanting those who will do
justice to his merit. Nor should he attempt any punishment of an envious
man, but leave the execution of that business to himself; for nobody
could impose on him a more cruel one than that which is inflicted by his
own furious rancour, that is incessantly gnawing his heart.


SECT. V.

XIII. The second danger of a lofty stile is, that the pen, instead of
taking a flight to the top of Olympus, may wing its course to that of
Parnassus; I mean, that, instead of arriving at the degree of sublimity
which is proper for history, it may soar to that which is adapted to
poetry. Every species of undertaking has its correspondent language; but
I do not assent to the distribution which is commonly made of different
stiles to different undertakings, and which assigns to history the medium
between the sublime and the humble. There is a sublimity requisite for
history, although it is different from that which is required for poetry;
and also from that which is necessary in oratory. Who entertains a doubt
of the stile of Livy, of Sallust, and of Tacitus, being sublime? But they
are all three very different, not only from that of Virgil, of Claudian,
and the other heroic poets, but even very different from each other.
They are much mistaken, who confine sublimity of stile to an indivisible
and fixed point. Elocution has many different graces and ornaments, and
the pen may be elevated by various ways. I do not think it so difficult
to hit upon the sublime which is proper for oratory and poetry, as it
is upon that which is suited to history; because, in the two first, the
frequency of tropes and figures give of themselves a magnificence to the
stile; in the last, all the elevation must consist in the liveliness of
the expressions, the natural energy of the phrases, the depth of the
conceptions, and the keenness of the sentences; nor must they presume
to take the liberties which are practised by the orators and poets;
because hyperbole is apt to disfigure the truth, and because integrity
and judgement suit but ill with the raptures of imagination; and because
also elevations of the pen make it in some measure difficult for ignorant
people to comprehend the relation. That tedious, hyperbolic, and pompous
description, which Claudian gives of the avarice of Rufinus, does not
appear so admirable to me as the short, energic, lively, and natural
phrases, with which Tacitus characterizes in its full extent the misery
and meaness of Galba: _Pecuniæ alienæ non cupidus, suæ parcus, publicæ
avarus._ Nor does the elegant colouring, with which Ovid has painted the
triumphs of vice in the iron age, appear to me equal to the profundity
of that sentence, with which Livy laments the compleat and ultimate
corruption of the Roman people: _Ad hæc tempora perventum est, quibus nec
vitia nostra possumus pati, nec remedia._


SECT. VI.

XIV. The last danger of elevation of stile consists in the difficulty of
supporting it. But it appears to me, that the censure which is commonly
passed in this respect is unjust. I have known many, who have been very
scrupulous in examining whether the stile was equal, and have been very
liberal in the praises of those who preserved this quality, and very free
of their abuse of those who have been deficient in it. They are very
exact in noting, whether an author falls, or rises it; when they ought
rather to attend to the thing the pen is describing. It would be very
wonderful if he should fall, who is always creeping close to the ground;
and, indeed, whence can he fall from, if he is never elevated? It should
be considered, on the other hand, that descending and falling are two
very different things. He who takes a flight is not obliged to pursue
his course at the same height or on the same level to which he rose; for
he may descend at his pleasure, as even the eagles do the same. And of
what consequence is his descending a little, since he always continues
much superior to him who never rises off the ground? The very caution of
those, who are so careful about not falling, proves, that they never will
attempt rising to any dangerous height, for this scrupulous vigilance is
not natural to sublime spirits, as they are apt to mount on the wings of
the wind, and leave to imagination the route they shall pursue. They do
not strive to support themselves at the point of altitude to which they
rose, as the appearance of such an endeavour would give a distasteful air
to the stile; for a becoming negligence is less disgusting than a forced
elevation. It ought also to be considered, that the same happy manner of
expressing himself does not occur to a man at all times alike; and what
is he to do in such a case? give a loose to the pen, till it happens to
fall upon phrases equally energic, and delicate with the antecedent?
What labour can be supposed more ridiculous than that of an author, who
with an instrument in his hand is always taking the height to which he
has raised his stile above the humble level, for the purpose of avoiding
suffering it to descend below that fixed point of altitude? I therefore
think the neglecting to do this is not a defect in a writer, but rather
argues that he is mistaken who censures him for the omission. But the
want of judgment or candour in him who criticises, is always dangerous
to him who writes.

XV. Besides this, the difference of objects produces of itself, and
makes necessary, such an inequality as we have just hinted. There are
some which naturally inflame the idea, and hurry on, or give a spring
to the pen. There are others, which do not agitate the imagination, and
should be described in plain words expressive of sound judgment. Some
require majestic language, and there are others in which it would appear
ridiculous. In my opinion, he would be guilty of the greatest abuse of
stile, who did not attend more to nature than the rules of art.

XVI. I am well aware, that the essential part of history does not consist
in the excellence of stile; but that this is an accidental quality, which
adorns and makes it more useful. Many read it when they find the stile
engaging, who would not read it, if it wanted that requisite. The matter
also makes a better impression on the mind, as the memory retains better
what is read with delight, in the same manner that the stomach does what
is eat with an appetite. An infinite number of people are acquainted with
the history of the conquest of Mexico, who would have remained totally
ignorant of the circumstances of it, if they had not been written by the
sublime and delicate pen of Don Antonio de Solis. Finally, Lucian lays
down excellent rules for writing history; and, in a little treatise he
compiled on purpose, prescribes that the stile should be clear, and so
far elevated as to approach nearly to the loftiness of speech made use of
in poetry.


SECT. VII.

XVII. But let us have done with the stile, and relieve the historian
from his care on this head; but when he is freed from this anxiety,
how many shoals and dangers will still remain for him to encounter in
his navigation of this sea? What strength of judgment does it require
to separate the useful from the frivolous? If he relates every minute
particular, he will fatigue the eyes and memories of his readers with
superfluities. If he selects, he will run the hazard of rejecting with
the superfluous part of the important; and prolixity, and excessive
curtailing, are two extremes which he should equally avoid. If he leans
to the first of these two sides, he will be censured as tiresome; if to
the last, for having left the narrative confused; and but few men are
capable of fixing on the just medium. Digressions are an ornament to
history, and a relief to the reader; but, if they are too frequent, very
long, impertinent, or injudiciously introduced, they convert the ornament
into a deformity. It is a nice matter, and requires great penetration and
judgment, to avoid inserting too much, or leaving out something material;
and it is more difficult for an historian to hit upon a right method
of proceeding, than any other author. If he is very attentive about
preserving the series of dates and time, he will be apt to interrupt
the thread of his relation; and, if he endeavours to keep his narration
of these things connected, he will be liable to lose the æras and dates
when they happened. It is a most arduous and difficult task to weave the
threads of history and chronology together in such a manner, as that
neither of them shall interrupt or obscure each other. Sometimes it also
happens, that events croud in upon, and embarras one another, because
it may fall out, that when you come to the middle of a narration, which
till then had gone on smooth and uninterrupted, you find it necessary
to postpone the remainder, and insert some other distinct account, the
circumstances of which happened posterior to the beginning, and prior to
the end, of the first relation. The worst is, that it is not possible
to give rules for surmounting these difficulties; for this is a matter
which must be left intirely to the perspicuity and discretion of the
writer. On these depend the choice where to place things, and the manner
of inserting them. If genius is wanting to effect this, the author must
have recourse to the method fallen upon by many others of these times,
which is composing a history after the manner of a news paper, where all
the relations are promiscuously thrown together, in the same way that
ingredients are mixed for making minced pyes.

XVIII. _For the purpose of preserving nice order in a history_ (says the
before-quoted Archbishop of Cambray), _it would be necessary that the
writer, before he takes pen in hand, should have the whole scope of the
undertaking collected together in his imagination; that he should be able
to discern the whole extension of it at a glance; and that he should
turn it over and over in his mind, till he can fix on the just point of
view in which to exhibit it. All this, to the end that he may preserve
its unity, and derive, as from one source only, all the principal events
of which it is composed._ And a little lower he says: _A historian of
genius, out of twenty stations, will chuse the most opportune wherein
to introduce a fact, so that by being placed in that situation, it will
throw a light upon many others. Sometimes, by anticipating the relation
of an event, you will facilitate the understanding of others, which
preceded it in point of date; and at other times, another will appear to
better advantage, by the account of it being postponed._ This is all very
well observed, and all tends to shew the great difficulties there are in
writing a history with propriety.


SECT. VIII.

XIX. But the most arduous part lies in ascertaining what is of the
most importance of all, which is the truth. A great modern critic
said, very justly, that it is very frequent for historical truth to
be as impenetrable as philosophical. The last lies hid in the well of
Democritus; the first is either buried in the sepulchre of oblivion, is
obscured by the clouds of doubt, or has retired behind the shoulders of
fable. I believe we may apply to history the remark of Virgil upon fame,
for they are nearly allied, and the first, very frequently, the child of
the latter.

    _Tam facti, pravique tenax, quam nuntia veri._

XX. From hence, some have taken occasion to distrust the best attested
histories, and others have had the audacity to doubt the most certain
informations. That famous philosopher Campanela said, he doubted whether
there ever was such an emperor in the world as Charles the fifth; and
Charles Sorrel not only denied that Pharamond conquered the kingdom of
France, but also doubted his existence. In the republic of letters, they
give an account of a man who had assured Vossius, that he had wrote a
treatise, in which he had proved with invincible arguments, that all
Cæsar said in his Commentaries, relating to his wars in Gaul, was false;
for that he had incontestably demonstrated, that Cæsar never passed the
Alps. An anonymous writer, before a hundred years had elapsed after
the death of Henry the third of France, had the rashness to affirm, in
a book, intitled “la Fatilité de Saint Cloud,” that Jacob Clement did
not put that prince to death. Such monstrous instances of distrust, and
audacity, does the uncertainty of history produce.


SECT. IX.

XXI. Seneca reduces the want of truth in history, to three principles or
causes, which are credulity, negligence, and a propensity to lying in
historians: _Quidam creduli, quidam negligentes sunt: quibusdam mendacium
obrepit, quibusdam placet: illi non evitant, hi appetunt._ (lib. 7.
Natur. Quæst. cap. 16.) He omitted to point out two other principles,
which are sometimes the impossibility of coming at the truth, and at
others the want of critical judgment to discern it.

XXII. Lying historians occasion others who are not lyars to relate many
fables. It seems as if the greatest diligence of an historian, who
relates the event of remote ages, can enable him to do no more than
examine carefully the authors who lived at that time, or immediately
after it, and to give the sum of their relations faithfully. But how
often has flattery or resentment been known to warp the pens of those
very authors? The first of these faults was remarked by Tacitus, in
those writers, who related the affairs of Tiberius, Cayus, Claudius,
and Nero, in the life-time of those Cæsars; and the second, in those
who gave an account of them a short time after their deaths: _Tiberii,
Caiique, Claudii, ac Neronis, res florentibus ipsis, ob metum falsæ,
postquam occiderant, recentibus odiis compositæ sunt._ By so much the
nearer historians are to the circumstances they relate, in so much a
nearer point of view do they see the truth, and are so much the better
enabled to distinguish it; but in proportion to these opportunities of
their knowing it, are the suspicions that various affections induce them
to conceal it. Fear, hope, love, and hatred, are four strong winds which
violently agitate the pen, and will not permit the nib of it to rest or
dwell on the point of truth. We shall select two examples, out of a great
number of others, that might be produced to prove this assertion, which
are Procopius a Greek historian, and Velleius Paterculus a Roman one.
The last of these, after having given an excellent account of the things
appertaining to Rome, in the anterior ages, when he came to relate those
of his own times, fouled the page of his history with gross adulations of
Tiberius, and his favourite Sejanus; and heaped the highest eulogiums,
on the heads, of two of the most perfidious and flagitious men that were
known in that corrupt age. Procopius, in his _Secret History_, describes
the Emperor Justinian, and the Empress Theodosia, as the most abominable
prince and princess upon earth. Paterculus lived under Tiberius, and
Procopius under Justinian; and, as they were both men of rank, and filled
considerable employments, could not be ignorant of the reality of things.
But envy in one, and dependence in the other, caused them both, equally
to deviate from the truth.

XXIII. This was the reason why Mons. du Haillan, a noble French
historian, terminated his general history of France with the reign of
Charles the seventh; nor have we a trace of his pen, respecting the
monarchs who succeeded immediately after that time. But let us hear
what Mons. du Haillan says in the prologue to his history, because it
is admirably suited to the subject we are upon. He says, _although
we must admit Francis the first was a great and an excellent king,
nevertheless, because all the histories which speak of him were written
in his own time, or in that of his son Henry, the authors of them were
more lavish of their eulogiums of him than his merit deserved, or than
were consistent with the obligations they owed to truth as historians;
and that this is a vice which all those are apt to fall into who write
histories of their own times, or of the princes of whom they are the
immediate subjects_. Thus we see, those _who write the history of their
own times, are agitated by many passions which seduce them to lie
openly, either to favour or blazon their own prince and nation, or to
misrepresent and blacken their enemies_.

XXIV. The saying of Pescenius Niger, to a man who wanted to repeat to him
a panegyric which he had written in his praise, is very applicable to
this matter: “Compose,” says he, “panegyrics upon Marius, Hannibal, and
other great captains who are dead; for blazoning living emperors, from
whom you entertain hopes and expectations, or of whom you stand in fear,
favours more of banter than encomium.”


SECT. X.

XXV. What we have said of those who write the history of their own
times, may be applied equally to them who relate the affairs of their
own country. These are generally believed to be the best informed, but
at the same time their impartiality is the most suspected. So that
truth navigates the sea of history, always surrounded by the dangerous
rocks of ignorance and prejudice. With respect to many things which are
of great importance, and incumbent on an historian to relate, he may
want information; with regard to those which he takes an interest in,
and looks upon as his own, his prejudices induce him to speak against
his conviction. Polybius remarks, that Fabius, a Roman historian, and
Philenus a Carthaginian one, are so opposite in their accounts of the
Punic war, that, according to the first, all is glorious for the Romans,
and ignominious to the Carthaginians; and according to the other directly
the contrary.

XXVI. From hence arises the embarrassment, which is ever occurring in
the comparison of different histories, with respect to one and the same
fact. Who, for example, could know better what passed in the wars between
France and Spain, than the French and Spaniards themselves? But if we set
ourselves to examine the authors of the different nations, we shall find
them as opposite in their accounts of the motives which led to the facts,
as in their relation of the facts themselves. Whom should we give credit
to? Why that is not so easy to determine; but we know for certain, who
believes who. The Spaniards believe the Spanish authors, and the French
the French ones. The same passion, which causes writers to describe
things favourably to their own country, induces readers to believe what
they write.

XXVII. It is not one enemy only which militates against the truth in
national authors. I mean that it is not only love, but fear also, which
makes them depart from the line of right; for, when they are not blinded
by their own passions, they are warped and impeded by those of other
people. They well know, that a history of their own nation, written with
frankness and candour, will be but ill received by their fellow citizens;
and who has so stout a heart as to resolve upon exposing himself to the
hatred of his countrymen? Even where the attainment of eternal happiness
is the object of a man’s contemplation, we find very few martyrs to the
truth.

XXVIII. The example of our great historian Father John Mariana, will
afford but little encouragement for others to imitate him; or to speak
more properly, it will rather deter them from doing it. That Jesuit was a
great lover of the truth, and adopted it as the sole or ultimate object
of his history; but his not being partial, which is the greatest glory
of a historian, was imputed to him by many national people for ignominy;
and because he disdained to lie or flatter, they calumniate him for being
disaffected to his country. They go still further, and by accusing him
of having an affection or partiality for France, impute the motive of
their own conduct to the author; this they do with such confidence, that
I should be apt to believe them, if I did not see that he was equally
ill treated by both Frenchmen and Spaniards. It is an established fact,
that his book, intitled, de Rege & Regis institutione, was condemned by
authority, to be burnt by the hands of the common hangman, at Paris; and
for what? why because he arraigned in it the conduct of Henry the third,
king of France. Thus, in both the nations, they did injury and injustice
to Father Mariana, for having been sincere and candid. In Spain they
would have him write nothing but what was glorious to their own nation;
in France, they would not permit him to touch the hem of the garment of
king Henry. In this manner is the world continually laying stumbling
blocks, to obstruct truth in history; and those few who have been
disposed to write it, from pure motives of integrity, have always found
themselves trammelled and embarrassed by the prejudices of others.

XXIX. Not only the natural dispositions of historians to favour their own
country, but sometimes the hope of reward, or the fear of resentment,
have occasioned their being partial to foreign ones. No man was more
lavish in his applauses of the Venetians than Marcus Sabellicus, who was
not a Venetian himself. He wrote the history of Venice, more in the stile
and character of a panegyrist than a historian. This might seem strange;
but Julius Cæsar Scaliger informs us, that the gold of the republic made
him consider that country as his own. By way of contrast to this, these
same Venetians were much offended with John de Capriara, a noble Genoese
historian, for some relations he had given, which were unfavourable to
their arms; but the answer this author made to the expressions of their
resentment is worthy the imitation of all other authors in the like
cases. He replied, _the Venetians should be angry with Fortune and not
with me; for as the events of the war were unhappy for them, I could
not represent them fortunate, for the sake of making them grateful and
pleasing to their palates_.


SECT. XI.

XXX. The bias of religion is not less forcible, but has rather more
power than the national to warp truth from the line of right in
history. The impositions which some protestant historians have palmed
on the world, in order to calumniate the characters of many popes, are
shocking; their fictions of adulteries, simonies, and homicides, have
been insufficient to satisfy their envy, or satiate their resentment
against the supreme head of the church; for they have extended their
rage to charging popes, who were extremely venerable for their virtue,
with committing crimes of the blackest die. What wickedness did they not
impute to that most venerable pope, Gregory the seventh? They not only
accused him of intruding himself into the papal chair, of simony, and
of a criminal correspondence with the virtuous Countess Matilda, but
also of heresy and magic; inventing many ridiculous tales, to prove him
guilty of this last crime. It was not against the popes alone, that
they forged these monstrous extravagancies, but extended them to many of
those, who by their learning and ardent zeal had signalized themselves
in defence of the catholic religion. Father Theophilus Rainauld tells
us, there appeared a libel against the most pious and learned Cardinal
Belarmino, accusing him of having murdered many new-born infants, in
order to conceal his lewd practices from the world; adding, that, touched
afterwards with remorse, and a disposition to repent of his sins, he made
a pilgrimage to Loretto, in order to expiate them; where the priest, to
whom he confessed, struck with horror at so much wickedness, refused
to give him absolution, which occasioned him in a little while after
to die with despair. The best is, that Belarmino was alive when the
libel was published, which he read and despised. What infamous things
did Buchanan write, which even the protestants of this day believe,
against the admirable Mary Queen of Scots? I am not surprized, that the
unanimous testimony of all the catholic authors in her favour does not
convince them, because they look upon them as partial; but I am amazed
that the relation of Camden, an excellent English historian, and whom
nothing but his love of the truth could induce to vindicate her, does
not persuade them; and one would suppose, the great difference of
character and manners between Buchanan and Camden would have weight in
deciding the question. The first, a drunken, spiteful, debauched, man;
the second, continent, modest, and a lover of historical truth; and one
in whose morals you could not find the least fault; but when we see party
prejudice prevail over all the persuasions of reason, it is a strong
proof of its force.

XXXI. But, as the true religion does not exempt the professors of it from
manifesting an indiscreet zeal against its enemies, there are not a few
catholic historians who have fallen into this very vice. From hence arose
the suppositions, that Luther was born of a devil incubate; that the
false prophet Mahomed was of mean extraction; that Anna Bolene was the
daughter of Harry the eighth; that this unhappy woman, hurried away by an
unbridled lust in her tender years, and long before she became the object
of that prince’s love, committed a thousand turpitudes; with other fables
of the same kind. The worst is, that as every infamous libel against
those of an opposite religion is easily believed; it soon, from the most
improbable and scandalous satyr, comes to be translated into history. In
consequence of this, five hundred authors are afterwards cited in support
of a fable, the whole of whose authority, when the thing comes to be
examined, originates in the libel from whence the tale was derived.


SECT. XII.

XXXII. If only the interest of the prince of the state, or of religion,
attracted the pen of the historian, and caused it to deviate from the
truth; we should at least have the satisfaction to suppose, that with
respect to those facts which have no relation to the party he follows,
or the power he obeys, an historian would not wish to deceive us. But
the private or particular motives which may excite him to deception are
so numerous, that even with respect to these facts, we can seldom say
we are secure. Who can form an idea of the affections which possess the
heart of an author, whom he does not know, nor has had any intercourse
with? Who can determine to how many objects his love or hatred extend?
Even with regard to those facts which seem the most remote, either from
his affections or his interest, he may be swayed by his prejudices or his
convenience; and sometimes historians lie, when their motives for doing
it are incomprehensible, of which we will proceed to give an example.

XXXIII. Peter Mathé, a famous French historian, tells us, that one la
Brosse, a physician and mathematician at Paris, had foretold the death
of Henry the fourth, and had communicated his prediction in confidence
to the Duke de Vendome. Peter Petit, another historian, who was much
celebrated for his knowledge of human nature, assures us, that such a
prediction never existed. These two men were both contemporaries, both
resided at Paris, were both there at the death of Henry the fourth,
and both knew the physician la Brosse; but with all this, as they give
diametrically opposite testimonies, it is very clear that one or other of
them must lie. If it should be urged, that one of them might be deceived
by some sinister information, I answer, that could not be the case, for
they both quote the Duke de Vendome as their author. Peter Mathé says, he
had the thing just as he relates it from the duke himself: Peter Petit
says, he asked the Duke de Vendome if what Peter Mathé had related was
true; and that the duke replied, it was false.

XXXIV. This is a contradiction, capable of exciting many reflexions on
the uncertainty of history. If it had not happened, that an author in the
situation and circumstances of Peter Petit had contradicted Peter Mathé,
who would have ventured to question the prediction of la Brosse? In what
author could concur superior requisites to establish a fact? A historian
of reputation, who was contemporary with the event, lived in the same
city with the astrologer where the tragical death of Henry happened, and
who heard the prediction from the only witness who could possibly give
testimony to the truth of it; and this was a man of the rank and quality
of the Duke de Vendome. What further evidence could the most rigid critic
demand, to engage his assent to an historical fact? With all this, unless
we transfer the deception to Peter Petit, we are under a necessity
of declaring, that Peter Mathé advanced a falshood; for the same
circumstances equally concurred, to induce giving credit to the first as
the last of them. Thus are we reduced to a necessity of acknowledging, in
spite of all the critical aid we can call in to our assistance, that we
are unable to ascertain the truth of this relation. Nor will transferring
the deception to the Duke de Vendome, and saying, that he told one person
one thing, and another another, remove the historical difficulty; for,
as historians seldom relate events of which they were eye witnesses, and
as the most they can do, is to make use of the testimony of credible
evidences, your calling in question whether they were so or not, would,
by extending to them the danger of propagating falshoods, be adding a new
difficulty to the certainty of history; for at this rate, it would not
suffice that an historian himself is a man of veracity; but it would be
also requisite, that those from whom he had his information should be men
of veracity likewise; and sometimes the intelligence passes through so
many different channels, from the æra of the fact to its arrival at the
pen of the historian, that it seems exceedingly improbable to suppose,
that in its passage through one or other of these channels, there shall
not be something added or diminished; nor can it be insured, that it
shall not come to him totally changed and disfigured; for the same thing
happens in this case as in morality, _malum ex quocumque defectu_. If,
from one to another, a relation goes through the mouths of ten different
individuals, by its passage through the mouth of one of them, who is not
a scrupulous observer of the truth, it will be vitiated, and occasion its
appearing corrupted in the page of history. Who, upon contemplation of
this, will not be astonished at those, who believe every thing to be true
as the Gospel, which they read in an author who writes the history of his
own times?

XXXV. We may with great probability, and without any violent or strained
supposition, conclude, that the facility with which the verification of
astrological predictions has been imposed on the world, was owing solely
to their not having in their origin met with the contradiction which that
of Peter Mathé did. If the refutation of a fable does not immediately
follow its invention, there is afterwards no remedy.

XXXVI. But leaving it for the present undetermined at whose door the
deception lay, what can we suppose could be the motive of either of these
historians, to quote the Duke de Vendome falsely as his author? It might,
in Peter Mathé, be his friendship for the astrologer, whose fame he
wanted to raise as a foreteller of events: it might proceed also, from a
desire of adorning his history with a curious and pleasing anecdote. On
the part of Peter Petit, might intervene his dislike to astrologers; or
he might also deny the truth of the prediction, because it clashed with
the system of his dissertation upon comets, which is the book in which
he denies it. According to this mode of reasoning, it is easy to assign
other motives of inducement; but it is not quite so easy to hit upon the
true one.


SECT. XIII.

XXXVII. Thus, you see, we on all sides are beset with hazards. The
authors who are remote from the time when, and the places where events
happened, are very much exposed to be deceived in one or other of the
various ways, by which informations descend to them; and those who were
contemporaries with the events, and lived in the places where they
fell out, are frequently interested by a variety of circumstances and
combinations to disfigure them.

XXXVIII. We have said, that perhaps Peter Mathé, without any foundation,
and without any other motive than that of adorning his history with a
curious tale, related the prediction of la Brosse; and to a desire of
doing this, we have also imputed the cause of an infinite number of other
historical errors, for there is no other author whatever, who does not
interest himself in making his history appear pleasant and delightsome to
his readers; and there is nothing tends more to produce this effect, than
inserting in them many particulars, in which are contained something of
the curious, the exquisite, and the admirable. It may be generally said,
that there are no histories more pleasant to read, than those which
approach nearest to novels. From whence it happens, that truth is often
dispensed with, for the sake of _edulcorating_ the narrative with fiction.

XXXIX. Upon what other principle than the foregoing, can we account for
authors relating many things as the events of very remote ages, without
ever having read them in any antient author, or found any traces of
them in an antient monument? or for their having, to events which they
found related at large, in order to make the account more entertaining,
added a variety of circumstances of their own invention? I therefore
say, whenever the fiction appears grateful to the reader, and he cannot
assign any other motive for the author’s inserting it, he may reasonably
conclude, it was done with no other view, than that of making his history
more pleasing to those who read it; and how much of this, do we meet with
in numbers of authors!

XL. The account of the great battle, in which Charles Martel and the
Duke of Acquitain routed the numerous army of Saracens, that, under the
command of Abdarramen, had made an irruption into France, we find related
in a very concise and summary way by the authors of that day, and the
times which immediately followed it. Notwithstanding this, some modern
authors give so prolix and circumstantial a relation of it, that it
seems as if they themselves had been present at, and personally engaged
in it. This is an observation of Cordemoi’s, whose words I shall insert
here, because they are very remarkable. He says, _the particulars of
this battle were worthy of being recorded, and the antient authors are
exceedingly reprehensible for not having given a circumstantial account
of so memorable an action; but in the eyes of all those who are lovers
of truth, some modern authors also, whose merit in other respects is
great, are inexcusable, for having given relations of this event, which
are so minute and circumstantial, that one might be led to think they had
assisted at all the councils of war preceding it, and had seen all the
motions of the two armies; for they not only describe how the French and
Saracens were armed, but how they disposed and arranged their troops;
give us the harangues of the chiefs on each side; tell us the stratagems
which Abdarramen made use of, and the measures Charles Martel took to
frustrate them; and finally, they proceed to describe the particular
positions in which the dead bodies lay on the field, the groans and
lamentations of the dying, together with all the circumstances of the
congratulations which passed between the French chiefs after the battle_.
The moderns which Cordemoi censures in this place, are Paulus Emilius,
and Fauchet, for he points them out in the margin.

XLI. There is nothing more doubtful, than the motives which induced
Constantine to put to death his wife the empress Fausta, and his son
Crispin whom he had by the concubine Helen. Authors disagree so much
respecting this point, that they represent the circumstances of this
double tragedy in more than twenty different ways; one of which is,
that Fausta, being in love with Crispin, solicited him to a criminal
intercourse with her; but that, finding him firm in refusing to comply
with her desires, she, irritated with the refusal, transferred her own
crime to Crispin, and accused him to Constantine of having made lewd
advances to her, for which Constantine caused him to be put to death;
and that coming afterwards to the true knowledge of the fact, he ordered
her to be put to death also. This is the way Simeon Metaphraste relates
the case, who is not one of the most exact authors, and of whom cardinal
Belarmine said, that he was addicted to write things, not as they
were, but as they ought to be. Father Causinus, in the second volume
of his work, intitled _la Corte Santa_, not only adopts the relation
of Metaphraste as true, but paraphrases it according to his own fancy,
decorating the tragedy with all the circumstances which he thought
would suit well with, and were applicable to an event of this nature.
He paints the beauty of Crispin, describes the origin and progress of
the love of Fausta, the manner in which she disclosed it to him; her
mortification at finding her offers rejected, and the artifice she made
use of to be revenged; and adds at last, what had never been suggested by
Metaphraste, nor any other writer, that, stung with piercing remorse and
grief upon hearing of the death of Crispin, she became her own accuser
to Constantine, and declared her criminality, and the innocence of the
unhappy youth.

XLII. I should be sorry if what I have just now said, should induce in my
readers, a disesteem for two such respectable writers, as Paulus Emilius,
and father Nicholas Causinus. I know the great merit of both the one
and the other of them, and I venerate more in the second, the candour
of his mind, and the integrity of his heart, than his great wisdom and
learning. He, in a particular instance of his life, gave a striking
proof of his virtue; which was, that, in order to guide in a right
train the conscience of a monarch, who, by making him his confessor,
had confided to him the direction of his religious conduct, he had
voluntarily exposed himself to, and felt the effects of the resentment
of a furious and vindictive minister, who governed every thing. But the
greatest men, sometimes give tokens of their being no more than men;
and I have purposely noted these defects in two authors, so celebrated
as Paulus Emilius and father Causinus; in order to shew, how strong the
temptation is in a writer, to ornament his history with something of his
own invention, if authors of the especial credit of those I have just
mentioned, are now and then liable to fall into this mistake.

XLIII. Our eloquent countryman, the illustrious Guevara, has been very
much taken notice of for having used this licence, not only by foreign
authors, but those of our own nation also; which freedom he has exercised
to such a degree, that Nicholas Antonio says, he took the liberty of
ascribing to antient authors his own fictions, and sported and made as
free with all history, as a man would do with the fables of Esop, or the
fictitious tales of Lucian. His life of Marcus Aurelius, with respect to
the veracity of it, is not held in better estimation among the critics,
than the Cyrus of Xenophon. It certainly cannot be denied, that he did
not scruple to introduce circumstances of fancy and imagination into
his writings, when he thought they would contribute strikingly to the
entertainment of the reader: such for example (in order to point out the
cause or origin of the extraordinary cruelty of Caligula) as that of
attributing it to the conduct or disposition of the nurse that suckled
him, who was a masculine fierce woman, and had for some slight offence
killed another woman, whose blood she bathed her nipples with; and, while
they were wet with it, applied the lips of the infant Caligula to them.
He quotes Dion Cassius as his author for this tale, although in Dion
Cassius there is no such relation to be found.


SECT. XIV.

XLIV. We have not as yet said any thing of the fictitious chronicles,
and supposititious Histories imputed to various authors, such as
Dictys of Crete, Abdias of Babylon, the many fabricated by Annias of
Viterbo, Bervosus, Manethon, Megasthenes, and Fabius Pictor; the Cave of
Magdeburgh, cited by Ruxnerus, the Encolpio inverted by Thomas Elliot;
together with the Chronicles of Flavius Dexter, Marcus Maximus, Aubertus,
and many others, of which in Spain there has been so much talk. These
supposititious histories were the fountains, from whence were derived
innumerable errors, for before the imposture of them was discovered,
many writers, who were men of veracity, deduced accounts from them,
which they afterwards came to be named as the authors of; nor was the
circumstance of their having imbibed them at those vitiated fountains,
ever adverted to. This species of writings, may be compared to the
doblons, which they say are put into peoples hands by the Devil; they
at first have the appearance of gold, but are afterwards found to be
charcoal. How great was the transport of Wolfangus Lacy, a man in other
respects very learned, when he fancied that in a corner of Corinthia,
he had met with the manuscript of Abdias of Babylon. Great numbers of
editions of this book were published in a short space of time, it being
universally thought, that the world had found in it a most precious
treasure. It may be easily conceived, that a work of an author of such
eminence as one of the seventy-two disciples of our Lord Christ, and the
Bishop of Babylon, established by the apostles themselves, would have
been thought of inestimable value, provided it had been genuine. But the
deception was afterwards discovered, by the very context of the relation;
and Pope Paul the Fourth, condemned the book as apocryphal.


SECT. XV.

XLV. With all the principles and causes hitherto pointed out, of error
in history, co-operates that of little reading. He who reads little,
frequently mistakes the doubtful for the certain, and sometimes the false
also. Generally speaking, in all the human theoretic faculties, much
study produces an effect different from that produced by mathematical
study. In this last science, the more a man studies, the more he knows;
in the others, the more he reads, the more he doubts. In the mathematics,
the study proceeds to remove doubts; in the others, it goes on to
increase them. For instance, he who studies philosophy only under one
master, all that master says, provided he is one of those who speak
positively and decidedly, he takes for granted. If he afterwards extends
his inquiries, and has recourse to others, although they should be of
the same school, the Aristotelic for example, he will begin to entertain
doubts, which will be occasioned by the nature of their disputes among
themselves; but he will still retain a firm assent to the principles
in which they are all agreed. If he afterwards reads with reflexion,
and free from all prejudice or pre-occupation, the works of authors of
other sects, he will begin to entertain doubts of even the principles
themselves.

XLVI. The same thing happens with respect to history. He who reads a
general history of the world, a kingdom, or a century, in one author
only, takes for granted all that is advanced by that author; and when, in
any future time, it occurs to him to speak or to write on the subject, he
asserts with confidence all he has read in that author. If, afterwards,
he applies himself to read books written by other authors on the same
subject, he will begin to entertain doubts of what he read in the first,
and the further he extends his reading, the more he will increase his
doubts; it being infallible, that the new contradictions which he will
ever find in authors, must beget in his mind a succession of fresh
doubts, till at last he will perceive many relations to be either false
or doubtful, which, in the beginning, he looked upon as absolutely
certain.

XLVII. In order to give a palpable demonstration of this truth, and to
point out some of the common errors of history, which is the principal
object I always have in view; I will introduce in this place, a
catalogue of many and various events of different ages; which already
in the general run of books, and the opinion of the vulgar, pass for
indisputable, and will, at the same time, state together with them, the
reasons for placing them in a doubtful point of view, or the evidence
which convicts them of falsehood.


SECT. XVI.

_The beautiful Helen._

XLVIII. Let us begin to clear up these mistakes and contradictions, where
profane history begins. It is generally assented to, that the rape of
Helen, executed by Paris the son of Priam, and the refusal of the Trojans
to deliver her up to her husband Menelaus, was the cause of the Trojan
war. The common opinion supposes, that, after this transaction, Helen
lived in Troy with Paris during the whole time of the war.

XLIX. This fact, which is taken for granted, is not so certain as not to
admit of serious doubts respecting the truth of it. Herodotus, although
he allows of her having been carried away forcibly by Paris, denies
that she ever was in Troy. He says, that from Greece Paris carried his
beautiful prize to a port in Egypt, where king Protheus took her away
from him; and says likewise, it is true the Greeks commenced the war
against Troy, upon a supposition that Helen was confined there; and that
although the Trojans, with great positiveness and truth, denied the
fact, the Greeks could never be prevailed on to believe them; but that,
after the war was concluded, and they were convinced of their mistake,
Menelaus sailed to Egypt, and recovered his wife out of the hands of
Protheus. I know very well, that Herodotus is not reputed an historian of
the greatest veracity; but who of equal antiquity to Herodotus, favours
the common opinion? I believe none but poets; and these deserve much
less credit than Herodotus in the case of an historical event. Servius
likewise, not only denies that Helen ever was in Troy, but asserts also,
she was not the occasion of the war, for that it arose from the ill
treatment of the Trojans to Hercules, in refusing him entrance into their
city, when he went in search of his beloved Hylas.


SECT. XVII.

_Dido queen of Carthage._

L. The loves of Dido and Eneas, did not originate in the city of
Carthage, but in the poem of Virgil, into which the author introduced
the tale, with a view of ornamenting his work with this partly tragical,
and partly festive fiction. The most learned chronologers, after exact
enquiry into the matter, find, that the loss of Troy, and the voyage of
Eneas, were two, some say three hundred years prior to the founding of
Carthage by queen Dido.


SECT. XVIII.

_Penelope, the wife of Ulysses._

LI. As the beforenamed queen was so unhappy as to have imputed to her
some gross amours, which she never was guilty of; Penelope, the wife of
Ulysses, has been so fortunate as to have nobody at this time dispute her
honesty, because of late days it has been much the fashion to celebrate
it; but this was not the case formerly. Franciscus Floridus Sabinus
says, “that Homer’s representing Penelope chaste was no less a fiction,
than Virgil’s representing Dido lewd.” In opposition to the pretended
virtue of Penelope, he quotes the poet Lycrophon, and the historian
Duris of Samos: which second describes Penelope to have been a most vile
prostitute; and Thomas Dempster adds, to corroborate this, the authority
of an ancient historian, called Lysander, who says the same with Duris of
Samos.


SECT. XIX.

_The labyrinth of Crete._

LII. Pliny gives an account of four famous labyrinths, that of Egypt,
that of Crete, that of Lemnos, and that of Italy. The first was esteemed
the most compleat as well as the most ancient and magnificent. That of
Crete, although exceedingly inferior in grandeur to that of Egypt (for it
was only so diminutive an imitation of the Egyptian one, that, according
to the author before quoted, it was not a hundredth part so big), had
the lot to make more noise in the world than the eminent original. This,
without doubt, proceeded from the fanciful imaginations and loquacity
of the Greeks, who, as it was nearer their neighbourhood, talked more
of it than they did of the others; and, according to their genius and
custom, transformed the truth of some immaterial facts into portentous
fables: the amour of Pasiphaë with Taurus, for example, who according to
some was general of Minos’s army, and according to others his secretary,
they converted into a lascivious bestiality with a bull, and they
metamorphosed the first of the two sons that were the offspring of this
princess, who was begotten by the adulterer Taurus, into a monster,
which was half man and half ox, which they called a minotaur; for
whose confinement the labyrinth of Crete was destined, where, with the
threads of Ariadne, he was enjoined to weave in tapestry the adventures
of Theseus. I say, that these fictions, promulged to all the world by
the loquacity of the Greeks, made that labyrinth so famous and so much
talked of, that the name of it is familiar to people of the lowest class,
although they never mention, nor have the least idea of any other.

LIII. Notwithstanding this, it is probable, that such a labyrinth never
existed. The most learned prelate, Peter Daniel Huet, upon the faith
of some authors he quotes, whose testimony he enforces with probable
conjectures of his own, firmly denies that it ever was in being; and
says, the fiction was derived from two great winding caverns at the foot
of Mount Idas, which were made by king Minos in digging stones at that
place, wherewith to build the city of Cnoso, and other large towns. He
adds, that these caverns are still remaining, and that Peter Belonius,
a famous traveller of the sixteenth century, testifies his having seen
them. What Pliny says, is not unfavourable to this opinion, who declares,
that although in his time there remained vestigies of the labyrinth of
Egypt, which was the most antient, there were not the least traces to be
found of that of Crete.


SECT. XX.

_Of Eneas, and his coming into Italy_.

LIV. The coming of Eneas into Italy, his wars, and marriages with the
daughter of king Latinus, have, besides the relation of the facts being
opposite and contradictory, some testimonies of antiquity to controvert
them. Leseches, a very ancient poet of Lesbos, is quoted, who affirms,
that Eneas was given up for a slave to Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles.
Demetrius, of Scepsis, says, that Eneas, after the destruction of Troy,
retired to the city of Scepsis, which was situated within the Trojan
dominions, and that both he and his son Ascanius reigned there. According
to Hegesippus, Eneas died in retirement at Thrace. Others relate, that
after the departure of the Greeks, he rebuilt the city of Troy, and
reigned there. These, and many other opinions respecting Eneas, may be
found in the Dictionary of Moreri.


SECT. XXI.

_Romulus._

LV. The foundation of Rome by Romulus is contested also. Jacob Hugo,
in his book entitled _Vera Historia Romana_, denies his having been
the founder of it. Jacob Gronovius, in a dissertation on the origin of
Romulus, which is quoted in the Republic of Letters, acknowledges that
he founded Rome, but says, he was a stranger, and consequently considers
as fabulous all that is said of his birth, parents, and ancestors. And
although these opinions are founded in mere conjectures, the doubt that
arises out of them is greatly fortified by the confession of Livy, who
declares the antiquities of Rome are very doubtful and obscure.


SECT. XXII.

_The cruel Busiris._

LVI. The cruelty of Busiris, king of Egypt, who is said to have put to
death all strangers that came, or rather were brought into his dominions,
has been so trumpeted by the voice of fame, as to become a proverb.
Apolodorus was the first broacher of the rumour of this barbarity;
and the poets, whose votes in establishing the truth of events are of
little weight, have concurred with him in propagating it. Diodorus
Siculus condemns this story for fabulous, and declares the origin of
it sprung from a barbarous custom which was practised in that country,
of sacrificing to the manes of Osiris all the fair-haired people that
came in their way; and, as almost all the Egyptians had black-hair,
the lot most commonly fell upon strangers. He adds, that Busiris, in
the Egyptian language, signifies the tomb of Osiris; and the name
which was meant to express the place where the sacrifice was made, by
equivocation, was brought to signify the author of the cruelty. Strabo,
who cites Eratosthenes for his author, who was a person very famous for
his knowledge of Egyptian antiquities, and who had the care of the great
library at Alexandria in the reign of Ptolemy Evergetes, asserts, that
there never was in Egypt either king or tyrant of the name of Busiris,
and, with regard to the origin of the fable, says just as Diodorus does.


SECT. XXIII.

_The Two Artemisias._

LVII. We find the fame of Artemisia, queen of Caria, greatly celebrated
in many histories, for her tenderness, constancy, and the conjugal
affection she bore to her husband Mausoleus, for whom she erected that
magnificient sepulchre, which is esteemed one of the seven wonders of
the world; and we find her equally applauded for her prudent conduct and
martial spirit in the war which Xerxes waged against the Greeks, and for
her behaviour upon many other occasions. But in their descriptions they
blended two different Artemisias in one, who were both queens of Caria,
and are distinguished by antient writers. She, who, in their accounts
of them, they place second, was much more antient than the other; for
she was daughter of the first Lygdamis, who was the daughter of the last
Hecatombe. From hence it should be observed, that she, who gave her name
to the herb Artemisa, was not the wife of Mausoleus, whom Pliny has
mistaken her for, but the daughter of Lygdamis; because in Hippocrates,
who was anterior to the wife of Mausoleus, we find the herb called by the
name of Artemisa.


SECT. XXIV.

_Dionysius the Elder._

LVIII. Dionysius the first, of Sicily, is stigmatized for one of the
most merciless tyrants the world ever knew; insomuch that we never
hear his name mentioned without the addition of the epithet Tyrant.
Notwithstanding this, there is room to doubt whether he was deserving of
this treatment. The historian Philistus, who applauds and defends him,
is known to have wrote his history while he was in a state of banishment
from Syracuse, his own country, into which he had been sent by this very
Dionysius; which is a circumstance that ought to weigh with all those
that don’t reason like Pausanias and Plutarch, who say he flattered
Dionysius, in hopes of being recalled from his banishment. But this is
pure conjecture, and cannot alter the fact; which is, that while he
lived out of his dominions, and had cause to be dissatisfied with him,
he praised him. The case of Thucydides with Pericles was similar to
this; and no one scruples to regard as sincere the commendations which
Thucydides gives of that leader, or doubts the justness of the applause
the author bestows on his virtue at a time when he was banished from
Athens, and persecuted by that same Pericles.


SECT. XXV.

_Apelles and Campaspe._

LIX. It is told, that when Apelles was painting the picture of Campaspe,
the beautiful concubine of Alexander, naked, which he was ordered to do
by that prince; he, while he was employed in executing the task, fell
violently in love with the object of his pencil; of which Alexander being
informed, manifested a piece of generosity and liberality, which had
scarce ever been heard of before, in ceding Campaspe to be possessed by
Apelles. Thus Pliny and Ælian relate the thing; but this seems improbable
and incompatible with what Plutarch says, who tells us, that the first
woman with whom Alexander began to be incontinent, was Barsene, the
beautiful widow of Memnon; and, upon a critical examination of things,
we shall find the account of Apelles with Campaspe prior to the amour of
Alexander with Barsene.


SECT. XXVI.

_Sextus, Tarquin, and Lucretia._

LX. Whenever the adventure of Sextus the son of Tarquin, with the
beautiful Lucretia, is talked of, people generally suppose that insult
was perpetrated by means of immediate and rigorous violence; which is a
circumstance that would greatly have aggravated the crime of the invader,
and have apologized for the innocence and virtue of that generous Roman
lady. But the thing, as Titus Livius and Dionysius Halicarnassus relate
it, happened in the following manner. Sextus, in the dead of night,
came to the bed-side of Lucretia, with a drawn sword in his hand, and
after waking her intimated to her, first of all, that she should be
quiet and not make a noise, for that, upon the first shriek she gave,
he would plunge the sword into her bosom. To this intimation succeeded
intreaties; and to the intreaties promises; which he carried so far,
according to one of the before-named authors, as to assure her, that
upon her condescending, he would make her his queen. When Sextus found
that neither promises nor intreaties would avail, he proceeded to
threatenings. He told her he would instantly put her to death, if she
did not comply with his desires. This was not capable of vanquishing
the constancy of Lucretia; and finally perceiving all other stratagems
useless, the cunning youth had recourse to one of signal force and
efficacy; which was, trying to overcome honour with honour; for this,
like a diamond, resists the impression of all other entities, and can
only be wrought or penetrated by those of its own species. He intimated
to Lucretia, that, if she did not consent, he would not only murder her,
but would put to death a slave also, whose dead body he would lay by
the side of hers in her own bed; so that when day-light came, and they
should be found thus lying together, she would be exposed to the public
disgrace of having been an adultress with so vile a person. Lucretia had
not fortitude to resist this last attack, but surrendered her honour to
escape infamy; for which criminal condescension, she afterwards punished
herself with excessive rigour, by taking away her own life.


SECT. XXVII.

_The Burning Glasses of Archimedes and Proclus._

LXI. The artifice, by which we are told Archimedes burnt the Roman ships,
which, under the command of Marcellus, were employed in the siege of
Syracuse, has been plausibly represented by historians; and has exercised
the ingenuity of not a few _mathematicians_, to find out how this could
have been effected. It is said, Archimedes did it by concentrating the
rays of the sun in the focus of a large burning glass, and reflecting
them on the ships. I judge, that this narration, although so much
vulgarized in authors, is fabulous; and my reason for being of this
opinion is, that none of the antients who treat of the siege of Syracuse
relate any such circumstance; nor does there appear the least mention of
the burning-glasses of Archimedes, either in Polybius, Livy, Plutarch,
Florus, Pliny, or Valerius Maximus: and it is very remarkable, that the
three first of these authors, treat very largely and particularly of the
machinations and contrivances which Archimedes made use of to destroy
the Roman ships. How then is it credible, that they should all have been
silent about the effect of the burning-glasses, if there had been any
such things used?

The first author in whom we meet with this information is Galen; to whose
testimony, besides his not being a historian by profession, and having
wrote four hundred years after the siege of Syracuse, may be made another
objection; which is, that he does not assert the thing positively, but
only speaks of it in the general terms of its being so said.

LXII. Thus much for the fact; but, with regard to the possibility of
executing the deed, the mathematicians who have disputed on the subject
are of various opinions, some denying the possibility, and others
affirming it. All the difficulty in the execution seems to depend upon
the distance of the ships from the walls, which some suppose to have
been so great, that it was next to impossible to make a burning-glass
of such a size that the focus of it would have been capable of reaching
them. It is proper to observe here, that the distance to which the
focus or burning point may be extended, bears a certain proportion to
the diameter of the glass. Some have fancied that they had found out a
contrivance, by which the burning-glass might be made to set fire to
a thing at any given distance; but the best mathematicians consider
as chimerical, the infinite extension of the line of the focus; which
being excluded, and the supposed distance the moderns allow to have
been between the ships and the walls established, which, according to
Father Kircher, who extends it the furthest, was thirty geometrical
paces; it will hardly be found possible to have made a glass that was
large enough to set the ships on fire. To obviate this difficulty, some
have imagined they had recourse to the invention of many concave or
parabolical glasses, which reflected the rays from one to the other. But
I can’t help remarking on the mathematicians, who have treated of this
matter, a great mistake, which they have been led into with regard to the
supposed distance: for Polybius, Livy, and Plutarch, place the ships so
near the walls, that the people on board them were capable of annoying
the besieged with darts and other missive weapons tipped with iron; and
Polybius goes so far as to say, that with ladders resting on the ships,
the Romans could pass from them to the walls; and if this was the fact,
there was no necessity to have recourse to a burning-glass of so large
a size, that it was next to impossible to have made, in order to set
fire to the ships. Thus it appears to me, that we may safely deny the
fact in opposition to the generality of the historians; and affirm the
possibility, in opposition to the common opinion of the mathematicians.
_Vid. Buffon._

LXIII. It is said of a celebrated mathematician named Proclus, who lived
in the reign of the emperor Anastasius, that he did the same with
Archimedes, that is, with burning glasses, set fire to the ships with
which count Vitalianus besieged Constantinople. The silence of all
the authors with respect to this matter, who were prior to Zonaras,
and who gave accounts of the war between Anastasius and Vitalianus,
is an argument against the probability of it; for neither Evagrius
the scholiast, who lived in the same century that war happened, which
was the sixth, nor count Marcelinus, who flourished in the seventh,
nor Cedrenus, who wrote in the eleventh, speak a word of Proclus or
his burning-glasses. Zonaras, who lived in the twelfth, is the first
who gives any relation of them, though he does not positively affirm
the truth of it, but only tells us the story with an _it is so said_,
or reported. I add to this, that count Marcelinus informs us count
Vitalianus did not raise the siege of Constantinople because his fleet
was destroyed, but because the emperor Anastasius solicited and procured
the raising the siege, by means of a large sum of money, and other
magnificent presents which he sent to count Vitalianus.

LXIV. I recollect also, that in a work called The Theatre of Human Life,
we find Evagrius, and Paul the Deacon, quoted in favour of the story of
the burning-glasses of Proclus; but neither in one or other of these
authors is there the least mention of such glasses; from whence we may
infer that these great compilations are exposed to great mistakes.


SECT. XXVIII.

_Communication of the Red Seas with the Mediterranean._

LXV. We read in various histories, that some princes endeavoured to make
a communication between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean, by means of
a cut from the Red Sea to the Nile; but that, in the execution of the
work, they met with such difficulties that were next to insuperable;
the principal of which was the apprehension that the Red Sea being
much higher than the Nile, its waters would inundate Egypt. In the
Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris, in the year 1702, when they were
examining the geographical map which Monsieur Boutier had made of Egypt,
they examined this point also, and found that such an apprehension was
chimerical: they push’d their enquiries further, and discovered, upon
reading some antient historians, that there was great reason to conclude,
that in the very remote ages there had been such a canal of communication.


SECT. XXIX.

_Pharamond, the Salique Law, and Twelve Peers of France._

LXVI. We have said before, that Charles Sorrel doubted the existence of
Pharamond, whom the French consider as their first king. Mons. du Haillan
does not go quite so great a length as this, but denies positively that
that prince ever passed to the Gallic side of the Rhine. He denies
likewise he instituted the Salique law; and holds as fabulous also the
story of Charles the Great having been the institutor of the twelve peers
of France.


SECT. XXX.

_The Sacred Oil of Rheims, and the French Fleurs de Lis._

LXVII. The fact of the singular glory resulting to the French monarchy and
its kings on account at the coronation of Clodovicus, the oil with which
he was consecrated, together with the fleurs de lis, having descended
from Heaven, the first brought by a dove, and the second by an angel; I
say the certainty of this fact is not so firmly established among the
French themselves, as that some of their own authors do not entertain
a doubt of it; because when they tell the story, they make use of the
expressions, it is so said, it is so reported, and it is believed,
&c. The silence of St. Gregory of Turene upon this head, who wrote so
extensively upon miracles, and of whom some have remarked, that he was
exceedingly credulous, is, with many people, a convincing proof that
there never was such a prodigy. The silence of Paulus Emilius also on the
matter, who was a noble and general historian of the affairs of France,
is an argument, that he looked upon the story as fabulous; because if he
had thought it probable, he would surely not have omitted to mention it.


SECT. XXXI.

_Origin of Salutation upon Sneezing._

LXVIII. Some fix the custom of saluting and praying for a blessing on
those who sneeze, to have commenced in the reign of St. Gregory, in
whose time Rome was visited with a melancholy pestilence, of which a
sneeze was the fatal crisis, as immediately after that the patient died;
and that the holy pontif ordained, that this salutation and blessing
should be established as a remedy to avert the evil; and from thence
this benediction and praying for the preservation of any one who sneezed
came to be in use ever afterwards. This tradition, although generally
received, is evidently fabulous. We are told by Aristotle, that in his
time it was the common practice to bless people when they sneezed.
In his Problems, sect. xxxiii. quæst. 7. and 9. he enquires into the
cause of this custom, and accounts for it in the following manner: that
sneezing is an indication that the head, which is the noblest and most
sacred part of a man, is well disposed and in good order; on which
account people reverence sneezing: _Perinde igitur, quasi bonæ indicium
valetudinis partis optimæ, atque sacerimæ, sternutamentum adorant
beneque augurantur._ This matter was treated of in the Academy Royal of
Inscriptions, where they produced testimonies, that not only among the
Greeks and Romans this was a common practice, but that the Spaniards
upon their first discovery of the New World, found it established there
also. Mons. Morin, a Member of that Academy, tells us, that the common
tradition which at present prevails, with respect to the origin of
these salutations, was produced by another fabulous tradition of much
greater antiquity. This was that of the Rabbins, quoted in the Talmudic
Lexicon of Buxtorf; which says, that God, at the beginning of the world,
established it as a general law, that men should never sneeze more than
once, and that immediately after it they should die; that things went
uniformly on in this way, without varying in a single instance, till
the days of the patriarch Jacob; who, in a second struggle he had with
God, obtained the revocation of this law; and that all the princes of
the world, upon being informed of this event, ordained, that their
subjects in future, should accompany the act of sneezing with words of
thanksgiving and prayers for health. Our tradition bears such an analogy
to the rabbinical one, that although it is not quite so extravagant, it
seems probable, that the first fable begat the second.


SECT. XXXII.

_Queen Brunequilda._

LXIX. Queen Brunequilda of France is execrated by nearly all sorts
of authors as the worst woman the world ever knew. The wickednesses
they attribute to her are innumerable and enormous; an unbridled lust,
which attended her from her early youth till she attained the age of
seventy-one; a furious ambition, to which she sacrificed all obligations,
both human and divine; an outrageous cruelty, which sacrificed as victims
to her resentment or ambition infinite numbers of innocent people, by
poison or the dagger, and among them some of royal race. Who could
imagine that any one would venture to stand up in defence of a woman, the
relation of whose conduct has stained the page of all histories, which
speak of her, with blood? Notwithstanding this, there appears an evidence
on her behalf, whose testimony, if you give it the credit his merit and
character intitle him to, will avert the force of the accusation, and
cause it to vanish in smoke. This is the great Gregory, who, in two
letters he wrote to that queen, covers her with eulogiums, and goes
so far in one of them, as to congratulate the French nation upon the
happiness of being governed by a queen, who was an illustrious pattern
of all kinds of virtues: _Præ aliis gentibus gentem Francorum asserimus
felicem, quæ sic bonis omnibus præditam meruit habere reginam._ (lib. 1.
epist. 8.) It is proper to observe, that the date of these letters, is
posterior some years to the perpetration of most of the iniquities with
which Brunequilda is charged.


SECT. XXXIII.

_Mahomet._

LXX. It is so currently asserted by all our writers, that the false
prophet Mahomet was of low extraction, that the truth of it has come
to be believed in all Christian countries, as an historical dogma. But
the Arabic authors unanimously agree, that he was descended from the
Corasinan family, which was one of the most noble and ancient of Mecca.
It is true, that these may be mistaken; but then they are the only people
who could know any thing of the matter.

LXXI. On the other hand, Ludovicus Maraccius, an author of eminence,
and one who was most learned in Mahometan affairs, in the Prologue to
his Prodromus, or refutation of the Alcoran, sufficiently gives us to
understand, that in our histories, there are many fables respecting that
remarkable Imposture: he says, that the Mahometans laugh at the stories
which some of our historians relate of Mahomet; and this judicious
author adds, that this serves to confirm and make them stiff in their
erroneous belief. I have no doubt but it has this effect, because
it is natural to suppose it would beget an aversion in them towards
Christians, and a distrust of all they affirm, even with regard to things
appertaining to their own dogmas. Therefore those who think they do any
service to religion, by relating all the ill things they can pick up of
the enemies to it, without a sufficient examination into the truth of
them, and especially of the chiefs or leaders of sects, are so far from
accomplishing the end they wish to obtain, that thereby they do the cause
they mean to serve a notable injury. What purpose, for example, would it
answer, to tell a Lutheran, that the leader of his sect was the son of
a devil incubate? it would answer no other, than that of irritating and
persuading him of the truth of what his doctors had told him, viz. that
we invent all kinds of fictions, which may conduce to serve the cause we
defend. The same may be said of the sin of Sodomy imputed to John Calvin,
if the accusation is not just, which is a point that I am sure I cannot
determine; and likewise of all other imputations of this sort. I am very
clear, that we should expose all the immoral practices of the founders
of false religions, that would tend to render them infamous, provided we
can maintain the truth of the allegations we bring against them; and many
charges of this sort might be brought against some of them that could be
supported, and especially against Luther. But in cases where nothing can
be clearly made out, let us not mix the certain with the uncertain; and
above all, let us avoid introducing the false.

LXXII. But to return to Mahomet, not only with regard to his birth,
but even with respect to those circumstances of his life, which have
no connection with, or tendency to clearing up the truth or falsehood
of his doctrines, the European and Arabic authors are totally opposite
in their accounts of him; and to such a degree do they differ, that
Ludovicus Maraccius says, that both one and the other of them, when
they are speaking of the same Mahomet, seem as if they were describing
two distinct men. There is nothing more firmly established and more
generally assented to among us, than that the monk Nestorianus Sergius
was his tutor and principal counsellor; but, notwithstanding this,
Maraccius thinks, that it was much more likely his master and director
was some Jew: the probability of which conjecture, he founds in the
many Talmudical and Rabbinical fables with which the Alcoran abounds.
Neither is there any certainty in what is said of the tame dove, which
was used to put its beak into his ear, and which he pretended was the
archangel Gabriel. The history of Mahomet, as given us by Maraccius, the
materials for writing which, he affirms, were extracted from the most
chosen Arabian authors, sets forth, that the apparitions of the archangel
Gabriel to Mahomet, were very frequent; but that he did not come in the
shape of a dove, nor in any other form that was perceptible to other
people; nor could the apparition be discerned by his wife Cadighe,
although she had been often present with him, at the times in which he
professed to have seen it. I also know, that Edward Pocock, a writer of
great veracity, says, that he never met with the story of the dove in any
Arabian author.

LXXIII. We have one, or rather two other fables to refute, with respect
to Mahomet, that both relate to the place of his interment. The first
says, that he was buried at Mecca; but this is an error, which is not
accepted at present by any but the lowest of the vulgar; for it is
generally known by other people, that he was interred at Medina, a city
of Arabia Felix, distant from Mecca four days journey. The perigrinations
of the Mahometans to Mecca, are made on account of their prophet having
been born there, and also out of a regard they profess to have for a
house in that city, which they say was built by Adam; and after the
deluge, was rebuilt and inhabited by Abraham. The second fable, which
may be termed a common error, is that of the body being suspended in
the air in an iron chest, which is held up, and kept in equilibrio, by
the magnetic power of some load-stones placed in the roof of the chapel
where it remains. Edward Pocock says, the Mahometans are ready to burst
their sides with laughter, when they hear any of us say these tales are
firmly credited in the Mahometan countries. The truth is, that it is
well known, from the testimony of many credible people who have been in
those countries, that there is no such suspension of the body of Mahomet
in the air; nor, according to good natural philosophy, is it possible
that there should be any such thing; for the magnetic virtue being
liable to alterations, the attractive power of the load-stones could not
always continue to act with the same force, or in the same proportion;
in consequence of which, the equilibrium could not be preserved. Father
Cabeus tells us, that with a great deal of labour and difficulty, he
accomplished the suspension of a needle between two load-stones, but that
the suspension did not continue longer than the time in which you could
repeat four hexameter verses, and that then it adhered to one of the
load-stones. For this reason, we ought to esteem as fabulous, what some
authors relate of an Image of the Sun, which was made of iron, and which
remained suspended by load-stones in the Temple of Serapis at Alexandria.


SECT. XXXIV.

_Kings of France, of the Merovingian Line._

LXXV. The cause of the translation of the Crown of France, from the
Merovingian to the Carlovingian line, was, for a long time, and without
the least contradiction, believed to have proceeded from the incapacity
of the princes of the first race to govern; and this was the motive
assigned by various authors and chronologers for the transaction; but
it having been afterwards found out, that they all copied this story
from Eginardus, who was antecedent to these writers; and it having been
also discovered that there was reason for suspecting the authority of
Eginardus in this respect, and that it was probable he was warped by
motives of favour and partiality; people began to doubt, and these
doubts were succeeded by an absolute denial, in some of the most eminent
modern French authors, of the truth of what he had asserted. Eginardus
was secretary of state to, and a great favourite with Charles the Fifth;
and it was the interest of this prince, that it should not seem as
if the Crown, which devolved to him as heir to his father Pepin, was
an usurpation, in which light the thing must have appeared, provided
Childeric had been unjustly deposed; and, besides the disgrace of his
father’s having committed an act of perfidy, he would have remained
without a legitimate title to the crown; for there was no other mode
of putting an honest face upon the coronation of Pepin, but that of
declaring Childeric and all the princes of his race incapable of reigning.

LXVI. Eginardus then, as a minister in whom Charles placed the greatest
confidence, could not divest himself of being partial to the interests
of his master; nor could he avoid, on this account, drawing upon him
the suspicion of his having been biased by motives of prejudice in his
favour. We may add to this, that in his narrative of the transaction,
he has mixed some false and incredible circumstances. He says, that
Childeric was deposed, and Pepin crowned, by the authority and direction
of Pope Estephanus the Third; which could not possibly be, for the
election of this pope was either some days posterior to the coronation
of Pepin, or happened within a day or two of that era. For this reason,
others, in order to vindicate the coronation, without violating
chronology, bring the authority of pope Zacharias to justify it, who was
the immediate predecessor of Estephanus. What Eginardus tells us of the
state of indolence and abasement in which the kings of the Merovingian
line lived, is totally incredible. He relates, that they used to appear
in public, and take their journies in a cart or waggon, drawn by oxen,
which was driven by a person who was habited like, and had in all
respects the appearance of a common carter; but who can believe such an
extravagance? He says further, that they were allowed no other income
to subsist on than the rent of a small farm; and that all the rest was
disposed of according to the will and pleasure of the steward and other
officers of the houshold. But how can this be reconciled, or rendered
compatible with the building of various monasteries, which were erected
and endowed by the kings of the Merovingian line, and with the grand
donations which were made by them to many others?


SECT. XXXV.

_The Tragedy of Belisarius._

LXXVII. We find the tragedy of Belisarius set-forth in an infinite number
of books, as one of the strongest instances that ever appeared on the
theatre of the world, of the inconstancy and instability of fortune. It
is asserted, that the emperor Justinian, after that great captain had
been crowned with so many laurels, having discovered that he had been an
accomplice in a conspiracy against him, caused his eyes to be put out,
and reduced him to so low a state of misery, that he passed the remainder
of his life by being obliged for subsistence to beg alms about the
streets, and at the doors of churches.

LXXVIII. We find also this story is contradicted by Cedrenus, and other
grave authors; but what most effectually makes against it, is the
silence of Procopius upon the subject, who was the author of the Secret
History, which is a virulent satyr upon the emperor Justinian, and the
empress Theodora. This writer, who resided in Constantinople in the
reign of Justinian, and who out-lived him, could not be a stranger to
the tragedy of Belisarius, if there had been any truth in it; nor is it
credible that, in his Secret History, he should conceal an event of such
magnitude, and especially when he could have made it conducive to the
principal object of his book, which was that of exposing and aggravating
all the faults of Justinian; who could not be looked upon as excusable,
for having behaved with cruelty to a man to whom he owed so many
obligations, even if Belisarius had ever been culpable; for scarce any
other prince, had ever been more indebted to a subject, than Justinian
was to him; besides this, it might have been very easy for Procopius,
by doubting or lessening the crime, to have made the punishment of
Belisarius appear as an act of absolute cruelty in Justinian.

LXXIX. In support of the common opinion, it is said, there is still a
tower at Constantinople, which is called the Tower of Belisarius, and
is supposed to have taken the name from that great man having been
confined in it. This is but a slender argument wherewith to support
the probability of such a tragedy, for this name might have been given
to it from some other particular respecting Belisarius; or it is not
impossible, that he might have been imprisoned in it for a short space of
time; for it is a fact, that before the second expedition of Belisarius
into Italy, he had fallen off in the good graces of the emperor, through
the intrigues of the empress Theodora: and he might then have been
imprisoned in the tower for a few days; and Procopius, who informs us of
this small disgrace of Belisarius, would not have concealed the great
misfortune which is said to have befallen him, had the circumstances of
it been true.


SECT. XXXVI.

_The Maid of Orleans._

LXXX. The famous Joan d’Arc, commonly called the Maid of Orleans, makes
a great figure in the history of France as a celestial heroine, to whom
that kingdom confessedly, in the reign of Henry the Sixth of England,
owed its restoration, and being preserved from the total destruction,
which was nearly brought on it by the success of the English arms.

LXXXI. The history of this wonderful damsel, reduced to a compendium,
is as follows: The French nation, and above all their king, finding
themselves dejected and dispirited by the repeated defeats they had
suffered; and also without the necessary resolution, to concert and
determine upon measures for opposing and averting the new dangers with
which they were threatened by the siege of Orleans, that was pushed
on by the English with great vigour: I say, at this crisis, a poor
Shepherdess, that is, Joan d’Arc, at the age of about eighteen or twenty
years, who was born in a little village on the Maze, felt in herself an
occult inspiration, or express commission from God, to succour Orleans,
and cause Charles the Fifth to be consecrated and anointed king at
Rheims; and, in order to execute this commission, after having first
opened herself to a nobleman of the kingdom, she was introduced to the
king, whom she knew the instant she saw him, although she had never set
eyes on him before, and he, to prevent her discovering him, had mixed
with the croud in a common dress. They put many questions to her, to
which she gave excellent and satisfactory answers; and informed them
of some things, which they thought were impossible to be known to her
but by revelation. Finally, upon the strength of these proofs, they
confided to her conduct the relief of the city of Orleans, in which
enterprize, the French, animated and led on by her, obliged the English
to raise the siege, and, in consequence of her influence and example,
gained afterwards many considerable advantages over them. She removed
the obstructions that were in her way, and conducted the king to Rheims,
where the ceremony of his consecration was performed and compleated: but
being afterwards taken prisoner by the English, they carried her to Roan,
where they iniquitously accused her of sorcery, tried her in the ordinary
form, and condemned her to be burnt for a witch.

LXXXII. I gave some account of this extraordinary woman in the Sixteenth
Discourse of my first volume, where I hinted it merely as a conjecture
of my own, that, in all probability, the divine impulse the French
attributed to her, and still persist in attributing, and the witchcraft
imputed to her by the English, were both equally false. But now I find
my conjecture is supported and confirmed by a celebrated historian, in
consequence of which, what I advanced as a supposition, wears the face
of an authentic information. This historian, is Monsieur Du Haillan,
who affirms, that all the feats of Joan d’Arc, which have been so much
admired, were the effects of political artifice; without the least
intervention, either of divine inspiration or diabolical compact.
According to this author, three French noblemen, whom he names, were the
contrivers and managers of the whole business. These (after disclosing to
her the most private secrets of the court, and instructing her largely
in all she had to do and say, in order to make it appear as if she knew
things by divine inspiration; and that all her actions were effected by
divine impulse) made use of her, thus instructed, as the most effectual
means to animate the dejected king and his dispirited troops. He adds,
that some people affirmed, that although they called her a maid, she was
no such thing, but the concubine of one of the three lords; but whether
this was so or not, I presume, they pitched upon her preferable to any
other woman, from having observed her to be endowed with an excellent
capacity, a clear and penetrating head, and a heart proportioned to the
dangers of so great an undertaking. Gabriel Naudé, in his book intitled
_Strokes of Policy_, adopts the sentiment of Du Haillan, and quotes
Justus Lipsius, and Monsieur Langei, as being of the same opinion; and
adds, that other authors, both French and strangers, adopt it. By this
development, the famous Joan d’Arc is divested of any pretensions to
being miraculously inspired, but not degraded from the rank of a heroine.


SECT. XXXVII.

_Prester John._

LXXXIII.It is wonderful, considering how slight our information is of
Prester John of India, that even children and rustics are acquainted with
his name, although it is not as yet known with any certainty, who this
prince is, where he reigns, nor why he is called by this name. When
the Portuguese received the first information that the king of the
Abyssinians professed himself a Christian, and that his subjects called
him Belul Gian, or as others have it, John Coi; they imagined this was
Prester John, and their sentiment was adopted, and passed current in all
Europe. When afterwards people came to know, that these words in the
Abyssinian language, had a different signification from what had been
put upon them, and meant the same as _precious king_, or _my king_; and
reflecting also, that those who gave the first accounts of Prester John,
placed him in Asia, and not in Africa, this opinion began to lose ground
with men of letters, and to be considered as erroneous. But the doubts
respecting who this Christian prince is, in what part of Asia he reigns,
and why he is called Prester John, still remain: and with regard to
this matter, there are so many opinions, that the enumeration of them
would be tedious; but in one thing they all agree, which is, that this
prince is of the Nestorian sect; although in other points relating to him
they differ widely: some say his empire was extinguished by the Tartars;
others, that the name of Prester John was given to the Great Mogul, on
account of his assuming the title of _Schah Gehan_, which signifies _king
of the world_; and that, by equivocal and forced interpretation, Schah
Gehan was construed into Prester John. Such a variety of opinions, has
raised in me some suspicion, whether all that has been related of this
Christian king of Asia, is not entirely fabulous. If, upon inquiry,
it shall appear that Paulus Venetus was the first who gave an account
of him, and that all other authors have taken what they said upon the
subject solely from him: I say, if this should appear to be the case, it
will afford a new motive of distrust, and it would be laughable enough,
to find that authors have been beating their brains, and scrutinizing
all the corners of the globe in search of Prester John, when no such man
exists, nor ever did exist in the world; at least, it is not probable,
that he exists at present, because in all the modern voyages and travels
that I have seen, I don’t meet with the least mention of him; and if
there really was such a man, authors in that way, would not have thought
him unworthy of their notice.


SECT. XXXVIII.

_Pope Alexander the Sixth._

LXXXIV. The memory of our countryman, Pope Alexander the Sixth, is so
blackened in story, that the characters in which his history is written,
seem to be all contaminated with blots; nor do I undertake, or think any
one else, with a probability of success can undertake, his justification
or defence, or pretend to clear him of all the crimes which are imputed
to him; but may we not suppose, that the hatred of his enemies augmented
the catalogue of his faults? It is certain, that Alexander was much
abhorred by the Romans, partly from his own misconduct, and partly from
that of his son, the outrageous Cæsar Borgia. I firmly believe, that the
vulgar rumour never charged any prince with more faults that he was not
guilty of, than Alexander; and if the writers of the time were infected
with the prejudices of the populace, they would not be scrupulous of
inserting the rumours of the vulgar in their histories.

LXXXV. Let us pass from this reflection (which is equally applicable to
all other princes who are abhorred by their subjects, as to Alexander) to
a particular fact, which, without doubt, is one of the most conspicuous
and notorious that is imputed to this prince. It is asserted, that he
conspired with his son Cæsar Borgia, to take away by poison, the lives
of several cardinals, one of whom was Adrian Cortus, a man who was
entirely devoted to him; and that their motive for perpetrating this
wickedness, was that of seizing on the riches of the devoted persons:
that for the purpose of executing the scheme, the intended victims were
invited to a grand entertainment, which was to be given by the pope, at
the country-house of Cardinal Cornetus; where a portion of cool poisoned
wine was provided, to be served to the persons devoted to death; but
by mistake, it was given to the pope and his son; that the son, by the
help of a robust constitution, and speedy remedies prescribed by the
physicians, escaped; but the pope, who being advanced in years, was
unable to resist the shock, resigned his life to the power of the poison.

LXXXVI. This cruel attempt, and the fatal result of it, may I believe,
be disputed upon grounds of great probability. Some, who affirm the
fact, doubt the pope’s having had any hand in the business, and lay
the crime wholly at the door of Cæsar Borgia. Alexander Natalis, who
is one of the most severe writers against that pontif, confesses, that
there are some who maintain the whole relation to have been fabulous;
and adds, that there are manuscript diaries existing, which testify he
died upon the seventh day of a continual fever; which is a regular and
ordinary disease: and let the truth prevail, why are we not to believe
these diaries, which are written originally at the same place, and
at the same time when the event happened? What writings can be more
deserving of credit than these Diaries? or who, living in Rome at the
time of Alexander’s death, would dare to assert in writing, that he died
a natural death at the end of seven days after being attacked with a
continual fever, if the fact had been otherwise, and especially if all
Rome had it in their power to convict him of the falshood? It may be
alledged, that the poison was of such a nature as might excite a fever
to occasion his death: but experience shews us, that the operation
of poisons, is always, or nearly always, attended with uncommon and
extraordinary symptoms. Besides, the enemies of Alexander, who were
very numerous, had a great propensity to invent and believe every thing
that could tend to blacken him, or blast his fame. John Francisco Pico,
in the life of a certain religious which he wrote, who was a friend of
his, tells us, that there were two opinions which prevailed concerning
the death of Alexander: one was, that he died by poison; and the other,
that he was suffocated by the Devil, with whom he had made a compact
to deliver his soul to him at a stated time, provided he would make
him pope. May we not infer from this, that there is no extravagance or
chimera which envy is not capable of inventing, in order to render a
man infamous: and it is worthy of remark, that those two opinions, with
regard to the certainty of them, destroy one another: I mean, that if you
could suppose the Devil suffocated him, it would overturn the certainty
of his having lost his life by poison. But how, when there is a failure
in establishing the certainty of the fact, can you believe a man to have
been guilty of so atrocious an action? Is it not doing a serious injury
to your neighbour, to suppose him guilty of a heavy crime, upon the
strength of uncertain assertions? what ought we to conclude in such a
case, but that the crime was invented by the hatred of some, and that it
gained credit from a principle of hatred in others?


SECT. XXXIX.

_Henry the Eighth and Anna Bolene._

LXXXVII. The fame that befel Alexander the Sixth, and just in the
same way, happened to Henry the Eighth of England, and his wife, or
rather concubine, Anna Bolene. Both these personages were guilty of
great crimes, and the dishonesty of Anna Bolene, was as notorious
as the incontinence of Henry. The king, hurried away by a criminal
passion for that lady, in order to possess her, repudiated unjustly his
virtuous queen Catherine; and Ann was not only an accomplice in the
unjust divorce, but was afterwards proved guilty of adultery. This was
sufficient with respect to their incontinence, to render their fame
odious to posterity. But Nicholas Saunders, urged by his indiscreet zeal,
being desirous of heightening to the utmost the turpitude of them both,
confounded the certain with the incredible; from whence it followed,
that many of the vulgar among the Catholics, believed the incredible as
certain facts.

LXXXVIII. Saunders says, that the love of Henry for Ann was not only
illicit, but most enormously incestuous; because, that long before he
knew her, he had had criminal conversation, not only with her mother,
but also with a sister of her’s, named Mary. He adds, that Anna Bolene,
according to the testimony of her own mother, was the daughter of the
said Henry. To strengthen the foregoing assertion, he says, this unhappy
woman, was born two years after Thomas Bolene the husband of her mother,
had been absent from his wife at the court of France, whither he had been
sent on an embassy by Henry: that, upon his return to England, he was
desirous of repudiating his wife, but the king interposed to prevent it;
and the adultress confessed to her husband, that the child he found in
his house was the daughter of the king. According to this relation, the
correspondence between Henry the Eighth and Anna Bolene, was shocking and
incestuous in three particulars.

LXXXIX. With regard to Anna Bolene herself, he represents her, from her
tender youth, to have been an infamous prostitute; for, he says, that at
fifteen years of age, she surrendered her person, to the embraces of two
of the domestics in her father’s house; that soon afterwards she went to
France, where her prostitution was so public and scandalous, that they
called her by the opprobrious name of the English Mare: that, after a
while, she introduced herself into the palace of Francis the First, who
was then king of France, and that this prince, was universally known to
have made use of the English prostitute, for the gratification of his
lewd inclinations: that upon her return to England, she was admitted as
a domestic into the houshold of Henry, where he fell violently enamoured
with her; but his solicitations to obtain her as a mistress, proved
abortive; for Anna, feigning herself to be a most virtuous person, made
her pretensions to modesty subservient to her views of ambition; and
always replied resolutely to the king’s intreaties, that no man but her
husband should have the dominion of her virginity; and upon this, the
unhappy Henry, blinded by his passion, solicited and obtained a divorce
from his queen Catherine, to enable him to marry Ann.

XC. There is nothing in this whole relation, which does not appear either
very difficult to be credited, or absolutely chimerical. The triple
incest of Henry, is so much out of the common course, and so horrible,
that nothing can excite our belief of it, but proofs which are clearer
than the sun at noon-day. That the gallantries of the king of France with
Anna Bolene, which were so public and notorious, should not have come
to the knowledge of Henry, is by no means credible; for irregularities
of this sort, committed by princes, are generally well known at their
own courts, and are soon communicated to those of other countries, and
especially, when they are so near together as those of London and Paris.
Neither is it credible that Henry, after he came to know that Ann had
deceived him with respect to her being a maid, and when he had gratified
the first cravings of his appetite, should not take a disgust to, or, at
least, put her away from him: Henry, I say, who was so delicate in these
matters, that he repudiated his fourth wife Ann of Cleves, for no other
reason than his coming to understand, that before she espoused him, she
had been under an engagement to marry another person. According to the
chronology of the English History, this relation is not only improbable,
but even impossible; because this tells us, that Anna Bolene was born in
1507, and Henry the Eighth was crowned in 1509; that in 1514 Anna went to
France in the suite of queen Claudia, who was the sister of Henry, and
wife of Francis the First; that Thomas Bolene did not go ambassador to
France till the year 1515; and that the return of Anna Bolene to London,
is placed between the years 1525 and 1527. From this account, there
results two manifest contradictions to Saunders’s relation: the first is,
that Anna Bolene, could not at the age of fifteen, and before her going
to France, have been guilty of the turpitudes which he charges her to
have committed with her father’s domestics; because, before she was eight
years old she went to France, and did not return till she had attained
the age of eighteen or twenty: the second is, that Anna Bolene was born,
not only before Thomas Bolene went ambassador to France, but before he
could have possibly been the Ambassador of Henry the Eighth; for Henry
was not crowned till the year 1509, and Anna Bolene was born two years
before. Finally, not only the English chronology, but Alexander Natalis,
in the eighth volume of his Ecclesiastical History, and Father Orleans,
in the second volume of his Revolutions of England, together with various
Catholic authors, dissent from the account given by Saunders.


SECT. XL.

_Marechal d’Ancre._

XCI. It has so happened, that the tracts of history inserted in this
discourse, are mostly favourable to, or in mitigation of the offences of
some famous delinquents. There has scarce been a favourite since the days
of Sejanus to our times, who was so universally detested, and, according
to the process that was instituted against him, with so much reason,
as the Marechal d’Ancre; who was a Florentine by birth, named Concino
Concini, and who came to France with queen Mary of Medicis, by whose
favour, during her regency, he was raised to the first offices in the
state, and arrived at having the absolute controul of the whole monarchy.
His insolence, his ambition, his cruelty, and his avarice, occasioned it
to be resolved upon, as soon as Lewis the Thirteenth ascended the throne,
to take away his life; but as on account of his creatures, and his great
power, they did not dare attempt the thing by a regular process, they
gave a commission to one Vitri, who was a captain in the guards, to put
him to death in any manner that he should find most expedient; which he
executed, by pistoling him upon the Pont Neuf, where he happened to meet
him, unprepared or provided for his defence. The fury of the populace,
manifested the implacable and inveterate hatred, which was entertained
against the defunct favourite: they tumultuously dragged his body from
the church, and hung it upon a gallows, which the Marechal had erected
to hang those on who should murmur against him; they next beheaded him,
and dragged the body through the streets and squares of the city; after
this, they cut pieces off from it, with an intent to preserve them as
precious mementos of the public vengeance. It is said, the ears were
sold at a very high price. The grand provost, attended by his archers,
attempted to restrain the populace, but was obliged to desist, as they
threatened, if he did not remain quiet, to bury him alive. They threw
the entrails into the river, and burnt part of the body before the
statue of Henry the Fourth, which stands on the Pont Neuf; and some cut
pieces of flesh, which they broiled at the fire they had made, and ate
them: one manifested his rage, by tearing out and publicly eating the
heart; and another, who by his dress appeared to be a man of condition,
running his hand into the carcase, and drawing it out all besmeared with
blood, lifted it to his mouth and sucked it; and scarce ever was the
hatred of any people carried to such a pitch of fury. After he was dead,
they instituted that prosecution against him which they did not dare to
commence while he was living; and upon the depositions and evidence which
were laid before his judges, they not only declared him guilty of high
treason, but of having professed Judaism, and been in league with the
Devil; and a little while afterwards, they beheaded and burnt his wife
Leonora Gallagai, for the same crimes.

XCII. With all this, there has not been wanting a person, who has
attempted to excuse and justify the Marechal d’Ancre, and not one who
was a creature or countryman of his, or in any shape connected with him,
but a Frenchman, a peer, and Marechal of France, Francis Annibal Duke
d’Etré, a man famous for his military exploits and his embassies, and
one who was very well informed with respect to the intrigues and secret
management of those times. This nobleman, in his Memoirs of the Regency
of Mary of Medicis, attributes the tragedy of the Marechal d’Ancre to
mere misfortune; he celebrates his great talents, and says, that he was
naturally disposed to do what was right, and that, therefore, very few
people who knew him disliked him; but he acknowledges, that although he
was a pleasing man in conversation, he entertained high and ambitious
notions; but adds, that he concealed them profoundly; and he concludes
with saying, that he had heard him declare many times, they murdered the
king without his order or knowledge.

XC. These contradictions in history are truly astonishing. The Marechal
d’Etré is an evidence superior to all exception; for if he could ever
have had any obligations to d’Ancre, they must have been but trifling,
because he obtained his most distinguished honours, and such as were
very correspondent to his merit, in the reign of Lewis the Thirteenth.
What then shall we say to all this? why, under such circumstances,
good criticism will pursue a middle course; and conclude, that d’Ancre
incurred the public hatred, partly on account of his being so great a
favourite, which of itself is sufficient to make a man regarded with
an evil eye; and partly on account of his being a stranger, which is a
circumstance that nearly always produces, in those who are to obey, envy
and indignation: and finally, the abuse of his power, in some instances
of his conduct, may also have contributed to raise the flame. But the
most atrocious crimes alledged against him in his prosecution, we may
suppose, were the invention of his enemies; for, notwithstanding the
evidence upon record seems to confirm the truth of them, we may conclude,
that out of so great a number as these consisted of, and who were for the
most part enraged witnesses, there would not be wanting some of them, who
would give such testimony as their rage dictated to them, although it was
contrary to truth, and against their consciences.


SECT. XLI.

_Urban Grenadier, and the Nuns of Loudun._

XCIII. Francis Urban Grenadier, canon of Loudun, in the province of
Poictou, is the last person we shall enumerate in this catalogue; his
tragedy has been, and still is, much animadverted upon, both within
France and without it. This man, who was endued with talents above
mediocrity, was genteel in his person, sufficiently learned, and an
eloquent orator; but a lover of, and beloved by the other sex, to a
degree bordering upon excess. Either his talents or his vices, or both
together, raised him many enemies, but their animosity was most probably
directed against the first; for the world is more apt to attack people
out of envy to their good qualities, than from motives of morality, or
from being disgusted at their vices. It happened, that all the nuns of
a convent at Loudun seemed affected in a strange way, which was imputed
by many to their being bewitched. What reason the enemies of Grenadier
had, or pretended to have, for attributing this mischief to him, I can’t
imagine; but they gave information of this matter to Cardinal Richlieu,
who was at that time, under colour of being minister, the king _de
facto_ of France; to this man of power, they accused Grenadier of being
the author of the possession of these nuns. The cardinal had more than
one motive to wish the ruin of Grenadier; for when he was no more than
Bishop of Louzon, there had been a sharp dispute between them; but what
irritated him most against Grenadier, was an information which those who
accused him of the crime of sorcery gave the cardinal, that Grenadier was
the author of a satyr intitled _Le Cordonier de Loudun_, which was very
severe upon his person, birth, and pedigree. The cardinal ordered that
an enquiry should immediately be made respecting the possession of the
nuns, and the sorcery of Grenadier; in which he directed, they should be
careful to observe the colour and appearance of strict justice. Twelve
ecclesiastics were appointed judges in the cause; who, after a formal and
seemingly minute enquiry, condemned him to be burnt alive; which sentence
was afterwards executed upon him, and he, at the terrible crisis of his
suffering, shewed great Christian patience and fortitude.

XCIV. But notwithstanding all the judicial solemnity of the process,
many people doubted of the justice of the sentence, and attributed the
whole proceeding to political artifice, assisted by the delusion of some,
and the credulity of others. The cardinal, who from aloft directed the
movements of the machines, although he was allowed to be a man of great
abilities, was generally known to be furiously vindictive. He neither
wanted capacity nor power, to crush the most spotless innocence under
the colour and shew of justice. The judges are said to have been good
men, but very credulous, and people of little penetration, who were on
this account pitched upon by the enemies of Grenadier. The rigour of the
sentence shews, that some other motive intervened to produce it besides
the love of justice; and what above all manifested such a motive, was the
cruel oppression that was practised on him, in obliging him to make use
of a particular confessor, notwithstanding he alledged that he disliked
him, for that he was his enemy, and had been one of the principal
instruments in working his ruin. He intreated, that for the expiation of
his sins, they would permit him to have Father Guardian of the society
of Franciscans at Loudun, who was a learned man, and a divine of the
Sorbone; but it was not possible for him, either to obtain this grace,
or a permission to have any other man but him whom he had objected to
as his enemy. It is also said, that the witnesses who deposed against
Grenadier, were the very Devils who tormented the nuns; and the testimony
of such men, by all laws, divine and human, is unworthy to be admitted.
Many observations were written and sent to the press upon the possession
of the nuns, with a view of evincing, that it was all delusion and a
made-up tale. The Devils at first, answered in French, to the questions
that were asked them in Latin; afterwards, when they were desirous of
speaking a little Latin, they made many false concords, which caused some
wags in France to remark, that the Devils of Loudun were but novices
in grammar, who had not yet advanced to the third form. There were two
men of ability, who offered to demonstrate the delusion and imposture
of the possession of the nuns; but they were so severely threatened by
the cardinal, that one of them fled to Rome, and the other was obliged
to conceal himself. The exorcists were sent from Paris by the cardinal;
which circumstance, joined to the great pains that were taken to persuade
the truth of the possession, sufficiently demonstrates the complexion
of the business. Finally, in consideration of the circumstances we have
recited, and others which we have omitted to mention, many authors within
France itself, and among them Egidius Menagius, and the most learned
Naudæus, have taken the part of Grenadier, and there is scarce any one,
who when he touches upon this matter, does not express himself with some
doubt.


SECT. XLII.

XCV. We have laid before the reader all these historical accounts, to
let him see, that even to contradict the best-attested relations, and
such as have generally been accepted and admitted as true upon the credit
of a multitude of writers, and upon the authority of judicial acts,
there are so many strong arguments to be alledged, that they excite in
the understanding a propensity to doubt them, which doubting sometimes
leads to a discovery of their falshood; and from hence we may learn how
difficult it is, not only to hit upon the certain, but even to point out
what is most probable in history, although I do not, on this account,
pretend to adopt absolute Pyrrhonism, or to claim a general suspension of
assent to all that is related by historians. There is a large field for
distrust, which, carried to a certain length, is discretion; and, to an
extravagant one, folly. It is necessary to examine with great attention,
the limits to which doubt may be extended, and to extricate yourself from
the labyrinth of it, whenever it is in your power, either by the road of
truth, or the path of probability.

XCVI. What I mean to illustrate, is the great difficulties that are to be
encountered in exercising worthily the occupation of an historian:
to do it well, requires immense reading, a most happy memory, and a
criticism that is extremely delicate. How can a man by reading one or
two authors, pretend to investigate the truth of what is related by an
infinite number? I don’t pretend that it is absolutely necessary he
should read them all; for this many times would be impossible; and with
respect to those, who he knows did nothing more than copy from others,
superfluous; but he should read all those who are of especial note,
either on account of the time in which they lived, the diligence with
which they applied themselves, or on account of some other circumstances,
which might contribute to their acquiring the most punctual information.
It is not sufficient to read modern authors only, but you ought rather to
proceed by retrospection; and, by beginning at the bottom, trace things
upwards through the series of time, till you arrive at the fountains
where the original writers drank, and from whom the others derived their
intelligence. Neither is the reading antient authors sufficient, as
it sometimes happens, that modern ones meet with monuments that were
concealed from the others, which often serve to explain old events; and,
upon the strength of which, they sometimes exhibit such solid arguments,
as render difficult, or totally obstruct our assent to the account given
of them by the ancients.

XCVII. Neither is it sufficient to read those authors who, from motives
of partiality, would strive to make their relations correspond with their
wishes. The rectitude of historic decision, requires that we should hear
every one, even our enemies, and pronounce sentence, not according to our
inclinations, but the strength and quality of the proofs.

XCVIII. It conduces much, in order to investigate the truth of events
related by authors, and is also in a manner necessary, to know the
situation and circumstances of the authors themselves; because in these,
we may find motives to give or deny them credit; such, as what country
they were born in, what religion they professed, and what party they were
attached to, whether they were under obligations to, or had cause to be
dissatisfied with the persons they introduce in their histories, and
whether they were the dependants or relations of any of them, &c.

XCIX. But, above all, it is necessary to find out the natural disposition
of an author. There are some, who so strikingly display the character of
men of truth and sincerity, that they command our belief of them, even
when they speak in favour of the party they are attached to. In this
elevated point of view, we may venture to place Philip de Comines, our
Mariana, and Henry Catherinus. But to acquire this knowledge of authors,
demands singular perspicuity; for, although it is generally said, that
in the writings of authors we may read their genius and disposition, we
should reflect, that these are much more easy to be disguised by the
pen than with the tongue. It is well known, that Sallust was a man of
debauched morals; but notwithstanding this, there is scarce any other
author, in whom we find such frequent declamations against vice.

C. The degree of reading and extent of historical information that is
required, either to write or make a just judgment of any history, is very
great. It is not only necessary to know exactly the religion, laws, and
customs of the nations to which the events relate, in order to be clear
whether they are repugnant to or correspondent with them; but it is also
frequently necessary to know those of other nations, because it often
happens, that the circumstances of one kingdom are blended with those
of another, either by commerce, wars, or a thousand other accidental
contingencies.


SECT. XLIII.

CI. But what above all makes writing history a difficult task is, that,
in order to be a historian, it is necessary for a man to be much more
than a historian. This, which may appear a paradox, is not so, but a most
true position: I mean, that a person can’t be a perfect historian, who
has not studied other faculties besides history; because, in various
instances, a knowledge of other faculties discovers the falsity of
some historical relations. The understanding geography, for example,
no one can deny to be exceedingly necessary. Polybius and Diodorus
Siculus, were so diligent in this matter, that before they wrote their
histories, they travelled over the kingdoms and countries to which they
related. Now-a-days this labour is not necessary, because the numbers
of geographical books and maps at present extant, although they are not
minutely exact, are sufficiently correct to make this trouble needless.

CII. Besides, there is another circumstance, which perhaps as yet,
has never been attended to, which is, that other faculties which are
seemingly very foreign from history, often serve to throw lights on
various occurrences. What faculty, for example, to appearance, can have
less relation to history than astronomy? but Quintus Curtius, through
his gross ignorance of this science, fell into an historical error. He
says, that when Alexander was marching to India, his soldiers complained
loudly, that he was leading them to a country where they should not be
able to see the sun. They might have had reason for this complaint, if
he had been marching them Northward, in consequence of which, they would
have perceived the sun to get lower, and the days to shorten upon them;
but by marching towards the South, as they then were marching, they
must observe the sun to get higher, and consequently, that fear in the
soldiers could not have been possible.

CIII. Who would think of supposing, that optics and catoptrics, and
we may say the same of other mathematical subjects, could be of use
in writing a history? But please to observe, that by understanding
optics, you would know, what Valerius Maximus, and other authors, tell
us of a man named Strabo, who, from the promontory of Lilibyum, saw and
counted the ships that had just sailed out of the port of Carthage was
impossible, because the image of every ship, which at such a distance,
could be formed on the retina, must be so exceedingly minute as to have
been imperceptible. Also by understanding catoptrics, would be known
either the impossibility, or almost insurmountable difficulty of making
the burning glasses, with which we are told Archimedes, at the siege of
Syracuse, set fire to the ships of Marcellus; that is, if we suppose the
ships to have been as far distant from the walls as some authors have
placed them, which was more than thirty geometrical paces.

CIV. Finally, and to sum up the whole, as human events which are the
object of history, may bear analogy to the objects of all sorts of
faculties, there is not one of them, which by an historian’s being
acquainted with may not afford assistance in the discovery of the truth
of some facts.


SECT. XLIV.

CV. From all that has been said, it is evident, that he, who sets about
writing a history, engages in a most arduous undertaking; and that this
is an occupation, fit only for those, in whom are combined so many
excellent qualities, that the possession of them all in one subject
approaches nearly to an impossibility; for, to the universal knowledge
which we have just hinted to be necessary, should be added a love of
truth, which nothing can intimidate; a comprehensive spirit, which the
multitude of species can’t confound; a methodical genius to arrange them;
a superior judgment, to class and estimate them according to their merit;
a penetrating ingenuity, which, among a great number of confused and
seemingly contradictory appearances, can discern the legitimate signs
of the true from the adulterated; and, finally, he should be able to
write in a clear and noble stile, such as we described in the beginning
of this discourse as best suited to history, in order to illustrate
and explain the whole. I say, find me a man possessed of all these
requisites, _et eris mihi magnus Apollo_.

CVI. Although I consider all the before-named qualities, as absolutely
necessary to form a compleat historian, I am well aware, that in many
of the occurrences of life we should wish for the best, and content
ourselves with the good or the middling; but this should be understood
to relate to those faculties, in which a multitude of professors is
absolutely necessary. Every town, for example, stands in need of many
mechanical artificers; and as neither all, nor the half of them, can
be excellent, we are obliged to be satisfied with those that are
tolerable. But what necessity is there for multiplying Historians in this
proportion, or for people to take upon them the occupation of such, who
want the necessary talents to comply with the obligation? What have the
multitude of historians ever done but multiply fables? It is commonly
thought, that to compile a history, nothing more is necessary, than to
be able to read, and write, and to possess or have access to books, from
whence to extract the materials. Thus men engage in this undertaking who
are full of passions, and poor in talents; whose study enables them to
do nothing more, than without examination, without judgement, without
stile, and without method, copy whatever flatters their imagination, or
is favourable to their partiality.

CVII. Hence it is, that we meet with so many books filled with prodigies
which never existed. All the marvellous, even abstracted from any
particular motive for inserting it, is pleasing to him who writes, and
him who reads it. This is inducement sufficient to cause the writer,
if he does not invent, to copy and enforce a fable, and give it the
appearance, if not of a true, at least of a probable relation. The
tale is regaling to his imagination, and he is interested in inserting
it, by the expectation, that it will make his history appear more
attracting and pleasing to the reader. If, in the course of time, some
writer of judgment, should with strong arguments, founded in reason
and probability, attack the gossip’s tale, they throw in his teeth an
infinite number of writers who have patronized it, and treat him as a
rash man, for running counter to such a stream of authority; although
upon a nice examination, you will find all these amount to no more than
one only, who was the person that first invented, or adopted the fable,
upon the credit of vain popular rumour; and that all the rest are mere
copyists from this man; and that they made no inquiry into the premises,
nor gave themselves any further trouble, than that of transcribing what
they found written by him. But for the present, we will have done with
History.




ADDITIONS TO THE FOREGOING DISCOURSE,

Extracted from the Ninth, or Supplemental Volume to the THEATRICO-CRITICO.


SECT. I.

I. The best method of beginning these additions, appears to me, to
be by introducing some curious observations made by Plutarch, on the
uncertainty of antient History, which we find inserted in his works, with
the title of Parallels. The object of this treatise, is to shew, that
many of the most illustrious and singular events which we find in the
Greek history, are to be met with in the Roman one; all of them attended
with exactly the same circumstances, and differ only with respect to the
persons who were engaged in them, and the places where they happened;
which affords a very probable conjecture, that the Roman authors, with
a view of blazoning their country with this false and borrowed lustre,
copied these events from the Greeks. Plutarch quotes the Greek authors
who relate these things, and from whom, in all probability, the Romans
copied them.

II. The Roman history says, that the vestal virgin Rhea Silva, having
gone into a neighbouring wood to sacrifice, the god Mars took that
opportunity of coming upon her by surprize, and ravishing her: the result
of which rape was, the twin brothers, Romulus and Remus; who, soon after
they were born, were left deserted on the banks of the Tiber, where
a she wolf suckled and preserved them; but being afterwards found by
the shepherd Faustulas; he took them up and delivered them to his wife
Laurentia, to be nursed and reared. The same story, without the least
variation in a single particular, is related by Zopirus Byzantinus,
of the Grecian Philonomia, the daughter of Nictimus, who having gone
into a wood, and been surprized and ravished there by the god Mars,
was afterwards, in consequence of the rape, delivered of two sons, who
were exposed on the banks of the river Erimanthus, and carried by the
current into a plain, where they received their first nourishment from a
wolf; and being taken up and preserved by the shepherd Telephus, came
afterwards to be kings of Arcadia.

III. We are told that the senators, tired of the dominion of Romulus,
killed him in the senate-house; and, in order to conceal his death,
carried out each a piece of the defunct king, hid under their garments;
in consequence of this contrivance, the body not appearing, they were
able to impose upon the people, and persuade them that he had ascended to
Heaven. The same story, tittle for tittle, is related by Theophilus of
Pisistratus, the ancient king of Orchomena, in his Peloponnesian history.
He says, the senators, fired with indignation against him, for favouring
the populace more than the nobility, demolished and cut him into pieces
in the senate-house, from whence each of them carried out a small portion
of his body hid under their cloaths, which they deposited in their
houses, and by that means concealed the assassination from the public;
and, just afterwards Tlesymachus, one of the faction, pretended that he
had seen Pisistratus upon the top of Mount Piseus in the shape of a deity.

IV. Macrobius and Plutarch tell us, that in a short time after the
Romans had driven the Gauls from Rome, by whose invasion they were
much weakened, the Latins entered into a league against them, and
threatened their total ruin if they did not deliver up to them all the
women of quality that were in the city. The senate were perplexed about
what resolution to take in so critical a case: but while they were
deliberating, all the slaves came, and offered to deceive the enemy, by
going out to them dressed in the habits of their mistresses. The senate
accepted the offer, and the slaves went forth, making a great parade,
and dressed out like gay ladies. The Latins, who devoted the night to
revel and debauchery, were surprized, and entirely routed by the Romans.
The same story is told by Dasilus, in his history of Lydia; who says,
the same demand was made by the Sardinians upon the Smyrnans, which was
eluded by the same stratagem, and with the same success.

V. One of the most heroic actions for the service of his country,
performed by any man, and which is recognized as such by all the Roman
writers, is that of Curtius, a Roman knight. A horrid chasm having opened
itself, which threatened to swallow up the city of Rome; and the oracle
being consulted about what remedy they should take in this alarming
urgency, answered, that tremendous chasm could only be brought to close
by throwing into it whatever was most precious in Rome. Curtius,
reflecting that the most precious thing was the life of a man; having
dressed himself in compleat armour, mounted his horse, and plunged into
the abyss; upon which the mouth instantly shut. The same story, without
the alteration of a circumstance, is told by Calisthenis of Anchurus, the
son of the king of Phrygia.

VI. Persenas, king of the Etruscans, having reduced the Romans to great
hunger and distress by a close siege, Mucius Scevola undertook to kill
him; but directed the blow designed for the king, against one of the
generals whom he mistook for him. Being taken a prisoner, he was carried
before Porsena; when, finding the blunder he had made, he thrust his hand
into the fire, and while it was burning, told the king, that he and four
hundred more as resolute as himself, had sallied out of Rome together
with a determination of demolishing him; and that Persenas, terrified
with the threat, raised the siege. Agatharcides tells exactly the same
story of an Athenian, named Agesilaus; who, when he was endeavouring to
demolish Xerxes, by mistake, killed one of his generals: he afterwards
put his hand in the fire, and spoke to Xerxes just in the same manner
Mucius had spoke to Porsena.

VII. The battle of the three Horatios with the three Curios, in which two
of the first being slain, he who remained alive, by a keen stratagem,
slew the three Curios; and, returning home a conqueror, upbraided his
sister for lamenting the death of one of the Curios, to whom she was
betrothed: I say, this story with all its circumstances, may be found
related by Demeratus, of three brothers of the city of Tregea, and three
of that of Phenea, both in Arcadia. Plutarch, in his book of Parallels,
instances many other relations, greatly resembling one another, and which
are reciprocally applied by both the Greek and Roman historians, to their
own countries; but I shall omit them, because they are not so uniform
in their circumstances, as not to admit of the repetition of them being
imputable to accident: but the perfect similitude of all those we have
instanced, demonstrate, that they were copied from one another.

VIII. The Abbé Salliere, in a dissertation which was printed in the
sixth volume of the History of the Academy Royal and Belles Lettres at
Paris, pretends, that in this opposite application of uniform events,
those who copied were the Greeks; but as the great authority of Plutarch
is in favour of a contrary opinion, he endeavours to shew that it was
not Plutarch, but some other Greek author who was deserving of little
credit, that wrote the Parallels; and that the intent of the writer, be
he who he would, was nothing more, than to make it appear that Greece had
not been inferior to Rome in numbers of great men.

IX. I, having read with attention the book of Parallels, find most reason
to suppose that the Romans, and not the Greeks, were the copyists. The
design which the Abbé Salliere attributes to the Greeks of being desirous
to honour their country, does not seem to have much force; because many
of the events related in the Parallels, tend rather to dishonour it. But
it has little effect on the object of our intention, which is that of
shewing the uncertainty of history, whether the original relation of, or
the copying of those famous facts, ought to be attributed to the Greeks
or the Romans; but the truth is, that nobody at present, in deciding the
question, can go beyond feeble conjectures, and therefore the imputation
must be left at the doors of both parties.

X. The Abbé Lenglet du Fresno says, that the descent of the holy oil and
fleurs de lis from Heaven, are marvellous events, unknown to the original
French writers of eminence, altho’ they are much celebrated by middling
authors of these later times. (_Mem. Trevoux, anno 1735, art. 66._)

XI. Father Menochio, tom. 3. cent. 11. cap. 4. proves, by many
authorities, the antiquity of saluting and praying a blessing on those
who sneeze, to have been ages prior to the days of St. Gregory; and we
have already observed, that in the New World, and among many of the
barbarous nations who inhabit it, we have found this custom to have been
established. We shall add at present, a pleasant tale upon this occasion,
which some authors tell us of the king of Monomotapa. Whenever this king
sneezes, all those who are in his presence salute him; but they do it in
so high a voice, that they are heard by those in the antichamber and the
adjacent apartments, upon which they do the same; and the salutation is
repeated in this manner till it gets into the street, and runs all over
the city; so that every sneeze of the king, is attended by horrid outcry
of many thousands of his subjects.

XII. Dr. Prideaux, who wrote the life of the false prophet Mahomet, quoted
in the Critical Dictionary of Bayle, says, that his ancestors, for four
generations prior to him, who were named Cæsar, held the government of
the city of Mecca, and the custody of the idolatrous temple that was
in it; which was not less venerated by the Arabs, than that at Delphos
was by the Greeks; but what certainty have we that this illustrious
geneaology, is not one of the many fictions, with which the Arabs
endeavour to honour that famous impostor?

XIII. The essay or discourse of the Marquis of St. Aubin, on the
Uncertainty of History, in the first book, chap. 6. of his Treatise on
Opinions, is so pleasing and curious, on account of the variety of the
informations, and the opportuneness of the remarks contained in it,
that I thought I should make a very acceptable present to many of my
readers by translating it; and especially to those who don’t understand
French, or who have not the book: but I must premise before I give the
translation, that I shall divest it of the quotations, and omit such
passages, as are nearly the same with those we have given in the original
discourse, or the additions we have already made to it; and also, that I
shall give here and there a critical note upon such passages as seem to
require it.


A Translation of the Sixth Chapter of the First Book of the TREATISE ON
OPINION.


_The little Faith that is to be placed in History._

XIV. It is a very judicious reflexion made by Plutarch in his life of
Pericles, that it was very difficult, or nearly impossible, to discern
the true from the false by the help of history; because, if it is
written many ages after the events it treats of, the antiquity of the
transactions is an obstacle to coming at the knowledge of them; and if
it is written during the lives of the persons of whom it speaks, hatred,
envy, or motives of adulation, excite the author to corrupt and disfigure
the truth.

XV. Is it not probable that historians have been partial to their own
nation? that they have been silent upon, or have spoke slightingly of
the merit of those whose families have fallen to decay, or been nearly
extinguished? and that on the contrary, they have endeavoured to elevate
the names and extol the fame of those families from whom they expected to
be rewarded? The motives for disguising the truth are many; and Tacitus,
notwithstanding his protestations that he is perfectly uninfluenced by
hatred or the hopes of reward; I say, notwithstanding this, a suspicious
reader would give most credit to Estrady; who says, that in order to be
a good historian, a man should divest himself of country and religion,
should be of no profession, nor a follower of any party; which comes
pretty near to saying he should not be a man.

XVI. It would be loss of time, says S. Real, to study history in hopes
of knowing with certainty what has passed in the world; as the principal
information that can be derived from it, is a knowledge of what such and
such authors believed; and that we should not so much seek in history
for facts, as for the opinions of men. Clio, the muse who presides over
history, becomes a prostitute, who, for any price, surrenders herself to
the embraces of the first who solicits her favours.

XVII. Velleius Paterculus, the unworthy flatterer of Tiberius and his
favourite Sejanus, may be more properly said to have composed a panegyric
than a history. Zozimus let himself be carried away by passion, and his
resentment against Constantine; and Eusebius flattered him in every
thing. Titus Livius was an avowed favourer of the party of Pompey; and
Dion Cassius was very partial to Cæsar.

XVIII. History is a present, which should only be made to posterity.
Bocalini recommends, that an historian should write nothing but what has
come within the compass of his own observation; and that his book should
not be published till after he is dead. But even supposing that he has
been quite impartial, which, by the way, is a thing rather to be wished
for than expected, still, the work of every writer partakes of his own
character or disposition. Sallust is a moralist; Tacitus, a politician;
and Titus Livius, superstitious and an orator. They all endeavour to
point out to us the causes of events which were unknown, not only to the
people who lived when they happened, but even to those who had some hand
in negociating public business.

XIX. Greece was so fertile in historians, that the account of one battle
was related by more than three hundred authors. Lucian compares the
passion of the Greeks for writing history, to the epidemical disease of
the Abderitans, in which there was much madness mixed.

XX. All ancient history was almost totally disfigured by the poets, who
were continually interweaving fictions with truth; as may be seen by the
history of Jupiter and all the family of the Titans, by those of Isis,
Dido, Hercules, and the Argonautic Expedition; by that of the siege of
Troy, and many other examples.


_History partakes of the Genius of the People to whom it relates._

XXI. It is easy to discern, that history has more affinity to the genius
of the people to whom it appertains, than to truth or the importance of
events. All this science of history, such as it has been handed down to
us, is the fruit of the passion the Greeks had for writing and relating
stories. The history of antiquity, has communicated to us nought but
such things, as had relation to the Greeks and the Romans. For, not to
mention the continent of America, discovered in these latter ages, which
is so extensive and important, that of other countries was not drawn
out of oblivion, but only in proportion as their affairs were connected
with the Greek and Roman histories. Profane history has scarce taken any
notice of the Jews; and in the little it has said of them, there have
been gross errors. It would likewise have made very little mention of
the ancient Gauls, who extended their conquests and colonies almost over
the whole world, if they had not given occasion to be taken notice of
by their pillaging some of the Greek temples; and by the wars, offensive
and defensive, which they had with the Romans. The four celebrated
empires of the Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, and Romans, were not equal,
either in their duration, or the extent of their conquests, to four other
powers, of whom we have only a partial or trifling information; these
are the Chinese, Scythians, Arabs, and Turks[2]. But, notwithstanding
the obscurity of history with regard to these empires, we may venture to
affirm, that of China exceeded that of Assyria, both in its duration, the
number of its inhabitants, the policy of its government, and the extent
of its limits. The Conquests of Almanzor, which comprehended Africa, to
the Western Ocean, and almost all Spain, were more extensive than those
of Cyrus. The conquests of Alexander can’t be compared with those of
Tamerlane[3]. This conqueror subdued a portion of China, and opened a
passage through Tartary and Muscovy, for the sake of serving the emperor
of Constantinople, and triumphing over Bajazet; and, on his return home,
aggregated to his dominions, the countries of Syria, Persia, and a part
of India.

XXII. Our want of historical information, respecting those numerous
swarms of courageous and powerful people, who came out of Northern
Scythia, and, under different names, dismembered the whole Western Roman
Empire, is very extraordinary; which they did many centuries before
the original Turks of Eastern Scythia, who came from the coasts of
the Caspian Sea, and were called in, as some say, by the emperors of
Constantinople, and, as others say, by the kings of Persia; and who, upon
the ruins of the Eastern, Roman, and Arabian empires, established a power
more formidable than ever that of Rome had been[4]; the history of all
which warlike and formidable people, is very little known.


_Of the Passion for the wonderful._

XXIII. The love of the marvellous is one of the stumbling-blocks of
history. There are some historians, who take a pleasure in relating
incredible things, and seem as if they sympathized in the admiration
which they produce in credulous readers.

XXIV. The passion for the prodigious, has been the cause of inventing
many extraordinary stories. Justin tells us, that after the defeat of the
Persians at the battle of Marathon, Cynegyrus, an Athenian, pursued the
enemy in their flight; and when they in great disorder threw themselves
into their ships, he, to prevent their escape, laid hold of one of the
ships with his hands, but they being successively cut off, he seized and
detained her with his teeth.

XXV. Plutarch relates, that Pyrrhus being wounded in the head in a combat
with the Mamertines, was obliged to retire, to get his wound dressed,
and to refresh himself; but, after a little while, in spite of all the
opposition his own people could make against it, he returned to the
field, and, irritated by the bravados of one of the enemy of gigantic
stature, he, fired with indignation, advanced up to him, and with his
sword discharged a blow on his head with such fury, that he split him in
two, and that one half of his carcase fell down on one side of him, and
the other on the other.

XXVI. Procopius writes, that two women, who kept a house of lodging and
entertainment for travellers, in the time of a famine, killed and ate up
seventeen men: and we read in Maffeus, that a Portuguese soldier, having
in an engagement expended all his ball, drew his own teeth, with which he
charged his musquet, and fired them on the enemy.


_Obligations of an Historian._

XXVII. History should not resemble a picture, which aims at representing
nature in a beautiful light; for, as Father Orleans observes, a fine
touch passes easily from the imagination to the pen; and, although it
may illustrate a hero, is very apt to wound the truth, which is the most
essential character of history.

XXVIII. Who is ignorant, says Cicero, that the first law of history
enjoins the historian not to have the audacity to write any kind of lie,
or to want courage to speak the truth in all things, be the danger of
doing it what it may; and that, as far as he is able, he should avoid the
suspicion of being influenced, either by love or hatred? And Polybius,
long before Cicero’s time, had said, that the historian who suppresses
truths, is not less a liar than him who writes fables.


_The great Sincerity of some Historians._

XXIX. Polybius conforms very exactly to his own maxim, which we have just
repeated. This author’s mode of proceeding in his history, is so distant
from all dissimulation, that he comments upon the errors committed by his
own father Lycortas. Thucydides omits nothing that could reflect honour
on Cleon and Barcidas, by whose management he had been banished from
Athens.

XXX. Titus Livius makes honourable mention of Brutus and Cassius,
although they were the enemies of Augustus, in whose reign, and under
whose auspices, he wrote his history, and delivered down to posterity the
murderers of Cæsar, with the characters of virtuous citizens. Grotius
gave a striking instance of his sincerity in his history of the Low
Countries, by always speaking of prince Maurice of Nassau, with as much
moderation and indifference as if he had never been persecuted by him.

XXXI. We are given to understand by a passage in Plutarch, that in old
times, authors did not think themselves sufficiently qualified to write
a history, till they had travelled through the countries which were the
theatres of the events they were to treat of. Polybius prepared himself
for writing his history, by travelling through all the world which was
known in his time. Sallust passed the sea, in order to see with his own
eyes the theatre of the Jugurthan war. John Chartier assures us, that by
order of Charles the Seventh, he attended the most important expeditions
of that prince, to the end that he might be a witness of the facts he was
to relate.

XXXII. In Ethiopia, in Egypt, in Chaldea, in Persia, and in Syria, the
writing of history, and the custody of annals, was confided to none but
the priests. Numa recommended it to the pontiffs of Rome, to write the
history of the country in the public registers; but when the Gauls took
the city, these registers were for the most part burnt. In China, the
superintendance of history is given to the magistrates; notwithstanding
which, all their public registers are full of impostures, calculated
either to establish the worship of false deities, to flatter their
princes, or to indulge the taste and vanity of the nation.


_Histories filled with Fables._

XXXIII. Herodotus, who is called the Father of History, was looked upon
by the antients as a very fabulous writer. Strabo, Quintilian, and
Causabon, don’t give more credit to Herodotus, than to Homer, Hesiod,
and the tragic poets. Lucian, in his Journey to Hell, tells us, he saw
Herodotus there, who was tormented among others, for having deceived
posterity.

XXXIV. Pliny gives Diodorus Siculus the honour of having been the first
historian among the Greeks, who wrote seriously, and abstained from
fables. Louis Vives, on the contrary, thinks Diodorus was a fabulous
writer, and one of no solidity; and the same Diodorus, treats as
fabulous, all the writers who went before him.

XXXV. The learned are divided in their opinions upon the _Cyropedia_
of Xenophon. Many adopt the sentiment of Cicero, who looked upon it
as a drawing of invention, designed to represent a perfect prince.
Notwithstanding this, a contrary opinion seems to prevail at this day,
and the _Cyropedia_ is considered as a true history.

XXXVI. Asinius Pollio, thinks the Commentaries of Cæsar are not written
with much care, nor with much sincerity: and Vossius makes mention of
the strange caprice of a man, who told him, that after having meditated
deliberately, and with much application on the subject, he had wrote a
book, in which he had proved with invincible arguments, that Cæsar had
never passed the Alps, and that all he had wrote in his Commentaries
about his wars with the Gauls was false. Procopius, in his General
History, loads the emperor Justinian and his wife the empress Theodosia
with eulogiums; and likewise Belisarius and his wife Antonina; but in his
Anecdotes, or Secret History, he is outrageous in his abuse of them, and
calls them by the most opprobrious names. Aretinus boasted that he was
the arbiter and disposer of the reputation of princes, dispensing among
them eulogiums or reflections, just as they were generous or parsimonious
towards him. He tells us, that Charles the Fifth upon his return from the
expedition against Tunis, presented him with a gold chain, and that he
said to the emperor upon receiving it, “This is but a very scanty reward
to excite me to speak well of an enterprize that was so badly concerted.”

XXXVII. The monuments themselves are not always faithful vouchers for
the truth of facts; for even the brass and the marble will sometimes lie.
The inscription on the triumphal arch of Titus, erected to celebrate the
conquest of Jerusalem, declares, that no emperor before him had ever
taken or dared to besiege that city. Notwithstanding this, besides the
assertion being contradicted by the authority of holy writ, Cicero in one
of his letters to Atticus, calls Pompey, _our Jerusalemite_; and no one
at Rome was ignorant that Jerusalem was one of the conquests of Pompey.


_Of the ancient Chronicles._

XXXVIII. If the historians of the first rate, and the monuments are
suspicious, what shall we say of our ancient chronicles? Why, I fear, we
can call them nothing but miserable attested novels filled with fables;
and this is the opinion which a celebrated academician expresses of them.
After the fierce barbarous nations of the North, spread themselves and
their ignorance over all the parts of Europe, the historians degenerated
into novelists: then, the relation of incredible and wonderful adventures
began to be looked upon as the sublime part of history. Thelesinus, who
is said to have lived about the middle of the sixth century, in the reign
of king Arthur, and Melchinus, who is not quite so ancient, wrote the
history of Great Britain, their own country; and of king Arthur, and
his knights of the round table; which, they disfigured with a thousand
fables. The same may be said of Hannibald the Frank; who, although he is
much more modern, some believe to have been contemporary with Clodovicus,
whose history is a rhapsody of lies, coarsly imagined. Such also was
the history, of which Gildas, a religious of Wales, was said to be the
author; and which relates an infinity of marvellous things; of king
Arthur, Perceval, Lancelot, and many others. The judicious criticism
which prevails at present, will be careful to transmit to posterity a
system of ancient history, amended and illustrated with a great number
of useful observations; and also, a more chaste and correct one of our
own times. But, notwithstanding all the care and precaution a historian
can take, and all the industry he can exert, it is certain, we can’t know
the characters of men, and the motives which led to events, but from the
memoirs of those who had a principal hand in conducting public business.


_Excessive Pyrrhonism in History._

XXXIX. Carlovicus, who had a share in the most material transactions of
his time, upon reading the history of Sleidan, and finding the truth
of things so disfigured in it, declared, that history inclined him to
withhold his assent to all that was related in any other, either ancient
or modern. Sir Thomas Brown, an Englishman, the author of a tract,
intitled The Religion of a Physician, in which he speaks of history,
says, ‘I don’t give more credit to relations of things past, than to
predictions of those to come.’ Thus we see men are disposed to run into
extremes both of credulity and pyrrhonism.

XL. Mr. Bayle says, that history is dressed and prepared, nearly the same
as victuals is dressed and prepared in the kitchen; every nation cooks
it in their own way; in consequence of which, the same thing comes to be
dressed in as many different modes as there are countries in the world;
and nearly all men, find those most grateful to their palates which they
are most accustomed to. Such, with little variation, is the lot of all
history. Every nation, every sect, taking the same facts, let us say
crude, prepare and season them to their own taste; and afterwards, they
appear to every reader, either true or false, just as they agree with or
are repugnant to his prejudices. We may even carry the comparison still
further, for there are certain eatables, absolutely unknown in some
countries, the inhabitants of which countries would probably loath the
sight of, let them be dressed and seasoned in what manner they would; so
there are some facts that would not gain credit but with this or that
particular nation, or this or that particular sect; and all the others
would be inclined to treat them as calumnies and impositions.

XLI. Many historians, from various motives, transmit to posterity some
facts which they themselves did not assent to. Eneas Sylvius, in his
history of Bohemia, says, _Plura scribo, quam credo_.


_Relations of Battles which seem incredible._

XLII. The accounts of many battles contain circumstances which appear
incredible. Plutarch tells us, that Marcus Valerius won a battle against
the Sabines, in which he slew thirteen thousand of the enemy without
losing one of his own men. And Diodorus Siculus, attributes the same
happy success to the Lacedemonians, in an engagement they had with the
Arcadians, of whom they killed ten thousand without the loss of a man on
their own side, which so fell out, that the prediction of an oracle might
be verified, who had pronounced, that war should not cause a single tear
to be shed in Sparta.

XLIII. In the battle which the Consul Fabius Maximus gained over the
Allobroges and Auvernagans, Appian says, there were but fifteen men slain
on the part of the Romans, and that there remained a hundred and twenty
thousand Gauls dead on the field of battle; and adds, that the Romans in
the pursuit, took and destroyed eighty thousand more, who were either
drowned in the Rhone or carried prisoners to Rome.

XLIV. Sylla, in his memoirs, writes, that at the battle of Cheronea, in
which he routed Archelaus, the lieutenant of Mithridates, there perished
a hundred and ten thousand of the enemy, and only twelve Romans. And in
the same memoirs he tells us, that in the battle he fought with young
Marius, with the loss of no more than twenty three of his own men, he
killed twenty thousand of his antagonist’s, and took eight thousand
prisoners.

XLV. In the life of Lucullus, written by Plutarch, we read, that in the
battle he had with Tigranes, in Tigranocerta, the whole of the cavalry
of the king, and more than a hundred thousand infantry, were put to the
sword, and that there remained only five of Lucullus’s soldiers dead on
the field, and that his wounded did not exceed a hundred.

XLVI. Alexander of Alexandria writes, that Pompey, in one of his battles
with Mithridates, did not lose more than twenty soldiers, and that there
fell on the side of the king forty thousand.

XLVII. In the battle of Chalons, between the Count Aëtius and Theodoric,
king of the Visigoths, on one side, and Attila, king of the Huns, on the
other; in which Theodoric was killed. Some authors make the number of
the slain in both armies to amount to three hundred thousand men. The
historians in general agree, that they at least amounted to a hundred and
seventy thousand, without reckoning among the number fifteen thousand
French and Gepides, who fell in with each other accidentally in the
night, and fought in the dark with such fury, that not one of the whole
number was left alive.

XLVIII. There are authors, who, upon the credit of Paul the Deacon and
Anastasius Bibliothecarius, compute the number of men the Saracens lost
in the battle of Poitiers, at three hundred and seventy five thousand;
which account, say the judicious authors of the History of Languedoc,
seems fabulous. Some, in order to give an air of probability to this
circumstance, have pretended that there were included in this computation
a great number of women, children, slaves, and other followers of the
camp. But Valois has shewn, that in this irruption none but soldiers
passed the Perines: and Mezeray says, that the army of the Saracens did
not exceed eighty, or at most a hundred thousand men.

XLIX. In the year 891, the emperor Arnuflus, gained so compleat a victory
over the Normans, that out of a hundred thousand men, which their army
consisted of, not one escaped; and that on the side of the Imperialists
they did not lose a single man. The authority quoted for this relation,
is the History of the World, by Chevreau, lib. 5.

L. Mariana, after all the chronicles, says, that in the battle which the
three kings of Aragon, Navarre, and Castile, fought with the Moors, the
Christians lost only twenty-five men, and that the number which perished
of the infidels amounted to two hundred thousand. In that of Tarifa also,
the Moors lost two hundred thousand, and the Christians only twenty.

LI. What historians relate of the victories of the Norman princes in
Sicily, is likewise void of all probability: for instance, that out of
three hundred thousand men defeated by Roger, not one escaped; that the
sons of Tancred, with seven hundred horse and five hundred infantry, beat
the army of the emperor of Constantinople, consisting of seventy thousand
men. But all we have hitherto mentioned, is nothing compared with what is
told by Nicetas in his history of the emperor Alexis; which is, that at
the siege of Constantinople, one Frenchman only, put to flight the whole
Grecian army.

LII. Lucian treats as fabulous and ridiculous all the accounts of such
disproportionate numbers slain. The remark of Titus Livius, when he was
told of an alarming apparition that had been seen in the tomb of Veis,
may be applied to many relations in history. He says, these incidents
are more proper for the theatre than history; and I don’t chuse either
to affirm or refute them, it being sufficient to know they were once
published by the voice of fame.


_Diversity of Opinions upon many famous historical Facts._

LIII. Metrodorus Lampsacenus without the least scruple affirms, that
the heroes of whom Homer makes mention in the Iliad, such as Agamemnon,
Achilles, Hector, Paris, and Eneas, are all fictitious persons, who never
existed.

LIV. Some authors assert, that the number of women stolen by the Romans
from the Sabines, did not exceed thirty. Valerius Antias and Dionysius
Halicarnasseus, make them amount to five hundred and twenty seven; and
Juba computes them at six hundred and eighty three.

LV. Titus Livius, Florus, Plutarch, and Aurelius Victor, say, that the
dictator Camillus defeated and drove away the Gauls who had taken Rome;
Polybius, Justin, and Suetonius, tell us, that the Venetians having made
an irruption into the territories of the Gauls; these, that they might be
at leisure to attend to the defence of their own country, accommodated
matters with the Romans, who agreed to pay them a certain sum of money,
upon condition of their leaving Rome, with which money and the plunder
they had made, they returned home.

LVI. Plutarch begins his life of Lycurgus thus: “We can say nothing
positively of the law-giver Lycurgus, because historians speak very
variously concerning him, and _because_, respecting his origin, his
voyages, his death, and even his laws, and the form of government he
established, there are divers traditions; but there is more disagreement
still in the accounts we have of him, with respect to the time he lived
in.”

LVII. Herodotus, Diodorus, Trogus Pompeius, Justin, Pausanias, Plutarch,
Quintus Curtius, and many other authors, have spoke of the nation of the
Amazons. Strabo denies, that such a nation ever existed. Arrian considers
as very suspicious, all that has been written of the Amazons. Others have
understood the Amazons to have been armies of men, who were governed
and commanded by warlike women; and they shew, that these examples were
not unfrequent among the antients; for the Medes and the Sabeans obey’d
queens; and Semiramis commanded the Assyrians; Thomiris, the Scythians;
Cleopatra, the Egyptians; Boadicea, the Britains; and Zenobia, the
Palmyrenes.

LVIII. Appian believes, that the Amazons were not any particular nation,
but that they gave this name to all women who went to war, be they
of what nation they would. Some think, the pretended Amazons were a
barbarous people, who wore long robes, shaved their beards, and dressed
and ornamented their heads after the manner of the women in Thrace.
According to Diodorus Siculus, Hercules, the son of Alcmena, whom
Eurystheus charged with bringing to him the shoulder-belt of Hyppolita,
went to the coasts of the Thermodontes, to engage, and there destroyed
this warlike nation.

LIX. But notwithstanding this, the most celebrated traces of history,
respecting the Amazons, are of a later date, than either the Grecian
Hercules, or the son of Alcmena; because the stealing of Antiope by
Theseus, excited the Amazons to undertake the war, in which they
conquered all Attica, and pitched their camp upon the parade of the
Areopagus itself. Pensithelea, queen of the Amazons, went to the succour
of Troy, and was killed by Achilles, and Thalestris. Another of their
queens, accompanied by three hundred of her warriors, went in search of
Alexander, with a view of having a posterity by him.

LX. Dion Chrysostom says, that Herodotus solicited from the Corinthians,
some recompence for writing his Greek Histories, but they having returned
for answer, that they did not chuse to purchase honour with money, he
quite altered the relation of the naval battle of Salamois, and charged
Adimanthus, a Corinthian General, with flying with his whole squadron at
the beginning of the battle.

LXI. Timoleon freed Corinth his own country, from the tyranny of
Timophanes, his brother. Plutarch relates the transaction in this
manner. Timoleon, and two of his friends who were zealous assertors of
liberty, having taken a solemn oath to depose the tyrant if he refused
to relinquish his usurpation, went to his house, and finding they could
not move him by intreaties, Timoleon retired a little and burst into
tears, and at that instant, his two friends flew upon Timophanes, and
tore him to pieces. Diodorus Siculus says, Timoleon killed his brother
on the public parade. The first historian considers the love of liberty
as a principle implanted in the nature of man, and therefore endeavours
all he can to soften and excuse the atrociousness of the act. The second
blazons and exaggerates it, with a view of exalting the zeal of Timoleon
for his country. In the midst of so many dangers, produced by the
characters, motives, and passions of authors, truth, in navigating the
sea of history, is shipwrecked, and hinder’d from being handed down to
posterity.

LXII. Cyrus, according to Xenophon, died composed, and in his bed.
Onesicritus, Arrian, Herodotus, Justin, and Valerius Maximus, affirm,
that Thomyris, queen of the Massagetes, having overcome, and made him
a prisoner, caused him to be put to death, and his head to be immerged
in a vessel filled with human blood, in order, as the irritated queen
declared, that the thirst he had ever had for that fluid might be
satiated. Ctesias writes, that he was killed by an arrow shot at him by
an Indian. Diodorus, that he was made a prisoner, and crucified by a
queen of the Scythians; and according to Lucian, he died of grief, on
account of Cambyses his son, having under the false pretence of an order
from him, put to death the major part of those he most esteemed.

LXIII. One of the most remarkable transactions of the Roman History, is the
defeat of the Fabians, in the engagement of Cremera. This body, composed
of one family only, and which Florus calls a Patrician Army, were cut
to pieces, and out of three hundred and six Fabians, there remained
only one youth of fourteen years old alive, who was spared on account
of his tender age. There are few facts which have been more unanimously
attested than this, nor by a greater number of authors. Titus Livius,
Ovid, Aurelius Victor, Silius, and Festus, relate it exactly in the same
manner; but notwithstanding this, Dionysius Halicarnassus rejects it as
intirely fabulous. Titus Livius places the death and fanatic consecration
of the two Decii, in the wars against the Latins and the Samnites; but
Cicero places it in those with the Etruscans, and against Pyrrhus.

LXIV. The silence of Polybius, respecting the fate of Regulus after his
captivity, has occasioned many learned men to doubt of all that has been
said on that subject.

LXV. Aurelius Victor relates, the emperor Claudius the second, knowing
that the books of the Sibyls promised great victories and prosperity to
the empire, if the first man in the senate would voluntarily surrender
himself to be sacrificed for the good of his country, which coming to
be talked of, the eldest senator offered himself to become the victim;
but the emperor would not accept the tender, chusing rather to reserve
to himself the glory of that sacrifice, alledging, that the prediction
applied to him, as prince and chief of the senate. The same author adds,
that for this magnanimous action, a statue of gold was erected to his
memory in the Temple of Jupiter, and a bust of gold in the senate. He
says further, the name of the senior senator, who offered his life to
obtain the completion of the Sibyl prediction, was Pompeius Bassus.
Neither Trebelius Pollio, nor Eutropius, make the least mention of all
this; but on the contrary, have both affirmed, this Emperor died of a
natural disease.

LXVI. That manifestation of heroic fortitude, in the action of biting the
tongue off with the teeth in the torture, is attributed by Jamblicus, to
Timyca Pythagorica; by Tertullian, to the Courtesan Leæna; by Valerius
Maximus, Pliny, Diogenes Laertius, and Philo Judæus, to the Philosopher
Anaxarchus; and by St. Jerome, in his Life of Saint Paul the first
Hermit, to a holy Martyr[5].

LXVII. Some say that Placidia caused her brother, the emperor Honorius,
to sign an instrument, by which he granted this princess in marriage
to one of his meanest officers, and that she afterwards complaining to
the emperor of this indignity, he denied that he had ever done any such
thing; upon which she shewed him his sign manual, and by this instance,
illustrated and corrected the facility with which he had been used to
sign papers he never read; for she herself had prevailed on him to set
his hand to the instrument, upon suggesting to him, that it contained
his assent to a matter of a very different nature. Others put this
stratagem in the head of Pulcheria, who betrayed her brother the emperor
Theodosius into signing a deed, by which he consented to sell his wife
the empress Eudoxia for a slave.

LXVIII. Upon no other principle than that of the violent preoccupation
of historians, can we account for the diversity with which the death of
Julian the Apostate is related. Some say, that being mortally wounded
in a battle with the Persians, and finding his dissolution approach, he
catch’d his blood in his hands, and in a rage threw it up towards heaven,
exclaiming with great earnestness to our Saviour, Thou hast conquered,
Nazarene, thou hast conquered. Others tell us, that he tried in vain to
extract the arrow from his wound, and in the attempt cut his hand with
it, and finding himself in a desperate state, ordered, that they should
carry him into the heat of the battle, to encourage his soldiers; and
when he was dying, he with his last breath, gave thanks to the Gods for
having blessed him with so glorious a death, in the flower of his age,
and in the full career of his victories, and before he had experienced
any reverse of fortune to tarnish his laurels; to which he added, that
long before that era, the Gods had announced this death to him[6].

LXIX. The punishment of queen Bruneguilda, who, it is said, Clodovicus
the second condemned to be torn to pieces by wild horses, for having
taken away the lives of ten Kings, is very doubtful and suspicious.
Mariana, who treats this relation as a mere fable, says, the French
historians had a great propensity to credit and write marvellous
occurrences, which he is at a loss whether to impute to their simplicity
or their assurance; and Pasquier refutes separately and distinctly, every
accusation that has been charged on that queen.

LXX. Historians are much divided in their opinions, with respect to how
the popes came to change their names upon their exaltation to the papal
chair. Fr. Paul Sarpi attributes the origin of it to the Germans, whose
names sounding harsh and dissonant in the ears of the Italians, they upon
being elected popes changed them; which came afterwards to be a custom,
says this author, that was followed by the other popes, and by which
they meant to express, that they had changed their private and human
affections for public and divine cares. Platina pretends, that Sergius
the second was the first that changed his name, because that he before
went by, had a harsh sound. Baronius treats this reason with contempt,
and attributes the origin of the practice to Sergius the third, whose
name happening to be Peter, he, from a motive of humility, divested
himself of the name of the Prince of the Apostles. Onuphrius believes,
that John the twenty-second first set this example, because he would not
preserve as pope, the name of Octavianus, which had a heathenish sound.
Many are of opinion, that this changing the name was done to imitate St.
Peter, whose name of Simon was by our Redeemer changed to that of Cephas.

LXXI. Although the fable of Pope Joan has been refuted by even the
Protestants themselves, among whom we may reckon David Blondel, who
wrote with an express intention of doing it; there have not been wanting
some, who had the reputation of men of learning, who have endeavoured to
establish as true so fabulous a fact[7].

LXXII. The original institution of the Electors of Germany is a matter
much contested. Some attribute it to Charles the great. Others, such as
Blondo, Nauclerus, and Platina, to Gregory the fifth. Maimburgus, and
Pasquier, to a celebrated council that was held in the time of this pope.
Many again pretend, that Gregory the fifth, the emperor Otho the third,
and the princes of Germany, concurred together in making this regulation.
According to Machiavel, Gregory the fifth having been driven from Rome
by the populace, and reinstated by the emperor Otho the third; he, to
chastise the Romans, transferred their rights of chusing the Emperor, to
the archbishops of Mentz, Treves, and Cologn, and to the three secular
princes, the Count Palatine, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquis of
Brandenburgh.

LXXIII. The Germans themselves, and they only, enjoyed the right of
electing an emperor. Albertus, Abbot of Stade, who was an author
contemporary with the emperor Frederick the second, says in formal
terms, that Gregory the ninth, who had excommunicated Frederick the
second, wrote to the German princes, requiring them to elect another
emperor; to which they answered, that it did not belong to the pope to
concern himself with the election of an emperor, for that was a right
appertaining solely to themselves; The same author immediately adds,
that by virtue of an ordinance, which had been before made by these
princes by common consent, the right of electing an emperor, was declared
to be vested in the archbishops of Mentz, Treves, and Cologn, the Count
Palatin, the Duke of Saxony, the Marquis of Brandenburgh, and the King
of Bohemia. Paulus Vindelecius, in his treatise upon the electors, says,
that long before this, it was the custom, to present to the seven great
officers of the empire, him who had the most suffrages in the diet; and
according to Aventinus in his Annals, and Onuphrius in his Treatise on
the Imperial Diets, the right of electing an emperor was restrained by
Pope Gregory the tenth to the seven electors.

LXXIV. All that can with certainty be deduced from this variety of
opinions, is, that the institution of the electors was not antecedent to
the thirteenth century, and that it did not take place till after the
reign of Frederick the second; for before that time, all the contemporary
authors testify, the princes, prelates, and German nobles, elected the
emperor. Lampadius, a great German lawyer, places the institution of
the electoral college in the reign of Frederick the second; and Otho
Frisingensis says, that Frederick the first, called Red Beard, was
elected by all the Princes of the empire. Trithemius, in his Chronicle,
determines the beginning of the suffrages of the electors, to have
commenced at the election of William Count of Holland, in the year 1247.
According to Frederick Brockelman, the mode of electing by seven, began
at the election of Adolphus Count of Nassau, who, he says, was chosen by
the three archbishops, the three secular Princes, and a proxy on the part
of the King of Bohemia. At another election, the Archbishops of Treves
and Mentz, the King of Bohemia, and the Marquis of Brandenburgh by proxy,
gave their votes for Louis of Bavaria; and the Archbishop of Cologn, the
Count Palatin, and the Duke of Saxony, voted for Frederick of Austria.
This division of the suffrages of the Electors, proves clearly, that
they then consisted of no more than seven. The electoral order was not
formally and permanently settled, till it was established by the Golden
Bull of the emperor Charles the fourth.

LXXV. William du Bellai de Langey, and Monsieur Haillan, say, that the
famous Maid of Orleans, Joan d’Arc, was not burnt; and Father Vignier
adds, that after her imprisonment by the English, or rather after being
released from that imprisonment, she married with Gil de Armuesa, and
left children by him. The author of the Latin poem, which contains her
history, says, that after she had suffered the punishment of being burnt
alive, to which the English had condemned her, her memory was restored to
credit by a decree.

LXXVI. The historians of the times in which the event happened, are
not agreed upon the circumstances of the assassination of the Duke of
Burgundy, at Montereau Faut-Yonne, in 1419; some say, that the Duke,
upon approaching the Dauphin, fell on his knees to salute him, and that
then, Tranquildo du Chatel gave him a blow with a hatchet, which he
instantly repeated, and the duke fell dead. Others tell us, that the
duke attempting to make the dauphin a prisoner, the attendants of the
dauphin who were with him, fell upon the duke and killed him. Others
again say, that three gentlemen of the defunct duke of Orleans, attended
this interview, with an intention of revenging the death of their late
master; which design they executed, by killing the duke so suddenly and
unexpectedly, that it was impossible to prevent it.

LXXVII. Alexus Piamontes, speaking of an elixir calculated to restore
blind people to their sight, says, that this remedy was contrived at a
consultation of the most learned physicians of Italy, in 1438, for the
purpose of recovering the sight of the emperor of Constantinople, who
was then attending the council of Ferrara with the pope Eugenius the
Fourth, and that in fact, it did restore his eye-sight perfectly. Father
Le Brun, in his history of superstitious practices, gives us this passage
of Alexus Piamontes, and says, that in order to find out the truth of
the fact, he had examined all the contemporary authors who had spoke
of the emperor John Palcologus, and what happened to him at Ferrara in
1438; and that upon this enquiry, he found that neither Blondo, Ducas,
nor Calcondylas, had wrote a word concerning the loss or recovery of this
emperor’s sight at Ferrara; and that Sylvester Scyropulus, so far from
giving us to understand that this emperor had been blind at Ferrara, or
had suffered the least disorder in his eyes during his abode there, says,
that instead of attending the business of the council, he amused himself
continually with hunting and shooting, which is a diversion, not well
calculated for a man who has lost his eyes, or has even an impediment in
his sight[8].

LXXVIII. Varillas, in his anecdotes of Florence, writes, that Peter de
Medicis finding his father dead, after Leoni his physician had given
assurances that he could cure him; in a fit of rage, fell upon Leoni
and tumbled him headlong into a well, where he was suffocated. Angelo
Politianus, who was present at his decease, and who, in one of his
letters on the subject, writes all the circumstances of the death of
Lorenzo the father of Peter de Medicis, says, that Leoni, in a fit of
despair at not having been able to cure Lorenzo according to his promise,
threw himself into a well, and was drowned there. Who shall we believe in
this case, Angelo Politianus, or Varillas? It may be that the enemies of
Peter de Medicis, with a view of tarnishing his fame, have attributed to
him this brutal act of drowning the physician: and it might also happen,
that Angelo Politianus, who was a partizan of the Medicis family, gave
the relation he did, in order to defend the character of Peter from so
black an imputation. We are often placed in this state of doubt and
perplexity by history, and don’t know who or what to rely on; and are
equally in danger of being deceived by authors, whether they mislead us
from motives of flattery or of hatred.

LXXIX. Some historians have said that Philip the Second, caused his
son Don Carlos to be strangled. Paul Piasechi, a bishop and senator of
Poland, gives us to understand, that King Philip procured his son Don
Carlos to be dispatched; but he speaks ambiguously, and does not explain
whether this prince died of poison, or of grief at finding himself
imprisoned. Saint Evremont writes, that the Spaniard who strangled Don
Carlos, said to him at the time he was about it, _Have patience Sir, this
is done for your good_. Nothing surely can have more the appearance of
an invented falsehood than this cruel and barbarous irony. The Venetian
senator, Andrew Morosini, says in his History of Venice, that Charles not
having any instrument wherewith to kill himself, determined to starve
himself to death; but not being suffered to do this by those who looked
after him, he tried the expedient of swallowing the diamond of one of his
rings; but this not having the desired effect, he was resolved to put an
end to his life by one means or other; and betook himself to eating and
drinking with excess, which brought on a dysentery that carried him off
in a few days. Cabrera agrees with the Venetian senator; but the greatest
part of historians insist, that his death was not voluntary, but directed
by his father; to whom they attribute his saying, by way of justifying
the act, that if he found he had any bad blood belonging to him, he had
an undoubted right to let it out. It is much to be wondered at, that
a circumstance of history which is of no greater antiquity, should be
enveloped in such clouds and darkness. Charles ended his life on the 24th
of July, 1568, at four in the morning, aged twenty-five years and fifteen
days.

LXXX. Isabella of France, called the Princess of Peace, on account of
that which accompanied her marriage with Philip the Second, died the
third of October in the same year, and two months and ten days after Don
Carlos. The Spanish historians attribute her death to a mistake of the
physicians, who bled her when she was pregnant: ours, on the other hand,
accuse her husband of being the author of it: and Mezeray speaks of the
event in the following words: We are about to relate one of the most
monstrous adventures imaginable; which is, that Philip the Second having
come to understand that his only son Charles had held a correspondence
with the confederated lords of the Low Countries, who were endeavouring
to prevail upon him to come to Flanders, caused him to be imprisoned, and
deprived of life, either by slow poison or strangling him; and that a
little while afterwards, on account of some jealousy he entertained, he
poisoned his wife, together with the infant in her womb; as was attested
afterwards by her mother queen Catherine, upon the authority of secret
informations given to her by her daughter, and by the depositions of the
domestics of that princess, after their arrival in France[9].

LXXXI. Nothing can be blacker than the colours in which Buchanan paints
the unfortunate Mary Queen of Scots, although other historians give her
the character of a very perfect princess.

LXXXII. I shall insert here the judgment Montaigne makes, of a history
written by William de Bellai, and of the memoirs of Martin de Bellai
his brother. He says, “It can’t be denied that we perceive evidently
in those authors, a great neglect for that frankness and sincerity of
writing which is resplendent in our ancient historians; such as Monsieur
Joinville, a domestic of Saint Louis; Eginard the chancellor to Charles
the Great; and Philip of Comines, who is more modern. Their works are
more properly a declamation in favour of king Francis, and against
Charles the Fifth, than a history. I would not willingly believe they
have altered any thing with respect to the material facts; but it looks
as if they took pains to warp the judgment of the reader in favour of
their own country, and as if they studiously omitted, to mention any
thing that made against the reputation of their own monarch: and it is
remarked by Montmorenci and Brion, that they never once mention Madame
d’Estampes[10]. They might omit to speak of private transactions, but
their being silent upon things that became of consequence on account of
the effect they had on public concerns, was an inexcusable fault; and,
believe me, he who would attain a thorough knowledge of the character of
Francis, and the things which happened in his reign, should read other
historians.”


_Of good Criticism on History._

LXXXIII. We think it is now time, to have done treating of so inscrutable
a matter as the contradictions of historians. In order to form something
like a consistent judgment of suspicious histories, criticism should
ascend to the first fountains, and perhaps the only ones from whence
they were derived; for instance, to Marianus Scotus, for the story of
Pope Joan; and to Gaguin, for the pretended erection of the kingdom of
Yvetot. It is next necessary, to attend carefully to the time, in which
the first bringer to light of an uncertain fact wrote, what profession he
was of, what party he followed, and, above all, what was his character
with regard to his adherence to or indifference for the truth; and also,
whether in all his works he has preserved exactness and uniformity;
and we should likewise attend to the consistency of the testimonies
in support of a relation, which ought always to be mentioned. These
precautions, might tend to lead us on to a knowledge of the truth of
historical facts.


_The Benefit to be derived from the Study of History._

LXXXIV. The principal object in the reading of history, ought to be that
of studying men, their characters, and geniuses. He who reads, says
Montaigne, should not attend so much to the era of time in which Carthage
was destroyed, as to the customs and manners of Hannibal and Scipio; nor
so much to the knowing where Marcellus died, as why he acted unworthy of
his duty and obligations, by exposing and losing his life for a trifling
object. To study history, is to study the opinions, the motives, and
passions of men; and the fruit of that study, should be learning to know
yourself by the knowledge you acquire of others; to correct your failings
by their examples; and to learn experience at their expence.

LXXXV. The obligations of an historian are, to instruct men by making
them acquainted with the exact truth of events; because, if nothing
more was necessary than to display sentiments, geniuses, and customs,
novels and theatrical pieces would be equally opportune to answer that
purpose as historical volumes. The author of the novel of Sethos says
justly in his preface, that feigned situations and circumstances are the
best suited for exhibiting great examples; but observes likewise, that
the display of characters and example, makes an incomparably greater
impression, when it is blended, if not with an intire persuasion, with a
probable opinion of the truth of the facts.




THE DIVORCE OF HISTORY from FABLE.


SECT. I.

I. The maxim, that a lie is always the child of something, has done great
mischief in the world; because it authorizes fiction, attributing to it
an illustrious birth, by supposing it to have been derived from, and
nursed in the cradle of truth. Those who adopt this opinion, conjecture,
that there is no error whatever which has not more or less mixture of
reality in its composition, and that fable, is always built upon some
solid historical fact.

II. Both reason and experience militate against this vulgar hypothesis;
experience, because we every day see artful impositions, which owe
their origin, solely to the malice of those who prefer them. What reason
could the wife of Potipher have, for attributing an infamous attempt to
the chaste Joseph? What mixture of truth was there in the premeditated
accusation, which the two old lechers preferred against the innocent
Susannah? but it is wasting time to repeat examples, which are daily
presenting themselves to our eyes and ears.

III. If we consult reason, we shall be convinced, that he who can devise
the one half of a fabulous tale, can easily invent the other half; for
what more difficulty can there occur in the invention of the one, than
the other part of it? or what necessity is there for his borrowing
materials for a fable from a true event, who possesses a fertile mine
of them in his own imagination? The logicians say, and they say right,
that there are some entities of reason which have real foundations; and
others, which have none. This maxim may be applied to fables; as there
are many of them which are partly grounded on true facts; and many
likewise, whose composition is all pure iron, in which, there is not the
least mixture of either gold or silver.


SECT. II.

IV. The idea, that a lie is always mixed with some truth from whence
it was derived, is not only prevalent among the vulgar, but has also
taken place in the imaginations of many learned men; who have extended
the opinion to those truths and lies, which are the most different in
themselves, and the most widely distant from each other; that is, to
revealed truths, and the errors which are diametrically opposite to them.
These pretend, that all the fables of gentilism, took their rise from
events that are related in the scripture; and that these fables, are
nothing else but sacred history altered and corrupted.

V. The erudition that has been expended in this endeavour, is immense;
and there is no doubt, but the arduousness of the undertaking, requires
great learning and reading, as it demands a knowledge of almost
all the profane authors, in order to extract from their works all
those circumstances, in which they shall find any allusion between
the fables and the histories; and also a profound knowledge of the
Oriental languages, for the purpose of deducing, either by means of the
signification or etymology of the words, the resemblance between the
names of the heroes and deities of the Pagans, and those of the persons
of the scripture. This is a task, that has been undertaken by men who
were extremely learned and able; such as Bishop Huet, Father Tournemine,
Samuel Bochart, Nicholas Butler, Heinsius, Vossius, and others. But their
labours turned out to be all cultivating with great industry a soil, that
was capable of producing nothing but flowers; I mean, that all the toils
of these great men, served only to shew their ingenuity and erudition,
but not to discover the truth.

VI. I well know this sentiment of mine stands in need of much support,
on account of the great numbers of literary men who are votaries to the
opinion, that in the fables of the Gentiles, are involved or disguised
the truths of the scripture; finding then that I can have but little
hopes of aid from authority, I must appeal to reason; but I consider
myself to have so good a plea at this tribunal, that I have great
expectations judgment will be pronounced in my favour by all such of my
readers, as are divested of prejudice or preoccupation.


SECT. III.

VII. The first thing that seems to have weight against this system, is
the great opposition between the authors themselves who are the advocates
for it, with regard to their application of the cases instanced by them;
for in the same fable, in which one fancies he sees traces of one part of
sacred history, another imagines he perceives those of a very different
one. For example, Monsieur Huet conceives, that in the fabulous story of
Hercules, is involved or disguised the history of Joshua; and Nicholas
Butler finds in the same fable, the adventures of Adam. Mons. Huet
fancies, that Moses is described in the fable of Perseus; and Mr. Butler,
in the same fable, discovers the history of Jonas. Is it not clearer than
the sun at noon-day, that the adventures of Joshua and Adam, as likewise
those of Moses and Jonas, which are so different in themselves, can only
by the force of violent and strained allusions, be made in one fable, to
be descriptive of Joshua and Adam, and in another, of Moses, and Jonas?

VIII. But the disagreement in what I am now about to mention, is much
more enormous still. Mons. Huet, who, in the errors of paganism, fancies
he discovers multiplied descriptions of Moses, imagines, he sees this
hero painted to the life in the fable of Prometheus; and in the same
fable, Father Tournemine finds depicted the crime and punishment of
Lucifer. Such a striking contradiction, makes it manifest, that authors
who employ themselves in such undertakings, are not guided by any firm or
permanent lights which are thrown on the objects of their speculations,
but by some false rays, which are furnished by their own imaginations.


SECT. IV.

IX. But this matter will be better explained, by reducing the
applications which the before-cited authors have made of the history
of Prometheus, to a comparative examination. And to begin with Father
Tournemine; he fancies it alludes to the crime and punishment of Luzbel;
because in the first place, according to the relation of Duris of Samos,
Prometheus was thrown down from heaven by Jupiter, for having pretended
to be betrothed to Minerva. I don’t know whether Duris of Samos, whose
works are not at present in being, said any such thing; but if he did
say it, it was as Natal Comite observes, a fable of his own inventing,
and one that was not generally current among the Gentiles; as may be
evinced, by examining the works of other profane authors; all of whom,
almost universally agree, that Prometheus, having by the assistance of
Minerva formed a man of clay, he by the favour of the same goddess, was
enabled to ascend up to heaven, from whence he brought a portion of fire,
with which he instill’d life into the statue he had formed; and that
the punishment Jupiter inflicted on him for this sacrilegious theft,
was chaining him to a rock of Mount Caucasus, and placing a vulture at
his breast, which should continually gnaw his entrails. It is clear,
this fable is not capable of any application whatever to the history
of Luzbel; and much less can it be made to apply to it, if we add the
remainder of the story, which is, that Hercules rescued him from the
punishment, by first killing the vulture with arrows, and afterwards
unchaining Prometheus; but the punishment of Luzbel is eternal, and not
transitory.

X. The second application of Father Tournemine consists, in that,
according to other authors, the crime of Prometheus was envying his
brother Epimetheus; which may very well be made to apply to Luzbel,
by supposing that in Epimetheus is represented the person of Adam; for
Luzbel, when he was thrown down from heaven on account of the envy he
bore to the happiness of man, excited or provoked his fall. But neither
does Father Tournemine point out the authors who attribute this sin of
envy to Prometheus, nor have I been able to discover one who has said
any such thing; but it rather appears to me, that Epimetheus had much to
envy in Prometheus, although this last had little to envy in him, because
Prometheus is described as exceedingly penetrating and sensible, and
Epimetheus as rude and stupid. Neither could any motive of envy arise
from the marriage, which, according to some mythologists, took place
between Pandora and him, because she was sent by Jupiter with the fatal
box, in which was shut up or contained all sorts of calamities, and which
she was to endeavour to prevail on Prometheus to open; this Jupiter, in
order to be revenged on him, was desirous he should do; but Prometheus,
like a wise man, withstood the intreaty; Epimetheus, on the contrary,
was weak enough to entertain Pandora, and open the box, in consequence
of which he filled himself with misfortunes. This transaction afforded
rather motives of pity than envy; neither could Prometheus envy his
brother the possession of Pandora, whom he had rejected.

XI. Father Tournemine, in his third application, says; that, according
to other authors, Prometheus sinned, by suggesting to Epimetheus through
Pandora, that he should open the box, which quadrates very opportunely
with Luzbel’s tempting of Adam through Eve. I have never as yet met with
any author who has mentioned such a suggestion; but on the contrary, have
seen some, who say, that Prometheus warned Epimetheus against receiving
any present which should be sent him from Jupiter.

XII. In his fourth application he observes, that according to the most
general received opinion, the crime of Prometheus, was bringing the fire
from heaven to earth, with which he instilled into man the passions that
stimulated him to vice; and this corresponds with what Luzbel did, by
inflaming with his persuasions, the keen appetite of Adam. It is certain,
that the most common and generally received opinion is, that the crime of
Prometheus consisted in his stealing the cœlestial fire; as it is also,
that the use he purposed to make of this fire, was to animate with it the
statue of clay, and not to instil into the statue the passions of man
after it was animated.

XIII. In his fifth and last application, he tells us, the Poet Nicander
says, that Jupiter having granted to man the blessing of eternal youth,
he by the advice of Prometheus, sold it to the serpent; in which is
insinuated, that Luzbel, by his temptation, was the cause of the death
of Adam and all his descendants. I don’t know what Nicander, whose works
I am not acquainted with but by quotation, says upon the subject; but I
know, that in a matter of this sort, the fiction of a particular poet
should not, nor ought it to be urged, in opposition to the common and
general received opinion of the mythologists, who attribute all the
misfortunes of man, to the fatal box in which they were contained, and
among which, were those of diseases. To this we may add, that Mons. Huet,
who quotes the same Nicander, tells the story very differently. He says,
that man having received from the hands of Jupiter the gift of perpetual
youth, laid it on the loins of an ass, which ass came thirsty to a
fountain that was guarded by a serpent, who prevented him from drinking;
but he agreed to give the serpent what he carried on his back, provided
he would permit him to quench his thirst; the bargain being made, the
ass obtained the water, and surrendered to the serpent perpetual youth.
According to this relation, there is no sale on the part of the man, nor
does there appear any persuasion on the part of Prometheus; but the whole
blame is laid upon the ass.


SECT. V.

XIV. We will now proceed to the applications of the illustrious Huet,
which are made in two ways, some directly, others indirectly. I call
those to be made directly, in which he proposes some immediate likeness
between Moses and Prometheus; and I look upon those as indirect, in
which he seeks for the likeness, by introducing some third agent or
property. For example, Mons. Huet pretends, and by the assistance of
certain analogies, endeavours to prove, that Prometheus and Mercury are
one and the same person; and afterwards strives to demonstrate by other
analogies, that Mercury and Moses are the same. This kind of proof is
very frequently introduced by Mons. Huet, who, by pursuing the system of
confounding all, or very nearly all the heathen deities in one, whatever
similitude he finds to Moses in any one of them, he applies to identify
the persons of every one of the others. But as in our progress, we mean
expressly to dispute and arraign this system, we shall confine ourselves
for the present, to the direct applications which are made by this
author of the history of Prometheus to that of Moses.

XV. In his first application, he begins by saying, that Herodotus calls
Prometheus the husband of Asia, and that others call him the son. Moses
was of Asiatic extraction, and all the Israelitish people when they
returned from Egypt, came back with him into Asia. (Demonstr. Evang.
prop. 4. cap. 8. numb. 7.) I have used the very words of the author in
this quotation, that no one should think, I was guilty of the least
imposition, in stating this strained and violent application. It is
really astonishing, to see a man celebrated in the Republic of Letters,
apply so trifling an allusion to so serious a business. Who does not
perceive, that according to this mode of reasoning, Prometheus may be
made to resemble every man who was born in Asia? and with more propriety
than he could be likened to Moses? for he was not born in Asia, but in
Africa, and was only of Asiatic descent. Besides this, what Herodotus
says of Prometheus, his being the husband of Asia, and others that he
was the son, should not be understood to allude to that vast extent of
country, which is reputed one of the four quarters of the world, but
to the nymph Asia, who the poets feigned to have been the daughter of
Thetis and the Ocean, and from whom, it is said, that prodigious tract of
land derived its name.

XVI. This second application begins thus: In the opinion of some authors,
Prometheus was the brother of Deucalion, of whom Apollonius speaking,
says, that he was the first who erected temples to the gods. This he
thinks applies to Aaron, the brother of Moses, who was the first high
priest of the Israelites. But this application is more extraordinary than
the other; because, in order to adopt it, the illustrious Huet falls into
two gross contradictions. The first is, that a little lower down, for the
sake of another application, he supposes Deucalion not to be the brother,
but the son of Prometheus; and this coincides with the general opinion;
at least I have never seen any other adopted by any author whatever.
The second contradiction is, that in the tenth chapter he affirms, and
endeavours to prove, that Deucalion and Aaron mean the same person. But
how can Deucalion and Aaron be supposed to mean the same person, when
the character and description of Aaron, differ so widely from that of
Noah? Who could imagine, that so learned a man could fall into such an
absurdity? and it would be idle to insist, that the building of temples
was peculiarly annexed to the office of high priests, as many more
temples have been built by legitimate princes, than by high priests.

XVII. In his third application, he observes, that Diodorus says,
Prometheus reigned in a part of Egypt. Moses was the leader or prince
of the Hebrews, who inhabited a portion of Egypt, that is, the land of
Gessen. Besides this, Thermutis, the daughter of Pharaoh, who adopted
him for her son, destined him to reign over her paternal inheritance.
This application, in the first place, proceeds upon a false supposition,
because Moses, was neither king or prince of the Israelites during their
abode in Egypt, nor can it be said with any propriety, that he ruled
over any part of Egypt; as the contrary clearly appears from scripture.
The second application is a strained one, because being destined to a
kingdom, and enjoying it, are things as different, as possession and
expectation. And besides all this, the scripture does not say one word of
the destination of Moses to the crown of Egypt. It is Josephus only who
relates it, and who, with respect to a matter of such remote antiquity,
it is not credible should have been able to obtain any authentic
instrument wherewith to corroborate his assertion.

XVIII. In the fourth application, he says that Prometheus found himself
in great distress, on account of an exorbitant inundation of the Nile,
which overflowed all the lands of his dominions; and that Hercules freed
him from the difficulty. In this event, Monsieur Huet figures to himself
the passage of the Israelites through, and the drowning of the Egyptians
in the Red Sea; but to make the allusion probable, he supposes Joshua,
the military leader of the Israelites, and the constant companion of
Moses and Hercules, to be one and the same person. The whole of this
application goes lame. The making the Nile the Red Sea is a voluntary
transformation; and this last must be supposed to have broke through a
large tract of country, and to have inundated the land of Egypt; which
is a circumstance that never happened. The ruin that was brought upon
the Egyptians by the Red Sea, was so far from giving Moses anxiety, that
it put him in safety. How then could the distresses of Prometheus, be
made to apply to Moses? Joshua in no shape assisted Moses in the passage
of the Red Sea? What relation then can the assistance which Hercules
afforded to Prometheus bear to Joshua?

XIX. In the fifth application, he remarks, that the statues of Prometheus
are carved holding a sceptre in the right hand, and that this alludes
to the miraculous rod or wand of Moses. This puerile mode of straining
for allusions, is terrible, and especially, when men descend to deduce
them from such trifling and impertinent circumstances. At this rate, all
the statues of princes with a sceptre in the right hand, are emblems of
Moses; and by the same mode of reasoning, may be called so many statues
of him. If Monsieur Huet was of opinion, that Prometheus was a king,
why should he seek for any other symbol or figure of it, than his being
carved with a sceptre in his hand, which is the proper and natural one;
and is intended as an emblem of regal authority? Finally, the resemblance
between a sceptre and a wand is so trifling, that we need not take the
trouble of dwelling upon, or attending to other particulars, this alone
being sufficient to reprobate the application.

XX. In his sixth application, he takes notice that Julius Africanus says,
that the fable of Prometheus having formed a man, took its rise from his
having by wise instructions, made those men penetrating and polished, who
were before rustic and stupid. By giving this turn to, and viewing things
in this light, we may, with more propriety, compare or identify Moses
with Romulus, Numa Pompilius, Minos, Draco, Solon, Lycurgus, and the
whole Areopagus.

XXI. In the seventh application, he tells us, that Prometheus held
conversations with Jupiter; and that Moses held them with God. I have
read in the scripture, of the conversation of Moses with God; but I never
in any author, read of the conversations of Prometheus with Jupiter.
But granting there were such, Jupiter is said to have conversed with
many other mortals; and, according to this mode of reasoning, it should
follow, that all those were so many Moseses. Truly, with respect to the
frequency of conversations with Jupiter, I would bet Ganymede against
Prometheus, and indeed against all others whatever.

XXII. In his eighth application, he tells us, that in a tragedy of
Æschylus, Prometheus is introduced saying, that he was the inventor of
divining by the inspection of the entrails of victims. Moses regulated
all the forms of worship, and the rights of sacrifices practised by the
Israelites. What analogy is there between these two things? Between
offering victims to false deities, in order to divine by their entrails,
and sacrificing to the true God, there is as great a difference, as there
is between due worship and superstition. Besides, what stress should
be laid upon what a poet, and a Greek one too, says in a theatrical
piece? Don’t we know that fictions are essentially material to poems;
and especially to those of this kind, as are likewise particular feigned
incidents, whether the subject of the piece is taken from true events or
common fables? The text of a tragedy, therefore, should never be quoted
as authority, when the matter in question is an enquiry into truth.

XXIII. In the ninth application, he observes, that Prometheus is spoken
of in a dialogue of Lucian, as one who knew future events. Moses was
a prophet. The dialogues of Lucian may, without doubt, be as properly
quoted in a matter of this sort, as the tragedy of Æschylus. No one is
ignorant that Lucian in his dialogues, gives full scope and play to his
imagination; and introduces into them, all the pleasing fictions that
occur to him; and especially those, which are conducive to turning into
ridicule the deities of Paganism. But I will admit, that the antients
held Prometheus as a soothsayer: this being however a quality they
acknowledged in an infinite number of others, either all those had a
right to be called the representatives of Moses, or none of them had;
although there is no more reason for identifying Prometheus with Moses
on this account, than there is for comparing him with all the other
prophets that are mentioned in holy writ.

XXIV. In the tenth application, he says, the fire which Prometheus
brought from Heaven, may allude to the lightning mixed with hail, which
Moses caused to descend from Heaven to terrify the Egyptians, to the
fire with which he consumed two hundred and fifty seditious of those who
rebelled at Coré, to the fire of the bush, to the celestial splendid
rays on Mount Sinai, when Moses spoke with God, to the refulgent glare
of the face of Moses when he came down from the mount, or the perpetual
fire which God ordained should ever burn on the altar. Allusions
between history and fable are very easy to be met with, if finding the
word fire in each of them, is sufficient to establish the similitude,
without having regard to union or conformity with respect to any other
circumstance whatever. At this rate, all that we find written of water in
fabulous histories, may be made applicable to all that is said of water
in the scripture.

XXV. In the eleventh application, he observes, that Jupiter sent Pandora
to Prometheus, to deceive him; but he, knowing the design, would not
receive her. In the character of Pandora is represented that of Eve,
whose history was written by Moses, although he abominated her crime.
Let the reader now reflect, what relation the writer of an event bears to
an actor in it.

XXVI. He says, in the twelfth application, that Jupiter, because the men
had revealed to him the theft of Prometheus, granted them the boon of
perpetual youth; and observes, that this alludes to the privilege which
God conceded to the Israelites, that their cloaths should not wear out in
the desert. Such conceits ought more properly to be termed illusions than
allusions; and as the extravagance of them is self-evident, I shall not
waste time in exploding them.

XXVII. In the thirteenth application, he says, that Jupiter chained
Prometheus to a rock, in a cave of Mount Caucasus, and appointed a
vulture to gnaw his entrails. God placed Moses in a cavern of Mount
Sinai, in order to manifest his glory to him there. This confounding of
Mount Caucasus with Mount Sinai, and a delinquent abhorred by Jupiter,
with a just man beloved by God, is a strange mode of making applications;
as is, to compleat the whole, comparing the most cruel torment of a
continual gnawing of the entrails, to the greatest blessing that ever
was enjoyed by a mortal.

XXVIII. In the last application, he says, Hercules relieved Prometheus
from that punishment. This circumstance, Monsieur Huet is desirous
of making allude to Joshua, whom he supposes to have been meant by
Hercules; and also to the battle Joshua fought with the Amalakites, in
the midst of which, Moses was on the top of an adjacent hill, with his
hands lifted up to Heaven, and imploring success to the Israelites till
such time as they obtained the victory; and he likens the delivery of
Moses, whom he supposes to have been in a sort of imprisonment on the
mount, to that of Prometheus. This is all a compound of incoherences
and contradiction; for, in order to accommodate the application to the
circumstances, he compares the confinement of Prometheus in the cavern
of Mount Caucasus, to the situation of Moses in the cave of Mount Sinai,
and to his situation on the Hill of Amalec. The fable of Prometheus,
supposes no battle of Hercules with any nation whatever. Finally, and not
to dwell upon many other objections, this application of the fable, is
contradictory to the whole tenor of history; as, according to the fable,
Moses the benefactor of Joshua, should be considered as the person on
whom the benefit was conferred. When Moses lifted his hands to Heaven,
then Joshua conquered; so that the success of Joshua depended on the
action of Moses. How then can you reconcile this with the fable, where
Hercules, who is the representative of Joshua, confers all the favour;
and Prometheus, who is supposed to mean Moses, does no act whatever, but
is a mere passive agent who receives favours.


SECT. VI.

XXIX. I believe, that with these examples, I have evinced to the
reader, that the attempting to discover the truths of the scripture
in the errors of gentilism, is a chimerical undertaking. The two
before-quoted authors, abounded as much as any others whatever in
learning and ingenuity. Notwithstanding this, they, by applying these
talents with the greatest exertion possible to this undertaking, could
attain nothing by their labours, but some applications that were so
forced and violent, that they seemed as if they were dragged in by the
hair of the head; which, together with their being partly founded on
uncertain suppositions, proclaims the ill success of the endeavours of
those authors. I am persuaded, that by permitting premises to be drawn
from such flimsy allusions as those I have enumerated, there is no man
of middling capacity, who would not be able to make any sort of fable
the symbol of any sort of history, and every sort of profane tale, to
resemble canonical relation, as this is what we see practised every day
from the pulpits. Every preacher of but ordinary ingenuity, and moderate
erudition, likens the saint of whom he is preaching, to some one or other
of the scripture heroes; availing himself of versions, glosses, and
comments, to multiply the allusions, in the same manner, that Monsieur
Huet avails himself of the various expressions of particular authors. By
using such sort of means, it is easy to find out, or pretend to find out,
the vestiges of sacred history in the fables of paganism, and indeed it
is every day’s practice. He must be but a heavy preacher, who, if he is
desirous of doing it, can’t among the festivals of the Gentiles, find
out some one or other, from the circumstances of which, may not be drawn
various particulars, applicable to the solemnity which is the subject
of his discourses; and, without doubt, a man of ingenuity, may be happy
enough to hit upon some, that are more opportune, than those we have
seen made use of by the illustrious Huet; but we should not from hence
conclude, nor do the preachers themselves draw any such inference, that
God, at the time he permitted these things to be done, and was offended
with those superstitious practices, intended by some occult Providence,
that they should be types of Christian solemnities.


SECT. VII.

XXX. The illustrious Huet, is not more happy in the other parts of his
undertaking, than in those we have given the examples of; but to go thro’
them all, would be very tedious, as the scope of his plan, comprehends
nearly the whole group of the fabulous gods and heroes, who he pretends,
were all descriptive of, and meant one and the same person, which was
Moses. I have said gods and heroes, because he reserved the goddesses and
the heroines, to be the representatives of Moses’s wife Zephora, and his
sister Maria. A magnificient system this truly, if it can be supported;
but its own magnitude exposes its weakness, and it fares with it as it
does with great buildings, which the bigger they are, if they are built
upon slender foundations, the sooner they fall to the ground.

XXXI. It not being practicable then, to combat the assertions of
Monsieur Huet one by one, and in detail, I shall attack the main body
and substance of his system, which I flatter myself I shall do with such
solid arguments, as will go near to divest it of every appearance of
probability.

XXXII. To this end, I shall begin with supposing, that idolatry commenced
long before Moses was born, and that it was pretty generally extended in
the world, before he could possibly have been the object of it: this is
evident from many parts of holy writ. In the book of Joshua, chapter the
24th, it is expressly affirmed, that Terah the father, and Nachor the
brother of Abraham, were idolaters; and these were antecedent to Moses
more than four generations. The idols of Laban also, which the scripture
takes notice of in the 31st chapter of Genesis, were greatly prior to
Moses; and the idol Moloch, was worshiped by some nations a long time
before the days of Moses, as we learn from the 18th chapter of Leviticus.

XXXIII. Idolatry likewise, while Moses was living, was very frequent
and common. It is evident that it prevailed in Egypt at that period;
because Moses, when he was speaking to Pharaoh, called the true God the
God of the Hebrews; from whence it may be inferred, that Pharaoh and the
Egyptians did not know him for such. He likewise told him, that there
was no God like his God. It is probable that the golden calf which the
Israelites worshiped in the desert, was an imitation of the ox, which,
under the name of Apis, was worshiped by the Egyptians, and from thence,
they most probably derived the superstition.

XXXIV. That idolatry at that time had also extended itself into many
other nations, is an established fact. Moloch was worshiped by the
Ammonites. The Moabites were idolaters; and the women of that region
perverted the Israelites, and drew them to the worship of their false
gods; as appears by the 25th chapter of Numbers; and the 7th chapter of
Deuteronomy, makes mention of seven other idolatrous nations.

XXXV. This is what clearly appears from scripture; and there are
well-founded probabilities, that not only in the nations beforementioned,
but even in all others, (although the scripture, on account of their
history not being connected with that of the Israelites, does not
mention them) idolatry in the days of Moses, was radically established:
first, because the expressions the God of the Hebrews, and the God of
Israel, which so frequently occur in the scripture, indicate, that the
Israelites were the only people, who knew and worshiped the true God:
secondly, because it does not seem likely, that if in those days there
had been any other people who were faithful to their maker, that the
Divine Providence would not have contrived some means, to have had
their memories handed down to us, either by the pen of Moses, or that
of some other canonical writer; and also, some account of such men who
had flourished among them, as were eminent for their virtue; thirdly,
because, if in the nations who bordered on the Israelites, who saw their
worship, and were witnesses of the wonders God wrought in their favour,
the light of the true religion did not shine forth, how is it credible
that it should have prevailed in the distant ones?

XXXVI. Supposing then, that idolatry in the days of Moses, prevailed in
all, or the greatest part of the nations in the world, this supposition
gives great force to my argument against the system of the illustrious
Huet; for it is totally incredible, that all the idolatrous nations,
as if they did it by common consent, should at once forsake their
antient errors, for the purpose of forming another new system of false
religion, the object of which, was the adoration of Moses: the conclusion
then, that all the idols of the Gentiles were designed to represent
Moses, is a false one. I shall adduce in support of this assertion,
the following arguments: this change of worship, if it had ever taken
place, would without doubt, have begun with the nations next adjoining
to the Israelites, because these were the first who must have known of,
or experienced the wonders that were wrought by Moses, and from these
nations, together with the information of the wonders, the new idolatry
must have passed to the distant ones; but I say it is incredible, that
this change should ever have taken place in the neighbouring nations;
because these, together with their knowing of the wonders that were
wrought by Moses, must have also been acquainted with the principles
of the religion of the Hebrews; and must have known likewise, that the
Hebrews did not worship Moses as a deity; but that both Moses and they
worshiped an invisible God, in whose name, and by whose supreme power,
the prodigies were performed; and that, in the execution of them, Moses
acted as a mere instrument: it follows then, that in case these wonders
had made such an impression on their minds as to induce them to change
their religion, they would unquestionably have embraced that professed by
Moses and the Hebrews; and not have adopted for a deity, a man who they
knew was a mere instrument in the hands of the true God.

XXXVII. We will illustrate the force of this argument in the instance of
the Egyptians. They saw the wondrous things that were executed by Moses;
did this incline them to acknowledge him for a deity, and to worship him
as such? Clearly no, for they were told by Moses himself and the rest
of the Hebrews, that these wonders were wrought under the conduct and
authority, and by the order of one great God, whom Moses and all his
followers worshiped, and whom they called the God of all Mankind; and at
times, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who were the predecessors
of Moses: in case then, that, excited by these portentous things, they
should have been disposed to change their religion, they would certainly
have embraced that of the Hebrews, and have worshiped the true God; and
not Moses, who was his minister and instrument, and whom they saw, that
even those who considered him as their leader and protector, did not
recognize as a deity.

XXXVIII. Admitting then that it is not probable the nations adjoining to
the Hebrews, should adopt Moses for the object of their worship, it is by
no means likely the distant ones should do it, because the information
leading to produce such an event, must have been communicated from the
first to the last; and of course, if in consequence of the accounts they
received of the wonders that were performed by Moses, and the means by
which he wrought them, they should have been induced to change their
religion, it would not have been to worship Moses, but the God of Moses,
for that is the resolution the intelligence they had received, would have
induced them to take.

XXXIX. To this argument, which in my judgment is invincible, I shall add
another, which seems to me to have equal weight, which is, that in not
one of all the idolatrous nations of the world, has the name of Moses
been preserved, as a person who was worshiped as a deity; it is not
likely then, that any of them ever venerated him as such. This opinion
can’t be controverted, because there is no mention of the religion of
any people whatever, either to be found in books or carved on marble,
in which the name of Moses, with the signification of a deity, is to
be traced or met with. The conclusion to be deduced from hence with
moral certainty, is, that if all the nations at any period of time, had
concurred in worshiping Moses, it is next to an impossibility, that some
one or other of them should not have preserved the remembrance of his
name. How is it credible, that among all the nations of the world, who
consisted of such vast numbers of people, and who were all unanimous in
paying adoration to Moses, as Mons. Huet pretends, his name should be
quite done away, without a single exception of its being preserved in
any of them? Mankind in general, have been observed to be very steady
in preserving the names of their deities; nor can it be otherwise,
because they are always fresh in the memories, and at the tongue’s end
of all the individuals of every nation. Thus we see, that from the days
of Hesiod and Homer, till the extinction of paganism, a space of time,
which, according to the antiquity that is given to Homer by the Arundel
marbles, amounted to twelve centuries, the same identical names of
their false deities continued to be preserved among the Greeks, such as
Jupiter, Juno, Diana, &c. It is then absolutely exceeding the bounds of
all probability, to suppose, that in some one or more of the idolatrous
nations, or even in the greatest part of them, the name of Moses should
not have been preserved, provided he had ever been the divinity they all
adored.

XL. We may conclude then that the system of the illustrious Huet is
totally improbable; and that the connexion and resemblance which he
fancied to have discerned between the errors of gentilism and scripture
truths, existed no where but in his own imagination.

XLI. The last argument we have urged against Monsieur Huet, militates
with equal force against all other authors, who have in different ways
engaged in the same undertaking, as against him; it being certain,
that in none of the fables of paganism, can there be found any of the
scripture proper names; and although some have pretended to meet here and
there one, besides the visible distinction there is between the words, we
may with very little reflection, perceive the signification of them is
quite different: for example, the word Evoe, repeated in the Festivals
of Bacchus, is pretended by Mr. Butler, to have been used in remembrance
of our first mother Eve: but the commentators upon Plautus, Virgil, and
Ovid, consider this word when it occurs in the works of those poets, as
an interjection, which is expressive of nothing more, than the affection
or esteem of him who pronounces it. The Latin and Greek dictionaries
agree in this definition, and give it the following signification: _Bene
sit illi_.

XLII. I confess, that in here and there a fable, we may meet with an
opportune application or allusion to historical truth; but this in no
wise proves, that the history gave rise to the fable. Accident of itself,
is capable of producing these coinciding circumstances. Because something
happens to a man to-day, which he dreamed of the night before, no prudent
person would infer from thence that there was any connection between
the dream and the event. Among the variety of images which the fancy
forms in dreams, it is next to impossible, that a part of them should
not coincide with some realities; and we may say the same of voluntary
fictions. It would be a striking wonder, if among the multitude of
extravagances and errors common to the Gentiles, some one or other of
them should not bear a lively analogy to here and there a revealed truth.

XLIII. It is true, that although this coincidence may be purely casual,
it is possible, that it may also be relative, or have some connexion. I
mean that it is possible, here and there a portion of sacred history,
either as the malice or ignorance of men took away from, or added
circumstances to it, might have degenerated by little and little from
its purity, and might ultimately have been involved or obscured in some
of the heathen fables. It is probable, that in the first book of Ovid’s
Metamorphoses, is contained disguised or disfigured, part of what Moses
wrote in the first chapters of Genesis respecting the creation, the
criminal outrages committed by those the scripture calls Giants, the
universal corruption of mankind, and the deluge. But the supposing, that
here and there a fable may have been derived from holy writ, is not the
same, as deducing from thence the derivation of a general system, which
applies to all the errors of paganism; and even with respect to those
few fables which bear a similitude to the scripture, we should suppose
the derivation as probable, and not as certain, for the reason we have
already hinted, which is, that the likeness of the error to truth may
have been casual.

XLIV. By adopting this conduct, and pursuing this prudent middle way,
we should avoid deriving all the fables from sacred history, and not
incline to the particular system of Senior Branchini, a learned modern
Italian, who attempted deducing them all from profane story. This author
is of opinion, that all the relations of heroes and deities contained in
the antient monuments, which were calculated to transmit to posterity
the memories of such men, as in the early times had particularly
distinguished themselves, and had become eminent by various ways; I say
Senior Branchini conjectures, that these testimonies of the actions of
those men, having fallen into the hands of poets, flatterers, their
passionate admirers, or their own immediate descendants; the first in
consequence of their profession, the second excited by their interest,
the third by their affection, and the last by their vanity, ornamented
them with many fabulous circumstances; and from this complication of lies
and truth, was derived all the theology of paganism.

XLV. There is no doubt, but it has been very common for men to deify one
another, from all, or each of those four motives. The poets did it above
two thousand five hundred years ago, and have not yet got the better of
the bad habit; for there is not a fine woman at this day, whom their pens
don’t elevate to the rank of a goddess. The flatterers made deities of
those, who, on account of their vices, were unworthy to be called men, as
is evident from the apotheosis of the Roman emperors; and the vanity of
descendants, deified their illustrious ancestors, by attributing a divine
origin to the founders of many empires and republics. The Romans, not
content with feigning the god Mars to have been the father of their first
prince Romulus, raised Romulus himself to the rank of a divinity, and
made him their tutelar deity.

XLVI. From the passion of love, was derived the most ancient propensity
to deify mortals; for the book of Ecclesiastes, chap. 14, points this out
as the first principle or source, from whence this species of idolatry
sprang. A father extremely afflicted for the loss of his son, snatched
away in the flower of his youth, to express his great tenderness and
affection for him, causes his statue to be carved; and this tenderness
and affection, being afterwards extended to the utmost limits of human
feeling, disturbs his understanding, and causes him so far to forget
himself, as to make the image the object of his adoration. His authority
and example, extends the superstition to his domestics; from them it is
communicated to all the inhabitants of a town, and from the inhabitants
of that town to those of a whole region. There was seen many ages after
this delirium commenced, an intention of repeating it, from the influence
of the same passion, by one of the greatest men of antiquity. Cicero,
that very Cicero, who at one time was the oracle of the Romans, and
afterwards the admiration of succeeding ages, so far lost himself upon
the death of his most beloved daughter Tullia, as to persist for a long
while, in a determination of erecting altars to her as a deity. He also
transmitted to posterity in his writings, testimonies, of his having once
entertained so extravagant and mad a resolution.

XLVII. This impious and ridiculous folly was carried to the most
shameless length by the emperor Adrian; who built temples, raised altars,
constituted priests, festivals, and sacrifices, to whom? Why, to a boy
of Bythinia named Antonio, the accomplice of his abominable turpitudes,
who as some say was drowned by accident in the Nile, and as others
tell the story, he of his own free will offered up his life in a magic
sacrifice, which was made to prolong that of the emperor, and which
according to the rites and ceremonies appertaining to it, required a
voluntary victim.

XLVIII. But although it may be true, that the human affections of love,
vanity, and interest, assisted by the fictions of the poets, have been
the cause of deifying many men, still the system of Senior Branchini
cannot subsist in its general and extended sense, for the following
reasons. In the first place, because of the total exclusion it makes of
all sacred history, which, as we have already said, some poets might have
adulterated, in the same manner, and by the same means, they adulterated
profane ones. Secondly, because some of the fictions might have been
pure fictions, or mere fables, unmixed or unconnected with any history
whatever. Who can prevent a cunning artful man, that travels into a
remote region, from relating prodigies of some hero of his own country,
who never existed? and who afterwards could be answerable, that the
people of the country where he had spread the lie, should not adopt this
imaginary hero as a divinity? Thirdly, as a great portion of the gentiles
worshiped stars or planets, which they believed were animated, it is
probable, that many of their fictions alluded to no other object but
them. For example, when the adoration of the sun became an established
worship, they might, and it is natural that they should feign, that the
deity who animated it, had done such and such things, which bore no
relation to any man or circumstance whatever, but only to the imaginary
spirit.

XLIX. Lastly, the greatest part of the fables of the Gentiles, may
have had no other origin, than some mystical, moral, political, or
philosophical figure or representation, which their authors calculated
them to illustrate or inculcate. I mean that those who contrived and
fabricated them, had no other intention, than to represent obscurely,
and under the veil of fables, some theological mysteries, or some
philosophical, political, or moral maxims; but that afterwards, the
ignorance of the vulgar, by mistaking their intent and meaning, and by
construing and understanding them in a literal sense, came to form out of
them, a ridiculous theology and religion, which never entered the heads
of those who were the original authors of them. It is well known, the
Egyptians under hieroglyphicks, concealed not only their religion, but
even their history, policy, and philosophy, which were only laid open or
explained to their kings, and priests of the Sun. It is probable that
in imitation of the Egyptians, who in those days were venerated as the
most learned people in the world, many other nations adopted the same
practice; and it is also possible that the Egyptians themselves, might
have derived this custom from some other nation, who at one time might
have been superior to them in wisdom and learning; and it is likewise
possible, that this might have been a common practice in early antiquity.
It is certain, that there are vast numbers of the pagan fables, which are
capable of bearing a much more apt and commodious application to their
physics, their morals, and their policy, than to their history. Read the
treatise of the famous Bacon _de sapientia veterum_, who, by pursuing
this idea, has been very happy in his explanation of not a few of those
fables.

L. Thus we perceive, this is a matter capable of affording innumerable
conjectures; but not a basis, solid enough to build any general system
upon; which is the point we have chiefly endeavoured to demonstrate in
this discourse; and particularly, with respect to the union or connexion
of fable with history; and more especially with sacred history; which
differs as much, and is as widely distant from the errors of paganism, as
the greatest truth is from the greatest lie.




THE ORIGIN OF FABLE IN HISTORY.

In a Letter from FEYJOE, to a Correspondent, in Answer to one censuring
the foregoing Discourse.


DEAR SIR,

I. My esteem for your person, induces me to respect your letter; but if I
was not restrained by the first of these considerations, I don’t know how
I might be disposed to treat the epistle; because the charge you alledge
against me in it, is destitute of all foundation. You first of all
point-blank accuse me, with having in my essay on the _Divorce of History
from Fable_, advanced, there is no fiction whatever of paganism, which
is derived from sacred history; and then treat the maxim as savouring
of impiety. But if broaching this maxim was criminal and a sin, alas!
what must become of the honour and piety, of the most learned, and most
religious abbot Branchini? for he was the man who first advanced, and
afterwards with all his might, endeavoured to enforce and establish this
system, and asserted, that all the fables of the pagans, were founded
on, and derived from profane history. But why does this sentiment savour
of impiety? You answer this, and say, because it takes away a species of
support from the truth of holy writ. This can hardly be esteemed a very
substantial species of support. Whoever would be inclined to doubt or
disbelieve the scripture truths, notwithstanding the firm foundation on
which they rest, would not be disposed to credit them, on account of the
weak auxiliary confirmation they derive from such a support? That the
origin of the fables of the Gentiles, were derived from those truths,
is at best but a doubtful, and a speculative opinion; and how can a
doubtful proof confirm any man in the belief of a matter, which rests, or
is founded in that sort of proof? But if a fair proof of this could be
adduced, it would answer no purpose, for it would be very easy for him
who was guilty of the impiety, in order to elude any consequences from
the detection, to pretend he derived the hint from another fable, and
that these tales are the children of one another, and that those of the
latest date, are introduced to ornament and give lustre to those which
preceded them.

II. But admitting that the maxim did border upon impiety, I am by no
means interested in defending or justifying it, as I was in no wise
concerned in preferring it, and therefore it is very unjust in you to
impute it to me. My object in the discourse you mention, was that of
combating the system, which derives all the fictions of gentilism in
general, from sacred history; although as is evident from my words in the
43d article of that Discourse, I admit that some of them might possibly
have sprung from that source, how then can you when these were my words,
fix a charge upon me of affirming, that no fiction whatever of paganism,
took its rise from sacred history?

III. I also combat, although it is only by the way, or _en passant_,
the system of Senior Branchini, who asserts, that all the fables were
the offspring of profane history; or, to speak more properly, he
endeavours to inculcate, that the first are mysterious or enigmatical
representations of the last, which attempt, necessarily betrays him into
some violent and absurd allusions; and perhaps into such as are more
glaring, than those I have pointed out, by which, he derives all the
fables from holy writ. For example; he pretends that all the Iliad is
a true history, but converted into allegory, agreeable to the practice
of the East. That Jupiter was the successor of the great conqueror
Sesostris, whose dominion extended over a vast tract of country in
the time of the Trojan war; that the inferior deities, represented
either eminent men, or particular nations; and that a part of those
deities, were tributary princes to the said Sesostris, or some one of
his successors, whose dependence upon him, did not deprive them of the
option, of taking part either with the Trojans or the Greeks, just as
their passions or interests dictated to them. That the goddess Juno was
Syria, called _Blanca_, and was characterized by the white arms of Juno,
so much extolled by Homer. Minerva was the wise Egypt, Mars the union
or combination of Armenia, Colquida, Thrace and Thessaly; and in this
manner, he reasons upon the other fables. Into such strange paradoxes as
these, are men drawn by their passion for systems of great extent.

IV. But although I don’t assent to the system of Senior Branchini, the
whole of which it is impossible to adjust, without falling into great
absurdities, I agree, after the example of many men eminent for their
literature, that a large portion of the fables, is a compound of parcels
of profane history, disguised and deformed; but still the alteration they
have undergone, has not so thoroughly disfigured them, but that we may
discern in the copies, sufficient marks of their origin and derivation;
and I propose pointing out to you in this letter, the instances of this
sort that occur to me.

V. It is highly probable, that some of the subaltern deities, were formed
upon the idea that was entertained by the populace, of some particular
persons, eminent either for their heroic virtues, or for having been the
inventors of some arts, that were found to be exceedingly useful to the
public. This is the account Pliny gives of the matter in chap. 1. of his
twenty-fifth book. _At herculè, singula quosdam inventa deorum numero
addidere._

VI. Saturn devouring his children, according to Mr. Rollin, is derived
from a part of the Carthaginian history, which speaks of a king of
Carthage, who buried his sons alive as a sacrifice to the gods; and
this agrees in substance, with the account given of the thing by Mons.
Bonamy, in his History of the Royal Academy of Inscriptions, _tom._ 7. p.
29. But, as we shall see in the sequel, it is much more probable, that
the fabulous Saturn of paganism was derived from the true Abraham of
scripture.

VII. The Cretans considered Jupiter as their countryman; and even in the
time of Lucian, as appears by this author in his Dialogue of _Jupiter
Tragicus_, shewed his tomb in that island; and although they allowed he
was dead, it without doubt had been handed down to them by tradition,
that he was some eminent man, and had peradventure been king of the
country.

VIII. In the fiction of the Stygian Lake, and of the boatman Charon, is
contained a mixture of natural and civil history. There is in Arcadia a
lake, which not only was called Stygia at the time when the poets first
began to make it famous by their inventions, but many ages after that
æra, preserved this name; for even in the days of Pliny it retained
it; and I don’t know whether it does not retain it with very little
alteration, at this period. The deadly quality of its waters, gave
occasion to the poets, to feign that it was of infernal derivation, and
to place the source, both of the lake, and the river which runs into it,
in the region of the dead. Pliny says, that the waters of it, by being
drunk, kill in an instant; and adds upon the authority of Theophrastus,
that there are little fish bred in it, which poison whoever eats them.
Some antient authors, attribute a faculty to its waters so intensely
corrosive, that it can’t be contained in any vessel, but one made of a
wild ass’s hoof, as it gnaws and tears to pieces, those made of any other
materials; and the disciples of Aristotle formerly pretended, that this
secret was revealed by their master to Antipater, to instruct him how he
might send some of this poisonous water to Babylon, for the destruction
of Alexander.

IX. The learned Abbé Fourmont, who in the years 1729 and 30, by order
of the most Christian king, made a voyage of critical enquiry to the
Levant, where he scrutinized with the greatest exactness all Greece,
and after passing the brook which supplied it with water, examined with
much attention the Stygian Lake; which he gives the following horrible
description of. He says, the water of the brook which runs into it,
before it enters the lake, is clear, but after that, becomes thick and
tainted; an alteration, which can only be imputed to the bad qualities
and pernicious nature of its bottom. He says further, the surface
presents to the view, a confused mixture of the most disgustful tints;
and that a thick scum, of the colour of the rust of copper tinged with
black, swims on its top, which being agitated by the wind, looks like
the bubbles of boiling tar or bitumen. The obnoxious active quality of
its waters, is not less pernicious than its aspect is displeasing; and
the vapours which arise from them, blight all the plants that grow near
the lake; and that it’s banks are avoided and fled from, by all sorts
of beasts. The Abbé Fourmont mentions a circumstance, that contradicts
what has been related by Theophrastus, which is, that its fish poison
whoever eats them; for he asserts, that no fish can live in the waters of
the lake; and saying they are deadly to the very fish, is certainly an
aggravation of their pernicious qualities.

X. The lake then, being in so many respects horrible and affrighting, it
is no wonder that from these circumstances, poetic fancy should place it
in the region of horror, or at the entrance of it.

XI. The fable of the boatman Charon, who for an obolo, an Athenian piece
of money worth a little more than our halfpenny, carried the souls of
the dead over the lake, was derived from an Egyptian story, related by
Diodorus Siculus. There was in Egypt a lake, over which dead bodies after
they were embalmed, were carried to the opposite shore to be buried; and
there were judges appointed to attend at the place of embarkation, to
examine into the course of life which had been led by the dead persons;
and after this inquiry, to pronounce whether they were or were not,
worthy to be interred; which office was exercised with such severity,
that this common honour has been denied to some of the royal family. To
this story there is annexed a tradition, which the Abbé Fourmont says,
subsists in that part of Egypt at this day. The tradition is as follows;
that there was once a farmer of the revenues of one of the Pharaohs, who
laid a tax upon this transportation of the dead, which brought in vast
sums. Thus you see, that both in Greece and Egypt, there were found true
materials, wherewith to fabricate the fable of the Stygian Lake, to build
the boat which conveyed the dead bodies to the abyss, and to erect a
monument, to eternize the avarice of the boatman Charon.

XII. The fable of the river Lethe, whose waters the dead are obliged to
drink, to make them forget all they ever saw or knew in the region of the
living, and also that of the boatman Charon, are both of African origin.
This river rises near the great bog or quicksand, and after running under
ground, and being hid for some miles, shews itself again near to the
city of Berenica, now Bernick or Bernisho, greatly increased in size,
by the addition made to it, by subterraneous waters; and this made it
thought, that it was not the same river which they had before seen bury
itself under ground, and was also the circumstance, that gave rise to its
deriving its source from Hell.

XIII. The river likewise which was antiently called Lethe, but now goes
by the name of Limia, and runs through my native country; and concerning
which, there was once a prevailing opinion among the Romans, that it had
the same properties which the poets attributed to the infernal river,
causing forgetfulness, not only in those who drank of its waters, but
also in those who waded through it, and it not being then certain whether
this error or preoccupation with respect to the river Lethe, and the
fiction of its source originating in Hell, took its rise from the river
Lethe of my country; or whether the fable of the river Lethe coming from
Hell, and the property of its waters being then established, might have
occasioned the confounding the river Lethe of Galicia with the other.

XIV. I say, however this was, the opinion of the qualities of the river
Lethe, was so rooted and fixed among the vulgar of the Romans, that when
the consul Decimus Brutus, as Florus calls him, or Aulus Brutus, as he
is called by Paterculus, was engaged in the conquest of Galicia, and who
on account of his having conquered it, obtained the surname of Gallego;
I say, when this consul came to the river Lethe, which is fordable, none
of his soldiers, for fear of incurring that general forgetfulness, would
venture to wade through it, till the consul who was not preoccupied with
the vulgar error, passed thro’ it to the opposite shore; and when he was
arrived there, turned about and called some of his countrymen by their
names, by which he gave them to understand, that he had not incurred the
forgetfulness they so much dreaded; and said further to them, as Florus
informs us, _Formidatum Romanis fluvium oblivionis_.

XV. The story of Dedalus, and his being obliged to fly from the
resentment of Minos, by means of the invention of wings, for having
facilitated to Pasiphaë her abominable commerce with a bull, was meant
to describe nothing more, than her having been enamoured with Taurus,
who, according to Plutarch, was one of the principal generals in the army
of Minos; and Dedalus’s having assisted, by exerting the ordinary means
practised on such occasions, in bringing about the completion of the
lovers wishes; after finishing the business he fled from the vengeance
of Minos, in a vessel that had sails, which might properly enough be
compared to wings, and which the imagination being put to the stretch to
find out a way of escaping, they were then supposed to have been first
invented: or if the idea had before been entertained, that was the first
time of its being carried into practice.

XVI. The chimerical feats of Jason, and his stealing the golden fleece,
are historically explained by the celebrated Samuel Bochart, who, by the
help of his knowledge of the Phœnician language, discovered, that there
were some words of equivocal meaning in that idiom, which gave occasion
to the fabrication of this portentous fable. The Syriac word _Gaza_, in
the Phœnician language, signifies both a treasure and a fleece; the word
_Saur_ also, in the same language, signifies both a wall and a bull; and
the word _Nachas_, is also indifferently used to express a dragon and
iron. Thus, instead of saying that Jason, by breaking down or scaling
a wall defended by armed men, had made himself master of the treasure
of the king of Colquida; they represent him, as having tamed the bulls
which breathed fire, and the tremendous dragon, which guarded the golden
fleece, and by that means had made himself master of it. Neither in the
love of Medea for Jason, or in her running away with him, was there any
thing extraordinary, or that required the assistance of Minerva, for a
natural passion, accompanied with resolution, could without any other
aid, surmount all the difficulties in such an undertaking.

XVII. The Centaurs, half men and half horses, which make a great
figure in the heathen mythology, were nothing more, according to the
best authors, than types or representations of some of the inhabitants
of Thessaly, who were the first people that were known to fight on
horseback, and to train and break horses, for the use and business of
war; and it was in that region, the poets placed the Centaurs, and it was
from thence, that they say Hercules expelled them.

XVIII. The harpies (who could suppose it?) were no more than great swarms
of locusts, which in the reign of king Phineus, desolated Paphlagonia. In
the dictionary of Moreri (vid. the word Harpies) you may see the proofs
of this, which I shall omit inserting here, as that dictionary is so well
known.

XIX. In the same manner, from portions of profane history, may be
explained many other parts of the heathen mythology; such as the fable
of Perseus, that of Belerophonte, that of the Hesperides, that of the
Gorgons, and many more. But this is not a matter of sufficient importance
to dwell upon.

XX. I also confess, that there are some parts of profane mythological
history, that may be opportunely explained by the sacred, as those who
have embraced the general system of deducing the first from the last,
have clearly proved; but their success in some of these particulars, has
been the cause of their great error, as it has encouraged them in the
absurd and incongruous attempt, of deducing from scripture, the whole
Pagan mythology. I will here venture, notwithstanding this has been a
path so much trodden, to point some especial marks of similitude and
identity, between a deity of the gentiles, and a conspicuous person of
holy writ. This is the example I before promised to give, and which
relates to the resemblance between the father of the faithful with one
of the most antient of the Pagan deities, that is, between Abraham and
Saturn. But I must premise, that the reader is not indebted to me for
this beautiful parallel, but to the Abbé Boissy, a member of the Academy
Royal of Inscriptions and Belles Lettres at Paris, who is the person that
advanced it in that famous assembly; and I shall translate it here in the
sense of the language of the author, as I find it inserted, in the first
volume of the History of that academy.

XXI. He says that Saturn, according to the relations of the poets and
historians, was the person who first introduced the detestable custom
of sacrificing human victims. The Saturn of the Pagans, is in the
judgment of the best critics, the Abraham of scripture; and a fragment
of Sanchionata, which is produced by Eusebius, does to appearance, put
the thing out of all doubt. The fragment runs as follows; _Saturn, whom
the Phœnicians call Israel, was after his death classed among the gods,
under the name of a planet, which at this time is called Saturn. In
the days of this prince’s reign in Phœnicia, he had by a nymph named_
Anobret, _an only son whom he called_ Jeud, _a word which even to this
day, among the Phœnicians signifies_ only son. Finding that he had
engaged his country in a dangerous war, he adorned his son with the
vestments and insignia of royalty, and sacrificed him on an altar erected
by himself. In another fragment of the same Sanchionata, we find, that
this same Saturn circumcised himself, and obliged all his family to
do the like. Nicholas Damascenus, Justin, and other authors, give to
Abraham the rank and quality of a king; and even the scripture remarks,
that he made alliances, and treated with other kings as with his equals;
and besides this, the patriarchs were known to exercise royal authority
in their own families. Berosus, as we are informed by Josephus, adds,
that Abraham had great skill in astrology; and Eupolemus, as we are
told by Eusebius, says, that he was the inventor of the science of the
Chaldeans. There needs nothing more to persuade us, that the Phœnicians
were disposed to place him among the gods and the planets. They called
him Israel, either from their confounding the grandfather with the
grandson, or because they gave that name to the people who were descended
from him. The name of _Jeud_, his only son, has the same meaning as that
of _Isaac_; and _Anobret_, as Bochart informs us, signifies _ex gratia
concipiens_, which signification, is very applicable to the circumstances
of _Sarah_. Finally, and as the last instance of conformity between
them, Saturn circumcised himself, and obliged all his family to do the
same; a remarkable particular this, and which can agree only with the
circumstances of Abraham. Thus far the before cited author.

XXII. I say the same of the two systems, that derive all the fictions of
Paganism, the one from sacred, the other from profane history, that I say
of all the other systems; which is, that there is somewhat of truth in
every one of them, but that they all in general are false. Father Kircher
inclined to the sentiment, that all the fables derived their origin from
the language, or hyerogliphical characters of the Egyptians; although it
is necessary, in order to support this opinion, to suppose that they all
originated in Egypt, which is very wide of the truth; but as that kingdom
in the ages of antiquity, made a great figure in the world, and was in
an especial manner venerated as the metropolis of the sciences, it is
probable, that the language of it, and the mysterious expressions of some
of its inhabitants, which were ill understood, or not understood at all
by the vulgar, might have given rise to some of the mythological tales.

XXIII. Bochart pretends to demonstrate, that they were all derived from
the equivocal meaning of words in the Phœnician language, and with
respect to some of them, has succeeded very happily in illustrating this
sentiment; as for example, in his explanation of the fable of the golden
fleece. But the general system is absurd, even if you suppose there is no
other thing to object against it, than the chimera, that Phœnicia is the
country from whence the whole of the fables are descended; but in order
to prove this, it will be necessary to shew, that no histories depraved
with fictions, were communicated to other kingdoms, but in Phœnician
manuscripts.

XXIV. The Platonists imagined, that nothing else was concealed under
the veil of fables, but documents and maxims of natural philosophy.
And there certainly is something of this sort implied in them; as for
example, in the description which Homer gives of Aurora, as the daughter
of the air, and the office which other poets assign to her, of the
guardianship or custody of the gates of the east, which she is to open
every morning with her dewy fingers, taking care to send the zephyrs
before to dispel the dark shades. All which imagery at the bottom, means
nothing more, than to describe the properties of the morning air, and to
display the appearances of day-break in the east, before the sun rises
above the horizon.

XXV. Others have imagined, that all the fables were meant to convey
some moral or political lessons, and that the authors designed nothing
more when they invented them, than to inculcate under a species of
allegory, rational maxims, which might be useful in human life; and
there are really some of them, that seem to have been written with no
other view. The fable of Phaeton for example, appears to have been
calculated, to represent the dangers to which people expose themselves,
by attempting things greatly superior to their power or abilities; and
that of Narcissus, to represent the extravagance and folly of self-love
or admiration. But saying that all the fables were written with this
design, would be a manifest chimera.

XXVI. Finally, the infatuated alchymists, or at least some of them,
have dreamed, that the fables of which we have been speaking, contain
enigmatically, the doctrine of the philosophers stone; that is, that they
teach in a mysterious way, all the operations which are necessary to
be gone thro’, for attaining the happy secret of transmuting all other
metals into gold. Perhaps what occasioned this silly apprehension, was
their finding in the idiom of their art, the names of the seven principal
deities of the Pagans, which are the same as those of the seven planets,
applied to the seven metals they make use of; but the application of
those names to the metals, was posterior many ages, to their being given
to the deities and the planets. The first alchymists who called the
metals by those names, were excited to do it by the same motive, which
has ever induced them to give to all the materials, operations, and
effects of their art, strange and sounding names, which they do, either
to conceal their pretended secrets, or by the mysterious magnificence of
their stile, to attract the respect and admiration of the vulgar; and
the resemblance of the splendor of the sun’s rays to the colour of gold,
and the light of the moon, to that of silver, was favourable to their
intention, and assisted them in making the application.

XXVII. This system, is not only in its complex or whole substance, but
in each, and every one of its parts, destitute of all foundation, and is
therefore not worthy to be controverted, but should be treated with that
contempt, which both this, and all the other imaginary productions of the
alchymists deserve.

XXVIII. If this letter shall afford you neither entertainment nor
instruction, it will at least serve as an apology for my conduct, and
incline you to retract the censure, which you have fulminated against me,
and my discourse of the _Divorce of History from Fable_; and I hope that
at all events, your resentment will be calmed, and your apprehensions
quieted by the following reflection; that although in that discourse
I have weakened the bond of matrimony between the two parties, I have
in this letter, on one of the sides, established a degree of affinity
between them.




ON BOOKS OF INSTRUCTION, WITH RESPECT TO POLITICS.


SECT. I.

I. We scarce ever hear the antients talked of, with that judgment and
moderation which good sense dictates. They are either treated with
excessive veneration, or else they are scoffed at and despised, and this
is generally governed by the subject matter on which you discourse.
If this happens to be science or learning, the antient professors are
talked of, as men much superior in abilities and comprehension to any
of the moderns; and it will scarcely be admitted, that these last have
discovered any thing, which was not known to the others long before. But
when political sagacity or industry becomes the subject of conversation,
all the advantage is given to these latter times; and to such an
excessive degree, that the men of former ages, compared to the moderns,
are considered as a sort of demi-brutes, who were actuated by a blind
ferocity, and who exercised power, unrestrained by reason, and with a
daring hardiness, void of all address.

II. I am of opinion, that this comparison between the antients and
moderns should be inverted, and the things placed in a quite opposite
point of view. I say, the moderns should be considered as superior to
the antients in science, but not in political industry. The reason is,
because science is communicated by books; and as we find expressed in
those all which the antient professors ever attained, we by them are
enabled to enrich our minds with the discoveries, not only of one, but
many learned men. Thus a modern, of equal application and ingenuity with
an antient, may consider himself as a river, which is enlarged by the
stock flowing from all those fountains, and who has over and above this,
a source in his own reason, with which he may add somewhat to the whole.

III. But this is not the case with political industry. For there is
scarce any man who possesses a greater stock of policy, than what arises
from the funds he has within himself. It is true, that you will find
books full of political documents, and histories which exhibit numerous
examples of them, which are still more instructive than the documents,
because they represent more strikingly the application of them to
practice, when circumstances for applying them to practice occur. But if
we attend to the thing with subtle reflection, we shall find, that this
instruction is only apparent; and although it makes a figure in theory,
is useless in practice.

IV. The reason is, because when we are desirous of carrying those
precepts into execution, there never occurs in the contingent we would
apply them to, the same complex of circumstances which we find in the
book. Never? Is it not possible that in one or another case we may meet
with the same? No certainly, for it is absolutely necessary that one
must always be wanting, which is the intervention of the agent who acted
in the business. This circumstance, which nobody adverts to, is of the
greatest weight. The same political maxim, which in the hands of one man
may be most beneficial, conduced by another, may be found useless, and
even pernicious.

V. The manner of doing things is of as much importance, and sometimes
of more, than the substance of the things themselves; and this is
hardly ever to be imitated. Every man has a peculiar, and an especial
something, which is characteristic of himself, and distinguishes him from
all others; and this is apt to vary in the same individual, according to
the different temperament or disposition of his body or mind. A frank
sentence, delivered with energy and grace, may be capable of exciting
the admiration, respect, and applause, of the same person, whom it
might offend, if spoken in a different manner; and the very same thing,
pronounced timidly, ungraciously, and with an unpleasant countenance,
might excite contempt, or indignation.

VI. A pirate who had fallen into the hands of Alexander, told the
conqueror to his face, that he was a greater robber than himself, which
was so far from exciting the indignation of that prince, that he rather
seemed pleased with the man’s frankness. The liberty that Clitus took
with him, was not near so insolent or injurious, and Alexander run him
through with a lance. From whence could this extreme difference in
Alexander’s feelings arise? Why from the pirate’s speaking with an heroic
and serene firmness; and from Clitus his having spoken with a coarse
impatience, and rustic impetuosity. This difference of manner is never to
be acquired by study, but is the production and effect of innate genius.

VII. It is commonly said, that flattery is one of the most certain
means by which a man can make his fortune; but with all this, how many
thousands of flatterers do we see despised and neglected? The reason is,
because there are very few of them, who know how to give to flattery that
nice application which communicates strength to it, and makes it appear
meritorious. Nor is it of any avail, to those who are so unfortunate as
not to hit upon the mode of doing this, to study by detail the motions,
the words, the air, and gestures of the fortunate, as the application we
have mentioned, depends upon an innate genial quality, which can never be
counterfeited by imitation; for how many people do we see make themselves
ridiculous, by imitating the very thing, which when done by others, makes
them respected?

VIII. Every political negotiation, may be compared to a machine, composed
of many wheels, every one of which, by being more rigid, or more pliant,
than is consistent with its just proportion, renders the whole machine
useless; or it may be compared to a chemical process of long duration,
whose success depends upon the different degrees of heat, to be applied
with great nicety and precision, in the different stages of the process.
But all the books that were ever written, either upon chemistry or
mechanics, can never teach how to preserve this exact proportion of
rigidity or pliability in the metals, or to apply this nice degree of
heat to the fire, which is necessary for the completion of the business,
and to answer the purposes intended. Even in these material operations,
where the most nice and delicate parts of them, and the ultimate degree
of exactitude in their execution, must be confided to a gift or innate
talent in the artificer, we find that precepts are unequal to teach their
performance; how then in political ones, where there is neither rule nor
limits to determine their extension, their degrees of suspension, delay,
or acceleration, with a thousand other contingent circumstances, can
modes be prescribed for their execution?


SECT. II.

IX. The impossibility of imitating political examples, will be found
still more manifest, if we consider, besides the person who acts, the
people he is to act with. What is it to the purpose, that such an
ambassador, has negotiated perfectly well at such a court, by employing
such means? This example will be of no use to another ambassador,
because, abstracted from an infinite number of other circumstances, a
repetition of whose perfect assemblage will scarce ever happen, he does
not negotiate with the same ministers; and every different genius, has a
different door, through which you must enter to have access to his spirit.

X. I may be told, that the political books have provided against this
inconvenience, and have accommodated negotiators with a variety of
prudent precepts, suited to the various geniuses with whom you are to
treat. This is nothing to the purpose, but is all talking at random.
For the examination of these geniuses, must be made by the negotiator,
and not by the author of the book, and the difference and variety of
geniuses, is totally incomprehensible to the human understanding.
Every man has his distinct one, which is no more exactly like that of
other men, than the features of his face. The terms in which these are
described, both in books of morality and politics, are general. They tell
you, that one man is passionate, another gentle; one ambitious, another
moderate; one avaricious, another liberal; one courageous, another timid,
&c. Do you think that these are the ultimate, and only differences to
be found in geniuses? No, they are not; but are sorts or species, every
one of which, contains within itself innumerable differences. Have you
not seen a man, who was remarkable for facing his enemy in battle, and
timid in supporting his opinion in conversation? and another who is very
patient under acute pain, and outrageous upon hearing any thing injurious
said against him? What does all this amount to, but that these are
different degrees of valour, and of patience, which we have no names for?
and it would be impossible to give names to all of them, because they are
innumerable.

XI. These things may be compared to colours. If you should be asked how
many species of colours there are, you would begin by reckoning up eight
or ten; such as the red, the green, the blue, the white, &c. But can
you suppose, that these are the ultimate and only species? No, they are
subalterns, as the logicians call them, or sorts, every one of which,
has innumerable species. To convince you of this truth, examine the
leaves of a hundred plants of different species. You will find them all
green, but not in any one of them, will you find a green perfectly like
to that of any other plant. To every different species of plant, there
is a correspondent different texture of the insensible particles of its
leaves, and a different texture of the insensible particles, occasions
a different reflexion of the light, in which, according to the most
probable opinion, consists the diversity of the colours.

XII. In the same manner, there is no man who has not a distinct
particular temperament, and different from that of all other men; and to
a distinct temperament, there is no doubt, but there must be annexed a
distinct genius.


SECT. III.

XIII. Don’t imagine, that in political concerns, these minute differences
are of no consequence; for oftentimes the whole depends upon them.
Historians represent Philip the second severe; and they also represent
the great Tamerlane the same, and even describe him as a ferocious and
most cruel prince; but this second charge, is either false or uncertain.
Who can comprehend, the difference there was between the severity of the
two men? perhaps it might have been imperceptible. But with all this, it
was sufficient to produce upon some particular occasions, diametrically
opposite effects. A buffoon, with whom Philip was much entertained, said
to him upon a certain occasion, a witty thing which the prince thought
was indecent, for which he punished him with banishment: a pleasant poet,
with whom Tamerlane used to amuse himself, said a satirical thing to him,
which expressed a contempt of his person; and in return, Tamerlane made
him a handsome present.

XIV. If I should be told, that this may depend not upon the substantial
diversity, and let us call it by this name, of the different geniuses,
but upon the accidental humour, which at that time prevailed in either
of the princes, it being certain, that the same person may have his
favourable and unfavourable moments, according as various internal or
external causes affect his mind, and dispose it, either towards anger, or
complacency; I reply, that for the support of my argument, one of these
causes answers my purpose as well as the other. This same accidental
disposition, is for the most part impenetrable, and is only known by
experience from bad success, and after the mischief is done. The clouds
of the soul, are sometimes seen on the brow of the countenance; but they
for the most part do not appear; nor do we perceive them, till they are
manifested to us by the flash of anger.

XV. So that all this upon reflexion, is but adding difficulty to
difficulty. A man who has business, or pretensions to advance, should
examine the genius of the prince or great person he is to negotiate
with; and when by dint of much labour and industry, he has arrived at a
thorough knowledge of him, he should watch the benign or adverse motions
of the planet, whose auspices he is to observe, which he will never find
instructions for doing, in any political almanack whatever.

XVI. From all that has been said, it may be inferred, that written
directions, are of little, or no service in these cases. They make
politicians for a coffee-house, but not for the cabinet; and may teach
people to talk, but not to act; for the hoping to find the circumstances
of the business to be treated upon, the same with those of the case or
cases in the book, would be entertaining a metaphysical and uncertain
expectation: on account, both of the substantial and accidental diversity
of the geniuses with whom you are to treat; and also, on account of the
diversity in the mode of acting by the same agent, at different times.
This last circumstance, which is but little attended to, is sufficient
of itself, for the reasons we have mentioned before, to produce effects,
totally different from those, we are taught to expect by the documents.


SECT. IV.

XVII. If the instruction of great masters was capable of making a man a
politician, Richard Cromwel, the son of Oliver, should have been one
of the greatest the world ever produced. The same Oliver, who after the
tragical death of Charles the First of England, which he had a principal
hand in accomplishing, erected himself into the tyrant of that kingdom,
under the title of a Protector; and without doubt, Cromwel the father
was one of the most able politicians which either that, or any other age
had ever seen. His industry and his valour, raised him from a middling
station of life, to the highest degree of military and magisterial rank.
His address and resolution, enabled him to accomplish that unexampled
attempt, of trying, and with all the formality of a legal process,
condemning his own Sovereign to an ignominious death. When the King
was dispatched, he abolished the house of Lords, and vested the whole
authority of parliament in the Commons; whom he afterwards divested
of all their power, by driving the members when they were assembled,
ignominiously out of their house; and as a testimony of the arbitrary
authority with which he acted, and to shew that was not a transitory
expulsion, he caused a board to be nailed on the outside of the door, on
which was the following inscription, _This house to be let_. In fine, he
ruled that kingdom to his last gasp, with a more absolute sway, than any
King who had ever gone before, or since his time has succeeded to the
throne; bringing about, that a parliament being convened by himself for
the purpose, should declare the title and office of Protector hereditary
in his family. All this he executed in a nation, so fierce and zealous
of their liberties as the English, which is the clearest proof that can
be given, of his supreme political abilities. In reality, I am disposed
to believe all circumstances considered, that there never to this day,
has appeared a man, who did so much, or has shewed so many, and so great
marks of political ability, as Oliver Cromwel.

XVIII. In the school of this great man, his son Richard was tutored
many years, and not only with instructions purely theoretical or
verbal, but practical and executive. He saw all the movements, and
various expedients, which his father exerted and played off, according
to the various exigencies of his affairs; neither was the reason of
proportioning these means, to attain particular ends, concealed from him.
And of what use was all this to the disciple? Of none, because instead
of teaching him how to acquire something more than he possessed, it
did not so much as instruct him how to preserve that which his father
had left him firmly established in; and before a year had passed over
his head after his father’s death, notwithstanding it had been secured
to him by act of parliament, he found himself deposed from the rank
of Protector, and obliged to live retired like a private gentleman, in
a country house. If within the same kingdom, and negotiating with the
same people, and in the same situation of affairs, where the views were
directed to the same objects, all the lessons both of theory and practice
which he had received from his father, were unprofitable to this man, who
did not retain one political arcanum, of the great number that had been
communicated to him from the vast fund of knowledge and penetration of so
able a master; and if a school of politics so circumstanced, was of no
use to him who studied in it for so many years, what occasion have we to
expect, that by the simple reading of books, a man should ever attain the
art, of skilfully directing the business of a state?

XIX. Nor is there any reason to suppose, that Richard was a stupid man,
and totally incapable of receiving instruction; for nobody has described
him as such; nor is it credible, if he had been such a sort of person,
that the English would have permitted him to have continued with the
rank of Protector as the successor to his father, for the little time
he enjoyed it. The truth is, that he was much inferior to his father
in natural talents; and that no political instructions were capable
of supplying this defect. Oliver was not only a man of great capacity,
but of a genius that was apt and suitable to every thing, and equally
understood how to command an army, or to direct a state. Over and above
this, he was magnanimous, and possessed a stout heart. There was not
known a more courageous soldier, in the age in which he lived. When
the town of Hull was besieged by King Charles, and in a weak state of
defence, Oliver at the head of only twelve horsemen, threw himself into
the place, by breaking through the centre of the royal army, exposed
to the fire of showers of bullets; and the preservation of the town,
was owing to the many prodigies of valour which Oliver exerted in its
defence. In one of the battles in which he was engaged, he took with his
own hands, two standards of cavalry, and the colours of a regiment of
infantry. In another battle, where one wing of the parliament army was
totally routed, and the Earl of Manchester the general put to flight,
Oliver, without giving himself scarce time to have a dangerous wound
he had received in the battle bound up, flew to stop the earl and the
fugitive troops, on whom his ardour and eloquence had so much weight,
that they returned with him to the charge, and intirely put to flight and
dispersed the royal army. These and other acts of extraordinary valour,
joined to the many victories he obtained by dint of his intrepid courage,
gained him the respect and esteem of the English, who are naturally
enamoured with bravery, and idolizers of military glory.

XX. To these great talents, Oliver added the lure of hypocrisy, which
has vast influence on the populace. At the same time that he was bathing
his hands in the blood of Great Britain, and striving to dethrone his
legitimate prince, in order to usurp the sovereign power, the name of God
was constantly in his mouth; who he endeavoured to make it believed, was
the especial director of his conduct, and that he himself was nothing
more than an instrument, who in obedience to the divine will, executed
the decrees of heaven for the public good, and to advance the prosperity
of the kingdom.

XXI. These good and bad qualities, were united in Oliver Cromwel, and all
conspired, to enable him to deprive a powerful monarch of his crown and
life, and to overturn a great state. But of what advantage was it to his
son Richard, to hear his father’s lessons, and to see these examples, if
he did not inherit his father’s talents?

XXII. I am already aware, that there will be some, who will be prepared
to urge as an excuse for Richard, the apology which Dionysius the
younger made for himself; who, when he was asked, how it came to pass
that his father from being a private man, acquired the principality of
Sicily, and that he who succeeded to him as a prince, found himself
reduced to live as a common subject; replied, my father left me his
crown, but did not leave me heir to his fortune. But with all this,
there is no doubt, that the fall of Richard was owing to his want of
ability to conduct himself, and it is very probable, that the disgrace
of Dionysius originated from the same cause. There is no indiscreet
man whatever, who does not impute to fortune, the mischiefs he brings
on himself by his imprudence. Dionysius the younger, was more cruel
than his father, and was nothing near equal to him in the capacity of
a warrior. Thus, the Syracusians experienced from him, severities that
irritated them, and also found, that he wanted the necessary power to
keep them in subjection. Between the Cromwels, this inequality was much
more conspicuous. The father had an able head, and a great heart. The
son had neither head nor heart; and it was for want of resolution, that
at the beginning of the revolt, he suffered himself to be overpowered by
the leaders of the opposite faction; and it was for want of judgment or
a head, that he placed such excessive confidence in the ties of kindred,
and relied wholly on his uncle and brother-in-law, who in their hearts
were unfriendly to him, and in the end were those who deposed him.


SECT. V.

XXIII. There is not, as I have already said, any instruction whatever,
that is capable of supplying or correcting these defects. Tuition, cannot
communicate valour to him, who has it not naturally; and the knowledge
of what people you can put confidence in, upon such and such particular
occasions, is precisely the effect of perspicuity and native sagacity,
accompanied with sollicitous and vigilant observation; neither of which,
can ever be taught. He, who by his temperament and disposition is
slothful, can never be made active; because the temperament is not to be
mended or altered. When you have done your best to correct it, you will
find, that it is like a dull jadish horse, who, when he is spurred, will
be enlivened for a minute, but immediately afterwards reverts to his
ordinary sloth.

XXIV. And indeed, intellectual heaviness, is more difficult to be
remedied than the other. I defy you to spur a slow understanding into
reasoning with any agility; nor can you make it advance a step faster
without causing it to stumble; and he who, left to his own natural
heaviness, might possibly hit upon something right, if he is hurried,
would be for ever making mistakes and blunders. Load such a man with
political lessons, and you will find, that it would have the effect of a
burden laid upon a dull beast; which would make him to move more heavily
than he did before. While he is revolving in his mind precepts and
examples, and examining them one by one, to determine which is adaptable
to the circumstances and matter he is to determine upon, he lets slip
the opportunity of giving his vote in the cabinet, or of acting in the
business.

XXV. But supposing the matter in question admits of delay, he will
scarce find in all his expedients acquired by study, one, which in all
its circumstances, will exactly quadrate with the case in debate, for
the expecting to find repeated in their full extent, the same identical
complex of accidents, is entertaining a metaphysical idea, and wandering
out of the ordinary course of nature. It may be objected to this
reasoning, that a person of ability, might modify and suit the doctrines
he has been taught, by making a few alterations in them, to fit the case
in question: I answer, that the same talents that it would require to
do this, would enable him, without resorting to this auxiliary aid, to
find out a proper expedient in the business himself. And it is worthy
of observation, that an expedient, which a man who is to negotiate a
business hits upon himself, although in general it may be inferior to
one that might be acquired by study, still it may do better for that
particular occasion, than the one of superior quality, which was the
offspring of another understanding. There is no man whatever, who does
not with more dexterity, carry into execution his own ideas, than those
of other people; for these are plants which thrive but ill, when they are
transplanted from their own native soil. Every one comprehends the force,
the use, and the opportuneness of a maxim, which springs from the source
of his own mind; and on account of the correspondence and agreement there
is, between the reasoning and the operative faculties in one and the same
person, a man’s head, accommodates itself well to the execution of the
means, which his own understanding invented.

XXVI. But, abstracted from this consideration, it is certain, that all
men have their distinct mode of acting; and the mode of operation, is of
the utmost importance for the attaining of ends. Of what use would my
having read the device, with which another man extricated himself from a
difficulty, if when I had occasion to put the same scheme in practice,
I found myself not possessed of the dexterity, the agility, the air and
manner, with which the other gave life and efficacy to his contrivance?
a deficiency in point of valour only, would spoil the whole; it being an
established truth, that a tremulous hand cannot draw a steady line.


SECT. VI.

XXVII. We may add to this, that the inserting the great number of maxims
and cautions which we read in histories, arose principally from the
negligence, sloth, or ignorance of those, with whom the communicators of
them have had to do in negotiations. If I can’t suppose in the business
that presents itself to me, some of those specifical defects in the
people with whom I am to treat; the imitation of the maxims, will not
only stand me in no stead, but may be hurtful to me. The same motion of
the arm, which in fencing may kill an unwary enemy, may give an opening
to another who is watchful and attentive, to demolish the person who made
the motion.


SECT. VII.

XXVIII. Finally: Experience is the arbitrator in these matters, as it
is in most others. There have in all times, been eminent politicians,
without the assistance of books; and very lame ones, who have read
and studied them. It is certain, that in Tacitus, we see exposed, the
errors by which some princes lost their crowns, and the artifices by
which others acquired or preserved them. Charles the First of England,
was a great admirer of Tacitus, whose works he always carried about
with him, and for which he had so great a respect, that he adopted them
as the oracles of his government. Notwithstanding this, they did not
teach him to avoid the errors of those who had lost their crowns; nor
to imitate the arts of those, who had acquired or preserved them; and
with all the assistance of this great guide Tacitus, he scarce advanced
a step, that did not approach him to the precipice; and by pursuing, or
misunderstanding the maxims of that politician, he caused himself to
descend from the throne, in order to mount the scaffold.

XXIX. By way of contrast to Charles the First of England, we may instance
Charles the First of Spain, and the Fifth of Germany, who, without the
assistance of literature, but left solely to the benefit of his own
genius, was one of the most profound politicians of the age in which he
lived.

XXX. The Romans, conquered the world without the help of books, and lost
it after they knew the use of them. It was in the reign of Augustus, that
the first schools of politics were opened in Rome; I mean, that then the
Romans began to read the Grecian histories, in which are represented
the industry and arduous application exerted by that most sagacious
people, in the management of public business. Of what use was all this
instruction to the Romans? Of the same it had been before to the Greeks
themselves; who, when they had present and before their eyes, inserted
in written histories, the conduct of their greatest politicians, were
obliged to submit to the superior ability of the Romans, who had not
the least benefit of those instructions; and the Romans, after that
cultivation was introduced among them, proceeded by little and little, to
lose all they had gained before.

XXXI. The two Roman historians, Livius and Sallust, who both wrote in the
reign of Augustus, were in no wise inferior to the best Greek ones; and
the Romans, in case they had not well understood the foreign ones, had
then masters of their own. We may add to this, that they had for their
instruction, the great example of Augustus himself; who, not from the
help of reading or study, but by the dint of his own excellent genius,
was without doubt a most signal politician. But all this was useless, and
perhaps hurtful. Rome, which had gone on continually prospering, while
she was a stranger to these lessons, was, soon after she began to listen
to them, advancing fast to her destruction. Or let us express it in
another way; the Romans were great politicians when they did not conceit
themselves such; and ceased to be so, when by studying foreign maxims,
they fancied they had improved themselves much in political knowledge.

XXXII. But where is the necessity of making a repetition of examples?
All those who were the first founders of monarchies and republics, were
endued with supreme political abilities; for without possessing those
talents, how could they have trained a roving and savage multitude, to
submit to the yoke, and live sociably and quietly under one prince, or
a determined set of magistrates? What books could they study, at a time
when such things were hardly known? And what examples could they copy
after, who were the first that adopted that kind of management? Those
who succeeded them, had the benefit of their examples for their guidance;
but with all this advantage, the greatest part of them could do no more,
than just preserve the dominion that fell to them by inheritance, very
few improved it, and some of them lost it. So that we may apply to both
one and the other of them respectively, what Cæsar in his oration for
Catiline, said in the Roman senate, _Profecto virtus, atque sapientia
major in illis fuit, qui ex parvis opibus magnum imperium facere, quam in
nobis, qui ea bene parta vix retinemus_. (_Apud Sallustium_)


SECT. VIII.

XXXIII. What we have said in this discourse, is equally adaptable to high
and low policy, both the one and the other of which, are derived from
the bottom of the soul. The first requires a noble innate disposition, a
clear understanding, and firm virtue; the second, cunning, dissimulation,
and hypocrisy. Activity and resolution, are qualities precisely necessary
in both of them; and he who possesses these requisites, whenever there is
occasion to exert his talents, and apply them to practice, will be found
a good politician, although he has never looked into a political book.

XXXIV. I won’t however deny, that historical instances may not afford
some sort of aid, but I assert, that they don’t do it in the way that is
commonly supposed. The study of history, will make no man a politician
who is not such by nature and genius; but he who has the natural
necessary talents for becoming one, may derive some advantage from
it; because it furnishes him with a general knowledge of the various
dispositions and arts of men, and because the reading of many uncommon
events, may prevent his being surprized or alarmed when such occur to
him; and because also, the reverses of fortune which present themselves
at every turn in history, may put him on his guard, and teach him not to
have too much confidence in his own security.

XXXV. It is true, that all these benefits, are attended with their
inconveniences, which are a sort of counterpoise to them; in the first
place, a multiplicity of instances may perplex; and in the second, the
apprehensions of the misfortunes he has seen happen so frequently,
may intimidate a man. The memory being crouded with a great number of
species, occasions, when it is necessary to separate and examine any one
particularly, a prolix discussion, which is much exposed to perplexities
and mistakes. The consideration of the many reverses of fortune people
are liable to, and the strange accidents that frequently befall them,
which no human precaution can guard against, is apt to beget in the mind
a great diffidence, which when a man is obliged to act, often renders his
operations remiss and languid.

XXXVI. But with respect to the various expedients, which present
themselves in history, and by which politicians of former times
accomplished the ends they had in view, I apprehend that they embarras
more than they assist. Even though we could meet with here and there one
adaptable to the matter in question, the selecting it from among such
a multitude of others, and the finding out perfectly its proportions,
requires more pains and study, than it would cost a man to invent a fresh
expedient, which he might derive from the fund of his own understanding.

XXXVII. The books which are wrote expressly upon politics, and which
proceed by cases, conclusions and aphorisms, only teach general rules;
which would occur to, and be taken in or comprehended by, every man of
good understanding, without the assistance of a book; and besides this,
they require so much consideration and attention, and are liable to
so many exceptions, and demand so many limitations and restrictions in
particular instances, that considered in the latitudinary manner in which
they are propounded, they become absolutely useless.




AN APOLOGY FOR, OR VINDICATION OF, THE CHARACTERS Of some Persons who
have been famous IN HISTORY.


I. Not only the people, whose defence we undertake in this discourse,
lived in different times, and were of different ranks, sexes, and
professions, but the subject-matters also, to which the apologies apply,
were of different kinds. This diversity of itself, seems as if it would
require a distinct discourse to apologize for each person separately; and
in truth, some authors have written whole volumes, upon subjects that
were not of any more importance. But as the variety of different matters
which I have proposed to comprehend under this head, obliges me to be as
concise as possible; I conjecture, that for the sake of the convenience
that will result from my doing so, I may be allowed to range them under
one common title. By pursuing this method, I shall prefer the benefit of
the reader to my own; for if I had divided into many discourses, what
might be comprehended under one general head, he would have paid me for
writing a great deal, which was not of more value than so much blank
paper; as in large letters, the titles of so many discourses would have
occupied a considerable space; and I, with little trouble to myself,
should have been paid the same price for the book, as if it had been all
filled with useful matter.


EMPEDOCLES.

SECT. I.

II. I shall not contend whether Empedocles, was a good or a bad
philosopher, or a good or a bad poet, although he professed both these
faculties; neither shall I dispute, whether he was so ostentatious, as
always to appear in public cloathed in purple, with a crown of gold upon
his head; or so vain, as to aspire at being honoured as a divinity,
but I shall confine myself, to examining whether he was so franticly
ambitious, as to throw himself privately into the flames of Mount Ætna,
to avoid his body being found, in order to make the world believe,
that he had been carried alive up to Heaven; to the end, that he might
afterwards be worshiped as a deity. This circumstance, is positively
asserted in many books; and Empedocles from thence, came to be quoted,
as an instance of the extravagance of the heathen philosophers; and upon
all occasions, when people in conversation discoursed upon morality, it
was introduced as an argument of the foolish ambition of mortals, which
they conclude is a frailty annexed to our nature, and that it corresponds
with the suggestion contained in the expression of the old serpent to
our first parents, _You shall be treated as if ye were gods_. This
information is taken from the writings of the most ancient Greek authors,
such as Hippobotus, Diodorus of Ephesus, &c. and from them it has been
diffused into the works of the Greeks and Latins. What we find in Horace
upon the subject is very trivial:

            ... _Deus immortalis haberi_
    _Dum cupit Empedocles, ardentem frigidus Ætnam_
    _Insiluit._

III. One of the elemental rules of Criticism, is, that when with respect
to any fact, we meet with different historical opinions, to abide by that
which is the least improbable; or where the circumstances of probability
are equal, to adopt that opinion which is supported by the best
authority. But I see this rule, which is clearly dictated by the light
of nature, frequently abandoned, and to such a degree, that some writers
seem as if they took pains to pursue a contrary method; which most likely
proceeds, from the improbable being nearly allied to the marvellous,
which, although it is not so well calculated to establish or persuade our
assent to a fact, gives lustre to the relation, and authors are generally
fonder of ostentation than of truth.

IV. There is an instance of this, in the subject we are treating of. It
is true, that Hippobotus, and Diodorus of Ephesus, give the account we
have mentioned of the death of Empedocles; but there are three other
writers, whom I look upon to be of equal authority, and who are more
ancient; to wit, Timeus, Neanthes of Cyzicus, and Demetrius Trezenius,
who all give other, and different accounts of the manner in which he
died, that are beyond comparison more probable than those given by the
first two. Why then should not these be believed before those other
two, the improbability of whose relations stares you full in the face?
Consider Empedocles on the margin of the volcano, with that ocean of fire
presenting itself to his sight, and a horrible death to his imagination.
Is it credible, that in such a situation, he, for an ideal felicity,
which could not be termed more than imaginary; I say, is it credible,
that a reasonable entity, who well knew that after his death he could
not be sensible of any enjoyment to be derived from a mistaken notion of
mankind, should, for such a chimera, precipitate himself into that abyss
of sulphur and flame? I will venture to pronounce that he could not.

V. But let us proceed. Admitting that any man could be absurd enough
to suppose such a thing probable, who was a witness of the fact? Why,
nobody; for this must be taken for granted; and they say, is to be
inferred from the circumstances of his disappearance, for that with the
most diligent search that could be made, they could never find his body:
others contradict this relation; and Timeus, so far from admitting that
he died in Sicily, or in the neighbourhood of Mount Ætna, says, that he
passed over to Peloponnesus, and died there. But allowing, that he died
in Sicily, and taking for granted, the circumstance of their being unable
to find his dead body, could not this have disappeared, without being
plunged into the gulph of Mount Ætna? Terenius says, that being grown
very old, as he was walking along a cliff on the sea coast, as it was
customary for him to do, his foot slipped, and he fell into the water,
and was drowned; and that his body was never found afterwards; which is a
much more probable account of its disappearance than the other.

VI. I may be told, this could not be so, because manifest tokens were
found of his having thrown himself into the abyss of Mount Ætna. The
principal of these tokens was, that a little while afterwards, one of
his shoes, by the emission of the flame, was thrown out of the volcano;
so Hippobotus tells us; but this is a glaringly fabulous tale; although
it should be affirmed by five hundred Hippobotuses. The flame of Ætna,
which the hardness of marble is unable to resist, had such a respect for
the shoe of Empedocles, as to leave it unsinged? But they say it was made
of metal, which is a subterfuge, that besides being ridiculous, is of no
avail in the case; for admitting that that philosopher, either to appear
particular and different from other men, or from some other vain motive,
should have been so extravagant as to wear metal shoes; would this have
indemnified them from being consumed by the voracious flame of the
volcano? By no means, for it is well known, that the powerful activity
of its heat, in an instant, dissolves the hardest of metals. In the
amazing and terrifying vomit of lava, which it emitted in the year 1665,
it cast up such a quantity of liquid metal, that it ran down in a river
of fire, till it nearly approached the city of Catania. And among other
experiments that were made to try the intense heat of that melted metal,
was contriving to introduce a sword blade into it, which as far as it was
immersed, instantly became liquid.

VII. A joke, which Father Dechales tells of a Spaniard, concerning Mount
Ætna, seems so applicable to this matter, that I think it will not be
amiss to relate it. He had considered, that volcanos had subsisted
a great many ages, and that there was no metal except gold, which
fire would not consume, and concluded from thence, that all the metal
which boiled in the Volcano must be gold. Filled with this conceit, he
persuaded himself that he had found out an easy method of acquiring
immense riches, which he proposed to do by the following invention. He
got a strong iron kettle made, to the handle of which, he fastened a
long iron chain, and by that, he let the kettle down till it reached
the metal, and hoped by dipping it in, to draw up a large quantity of
liquid gold. But what followed? Why, that the moment the kettle entered
the burning mass, both that, and a part of the chain were melted, and
the poor Spaniard was left with the other part of the chain in his hand,
which he was obliged to draw up with the loss of the lower end, and his
kettle. So powerful and active is the heat of that burning metal. Thus
it would have been better for Hippobotus, to have feigned the shoes of
Empedocles to have been made of Salamanders hairs, which it is said can
never be consumed by fire.


DEMOCRITUS.

SECT. II.

VIII. The vulgar opinion has represented this philosopher, as a poor
madman, and an extravagant buffoon, who passed his whole life in
continual bursts of laughter, and who by laughing at every thing, had
made himself the laughing-stock and derision of all mankind; and the
conclusion drawn from thence has been, that he was not less ignorant
than ridiculous. But notwithstanding this opinion has been so generally
adopted, it is easy to demonstrate, that Democritus in reality, was one
of the most thinking and enlightened men of antiquity. A proof of which,
was his application to study, his manner of living, the estimation he
was held in by his countrymen, and his vast learning and wisdom. All that
we are about to urge in his defence, is taken from the authorities of
Diogenes Laertius, Athenæus, Valerius Maximus, Cicero, and other writers
of eminence.

IX. His application to study was such, that he lived in an almost
continued state of seclusion from the world. He hardly ever stirred out
of his house; nor within it, did he scarce allow himself any respite from
his labours, but remained almost always shut up in his study, reading,
meditating, and writing. His ardent desire for acquiring more and more
lights and information, induced him to leave for a long time, not only
his retirement, but his country also, and to travel into distant nations,
in order to consult the learned men of Egypt, Persia, and Chaldea; and as
some say, even went to consult those of Ethiopia, and India likewise. He
expended in these peregrinations, all that he inherited from his father,
which amounted to a hundred talents. At his return to his own country,
he was accused before the magistrates, as a dissipater of his paternal
inheritance; which in that country, was looked upon as a serious offence,
and was punished, by depriving the spendthrift of being buried with his
ancestors, as an unworthy descendant of his family. The method Democritus
took to justify himself, was very singular. He produced to his judges,
the best book he had written, which was intitled, _The Great Diacosmus_,
and read to them a large portion of it, and pleaded, that the knowledge
contained in that book, was the fruit of his travels, and that he had
expended his paternal inheritance in acquiring it. The magistrates were
astonished at the profundity of the learning contained in the book,
and determined, that his money had been well expended in making the
acquisition; and not only acquitted Democritus of the charge that had
been brought against him, but adjudged that he should be rewarded with
five hundred talents, to be paid out of the public treasury, and adjudged
further, that statues should be erected to him as a most excellent man.
Let any one now consider, whether it is probable, that his country should
pay such honourable attention to a person, who was a ridiculous fellow,
and a buffoon? to say nothing of his being looked upon as a half madman,
who every moment of his life, was scoffing at his judges, his country,
and all mankind.

X. The great application of Democritus, accompanied with his vast and
subtil genius, begot such a high opinion of the extent of his learning,
that no man was considered as his equal in that respect in the age in
which he lived; for at the same time that the philosophers of those
days, extended their studies and enquiries, no further than to the
contemplation of physics, ethics, and metaphysics; Democritus added to
these three faculties, medicine, botany, geometry, arithmetic, music,
astronomy, poetry, painting, and the knowledge of languages. All which,
may be inferred from the catalogues of his works, to be found in Diogenes
Laertius.

XI. I ask now, whether the circumstances we have enumerated with respect
to Democritus, bespeak him to be a ridiculous buffoon? or whether they
may not rather be termed descriptive of a grave, serious, contemplative
man, of much superior lights to the generality of mankind?

XII. I confess, that the laughter of Democritus has been a proverb in
the world, which has been commonly used to express laughter to excess;
although the proverb took its rise from the accounts some ancient authors
have given of this philosopher. But notwithstanding this, I will venture
to assert, the laughter of Democritus, which has been so much talked
of, did not exceed the bounds, which should circumscribe the gravity of
philosophy.

XIII. In order to demonstrate this, we should premise, that all the ills
to which man is exposed, may be said to spring from three sources, which
are those of malice, misfortune, and ignorance, or want of information.
These three evils, to those who rationally contemplate them, will appear
to excite naturally, three distinct affections. That is to say, malice,
to be productive of indignation; misfortune, grief; and ignorance,
laughter. According then to whichever of these causes we consider the
evil to spring, we should suppose it to excite an affection correspondent
to that cause; and from hence, arises the great characteristic difference
of affections, which has been remarked to predominate between the two
antagonist philosophers, Heraclitus, and Democritus. Heraclitus, is
described to have been weeping and sad, and to the same excess, that
Democritus is said to have been laughing and cheerful. That is, these
tokens of the characters of the two men, were supposed to be produced, in
the first by his sensitive feelings, and in the second by his follies.
This is the common opinion; but I for myself believe, that the fault of
Heraclitus, was rather the offspring of indignation than compassion; and
that he did not consider the evils of mankind, to proceed so much from
their misfortunes, as from their malice. This is apparent, from his three
letters to his friend Hermodorus, which are the only fragments that have
been handed down to us of his writings: what he says there, when he is
speaking of the bad government and depraved manners of Ephesus, which
was his own country; does not favour the least of compassion; for the
whole context, breathes nothing but indignation and resentment. By the
same letters we may perceive, that he was presumptuous in extreme, and
also arrogant, proud, and a contemner of the rest of mankind. How does
this correspond with the soft, and compassionate disposition, that is
attributed to him? Finally, it is a fact well established, that from his
disgust to, and loathing of mankind, he retired from the world, to lead a
solitary life in the mountains. All this, bespeaks a man of a perverse,
unsociable, and gloomy genius, and proves, that Heraclitus deserved the
character that had been given of him by Timon of Athens, which was that
of _a Misanthrope_; and means, _that he was an enemy to, or an abhorrer
of mankind_.

XIV. But whether Heraclitus was generally crying or lamenting, as is
commonly thought; or agreeable to my opinion of him, was continually
growling and snarling, it amounts to the same thing, for the use I
propose to make of the premises, which is to manifest, that Heraclitus
and Democritus, were excited by distinct affections, because their
attentions, were confined to distinct objects; and without entering into,
whether the lamentation, or indignation, whichever it shall be thought
fit to call it, of Heraclitus, whose apology I am not writing, was
justifiable, I maintain, that the laughter of Democritus was reasonable,
and not extravagant. Democritus viewed men on their ridiculous side,
and contemplated their absurdities, their follies, their ill-grounded
presumptions, their vain desires, and their useless occupations, all of
them, as objects worthy to be laughed at; for as Aristotle says, all
turpitude that does not occasion sadness, is laughable and ridiculous,
_turpitudo sine dolore_. The follies and vanities of man being then a
sort of turpitudes, which do not produce grief in him, but rather tend to
make him contented and happy in himself; are objects worthy to be laughed
at.

XV. Yes. But laughter, although it may be directed to a proper object,
may be carried to excess; and perhaps this was the fault that was
reprehended in Democritus. To this I answer, that the accusation, even
considered in this sense, is founded on a mere equivocation. The laughter
of Democritus, which has been so largely cried out against, did not
favour so much of a habit, as of a dogma; and ought more properly to be
considered as applying to an object, than looked upon as a distinct act.
This philosopher was distinguished from the rest, not because he laughed
more than all the others, but for placing his especial attention on the
absurdities of mankind; and the singular maxim, that human things tended
more to excite laughter, than indignation or compassion, made a principal
part of his moral doctrine. It was easy to imagine, that a philosopher
must be much addicted to laugh, who philosophized in this way; and from
conceiving him much inclined to laugh, it was easy also for them to
proceed to supposing that he was laughing every minute; but his solitary
disposition, and retired life, afford an efficacious proof to the
contrary. Who ever knew a man that was much inclined to retirement, who
was of a very laughable disposition? These two things, seem absolutely
incompatible with each other. He who has a great propensity to laughing,
seeks occasions to gratify that inclination, and these are to be found in
the company of other men, and not in solitude.

XVI. From a story that is related of him by Lucian, I am persuaded, that
Democritus was more disposed to be serious than jolly. He was used to
say, that all the stories of spectres, phantoms, and apparitions, were
fabulous and ridiculous; and certain young fellows, to try whether these
were his real sentiments, or else with a view of making him alter them,
entered his room in the dead of night, with frightful masks on their
faces, and habited in the garb of devils, to which terrible appearances,
they added horrible shrieks and cries, accompanied by terrifying
gestures. Democritus, who was writing when they entered his room, far
from seeming surprized, without lifting the pen from his paper, and
without even deigning to pay any attention to them, in a severe tone
bid them hold their noise, or else go and make it in some other place,
and without articulating another word, he betook himself again to his
writing. What, if Democritus had been of a risible disposition, could
have been more likely than such a scene to have excited him to laughter;
for he well knew the appearances were all feigned, and a jocose derision
would have been the best rebuke he could have given them for such an
attempt. Finally, that spectacle afforded abundant matter proper to
excite laughter, for it might truly be called turpitude, _unattended by
sadness_. Why then did not Democritus laugh? Why did he not scoff at, and
treat them with jocose contempt? Why without doubt, because he was not
of a bantering, or laughable disposition.

XVII. I will not dispute, that Democritus might sometimes affect
to laugh, in order to open a door, for the introduction of his
animadversions on the absurdities of mankind; but affected laughter is
not incompatible with, nor does it tend to annihilate serious truth.
I will also admit, that at sometimes when he laughed in earnest, his
laughter might border on the extravagant. Democritus considered many of
the actions of men as ridiculous, which others regarded as reasonable,
and considered as foolish, many, which others looked upon as discreet:
Democritus would laugh at such, and other men who did not discern like
him the absurdity of the things he laughed at, might look upon him as a
ridiculous man for so doing.

XVIII. In the first discourse of our first volume, we made mention of
three letters of Hippocrates, which gave a relation of his having been
sent for by the Abdarites, to cure their country-man Democritus, who, on
account of his bursting into fits of impertinent and unmeaning laughter,
they concluded was mad. In those letters, there is also a relation given
of Hippocrates’s visit to him, and of the conversation that passed
between Hippocrates and Democritus at that visit, and the result of
the interview between them; which was, that Hippocrates esteemed him
ever afterwards, as a man supremely wise and learned. This might serve
as a confirmation of all we have said respecting Democritus; but as I
am a lover of truth, I will not scruple to acknowledge, that since my
writing of that discourse, I have come to understand, that there are many
critics, who are inclined to think those letters are supposititious; and
therefore I will not pretend to avail myself of them further, than as of
a testimony, whose authenticity may be disputed.

XIX. But I must beg leave to remark one thing; which is, that in the
beforementioned discourse, there is an expression of mine, which may
be construed to imply, that I thought the laughter of Democritus
inclining to the excessive; but to avoid being accused of falling into
contradictions, I thought it necessary to repeat here, an observation I
have made upon other occasions; which is, that I am not accustomed to
express my particular opinion upon any matter, respecting which I think
differently from the vulgar, unless it is when I treat expressly of
that matter; but when I touch upon a thing incidentally, it is a rule
with me, to fall in with the common opinion concerning that thing. This
is a method I found absolutely necessary to adopt, in order to avoid
interrupting the thread of my discourse, and incumbering it with foreign
matter and new questions.

XX. They have set up another story against Democritus, which, if there
was any foundation for, would more effectually prove his want of
understanding, than all the bursts of laughter that have been imputed to
him. Many authors, and among them Aulus Gellius, relate, that Democritus
having considered, that the sight of many sensible objects diverts the
understanding from contemplating natural things with proper attention,
put out both his eyes, to qualify himself for reflecting upon them with
greater profundity, and more intensely. I will readily acknowledge,
that such a resolution, could only be taken by a man of a depraved
understanding. _Illud quidem falso jactatum est de Democrito, quod sponte
sibi ademerit oculos, &c._ (Lib. de Curiosit.) What necessity was there,
in order to remove the impediment arising from sensible objects, for his
putting out both his eyes? Would not shutting himself in a dark room,
whenever he was disposed to study, have answered the same purpose. The
poet Laberius, who takes the thing for granted, assigns another reason
for his blinding himself. He says, that Democritus put out both his
eyes, to avoid seeing the prosperity of bad men; as if he could not
as well have enjoyed this satisfaction, by retiring from all commerce
or intercourse with the world; besides, a man’s blinding himself for
such a reason, argues a sour, morose, and furious disposition, instead
of a pleasant and chearful one, which Democritus was said to possess.
Nor is what Tertullian advances more probable, who says, he blinded
himself because he could not bear to look at women without emotions
of incontinence, nor without being vexed if it happened he could not
enjoy them. Nothing could be more foreign than this to the genius of
Democritus, of whom it is an established fact, that he was always averse
to matrimony. Such fables can be but feebly supported, when the truth is
enquired into and sought after with attention.


EPICURUS.

SECT. III.

XXI. This philosopher flourished in the times, in which the fire of
emulation began to burn among the masters and disciples of the various
schools of philosophy, who mutually waged war against each other, by
making false interpretations of the doctrines that each maintained, and
by raising false accusations against one another’s customs and manners.
In the first place, many look upon Aristotle as a notorious calumniator;
but in the second place, they remark that he was amply repaid in his
own coin, for that he was egregiously calumniated himself. I find more
appearances of malice in the calumnies raised against Epicurus, than
in those raised against any of the other philosophers. Epicurus placed
extreme felicity in enjoyment; which was an equivocal doctrine, for,
considered in a latitudinary sense, it might be construed to mean both
honest and criminal enjoyments. The vulgar, when they hear the word
enjoyment, are apt to impute an evil signification to it, because,
agreeable to their gross ideas, they hardly consider any other things as
enjoyments, but unbounded indulgences, in incontinence and debauchery;
or they at least, are inclined to consider these as the greatest of all
enjoyments. This gross construction of his doctrines by the vulgar, gave
encouragement to his rivals to stigmatize his tenets, and to accuse him,
of placing all happiness in sensuality and gluttony. It was an easy
matter, to transfer the accusation against his doctrines, to militate
against his customs and manners; because it being evident, that all men
have an innate desire to make themselves happy; consequently, Epicurus
must be understood studiously to recommend those objects to them, in
which he thought happiness to consist. By attributing to him then this
perverse dogma, the inference drawn from it was, that he led a life which
corresponded with the tenet; that is, that it was all spent in lewdness,
gluttony, and drunkenness.

XXII. Besides the before-mentioned cause, there were two others, that
concurred to blacken the fame of Epicurus. The first was, his erroneous
and impious opinion with respect to the Deity; for he held, that it
consisted of a multiplicity of gods, which he maintained were indolent,
unable to do, and having no power of doing, either good or harm to
any one; and were without providence, without activity, and without
influence; and although he acknowledged they had a right to be worshiped,
he attributed the obligation we are under of paying them adoration, to be
due to the excellence of their nature, intirely distinct, and separate
from all dependence we have on them, or gratitude that we owe to them;
and that the obsequies we pay them, should be like the respect we pay
to a nobleman, on whom we have no dependence, and from whose favour we
entertain no expectations; and which we consider, as a thing due to his
quality. I grant, that this afforded a powerful motive for entertaining
a bad opinion, both of the moral doctrine, and the manners of Epicurus;
for if you take away the fear of punishment, and the hope of reward from
mankind, you can found but little expectation, that they will esteem, or
practise virtue.

XXIII. The second cause which tended to discredit Epicurus, was the
loose manner in which some of his followers lived; who, by perverting
the doctrine of their master, and construing it to favour their vicious
inclinations, persuaded many people, that Epicurus had taught what they
asserted he had taught, and that he had lived as they did.

XXIV. Notwithstanding all these prejudices against him, the cause of
Epicurus was not looked upon as so hopeless and forlorn, as to deter some
authors of eminence from undertaking his defence, which they did with
good success. Among these, we see stand forth in the foremost ranks, our
famous Don Francisco de Quevedo, who, from the clear testimonies of many
enlightened men of antiquity, proves in the first place, that Epicurus
did not place happiness in corporeal, but in spiritual enjoyments; and
secondly, that this philosopher, so far from being given to gluttony, was
very sparing in his diet, both with respect to his meat and his drink,
living for the most part upon bread, water, cheese, and the produce of
his own garden; and thirdly, that he lived chastly, and abstained from
venereal indulgencies. As the works of Quevedo are almost in the hands of
every body, I shall omit a repetition of the testimonies he produces in
favour of Epicurus. But to those he mentions, I shall add two others of
great weight, which he has not taken notice of. The first is, that of St.
Gregory Nazianzenus, who in his Iambics, applauds highly, both the moral
doctrine, and the life of Epicurus. These are his words:

    _Ipsam voluptatem putavit præmium_
    _Epicurus extare omnibus laboribus,_
    _Mortaliumque tendere hùc bona omnia,_
    _Ac ne ob voluptatem improbam hanc laudarier_
    _Quis crederet, moderatus, et castus fuit,_
    _Dum vixit, ille, dogma moribus probant._

In English:

    _Epicurus thought that pleasure was the reward of all toils,
    and that this was the object or completion of all mortal
    good. But that no one should conclude he meant to recommend
    vicious enjoyments, it will be proper to observe, that through
    the whole course of his life, he was temperate and chaste,
    and proved what his dogmas were intended to inculcate by his
    manners._

XXV. The authority of this father, is of great weight in this matter,
because he studied in Athens, where Epicurus had fixed his habitation and
his school; and therefore it is probable, had an opportunity of obtaining
some authentic testimonies, both of his doctrine and manner of living.
This should mollify, or abate the force of the objection that is made
to Epicurus, by reason of the terms of contempt and reproach, in which
Saint Austin, Saint Ambrosius, and Saint Isidorus speak of him; who
having always lived at a great distance from Athens, may have given this
account of him, upon the credit of uncertain memoirs; and might possibly
have been induced to think, that some things were the productions of
Epicurus, which were falsely attributed to him by Diotimus, who was a
Stoic philosopher, and his declared enemy.

XXVI. The second testimony which Quevedo has omitted to mention, is that
of the philosopher Chrysipus, who was contemporary with, and an avowed
enemy and rival of Epicurus, and as such, should be believed with respect
to every thing he testifies in his favour. Chrysipus then, as quoted
by Stobæus, admits that Epicurus was endowed with chastity, although
he malignantly insinuates, that it proceeded from a cause, that was an
opprobrium to his character, for he attributes it, to his insensibility
or stupidity. These two philosophers, lived in Athens at one and the
same time; and as his neighbour and his rival, Chrysipus could not have
been ignorant of the vices of Epicurus; and if he had been lascivious,
it is very clear, that he would not have allowed he was continent. As he
could not then deny he was chaste, he gives his malice another turn, and
says, that his continence was not the effect of his virtue, but of his
stupidity.

XXVII. Finally, I shall urge against the calumniators of Epicurus, an
argument, that appears to me of great weight and efficacy: Diogenes
Laertius relates, that the writings of Epicurus were innumerable; and
that there was no author of antiquity, who had compiled such a multitude
of books. _Scripsit autem Epicurus infinita volumina, adeo ut illorum
multitudine cunctos superaverit._ (Diog. Laert. lib. 10.) Let any
man now who is the most prejudiced against Epicurus, tell me whether
it is likely, that a man who placed his whole happiness in corporeal
gratifications and enjoyments, and must consequently have given himself
up to gluttony, drunkenness, and lust, could possibly have written so
many books. It is plain and evident that he could not; because his
debaucheries would have prevented him for the greatest part of his time,
from being able to pursue his studies, and from taking pen in hand, and
must at last, have come to incapacitate him totally, as such debaucheries
commonly do those, who lead that brutal kind of life.

XXVIII. There remains something still for us to reply to, that has
been advanced on the three beforementioned heads, which are the
articles, on which the calumniators of Epicurus, principally ground
their accusations against him. The first thing he is charged with, is
easily answered, because it is generally allowed, that Epicurus lived
sparingly, and was sober and continent; from whence it may be evidently
inferred, that he could not place his whole happiness, in the delights
of gluttony and sensuality. He wished to be happy; which is a desire,
that from invincible necessity, attends every man; and consequently, if
he had thought happiness consisted in corporeal enjoyments, he would
industriously have fought after and embraced them. But let us delineate
this matter, with greater nicety and exactness.

XXIX. There are two things to be considered in the doctrine of Epicurus;
the one certain, the other questionable: the certain one is, what species
of enjoyment it was, in which he thought happiness consisted. With regard
to the first of these points, so far was he from falling in with, or
adopting gross ideas, that it was always remarked, he expressed himself
with more delicacy and propriety, and also more philosophically, than any
of the philosophers of Paganism; some of whom make happiness to consist
in riches, others in dominion, others in honours, others in health,
others in fame, &c. Generally, if you attend to them, besides their
erring in fundamentals, they reason with great impropriety, because they
sometimes mistake for happiness, the object that produced it; and at
others, the instrument that procured it. Epicurus, explains the matter
in a direct way, and agreeable to the nature and essence of the thing
itself, and not by its causes. He constitutes happiness, to consist in
an act of the soul, and in this, all our most eminent theologians agree
with him, and some of them likewise concur with him, with respect to
the species of the act; for they, like Epicurus, place formal felicity,
in delight, enjoyment, or fruition. This is a sentiment, which although
it is not the most approved in the schools, seems to be upheld by those
great authorities, Saint Austin, and Saint Thomas. Saint Austin in his
first book de Doctrin. Christ. cap. 32, says, that the supreme reward
which God bestows, is in the enjoyment of him: _Hæc autem merces summa
est, ut eo perfruamur_; and in his eighth book de Civit. cap. 9. he
expresses himself to this effect, that no one can be happy who does
not enjoy his beloved object: _Nemo beatus est, qui eo quod amat non
fruitur._ Saint Thomas 1. 2. quæst. 33. art. 3. in corp. distinguishing
between the ultimate objective, and formal end of man, says, _that the
first is God, and the second fruition, or act of enjoying God; in which
is included, the delight of possessing the ultimate end, and in this
sense it may be said, that enjoyment is the summum bonum of man. Optimum
in unaquaque re est ultimus finis. Finis autem, ut supradictum est,
dupliciter dicitur, scilicet ipsa res, et usus rei, sicut finis avari
est, vel pecunia, vel passio pecuniæ, et secundum hoc ultimus finis
hominis dici potest, vel ipse Deus, qui est summum bonum simpliciter, vel
fruitio ipsius, quæ importat delectationem quandam in ultimo fine; et
per hunc modum aliqua delectatio hominis potest dici optimum inter bona
humana._

XXX. Supposing then that Epicurus did not err, in placing all human
felicity in enjoyment, all that can be urged against him is, that he
mistook in assigning the object of this enjoyment; and I acknowledge that
he did err in this particular; but at the same time that I make this
acknowledgment, I must beg leave to alledge two things in his favour:
the first is, that if he did err, his error was not accompanied with
any dishonest design that tended to corrupt the manners of mankind: the
second is, that he erred less than any of the other Gentile philosophers.
In the first place, besides the testimonies we before produced, of the
sobriety and continence of Epicurus, the thing is proved by his own
writings. Among the few, which by the diligence of Diogenes Laertius
have been rescued from oblivion; is his letter to Meceus, where he
expounds his whole moral doctrine, and clearly points out and inculcates,
that the enjoyment he means to assign as the constitutive principle of
happiness, is that, which results from the blessings of health, bodily
ease, and tranquillity of mind; but positively excludes indulgences
in forbidden pleasures. The following words of his, which refute the
malignant interpretation that has been put upon his doctrine, by his
rivals, and many ignorant people, deserve particular attention: _Constat
igitur, quando voluptatem; beatæ vitæ dicimus finem, non intelligere
nos eas voluptates, quæ sunt virorum luxu diffluentium, aut aliorum
etiam, quatenus spectantur in ipsa actione fruendi, qua nimirum sensus
jucundè, dulciterque afficitur, veluti quiddam ignorantes, aut a nobis
dissentientes, aut alioquin adversum nos male affecti interpretantur; sed
illud dumtaxat intelligimus, non dolere corpore, ac animo non perturbari.
Siquidem non compotationes comessationesque perpetuæ, non ipsa puerorum
mulierumque consuetudo, non piscium deliciæ, aut quæcumque aliæ mensæ
lautioris cupediæ jucundam vitam pariunt, sed quæ cum sobrietate,
sereneque adeo animo, est ratio, causas, cur quid eligendum, fugiendumve
sit, investigans, ac opiniones abigens, ob quas plurima mentes occupat
perturbatio._

XXXI. This doctrine, does not tend to promote any irregularity whatever
in human life, for health of body, and serenity of mind, may very
lawfully be wished for by any man; and there are men very spiritually
disposed, who positively desire them, and are also solicitous about
procuring them. It is however a mistaken notion, to place ultimate, or
supreme felicity, in the enjoyment of them; but this is an error, which
was common to all the Gentile philosophers, who every one of them,
placed it on created objects. I say also, that the error of Epicurus
in this respect, was less than that of any of the others, because
he was at least right, with regard to the object on which he placed
happiness, by speaking of it, as confined to sublunary things; but the
other philosophers, did not even hit this nail on the head: for if we
contemplate a man possessed of all those advantages, in which they
maintained happiness consisted, such as riches, honours, fame, learning,
&c. he may notwithstanding his possessing all these, lead a very unhappy
and miserable life; because neither of them separately, nor all of them
put together, can secure him from a thousand afflictions, that may be
brought upon him, by numberless adverse accidents. For, suppose him to
be learned, rich, and powerful, to whatever degree you please, none of
these, can prevent the death of his esteemed friend; nor the infidelity
of his beloved wife; nor can they insure him, that his children shall not
turn out stupid or ill-disposed; nor can they shield him, from the stings
and mortifications he is exposed to, from the malice of envious people,
&c. But by attaining what Epicurus held happiness to consist in, that is
health of body, and serenity of mind, a man, let what will happen to him,
would at least live free from misery, and so long as he preserves these
blessings of bodily health, and a serene state of mind, may be said to be
a happy person, because he experiences no affliction, or anxiety.

XXXII. In opposition to this, some may reply, that the tenets of Zeno and
the Stoics, who place all happiness in the practice of virtue, should be
preferred to those of Epicurus. To which I answer, that this doctrine
has a fine sound, but that it is false and ridiculous in the fundamental
parts of it. I firmly believe, that the Stoics were the least sincere
of all the ancient philosophers. A great critic of recent date, very
humorously and properly called them the Pharisees of Paganism. The name
of virtue was ever in their mouths, and the virtue they preached up, was
of the most austere kind; but notwithstanding this, they in fact were as
solicitous to promote their own temporal interests and convenience, as
the most worldly of mankind. Seneca, that bright pattern of, and esteemed
honour to the Stoic school, at the same time that he rolled in riches,
and was living in the highest stile of pomp, and with the greatest
profusion of luxury, to say nothing of his usury, vociferated loudly in
favour of poverty; which strongly evinces, that the Stoics, without the
exception of even Seneca himself, were hypocrites, who did not believe it
was possible for any one to practise, the very virtue they had preached
up. They would have had a learned and a wise man, arrive at being an
insensible one; who while he was suffering the greatest torments, should
appear cheerful and serene; and that he should seem no more affected with
all the vexations that can be given him by mankind, than the sun seems
to be, with the arrows that are discharged against Heaven; or, than the
gods are with the blows that are given to their statues. Both the one and
the other of these similies, are made use of by Seneca; from whence, it
may evidently be inferred, that the virtue he recommended, was not only
an ideal, but a chimerical one. The behaviour of Dionysius of Heraclea,
shews very plainly, the extravagance of the Stoic philosophy. This
philosopher, was for a long while a disciple and a sectary of Zeno’s,
during all which time, he enjoyed a good state of health; but became
afterwards afflicted with a severe disorder in his eyes, or as some say,
in his kidneys; and indeed Cicero mentions them both: and finding that it
was impossible under these afflictions, for him to enjoy that calmness
and serenity of mind, which was so much recommended by Zeno, he abandoned
his master’s school, and gave himself up to all sorts of debauchery.

XXXIII. Virtue is not only good, but even capable of making a man happy,
if considered as a means; but contemplated according to the system of the
Stoics, as the sum of all happiness, independent of any reward, except
what results from itself, it is arduous and toilsome. I suppose that
Saint Paul, was full as virtuous a man, as either Seneca or Zeno. And
what did he say of virtue, as standing by itself, and considered, without
relation to the reward of eternal happiness? Why the very reverse of
what was said by those philosophers: _Si in hac vita tantùm in Christo
sperantes sumus, miserabiliores sumus omnibus hominibus_. (1 ad Corinth.
15.) _If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable._ And why the most miserable? can it be because we are the most
virtuous?

XXXIV. The point of religion, is the most tender one in all the doctrine
of Epicurus. He admitted that there were gods, but maintained, that
they had no hand in the direction, or management of human affairs. I,
in truth, can conceive no error more absurd, than that of denying the
existence of a deity, except it is, that of admitting there is such a
being, and denying his providence. Some suppose that Epicurus, thought
differently from what he spoke on this subject; that is, that he did
not believe in the Heathen divinities; but, only acknowledged their
existence, for fear of being punished if he had done otherwise. But
the truth is, that he frequented the temples, and assisted devoutly
at the sacrifices, insomuch, that Diogenes Laertius, extols him for
his eminent devotion to, and respect for the gods: _Sanctitatis quidem
in Deos, et charitatis in patriam fuit in eo affectus ineffabilis._ I
say, some suppose that this was all hypocrisy: it may have been so, but
there seems no reason to suspect, that he did not both speak and act
with sincerity. For, admitting there have been philosophers, who have
denied the existence of any deity, there can be no great difficulty in
supposing, that there might be another, who conceived the existence
of such a sort of deity only, as was idle and inactive, and who was a
titular or honorary being, that was happy in himself, and divested of
all care. The conceptions of men, are exceedingly strange and various; of
which truth, we have an instance in Pliny the elder. This great man, who
was sufficiently enlightened to be convinced, that the gods the Gentiles
worshiped, were fabulous; and to be fully satisfied, that if there was
a God, it must be one only God: yet, notwithstanding all this, he fell
into the same error that Epicurus did; for, he said positively, that in
case there was such a deity, he never interfered either little or much,
with human affairs; and asserted, that it was ridiculous for any man
to suppose he did: _Irridendum verò agere curam verum humanarum illud
quid quid est summum._ But what is more, he looked upon this neglect
of the government of the world, not as a defect, but as an excellence,
precisely appertaining to the deity; and declared, that the admitting
of his providence, was a degradation of his dignity: _Anne tam tristi,
multiplicique ministerio non pollui credamus, dubitemusve?_ If then
one of the greatest men of antiquity, which Pliny unquestionably was,
conceived inaction to be a perfection necessarily belonging to the deity,
why should we be surprized that Epicurus adopted the same error? He, let
this proceed from what principle it would, either the extravagance of
his imagination, or artifice to disguise what the Athenians held to be
impiety, lived unmolested in Athens, nor was there ever any prosecution
instituted against him in that city, on the score of religion. If
Diagoras had conducted himself in the same manner, he might have vented
his furious choler, without danger of the Athenians pursuing him with
fire and sword, and setting a price upon his head by proclamation; but
this philosopher having continued for the greatest part of his life,
superstitiously devoted to the gods, when he was advanced in years, all
of a sudden turned Atheist; and his motive for doing this, was one of
the most ridiculous in the world. Diagoras, was both a philosopher and
a poet; and it happened, that one of the same profession, had purloined
from Diagoras, certain verses which he had composed; for this, he
convened him before the judges to answer for the plagiary; where the
accused person was examined upon oath; and he swore falsely, that the
verses were of his own composing. Diagoras could produce no witnesses
to prove the fact against him, so the man was acquitted, and afterwards
published the verses as his own, receiving the applauses for them, which
were properly due to Diagoras; whose indignation was so inflamed at this,
that it in a manner turned his head; and he, in the fulness of his wrath,
began to write against the Grecian deities; and to publish to the world,
that it was the most foolish thing imaginable, to suppose that there
were gods; for if such beings had existed, they, instead of suffering
the man who had injured him, to be crowned with unjust applause, would
either not have permitted, or else would have punished his insolence. I
say, that Diagoras, by adopting the theological system of Epicurus, might
have vented his anger without endangering his head; as for the purpose
of letting wickedness go unpunished, and reign triumphant in the world,
the want of providence in the deity, would have the same effect, as the
actual want of a deity, and the Athenians would have winked at that
blasphemy, as they did at the blasphemy of Epicurus.

XXXV. But what is most to the point, will be to examine whether the
theological error of Epicurus tended to produce any consequences, that
might promote the disorderly life, which his rivals attribute, and which
is vulgarly imputed to him. I confess, that he who would say of a man,
who denies the existence of a deity, or if he admits of his existence,
denies his providence, that he is a person of perverse manners, would
generally be right in his judgment with regard to the facts, but would
mistake in point of the propriety of his decision, if he only considered
the error as the necessary consequence of an erroneous dogma. The reason
is, because there are men who are without vices, only because they
are without passions; and temperament has the same effect with them,
that virtue has with other people. Vice necessarily supposes a man to
be actuated by a depraved inclination, and the desires depend on the
complexion of the individual. Thus he who is naturally of a very placid
disposition, seldom shews any inclination to run into the excesses, of
either gluttony, or lust, and whether he believed there was, or was not a
God, and that if there was, he would not punish those excesses, he would
still be temperate and chaste. I say the same of all other vices, and
vicious passions. In reality, an atheist of good customs and manners,
if he is a monster, is a monster we have sometimes seen. Pliny doubted
whether there was a Deity, or if he did not doubt it, disbelieved his
Providence; but with all this, nobody could cast the least imputation on
his customs or manners; for he was temperate, sincere, and a lover of
justice; and his writings are full of invectives against vice, which are
expressed with such force and energy, that we can hardly doubt of their
coming from his heart. To sum up the whole, two of the best emperors
that were known in Rome in the days of paganism, Titus, and Vespasian,
esteemed him much, and always confided to him most important employments.
The famous atheist of these latter times, Benito Spinosa, always led a
retired life, and kept himself constantly employed, either in study,
or making telescopes and microscopes, and was a sober, continent, and
pacific man. There were strong suspicions of atheism, against the
Englishman Thomas Hobbes, but he never was accused of being addicted
to any vice. Then why might not Epicurus, notwithstanding his mistaken
faith, have lived exempt from the vices, of which he has been vulgarly
accused? and this being not improbable, why should not we believe he
did so, upon the credit of the many and grave testimonies that have
been exhibited in his favour? If to this it should be replied, that the
lives of atheists were made up of mere appearances, and deceptions, to
escape either infamy or punishment; I answer, that for my purpose, this
is sufficient, for that I never meant to insist, that Epicurus was a
man truly virtuous, but only to shew, that what had been said of the
turpitude of his moral doctrines, and of his gluttonies, and obscenities,
was false and groundless.

XXXVI. The last presumptive charge against Epicurus, which is founded
upon the dissolute lives of some of his sectaries, is totally
contemptible. The argument urged against Epicurus, that some of the
debauched pupils of his school interpreted his doctrines in favour
of vice, is like that which is brought against the catholic church,
on account of some introducers of novelties, having misunderstood or
misinterpreted the gospel. There were two sorts of Epicureans known to
antiquity, one of which were termed the rigid, and the others the relaxed
ones. These last, were considered as the heretics of Epicurianism, and as
deserters of the doctrine of Epicurus, although they retained the name
of his sectaries. The authority of Cicero seems strongly to confirm this
sentiment, who (lib. 2. de Finibus) says; _Ac mihi quidem quod et ipse
(Epicurus) bonus vir fuit, et multi Epicurei fuerunt, et hodie sunt, et
amicitiis fideles, et in omni vita constantes, et graves, nec voluptate,
sed consilio consilia moderantes, hoc videtur major vis honestatis, et
minor voluptatis._ If Epicurus then, was a good and an honest man, why
should not those who under the name of his sectaries, led scandalous
lives, be rejected as bastard Epicureans? And if among those who were
called his sectaries, there were many good men, although there were many
bad ones likewise; which of these should we esteem as the true and
sincere expounders of the doctrine of Epicurus? ought it to be the first,
or the last?


PLINY THE ELDER.

SECT. IV.

XXXVII. Pliny makes but a poor figure, in the eye of the inferior class
of literary people, who look upon him as no better than an artful
impostor, that filled his natural history with improbable tales. This
has been occasioned principally, by some authors who are a kind of
secret-mongers, and who deal in the marvellous, and have, in order to
give a sanction to their writings, quoted the authority of Pliny, to
justify many of the wonderful tales they relate; but these have not only
quoted Pliny for what he never said, but have also had the effrontery to
make use of his name, to patronize stories which he point-blank contemns
and reprobates. Pliny frequently makes mention of the wonderful secrets,
or strange operations of magic, but he always does it with derision and
contempt; and treats the authors of them as mountebanks and impostors. I
have always said, and I won’t retract my assertion; that you will not
find in all Pliny, mention made of any secret of the portentous kind
(and he relates many of that sort) which he does not reprobate as a
ridiculous tale, and an absurd fiction, generally invented by those who
call themselves magicians. Now what is the practice of the dealers in
these kinds of secrets? Why they say, that they extracted the relations
they give of them from the works of Pliny, but fraudulently conceal
that Pliny, made a joke of them. How many silly people have been led
to imagine, that there are those that can make themselves invisible
whenever they please, and that the great secret of doing this, consists
in carrying about them, what they call the sun-flower-stone, together
with the plant that bears the same name. This wonderful receipt, may be
seen in Pliny (lib. 37. cap. 10.) but you will also find there annexed to
it, by Pliny, the strongest censure that can be expressed; for he says,
that an extravagance of this kind is a clear proof, of the assurance and
want of modesty in those who are called magicians, and shews plainly,
to what a degree they are capable of lying. _Magorum impudentiæ, vel
manifestissimum in hos quosque_, (that is the sun-flower-stone) _exemplum
est_. He expresses himself to the same effect, in every other part of
his writings where he speaks of magicians. In his thirtieth book, cap.
1. in one short sentence only, he condemns the whole farago of magical
operations, and calls magic the most deceitful and fallacious of all
arts, _fraudulentissima artium_.

XXXVIII. Even of the lesser sort of secrets, which do not border upon
the incredible, such as medicinal ones commonly are, he speaks with so
much circumspection, that he scarce ever says any thing affirmatively
respecting them. He always, or nearly always, speaks doubtfully of them,
and uses the terms, it is so said, or it is so believed; _dicunt_,
_tradunt_, &c. and very often, he names the author who makes mention of
them.

XXXIX. But as those are very few who know Pliny in his own works, and
only see the miserable extracts that are made from them by puffing crafty
people, they are led from thence to conclude, that Pliny was the author
of all the ridiculous fictions that are imputed to him, by which means,
this great writer has incurred the vulgar ignominious note, of being a
man of little veracity, and one who could not be depended on.

XL. The worst is, (and although I could wish to conceal it, the sacred
reverence due to truth obliges me to declare it) that not only
secret-mongers, and mountebank puffers, have brought Pliny into this
disesteem, but even authors of a very different character, have greatly
contributed to discredit him. In how many philosophical writings, in how
many printed sermons, and in how many moral and mystical essays, have
we seen Pliny quoted as the legitimate author, of this or that fabulous
tale? I am willing to believe, that the greatest part of them quote him,
without the least design of injuring his fame, and relate what they say,
from the quotations of others. But God defend us from a little preacher
of bagatelles, having it in his power to bring Pliny into contempt,
because some things which improperly go under his name, apply aptly as
similies, or allusions to his chimeras; I say God defend us in such
cases, that he, by quoting Pliny, should be enabled to shelter himself
under his authority, as if the things he mentions came immediately from
him!

XLI. Another cause of the discredit of Pliny, is the multitude of natural
prodigies, which are for the most part false, that we find related in
his history, especially those of monsters of a strange appearance, such
as pigmies, men without heads, and with their eyes in their shoulders;
others with canine or dogs heads; others again, who had only one eye,
that was placed in the middle of their foreheads; others, with their
feet turned backwards; others with two pupils to each eye; others, with
feet so large, that they were capable of shading their whole bodies;
others, who see better by night than by day; and of whole nations of
Hermaphrodites; of a people, who support themselves wholly by smelling to
perfumes; and of another people, where all the individuals are witches
and wizards, &c. But as the Europeans of late years, have penetrated
into, and explored nearly all the provinces of the world, but have found
none of these species of monsters, some have suspected that they were all
the children of Pliny’s brain, and others have been led to think, that
Pliny had been indiscreet enough to believe them, upon the relations of
lying travellers.

XLII. It is possible to refute, both the one and the other of these
calumnies, and to support the refutation by good evidence. In the
first place, Pliny subjoins to every one of these stories, the author
from whom he took it. Secondly, prior to his giving the account of the
multitude of prodigies he relates, he protests that he does not pledge
himself as a voucher for the truth of them; and immediately refers the
reader to the works of the authors from whence they were taken, that
by examining them, he may have an opportunity of informing himself more
fully, respecting any doubts he may entertain of them; _Nec tamen ego in
plerisque eorum obstringam fidem meam, potiusque ad auctores relegabo,
qui dubiis reddentur omnibus._

XLIII. By way of summing up the defence of Pliny, we shall here recite
the opinion, which some very learned men, and critics of the first
note, have entertained, both of him and his natural history. Celius
Rhodiginius, calls Pliny _a most learned man_, and adds, _that none but
unlearned ones, disrelish his writings_. Gerard John Vossius, calls his
history _a great work, and one that can never be sufficiently applauded_.
Joseph Scaliger, pronounces that the natural history of Pliny, _on
account of its being so great and excellent, is not relished by vulgar
understandings_; Lansius, gives it the title of the Library of Nature;
and Angelo Politianus, illustrates it with the epithet of a collection
of all memorable things, and calls the author, _the supreme judge of
ingenuity, and a most acute, discreet, and admirable censor_. The Jesuit
Drexelius, proclaims him _the most noble panegyrist of nature, and a man
of prodigious erudition_; and says in another place, _that he is a most
perspicuous scrutinizer, and delineator of nature_. Justus Lipsius says,
_that there was nothing which Pliny had not read, and which he did not
understand, and that his writings comprehended all the learning of the
Greeks and Romans put together_. The two eulogiums which remain for us
to mention, apply more directly and immediately to the subject of this
apology than any of the others. The first is that of Gulielmus Budeus,
who gives him the attribute, of a man of the _strictest veracity_, for
this is the true meaning of the expression Budeus makes use of, which is,
_veritatis antistes_. Thomas Dempster bestows on him the epithets, _of a
most diligent and eloquent writer, and a man of incomparable veracity_;
and finally pronounces, that his writings were of more value, than those
of all the other antient authors put together. _Unus omnium instar._ More
cannot be said.


LUCIUS APULEIUS.

SECT. V.

XLIV. I have always wondered, that the enlightened Doctor Gabriel
Naudæus, should have taken no notice in his learned book, intituled,
_An apology for great men who have been suspected of magic_, of Lucius
Apuleius, against whom, the suspicions of magic are much more vulgarized,
and with a better foundation of reason, than they are against many others
he has mentioned. But let that omission have proceeded from what cause
it will, we will at present endeavour to supply the defect, so that this
essay may in some sense, be stiled an addition to Naudæus’s book.

XLV. The rumour of Apuleius being a magician, which began in his
life-time, and was propagated after his death, is still preserved in the
annals of vulgar literature. It is certain, that Apuleius was accused in
form of the crime of magic, before Claudius Maximus, the proconsul of
Africa; and also, that he acted as his own council and advocate through
the whole course of the prosecution; and being a learned and eloquent
man, defended himself admirably. This process, was instituted before
a Gentile tribunal, where the judge, the culprit, and the accusers,
were all pagans. After the death of Apuleius, the Gentiles spread the
report of his magic, and the fame of it insinuated itself secretly
and by degrees, among the Christians; by whom the tale has since been
propagated in books of vulgar literature; but has never gained credit
with learned men; who did not adopt the error, upon the assertions of
ordinary writers; although there is nothing surprizes me more, than the
learned Louis Vives, having made no scruple to affirm (_In lib. 18. de
Civit. cap. 18._) that the magic of Apuleius, was a certain, and well
established fact.

XLVI. Apuleius was a native of Africa, and studied first in Carthage,
afterwards in Athens; and last of all in Rome. He was a man of great
ingenuity, and made large advances in a little time; so that in the
flower of his youth, he returned to Africa an accomplished scholar, but
very poor, he having consumed all his patrimony, in the expences of his
travels and his education. His youth, his agreeable person, and his
discretion, opened him a door, that afforded him entrance into a life of
plenty and accommodation. A rich widow, named Prudentila, was captivated
with the wit, and genteel personal appearance of Apuleius, and invited
him to live in her house; which invitation ended in her marrying him.
The relations of Prudentila’s first husband, by whom she had two sons,
were much disgusted at this; and although one of the sons, who was named
Pontianus, and was nearly arrived at man’s estate, professed a great
friendship for Apuleius, and was assistant to him in bringing about the
match; he became afterwards the instrument of the indignation of his
relations, and joined with his brother and them, in accusing Apuleius of
witchcraft. Their first allegation against him was, that he with magic
arts, had seduced Prudentila, and won her heart; because that after
having lived nine years a widow, without giving the least occasion for
any suspicion of her continence, she, when advanced in years, and had
sons nearly men grown, would not have had a propensity to matrimony,
unless she had been excited to it by some unfair practices. They alledged
secondly, that Apuleius superstitiously kept a magical hobgoblin, very
carefully wrapt up in a piece of linen; and they alledged thirdly, that
he must be an enchanter, for that Prudentila had written him a letter, in
which she declared he had enchanted her; and this part of the letter they
exhibited, to prove the charge.

XLVII. The reply we shall make to these heads of accusation, is that
which Apuleius made himself to the court, and which is still preserved in
his works. He treated the first allegation with derision, saying that it
was unnecessary for a man possessed of the graces and accomplishments
they had assigned him, to practise magic arts, to captivate the heart
of a woman of forty years old, for that she was no older, although
his accusers had asserted she was sixty. To this he added, that her
physicians had advised her to marry, imputing to her continence, some
indispositions she laboured under; and said further, that her son
Poncianus had advised her, in case she did marry, to take his friend
Apuleius for her husband.

XLVIII. In reality, nothing could be more ridiculous than this part of
the accusation; but with all this, it was well received and much attended
to by the vulgar; who upon perceiving, that a person who in other
respects is prudent and cautious, has a passion for one of a different
sex, begin immediately in their gossiping conversations, to impute it
to magic potions; and this practice or notion is very antient. The same
sort of rumour was circulated in Macedonia, against a woman of Thessaly,
with whom, Philip the father of Alexander was greatly enamoured; but her
absolution from the sin of witchcraft, came from a quarter from whence
it might have been least expected, that is, from the injured Olympias,
the wife of Philip. This queen contrived means to have the concubine of
her husband brought into her presence; and upon viewing her beauty, and
the gracefulness of her person, she, without further enquiry, pronounced
sentence in her favour; and said to her, _Ah, my child, how unjustly have
you been calumniated, for you have no need of the arts of witchcraft, as
your personal charms, added to the sprightliness of mind with which God
has endowed you, are sufficient of themselves, to captivate the heart of
any man_.

XLIX. Nor is it of any avail to render probable a charge of witchcraft,
to alledge, that a person of whose judgment and circumspection we have
had long experience, should, in contradiction to the great opinion we
had formed of his chastity, have been hurried away by an excessive
passion of love, to act diametrically contrary to the former tenor of
his conduct; for such a change, without having recourse to the power of
magic, may be accounted for upon very rational and natural principles.
There are those, who, but here and there an individual, have sufficient
attraction to excite in them such a passion, and they go on to preserve
the reputation of being rigorously chaste people, till their fate
presents to their view, the steel, that is capable of striking fire into
their flinty breasts; nor, to produce those kind of effects, is there
any necessity for having recourse to sympathies, as these are things
which can’t be explained; and all this business is performed by an occult
mechanism, whose operations are not to be discerned, altho’ it causes the
impressions objects make on us at different times, to vary, and produce
different affections in us.

L. To the second article of accusation, he answered, that what he kept
wrapt up in the piece of linen, was a kind of relique, token, or sacred
symbol, of the mysterious worship of a certain deity, and that it had
been given to him by some priests in Greece; which he proved in such a
manner, as was satisfactory to the judge.

LI. In his reply to the third article of accusation, he loaded his
accusers with ignominy, and filled them with confusion. The fact was,
that the sentence of the letter of Prudentila, which they exhibited
against him, when detached from the context of it, had the meaning
which they alledged it to have, but when united to the other parts, and
restored to the place from whence it was taken, it had a quite different
signification. I shall insert the part of the letter from whence they
extracted the sentence. Prudentila, after expostulating with her son
Pontianus, and complaining that both he and his brother, incited to it
by their relations, had embroiled themselves in a vindictive dispute
with Apuleius, speaks thus to him: _I having determined to marry, for
the reasons I have recited to you, you yourself persuaded me to take
Apuleius for a husband, preferable to any other man; and you being also
a great admirer of his accomplishments, made him familiarly acquainted
with me, for the purpose of bringing about the match; but now that you
are stimulated to it by some vindictive and perverse persons, you insist,
that Apuleius has suddenly turned magician, and has enchanted me._ It is
clear, that this is a manifest irony, and contains a lively reproof of
their calumny; but the accusers exhibited no more than these last words
of the letter: _Apuleius has suddenly turned magician, and has enchanted
me._ Apuleius requested, that the whole letter might be read; and when
that was done, the infamous cheat appeared in its proper colours.

LII. These reports of the magic of Apuleius, which did not exceed mere
suspicions, and suspicions that were likewise ill founded, and which
when they were first raised, were dissipated and driven away by his
own masterly justification and defence of himself, revived after his
death, and were augmented to such a degree, that at the period in which
Christianity began to predominate, they came to be established almost
every where by general consent, and by the voice of common fame. This
appears from Lactantius, who in his refutation of the Pagan Hierocles,
that was governor of Alexandria, and who, in a treatise he wrote to
defeat the arguments of the Christians, which, in support of their
faith, they founded on the miracles of Christ, insisted, that Apollonius
Thyaneus, by the help of his magic, had done equal or greater things;
upon which, Lactantius observes, that he wonders he had not joined to
the miracles of Apollonius, those which were said to have been done by
Apuleius: _Voluit ostendere Appollonium, vel paria, vel etiam majora
fecisse. Mirùm quod Apuleium prætermissit, cujus solent, et multa, et
mira memorari._ So that in those days, it appears that many miracles were
said to have been done by Apuleius, and that he had the fame of being
a great magician, and one that could vie, or stand in competition with
Apollonius.

LIII. It appears also, that a century after the days of Lactantius,
the rumour of the feats of Apuleius and Apollonius still existed, and
seemed to have become more prevalent than they were before; and that the
Gentiles, to discredit the miracles of Christ, urged the prodigies that
had been done by Apollonius and Apuleius, and affirmed, that both the one
and the other of them, had done greater things than our Saviour. This
is evident, from the letter of Marcellinus to Saint Augustin, in which
he requests the Saint to answer the objections, the Gentiles made to
the miracles of our Saviour, and to refute the arguments they made use
of to discredit them, which were founded, on the wonders that had been
performed by those two magicians. He says to him: _Precator accesserim,
ut ad ea vigilantius respondere dignerit, in quibus, nihil amplius
Dominum, quam alij homines facere potuerunt, fecisse, vel gessisse
mentiuntur. Apollonium siquidem suum nobis, et Apuleium aliosque magicæ
artis homines in medium proferunt, quorum majora contendunt extitisse
miracula._ The same thing appears from the second letter of Saint Agustin
to Volussianus, and from his forty-ninth to the presbyter Deogratias.

LIV. But what man of any understanding, would conclude that Apuleius
was guilty of witchcraft, upon the depositions of the Gentiles; who,
seeing that the truth gained ground, were intent upon nothing, so much
as inventing tales and lies to preserve their ancient superstition?
They had before this, availed themselves of the history of the deceiver
Philostratus, and in order to eclipse the miracles of Christ, had made
use of the relations he gave of those of Apollonius; and as one crafty
deception generally begets another, they afterwards brought Apuleius upon
the theatre of the world as a rival of Christ; but with what foundation?
Why, with less, if it was possible there could be less, than they had
for introducing Apollonius; for, of the prodigies performed by this last,
there had been a history composed, such a one as it was; but of Apuleius,
they knew nothing more, than that he had been reputed a magician; and
upon the strength of this rumour, they began to form stories of his
portentous feats, for the truth of which says Saint Augustin, _Nullo
fideli auctore jactitant_, which is sufficient, to discredit all that has
been said of his magical operations.

LV. The arguments we have hitherto mentioned for supposing Apuleius to
be a magician, are sufficiently contemptible; but the one we are about
to recite, is much more so, because it is founded in gross ignorance;
but notwithstanding this, I am inclined to think, that those who at
this day believe in the sorceries of Apuleius, do it upon the credit of
the story we are going to relate. We find in the works of Apuleius, an
ingenious fable, intitled, _The Golden Ass_; in which, Apuleius recites
of himself, that when he was upon his travels, he was entertained in
the house of a woman of Thessaly, who was a famous witch, and who kept
many ointments, which had the virtue of transforming those who rubbed
themselves with them, into various shapes, and that he saw her one
night, from a place where he had secreted himself, anoint with one of
them, which transformed her into a screech owl, and that after this was
done, she flew immediately out of the window in quest of her gallant,
who lived a great way off. Apuleius, excited by a violent curiosity, was
tempted to try the effect of the ointment on himself; so he advanced to
the cupboard were the ointments were kept, and laying hold of one of
the gallipots, began to anoint himself, which he did very plentifully;
but as ill-luck would have it, instead of taking hold of the gallipot
which would transform him into a screech-owl, he laid his hand upon
one, whose contents converted him to a quite different species of bird;
upon this he seized on another, the ointment of which, instantly turned
him into an ass. The rest of the fable, consists in the recital of many
pleasant adventures that happened to him under the form of an ass; and
of his being sold and resold to many different masters, some of whom
were better, and others worse; and of his undergoing a great variety of
hardships; but at last, he was so happy as to meet with some roses, which
were the only things capable of restoring him to his natural state, and
upon eating a mouthful of them, he instantly recovered it. This is the
substance of the fable of _The Golden Ass_; under which figure, Apuleius
represents himself to have acted in _propria persona_, and gives an
account of many humourous and odd things that befell him, while he was
thus metamorphosed.

LVI. This fable then, either from having been read without proper
attention, or from people’s not having had any account of it but by
hearsay, but chiefly and principally for want of knowing from whence it
originated, has been supposed by many, to have been a true history; and
from a belief, that Apuleius had really practised magic arts, they went
on to credit that he had been a magician by profession. But there was no
mistake, which could have been more easily cleared up. The first sentence
of the writing, undeceives us, for the author says, I am going to relate
a Grecian fable: _Fabulam Græcanicam incipimus_; and in his preface
to the book wherein it is contained, he says; _Sermone isto milesio
varias fabulas conferam_; and in reality, the whole complex of accidents
and incidents in the tale, clearly shew, that it was a fabrication of
ingenious and pleasant fictions. But the strongest argument to acquit
Apuleius of magic, in this case, is, that he was not the author of
the fable; for the same tale, to which is prefixed the same title, is
to be found in the works of Lucian, who long before had written it in
Greek; and Apuleius only added to it, some new fictions and particular
relations; and in a long digression, he introduced into it, the loves of
Psyche and Cupid. Some learned men, have thought that Lucian was not the
original author of the fable of _The Golden Ass_; but that he abridged
it from the works of another Greek writer, called Lucius of Patras, which
I have never seen, nor do I know whether the book of Metamorphoses of the
person whose production they say this fable was, is now existing.

LVII. All we have recited being so clear and plain, is it not amazing,
that Saint Augustin should believe, Apuleius wrote the History of the
Golden Ass, and that he gave the relation, as of an event, that had
really happened to himself? (vid. _lib. 18. de Civit. cap. 18._) Louis
Vives excuses him, by saying, the Saint being little versed in Greek
authors, did not know that the same fable had been written before by
Lucian. But this observation cannot suppress our astonishment, because
from the words of Apuleius himself, without, to elucidate the matter,
having recourse to any other author, it is plain and evident, that
he related the story as a fiction, because he expressly says in the
beginning of it, what I am about to write, is not a history, but a fable.


THE GREAT TAMERLAN.

SECT. VI.

LVIII. The proper name of this hero, is not Tamerlan, but Timurbec; for
thus he was called by his own subjects; and this is the name by which the
Persian writers call him. It is true, that some of the Oriental authors
call him Timur-lenk; and so Monsieur Herbelot calls him; but others are
of opinion, that this last name was affixed to him as a term of reproach
by the Turks, who changed the termination _bec_, which signifies prince,
into the word _lenk_, which signifies lame; which was done, either
because the Turks really thought he was so, or because they feigned him
to have been so; or else, the cause of his lameness, was a fiction of
their raising, as we shall presently make appear probable. The describing
him by the name of Timur-lenk, having been introduced into Europe, it
soon became corrupted there into Tamerlan, or Tamorlan, and has been
generally made use of by all the European writers, for it is but a few
years ago, that we learned from the Oriental authors, his true name. But
as calling him either by one name or another, is a matter of little
importance, we shall make use of the name which has been most generally
adopted, as by that he will be best known.

LIX. Tamerlan, without doubt, was one of the most famous conquerors the
world ever knew, and deserving to be ranked among the catalogue of the
greatest heroes, with the Alexanders and the Cæsars. It may be, that
circumstances made the victories of Alexander and Cæsar more remarkable
than his; but it is certain, that neither the one nor the other of
them, obtained so many as Tamerlan. There is not a single author, who
does not acknowledge the great number of his triumphs and victories,
and they also unanimously confess, that he was possessed of all the
endowments necessary for obtaining them; so that we should not look
upon his conquering so many countries, and preserving them after he had
acquired them, as owing to a lucky assemblage of fortunate events; or
as a gratuitous bequest of fortune; but as a tribute due to his valour,
and military and political conduct. But the virtues of the conqueror,
have been so blackened with the savage actions of the barbarian, that we
have lost the image of the man in the colouring of his picture; because
we only find in his character, as it has been drawn by some historians,
representations in the extreme, of the hero and the brute; and, in order
that his origin should bear proportion with his behaviour, they have made
him the son of a poor shepherd, who soon forsaking the occupation of his
father, became the leader of a gang of thieves; and by increasing his
infamous band to the size of an army, found himself in a condition to
plunder kingdoms, and dethrone princes.

LX. As the account of all these particulars came to Europe immediately
from Turkey, which is a country, where they detest every thing belonging
to Persia, there is no doubt to be made, but all, or nearly all, the
Turks have said to blacken the character of Tamerlan, was an invention
of their own; who, besides the general hatred they bear to the Persians,
view with a particular envious eye, the prince, who above all others, has
humbled the Ottoman pride. To detect the imposture of these relations,
I shall have recourse to those Persian authors, whom Monsieur Herbelot
quotes in his Bibliotheca Orientalis, and the extract from it of the
History of Tamerlan, which is inserted in the Memoirs of Trevoux,
translated from the Persian by Monsieur Petit Lacroix.

LXI. In the first place, what is said of his mean extraction, is false;
for the Oriental authors, which Messieurs Herbelot and Petit Lacroix
quote, describe him as a person most nobly born, and of kingly descent.
Cheref Eddin Ali, who is the author Monsieur Petit Lacroix translated,
says, that his father was a sovereign prince in a part of Transoxana,
and that his territories were in Scythia or Asiatic Tartary; also, that
upon Tamerlan’s succeeding to the sovereignty, he married the sister of
Hussein, king of Transoxana.

LXII. Proceeding from the birth of Tamerlan, to treat of his customs
and manners, I must premise, that I don’t pretend to represent him as
having all the accomplishments of a perfect hero; but those would swerve
as far from the truth, who were to paint him as an infernal fury, and a
barbarian, destitute of all humanity and good faith; and as one, whose
whole behaviour proclaimed, that he was actuated by no other motives,
than those of brutal pride, savage cruelty, and blind rage. Tamerlan,
without doubt, was extremely ambitious; and this was his ruling vice.
But how much more virtuous than him in this particular, were those, who
have been celebrated as consummate heroes, by the unanimous consent of
ages? And what is more, it was the vice of ambition which gained them the
reputation of heroes. If Alexander had not been unboundedly ambitious,
he would never have acquired more applause in the world, than many of
the other kings of Macedonia. Cæsar, without ambition, might have been
equally a great captain; but, divested of his ambition, would never have
made so much eclat in the world.

LXIII. There was certainly a great difference, between the characters
of these two heroes, and that of Tamerlan; for they never exercised any
inhumanity on those they had vanquished; but it must be confessed, that
Tamerlan sometimes did. It will be necessary however in this place,
to obviate an objection that has been made to his conduct, and which
has arisen principally, from those who have treated of the affairs of
this prince, not having made proper allowances for his circumstances
and situation, and from their imputing his actions to wrong motives.
I admit, that he was sometimes inhuman, although he was not so from
genius or inclination, but from policy only. In consequence of the vast
design he had formed, of making himself master of all Asia, or, to speak
more properly, of all the world, he conceived it necessary to adopt
alternately, the two extremes of gentleness and severity; gentleness,
with those who submitted upon the approach of his standards; and
severity, with those who obstinately held out to the last extremity. He
was violently passionate, which is a vice, that although it is different
from that of cruelty, has much the appearance of it, and is frequently
mistaken for it; for to determine whether a man is cruel, we should
observe how he acts in cold blood; as the most merciful and mild disposed
person, in the impetuous sallies of his anger, may be betrayed into
executing a stroke of violence. Many of the bloody orders of Tamerlan,
were given, not while he held the pen, but the sword in his hand; either
in the hour of battle; or immediately after it; and it was before the
warlike raging heat of his blood had time to cool, that he determined
upon acts of vengeance; nor was it in the cabinet, but the field, that
he manifested these dispositions of barbarity. It is certain on the
other hand, that he never was known, neither with those who submitted
themselves voluntarily to him, nor with any of his own subjects, to have
practised an action, that might be termed a cruel one. Tamerlan then, was
not what he has commonly been described to have been, a fierce savage
brute, who, like a Nero, or a Caligula, from sallies of inhumanity and
caprice, and his fondness for doing acts of barbarity, would shed human
blood.

LXIV. Nor was his ambition so outrageous and unbridled, as to excite him
to trample with contempt, on the opinion of the world. He was desirous
of usurping absolute authority, but without incurring the stigma of
being termed an usurper. To accomplish this, he, like other artful
tyrants, disguised this vicious disposition, with the masque of virtue.
He declared, that the world was over-run with corruption, and that
justice and good faith were banished from among mankind, and that we saw
nothing but perfidy and wickedness, practised by princes with princes,
by princes with their subjects, and by the subjects themselves with one
another. Therefore, as he had been vested with a special commission from
the Almighty for the reformation of mankind, he gave out, that Divine
Providence had chosen him as the instrument, to chastise evil-doers, and
to restore all things to their proper state of order and decorum; but he
was neither so vain nor so foolish, as to think the world would give him
credit for being vested with such a commission, upon the bare testimony
of his own word; and therefore, he endeavoured to gain credit for being
so impowered, by putting on the appearances of a devout man, and by
practising the actions of a just one. He esteemed men of letters, and
took delight in their conversation; and always shewed a profound respect
for his false prophet Mahomet. He treated with special attention, the
Doctors of that mistaken sect, and with singular reverence, all those who
had acquired the reputation of being eminently virtuous.

LXV. But above all, he was a strict observer of justice towards his
subjects; and punished thefts and roguery, without remission, or
distinction of persons. He caused governors of provinces to be hanged
like common thieves, if they plundered, or exercised any acts of tyranny
on his subjects. Thus through all his dominions, people’s persons and
properties were so secure and well protected, and their confidence in the
safety of both, was so thoroughly established, that no man seemed to take
the least thought, or to be the least anxious about preserving either of
them, for Tamerlan was the general guardian of all things; and so free
were his territories from thefts, robberies, or outrages, that Cheref
Eddin Ali declares, an unarmed man might travel any route, and from one
end to the other of his dominions, with a bowl of silver on his head
filled with gold, and not meet with the least molestation.

LXVI. It is true, that his severity in some instances, was carried to the
extreme, as for example, when he ordered a soldier to be put to death for
taking from a poor peasant, a little milk and cheese. But the proportion
of bad contained in such actions, should be estimated, by taking into
consideration the whole combination of circumstances accompanying
them; for there are without doubt, various cases, where what seems
excessive rigour, may be dictated by prudence. The sallies of military
licentiousness, require many times, to be restrained by such violent
strictures; for when either among troops, or the people in general,
outrages are very frequent, it may become necessary, in order to suppress
them, to exercise greater rigour, than by the true spirit of justice, is
permitted to be exercised upon ordinary and common occasions.

LXVII. I cannot help in this place making a remark, which is very worthy
of being attended to, and as I don’t remember it has been made by any
other person, I mention it here, which is, that under governments who are
very vigilant in detecting rogues, and very rigorous in punishing them,
there are fewer executions, than where the government is more relaxed;
so that what at first sight may appear extreme rigour, when all things
are considered, is in truth and reality, lenity. It is not difficult to
decypher this seeming paradox. Whenever it is universally known in a
state, that there is great vigilance practised in detecting roguery, and
that after people are convicted of crimes, there is no hope of pardon
for them, the instances of outrages become very rare, and consequently,
if capital punishments don’t become totally unnecessary, they are very
unfrequent. The terror impressed by the first executions, is a curb,
on vile and perverse geniuses; and by a king’s hanging fifty or an
hundred without remission, in the first year of his reign, he may find
it necessary for the rest of his life to execute but very few; on the
other hand, when the pardons are very frequent, and there is but little
pains taken, to apprehend and bring rogues to justice, notwithstanding
that there are many offences concealed, and many pardoned, the number
of executions will be much greater in the course of a reign of moderate
length, where this policy is adopted, than they would in that of a
prince, who was vigilant to detect, and inexorable to punish, when
he first ascends the throne. Let then these pernicious, and mistaken
feelings of lenity, be banished from every state, as what is generally
stiled rigour, is both salutary and beneficial to a community, and to all
the individuals who are members of it.

LXVIII. I must add to this, that the proportioning punishments to crimes,
should not be adjusted by the same rules in all places indifferently. In
the ratio, that some nations are more fierce and stubborn than others,
the degree of punishment, should be increased in those nations; for what
would be sufficient to restrain a mild and timid people, would be useless
to curb a ferocious and hardened one. Tamerlan, who knew the genius and
disposition of those who were under his dominion, knew also, how to
proportion his punishments, to suit the nature and tempers of his various
subjects, and knew likewise, that what would not be more than precisely
necessary in one region, would be excessive in another.

LXIX. There is a particular instance, which demonstrates that he had
great judgment in proportioning punishments, and that he never proceeded
to excessive severities, without sufficient cause. An officer, who had
served with reputation in former wars, was found tardy in a particular
action. We might be apt to conclude from the martial temper of Tamerlan,
that he would have ordered the man to be immediately beheaded; but he
acted quite differently, and was satisfied with inflicting on him a
much milder punishment, and one that was of such a nature, as did not
affect the blood of the delinquent in the execution of it, except it
was, by making it rise in his face from the shame and disgrace of the
chastisement. He caused him to be affectedly ornamented and dressed out
in womens cloaths, and in this habit, exposed him to the derision of the
whole army. This in a European prince, would have been celebrated as a
humourous, and a lenient punishment.

LXX. On the other hand, in his ordinary deportment as a man, he was
mild, affable, and entertaining. What passed between him and the poet
Ahmedi Kermani, shews evidently, that in conversation with his subjects,
he abated his dignity even more, than it is common for the most pacific
princes to do. The same poet tells us the story, in the history of
Tamerlan, which he wrote in verse, and it was from thence Mons. Herbelot
says it was taken.

LXXI. The story runs thus; the king, when he was one day bathing,
attended by many of the nobles of his court, and also by the poet Ahmedi
Kermani, with whose wit and humour he always used to be much pleased,
proposed to him, that he should entertain the company with some pleasant
relation. To which Ahmedi replied, that he begged his majesty would name
the subject. Be it so, answered Tamerlan: I would have you then suppose,
that we are all here in a fair to be sold, and that you are to have the
disposal of us, and are to set a value upon each individual. Upon this,
Ahmedi began to scrutinize all the noblemen who were present, and to
determine with great pleasantry, what he should ask a head for them: he
rated one at one price, and another at another; and for his estimates of
them, assigned some humourous reason. Tamerlan, observing that he had set
a value upon every body but him, reminded him, that he also was for sale.
Ahmedi, without the least embarrassment, replied, Why truly, Sir, I think
I may venture to estimate you at about thirty aspres, which is an eastern
coin of very small value. How! says Tamerlan, you surely have underrated
me; for the napkin round my waist is worth as much as that; why, answered
Ahmedi, that’s the principal thing I regarded in making the estimate;
for I should not have valued your person at above two oblos. Tamerlan,
so far from being offended at this, was pleased with the joke, and
rewarded the poet with a handsome present. I ask now, is this anecdote
of his life, descriptive of a fierce tyrant, or a most affable prince?
These domestic trifles, better display the natural tempers of princes,
than great military, or political operations, because the last, are
almost constantly attended with ostentation mixed with reserve, and the
others, are generally the effects of the pure simple workings of nature
unconstrained.

LXXII. Nor was he deficient in point of modesty, for he generally had an
eye to preserving the appearance of it in his deportment; and if this
was not the effect of virtue, it at least shewed his discretion; and may
as fairly be urged as an argument, to disprove the allegation of his
being a vain boaster, as if his behaviour had proceeded from the purest
motives. Being once in conversation with a Mahometan Doctor, whom he had
taken a prisoner, he said to him, Doctor, you see me here just what I am;
which is properly no more than a miserable little man, or rather a half
man; and notwithstanding I have conquered so many provinces and cities,
in Iraca, in the Indies, and in Turquestan; I owe all my successes, to
_the divine Grace and Favour_; nor has the spilling the blood of so many
Mussulmen been my fault; for I swear and protest to you in the presence
of God, that I have never undertaken any war, with a deliberate purpose
of oppressing any one; but it has been my enemies, who have provoked the
chastisement of my arms, and have brought on themselves their own ruin.

LXXIII. He was always consistent and uniform in his declarations of
the motives for his conduct, and constantly insisted, that he never
employed his troops in any enterprize, from mere views of ambition, but
from necessity, and upon great provocation; and in truth, he was not so
unjust as he has commonly been represented to have been. Hussein, King
of Transoxana, whose dominions were the first he conquered, might more
properly be called the invader of Tamerlan, than Tamerlan could be deemed
the invader of him; for Hussein, to the injustice of entering the other’s
territories hostilely, and without provocation, added ingratitude also,
Tamerlan having in some of his military enterprizes, done him great
service. The other princes, over whom he triumphed, were for the greatest
part usurpers, and people who had acquired what they held, by more
iniquitous means, than Tamerlan used to distress them; for they usurped
what they seized from the legitimate owners, but he only took what he
despoiled them of, from a set of thieves. Neither did he move against
Bajazet unprovoked, for he, before experiencing the least hostility from
Tamerlan, exercised some hostile acts, both upon Tamerlan’s subjects,
and upon several princes who were in alliance with him; to which we may
add, that various other princes whom Bajazet had despoiled, implored the
assistance of Tamerlan against his oppressions, as against the common
enemy of mankind. In consequence of all this, Tamerlan sent an ambassador
to him, to remonstrate against the injustice of his conduct, and to try
by fair means, to bring him to reason, but he treated his ambassador with
scorn, and dismissed him contemptuously.

LXXIV. But the most material thing in Tamerlan’s favour is, that he left
those princes who submitted to him voluntarily in the quiet possession
of their dominions. This benefit, was obtained by the King of Kurt, by
the Sovereigns of Mazanderan, Schirvan, and many others; but in order to
obtain this, they found it necessary to submit to Tamerlan, before his
triumphant troops invested their walls.

LXXV. Neither is there the least foundation, for the tales of the
insolencies he exercised on the princes who became his prisoners. He
not only granted Hussein his life, but permitted him to retire and
live quiet wherever he liked best; but the imprudent distrust of this
unhappy man, cost him his life; for doubting of his safety, he fled from
his habitation, and hid himself in a cave, where a peasant finding him
concealed, put him to death. We are assured, that Tamerlan shed tears,
upon hearing of his catastrophe; but whether those tears were affected
or sincere, will ever continue problematical, as it does, of which
species those were, that Cæsar shed, upon hearing of the death of Pompey.
But, admitting that this grief was feigned, it proves at least, that
Tamerlan strove to preserve the appearance of his being a clement and
compassionate man, which is incompatible with the vulgar accounts of his
brutal and undisguised ferocity.

LXXVI. But after all, the most clamorous charge against Tamerlan remains
still to be replied to, and which we find greatly aggravated in all the
histories that have been written in Europe, where his conduct has been
canvassed, and relates to the cruel imprisonment he inflicted on Bajazet.
That unfortunate monarch, to whom, before he was defeated by Tamerlan,
they, on account of the rapidity of his conquests, gave the surname of
Gilderin, which signifies ray, or flash; after having for a long time
been the terror of Europe and Asia, and after innumerable conquests
gained over both the Christian and Mahometan princes whose territories
were in the neighbourhood of his dominions, was at length, miserably
defeated by Tamerlan, and made a prisoner in a great battle, where they
counted the number of combatants on each side, by hundreds of thousands.
Of this fact there is not the least doubt; the point in dispute, being
only, what was the sequel of the tragedy. All the European authors agree
unanimously, that Tamerlan, as soon as he had the Ottoman monarch in
his power, caused him to be put into an iron cage, which cage, at his
meal-times, he used to order to be placed at the bottom of his table,
from whence he fed him with bones and scraps that he threw to him, in
the same manner that you would feed a dog; and that he never had him
taken out of the cage, but to serve him as a block to tread on whenever
he mounted his horse; and for this purpose, he caused him to be laid
prostrate on the ground, and was used to set his foot on his shoulders.
They tell us further, that Bajazet lived some time in this miserable
state of humiliation; but that at length, he in a fit of rage and
despair, dashed his brains out against the bars of the cage. Some authors
add to this, another very heavy charge against Tamerlan, although they
don’t quote the antient authors from whom they took it, nor have I seen
any author who mentions it. The accusation is this, that Tamerlan caused
the wife of Bajazet to wait upon him naked, when he was sitting at table,
Bajazet himself being present at the spectacle; and that the furious rage
excited in him by the sight of such an object, the beholding of which,
was worse to him than death itself, caused him to dispatch himself.

LXXVII. But with all this, the wonderful relation we have been just
mentioning is fabulous, and deserving to be comprehended in the catalogue
of injurious impostures, which should be blotted out from the history
of Tamerlan; for it is not credible, that he would have treated so
unworthily, so great a monarch as Bajazet; and notwithstanding there
has been no tale circulated in a greater number of volumes, than the
abasement and disgraceful death of Bajazet; for, besides the numerous
histories in which we read accounts of them, there is scarce a book
of ethic, or moral reflections, in which, to display the inconstancy
of human affairs, and the great reverses of fortune, the instance of
Bajazet, precipitated from the proudest throne in the world, to the
bottom of the table, and the feet of the horse of Tamerlan, is not
brought as an example; I say, notwithstanding all this, the story
ought to be rejected as fabulous. The testimony of Monsieur Herbelot,
should have great weight in this question, who says, that in none of the
Oriental authors, even including those who were enemies to Tamerlan, is
to be found the story of the iron cage, save and excepting in an Ottoman
chronicle of very modern date, that has been translated by Leunclavius,
and which takes notice of it. This evidence, should be esteemed of little
weight; because, besides it’s standing single, and being but of small
antiquity, the person who gives it, was an enemy to Tamerlan; and it is
not improbable, but the Turk who wrote that chronicle, collected his
materials from European authors. The authors of credit and reputation
whom Monsieur Herbelot examined, relate the thing in a quite different
manner, for they rather assure us, that Tamerlan’s treatment of the
Ottoman Emperor, was of the most generous kind; that he invited him to
his table, and caused a magnificent and royal tent to be erected for his
habitation; that he most obligingly endeavoured to divert and amuse him,
in various ways; and made several feasts, and contrived divers pastimes
to entertain him: that in the conversations he had with him under his
misfortunes, he discoursed much of the inconstancy of fortune, and the
vicissitude of human affairs; and they say finally, that Bajazet died a
natural death, and differ only, in their accounts of the distemper that
carried him off; some asserting that it was a quinsey, and others that it
was an apoplexy. They say further, that Tamerlan was much concerned for
his death; and protested solemnly when they informed him of it, that it
was his intention to restore him to the throne of his ancestors, after
first reinstating in their dominions, the princes whose kingdoms he had
taken from them.

LXXVIII. The benignity of Tamerlan towards Bajazet, was so much the more
commendable, by so much the more the rigour the latter exercised with
others, would have justified his treating him with greater severity; for
Bajazet behaved to those he had conquered, with the utmost haughtiness
and cruelty; and affected to despise all the other sovereigns upon earth.
What excess of severity could have been imputed to Tamerlan, if after
having in lawful war, taken such a man a prisoner, he had chastised
rigorously, his usurpations, insolencies, and cruelties, among which,
might be enumerated his ordering in cold blood, six hundred French
cavaliers, whom he had taken prisoners of war, to be beheaded in his
presence? What treatment could be better proportioned to the proud
haughtiness of a man, who pretended to make slaves of all the world,
than loading him with chains, and imprisoning him in an iron cage; and
in order to humble his pride, using him like the most vile slave, and
converting his superb shoulders to a block, for the conqueror to set his
foot on when he mounted his horse? I say all this might be justified,
upon the principle, of making him an example to deter others from the
like practices. And besides what we have enumerated, the injuries he
had done, and the provocations he had given to Tamerlan himself, would
have justified his behaving to him with great severity; for example, his
wantonly invading the possessions of his subjects, and the territories of
his allies; his speaking of him in reproachful and ignominious terms, for
instance, calling him thief, and a mean vile fellow, all which had been
told to Tamerlan; and to sum up the whole, his treating with derision and
contempt, a reasonable expostulatory letter, which Tamerlan had written
to him on his behaviour. When all this is considered, we shall not find
it wonderful, that Tamerlan, a conqueror, who was not instructed in,
nor influenced by the mild precepts of the gospel, exercised on such a
captive as Bajazet, the utmost rigour; and it being certain, that his
treatment of him was as mild as we have represented it to have been, we
ought rather to be surprized at his using him so gently, and to censure
his clemency towards a man, whom the principles of justice, seem to
dictate should have been punished with rigour.

LXXIX. Although it appears rather superfluous to add any thing more in
favour of Tamerlan, we will just take notice of a circumstance respecting
his usage of Bajazet, which the authors who relate it, mention with great
confidence; and that is, that Bajazet, after he had fallen into his
hands, afforded him a special provocation for treating him as he did.
They say, that Tamerlan asked him, how he would have treated him if he
had been the conqueror? To which Bajazet with an unbridled ferocity, and
in a disgustful tone of voice answered, that he would have loaded him
with chains, and have shut him into an iron cage, and would also have
made him serve as a block to set his foot on when he mounted his horse.
Upon this gross and barbarous answer, Tamerlan ordered, that he should be
treated in the same manner himself; and I believe you will hardly find
a prince of such tender feelings, that upon receiving so irrational a
provocation, would not have taken the same kind of satisfaction.

LXXX. With regard to what is said of the gross manner in which he used
the wife of Bajazet, although many authors affirm the fact, I make no
doubt but the story is fabulous; for besides the silence of all the
Oriental authors upon this head, Chalcondylas, who is the most ancient
of the European ones who treat of the affairs of Tamerlan, as he wanted
but little of being contemporary with that prince, takes no notice of
it, which is a strong presumptive argument that the tale is fabulous;
and indeed it is not only a presumptive, but in some degree a positive
one, of its being so. It is true, that he speaks of Tamerlan’s treating
her with indignity; and mentions the affront he put upon her, which was
making her serve him with the cup at table in the presence of Bajazet:
_Jussa est in conspectu mariti sui vinum infundere._ Would this Greek
author have concealed the gross circumstance of his making her do it
naked, which would have infinitely aggravated the injury, if the thing
had been true? I might safely venture to answer, that he certainly would
not. I therefore conclude, that the story of the nakedness, was the
invention of some author, who was greatly posterior to Chalcondylas;
who, having read of Tamerlan’s obliging the wife of Bajazet to serve him
with the cup, in order to heighten the tragedy of that prince, and give
a gloss to the relation, foisted it into his history. If Tamerlan really
acted by the wife of Bajazet, as Chalcondylas has represented him to
have done, I won’t pretend to justify his behaviour; but admitting all
he says to be true, if we attend to the many instances of provocation
which Bajazet had given to Tamerlan, by his barbarity, haughtiness, and
ferocity, Tamerlan’s taking this method of humbling his pride, will not
appear so highly reprehensible; and we might even add, that it was in
some degree excusable.

LXXXI. From all that has been said, we may infer the opinion we ought to
entertain of the character of Tamerlan; which is, that he was a prince,
who, like all other conquerors that are without the light of the gospel,
did much good, and much harm. He was an eminent warrior, a profound
politician, and a zealous observer of justice to his own subjects;
although he acted by strangers, sometimes justly, and at others unjustly;
and also sometimes mercifully, and at others cruelly; but by his natural
genius and disposition, he was more inclined to mercy than severity;
and the enormous deluges of blood, which he caused to be shed upon some
occasions, did not proceed from his ferocious and merciless disposition,
but from starts of blind rage, and his thoughtless compliance with the
maxims, which his ambition and his policy dictated to him, and which
allowed of no intervals for the operations of humanity.

LXXXII. Upon the whole, I don’t pretend that the apology I have made for
this prince, cannot be replied to. It is sufficient for my purpose, if
what I have said in his favour, has the greatest probability of its side;
as its being the most probable, ought to be effectual to exonerate him
from the public infamy that has been thrown upon him; for no man should
be deprived of his honour, without first establishing the certainty of
his guilt.




AN ANSWER TO THE LETTER of a GENTLEMAN

Who made an Objection to the historical Account given by FEYJOÖ of My
Lord BACON.


DEAR SIR,

I. Your reproving me for the Eulogiums bestowed on you in my letter,
convinces me thoroughly that they were just and merited; as modesty
and an aversion to being praised, are qualities that always accompany
elevated worth. I shall therefore not dwell longer on this head, but
proceed in the best manner I am able, to give you the satisfaction you
desire, with respect to what I said in a former letter, that my Lord
Bacon was the first who told the philosophers, that pursuing systems,
was going on in a mistaken road to search for truth; and who in his
writings, pointed out to them the path they should pursue in order to
arrive at this object; but as he perceived that Aristotle was the leader
and master of the literary world, that is, that his philosophical system
was almost universally received and adopted, he found it necessary, in
order to induce them to follow his advice, to attempt to discredit the
authority of Aristotle, which he in a great measure accomplished, and
brought many eminent men to concur with him in opinion.

II. You deny that Bacon was the first who engaged in the undertaking of
discrediting Aristotle, and attacking his systems; for that Bernardinus
Telesius, a celebrated philosopher, and native of Cosenza, attempted it
before him; and although Bacon made great advances in this matter, he
only improved an undertaking begun by another man, and worked upon his
plan.

III. My good Sir, in investigating this point, we shall find there are
two distinct things to be considered, and that the consequences to be
deduced from them, are by no means reciprocal or the same. One of them
is, whether Bacon was the first who formed the project of discrediting
all systems; and the other is, whether he was the first who undertook to
attack Aristotle. I affirm that he took the lead in attacking all systems
in general; but not that he was the first who attacked the doctrines of
Aristotle. Indeed I could not assert this last circumstance, without
falling not only into a gross error, but into a manifest contradiction of
myself; for in the fourth volume of the Theatrico Critico, I have said,
that not only Bernardinus Telesius, preceded Bacon, in the attempt of
combating Aristotle; but I also pointed out many others, who had preceded
him in the same attempt; and instanced Gemistus, Plethon, Cardinal
Bessarion, Franciscus Patricius, Theophrastus Paracelsus, together with
Peter del Ramo.

IV. I also declared in the same place, after making mention of
Paracelsus, that Bernardinus Telesius (nearly at the same time with him)
who was a native of the city of Cosenza in the kingdom of Naples, and
a man of subtle ingenuity, declared himself averse to the physics of
Aristotle; and endeavoured to establish the system of his own, upon the
principles, which, with a little variation, were afterwards adopted by
Campænela.

V. I there also, in express words, declared, that Bacon was posterior
to Telesius in his attack upon the doctrines of Aristotle, as may be
seen by the order in which I ranged Aristotle’s impugners; for after
mentioning the philosopher Cosentinus, and many others of them, I
proceeded to speak of Bacon, which I did in the following words; _After
these came that great and sublime genius Francis Bacon, earl of Verulam,
&c._ and you will please to observe, that the words after these, as they
stand in the context, clearly imply, that Bacon was not only posterior to
Telesius, but to all the others; both with respect to the time in which
he lived, and also in his attack upon Aristotle. By all this you may see
clearly, that I can make no objection to your well-grounded assertion,
that as Telesius was considerably anterior to Bacon, he could borrow no
lights from Bacon’s works.

VI. But did Bacon borrow any from Telesius to assist him in his
endeavours of demonstrating, that all philosophical systems are
erroneous; and in pointing out to the philosophers, the track they
should pursue in order to arrive at truth? This is the point in which we
differ, and this is the only point of view in which I insist that Bacon
stands single, or at least, that this is an undertaking in which he never
was preceded, either by Telesius, or any other. Telesius, it is true,
attacked the doctrines of Aristotle before Bacon; but did he declare
himself averse to all systems, or systematic modes of philosophizing?
Nothing like it, for he himself was a rigorous systematic philosopher,
and a follower of the antient doctrine of Parmenides, who constituted
heat and cold as the first principles of all things.

VII. If further proof in this matter was necessary, Bacon’s Treatise on
the Philosophical Doctrines of Parmenides, Telesius, and Democritus,
where he intentionally and expressly, attacks and reprobates all their
philosophical tenets, seems decisive; for he there, so far from shewing
himself a follower of Telesius, or a worker upon his plan, studiously
and seriously applies himself, to taking to pieces and overturning the
whole plan of Telesius; and in another part of his works, that is in his
Treatise _de Auxiliis mentis, et accensione luminis naturalis_; he treats
his system as a theatrical fable: _Quin etiam nudiustertius Bernardinus
Telesius scenam conscendit, et novam fabulam egit, nec plausu celebrem,
nec argumento elegantem_.

VIII. From these premises it must follow, that Bacon could borrow no
lights from Telesius, to assist him in pointing out to the philosophers,
the path they should pursue to arrive at truth; and this path which he
pointed out to them, was that of experience, which never once occurred
to Telesius. Or indeed, how can it be supposed that such a man as
Telesius, should point out to others the road of experience, as the only
one by which they could arrive at a knowledge of philosophical truths,
when he was pre-occupied and pre-possessed, in favour of the system of
Parmenides, which he recommended to every one, as the only mode, by which
that knowledge could be attained? An author never directs his readers to
follow any other road, than that which he pursues himself; nor does he
lead them by any other, than that which he himself travels.

IX. I have not seen the Philosophical Works of Telesius, but I have in
my possession all those of Campanela, who no one doubts was a faithful
sectary of Telesius; but I can find nothing in them that is at all
like Bacon; although it is by no means unlikely, that Bacon, when he
was combating some particular propositions in Aristotle, might make
use of some arguments that had before been urged by Telesius; but upon
the whole, the plans and the objects of the two men, were very widely
different. Telesius endeavoured to throw down the system of Aristotle, in
order to build up that of Parmenides on the ruins of it. Bacon strove to
demolish that of Aristotle, that of Parmenides, and the systems of all
other philosophers whatever; and recommended to all those who employed
themselves in philosophical speculations, to apply themselves solely to
the study of experimental observations.

X. This is what has occurred to me on the subject of your objection,
which I submit to your consideration and correction; and beg leave to
return you my thanks for the honour you have done me in dedicating your
little new book to me.

GOD keep you.




A LETTER On the Subject of the WANDERING JEW.

In Answer to one written to Feyjöö, asking his Opinion of that Matter.


DEAR SIR,

I. In return to your enquiries concerning the story of the Wandering Jew,
and the question you ask me respecting it, which is, whether I have read
an account of such a person in any author deserving of credit, or who is
esteemed classical? I must answer, that I have read accounts of such a
man in various authors, some of whom are reckoned classical, but their
relations of him vary in particular circumstances.

II. The first, to the best of my remembrance, who made any mention of
him in a regular history, was the celebrated English historian Matthew
Paris; according to which author, there came to England in 1229, an
Armenian bishop, who was recommended by the pope, to be shewn the relics
of saints that were deposited in that kingdom; and the pope added in his
recommendation of him, a request that he might have all the information
he was desirous of respecting these matters, and every particular
relating to them. As it was current among the vulgar at that time,
that the Wandering Jew was then going about the Oriental Regions; some
curious people asked the bishop, whose habitation and diocese was in that
quarter, and who they on that account, thought must know whether those
reports were true or not, many questions concerning them; and desired
he would tell them, whether there really had been, or was then, such a
person as the Wandering Jew in that country; and if he was living now,
in what quarter he was travelling, what sort of man he was, and what
account he gave of himself? To which the bishop answered, that the said
Jew really now existed, and was at present strolling about Armenia. They
put the same questions to several others, who came as attendants on, or
companions to the bishop, who all gave the same answer; and one of them
gave a particular account of him and his adventures, who was a person
that could speak English, and express himself readily in Latin also.

III. This man told them, that the Wandering Jew, before his conversion,
was named Cataphilus, and had been the porter or door-keeper of Pilate;
and that, being at his station as such, when they brought our Saviour
from before the prætor, in order to crucify him, he, to make him move on
faster, at his going out of the door, gave him a blow with his fist on
the shoulders; upon which our Redeemer turning his head, said to him,
_The Son of Man is going, but you shall remain here till he returns_. The
porter upon this immediately became a convert to Christianity, and was
baptized by Ananias, who gave him the name of Joseph. This expression of
our Saviour’s to him, was understood to imply a prediction, that this Jew
should not die, till Christ’s return to judge the quick and the dead;
which prophecy had been verified with respect to the Jew to that day, who
was then more than twelve hundred and fifty years old, although at the
end of every hundred years of his age, he had always experienced some
threatenings of death, for at this period, he had been constantly visited
with a severe disease, which so far debilitated him, that it might be
said to have brought him to death’s door; but upon his recovery, his
youth seemed to have been renewed, for he did not appear a man of more
than thirty years old, which was the age of Christ, at the time of his
crucifixion.

IV. This person added, that the Jew Joseph was very well known to the
bishop, and had lived in his house but a little before he set out on his
journey to England.

V. The said historian, upon the authority we have been mentioning,
tells us further, that the Jew answered minutely, and in a grave, and
composed manner, to all questions that were asked him concerning antient
things, and gave a particular account of the opening of the graves, and
the rising of the dead, when our Saviour gave up the ghost, and also of
the lives and actions of the apostles; that he always seemed greatly
afraid that the day of judgment was near at hand, because that would
be the period of his life; and that he never failed to be seized with
great horror, when he was reminded of the sacrilegious disrespect he had
been guilty of to our Saviour; but he always expressed hopes of being
pardoned, on account of his great ignorance of the sin he committed.

VI. Jacob Basnage, a Protestant author, in his history of the Jews,
tells us of three wandering Jews. The first and most antient of whom,
was named _Samer_, and was condemned to wander, as a punishment, for his
having cast the first golden calf in the days of Moses. The other, was
the Cataphilus we have been speaking of, who was the porter to Pilate;
and the third was named Asuerus, and was a shoemaker at Jerusalem. He
says this last appeared in 1547 at Hamburgh, and the account he gave of
himself, was with only the variation of here and there a circumstance,
the same, that the Armenians gave of the person, whom they said they knew
in their own country. This man declared, that before his conversion, he
was called Asuerus, was a shoemaker by trade, and kept a shoemaker’s
shop near the gate of Jerusalem, at which our Saviour went out in his
way to Mount Calvari; who when he approached the gate, finding himself
much fatigued, was desirous of resting himself a little while in his
shop; but that he gave him a shove, and would not suffer him to enter
the door, and that then Christ said to him; _I shall soon be at rest,
but you shall wander about without ceasing till my return_. He said, the
prophecy began to take effect from that instant, and had continued in
force till then; for that he had constantly, ever since that æra, been
wandering without being able to settle himself in any province whatever.
He was a man of large stature, and had the appearance of one of about
fifty years of age; he was also apt to fetch frequent deep sighs, which
the by-standers imputed to the sadness that was caused in him by the
remembrance of his crime.

VII. Our great expositor Augustin Calmet, in his Dictionario Biblico,
testifies to have had in his possession, a letter written at London by
Lady Mazarine (who I suppose was she they called the Dutchess Hortensia
Mancini, and who was as famous for her labours, as her beauty) to the
Dutchess of Bullon, in which she relates, that at the time she wrote
the letter, there arrived a stranger in England, who gave the same sort
of account of himself, as that the Jew we mentioned before did. He
asserted, says Lady Hortensia, that he knew all the apostles, and gave a
particular description of their stature, their features, and the cloaths
they wore; he said, he had gone over all the regions of the earth, and
that he should not cease to wander till the end of the world. He boasted
that he could heal the diseased with his touch, and understood many
languages; and related with such exactness the events of all ages, that
every one listened to him with admiration. A gentleman who was eminently
learned addressed him in Arabic; and he answered him off hand in the
same language; nor could you mention to him the name of any person who
had been famous in former ages, that he did not affirm to have known. He
said he was at Rome, when it was set fire to by Nero, and that he had
conversed with Mahomet, and knew his father; that he had seen Saladine,
Tamerlan, Bajazet, Soliman the great, &c. and she added in her letter,
that simple people attributed many wonderful performances to him, but
that the wise and prudent looked upon him as an impostor.

VIII. The author of the Turkish Spy, whoever he might have been, which
is a fact that I don’t think has yet been ascertained, makes mention
in many of his letters, of the wandering Jew. Epist. 39. of his
second volume addressed to Ibrahim, and which was supposed to have
been written about the year 1643, is all taken up with particulars and
circumstances relating to the Wandering Jew, who he says he saw and
conversed with at Paris, and asked him many questions respecting the
things of antiquity. The Spy says, he told him his name was Michob Ader,
and that he had been door-keeper to the Divan at Jerusalem, together
with all the circumstances that Calmet says were related of him by the
Dutchess of Mazarine; to which was added, that he had travelled through a
variety of countries, had read much, and understood many languages. But
notwithstanding all this, the Spy was of opinion, that he was either a
madman, or an impostor.

IX. The same author in his fifth volume, epist. 50. addressed to his
friend Nathan Ben Saddi, a Jew, and which was written about the year
1666; I say the same author in this letter, relates to Ben Saddi, many
particulars and circumstances respecting the Wandering Jew, whom he tells
him he had seen and conversed with at Paris; and acquaints him with a
variety of things, that the said Jew had told him relating to the Jews in
the northern parts of Asia, which he believed to be the relicks of the
twelve dispersed tribes.

X. This author in his sixth volume, epist. 9. written in the year 1672,
to Gulielmus, tells him, towards the latter part of it, that they talked
in all places of a wandering Jew, who at that time was said to be at
Astracan, and there preaching, that Christianity would be at an end
in 1700. And in his seventh epistle addressed to Codabafrad Kheick, a
Mahometan, written in the same year of 1672, he gives him an account, of
all the Wandering Jew preached and prophesied at Astracan. The Spy says,
that a relation of his, named Fousi, was living there at the same time,
who had been a great traveller, and was a merchant; and adds, that he had
received a letter from him but a little while before, which gave him the
account of all these particulars respecting the wandering Jew.

XI. He prophesied, says the Spy, that in the year 1700 of the Hegira of
the Christians, the Turks would over-run all the continent of Europe,
and every part occupied by the Christians on the main land; that the
Christians would fly to England as an asylum, and that there a great
person would spring up, that would become their chief and leader, and
that he would conquer Jerusalem. The Jews would then open their eyes, and
acknowledge Jesus Christ for the true Messiah; but the Spy adds, that he
only relates these things, and does not believe them.

XII. Notwithstanding the foregoing, he in his seventeenth epistle of
the same volume, written in 1674, to the Turk Ali Bashaw, gives him to
understand towards the conclusion of the said letter, that he believes
the prophecy of the Wandering Jew, which perhaps he did to flatter the
Mahometans, because the Jew says that they will over-run all Europe in
the year 1700.

XIII. Finally, Father Louis Babenstuber, a German Benedictin, in a volume
which he divided into three books, which was printed at Augsburgh in the
year 1724, intitled _Prolusiones Academicæ_, where he institutes and
treats of fifty-one questions, which he terms _Quodlibeticas curiosas_;
and in the beginning of his 16th proposition of his third book, he
proposes the question, whether, except Elias and Henoch, there ever was
an older man in the world than Methusalem? and there after treating of
Elias and Henoch, he speaks of the Wandering Jew; and after having
related of him nearly the same that Jacob Basnage did; to Basnage’s
account of him, he adds, that he was examined at Hamburgh, by Paulus
Elizius, a Theologian, and then proceeds to say, _Visus est autem hic
Judæus ab innumeris mortalibus in multis Europæ partibus, nempè anno
Christi 1547. Hamburgi. anno 1575. Matrici in Hispania, anno 1599. Viennæ
in Austria, anno 1610. Lubecæ, anno 1634. in Moscovia, alia plura loca
sciens præterea._

XIV. These are all the informations we have of the Wandering Jew; by
which you may see that this extraordinary person appeared in the year
1229 in England. In that of 1547 at Hamburgh. In that of 1575 at Madrid.
In that of 1599 at Vienna. In that of 1610 at Lubec. In that of 1634 in
Muscovy. In that of 1643 at Paris. In that of 1672 at Astracan; and a
few years after at London; which was his second appearance in England. I
say a few years afterwards, without pretending to determine in what year
it was; because Calmet has omitted to give us the date of the Dutchess
Hortensia’s letter. But this Lady, as appears from her life written by
Monsieur St. Euvremont, and which is to be found in the fourth volume of
his works, came to England in 1675, and died there in 1699, from whence
it is plain, the second appearance of the Wandering Jew in that kingdom,
must have been some time between those two æras.

XV. But can we give any credit to these accounts? I think none at all;
and am inclined to disbelieve them; not so much because there is a great
variation in the writers who speak of this person, in their relations
of some circumstances concerning him, for this is not unfrequent in
histories of established reputation, but because the most antient
information we have of him, commences in the year 1229, which considering
the antiquity of the fact, is without doubt a very recent date. How is it
credible, that an event of such superlative magnitude, so extraordinary,
and so singular in its kind, and so well calculated to enforce the truth
of the Christian religion, and to defend it against the attacks of the
Gentiles, should never have been known to, and never made mention of,
by the fathers of the primitive ages? Even abstracted from its being
a circumstance of such weight and importance in the case we have just
mentioned, it would have reflected a very singular and brilliant lustre,
on the glorious passion of our Saviour, and was on that account not only
a worthy subject for the pens of the fathers to illustrate, but for those
of the evangelists also.

XVI. But upon a supposition that this was a fable, it might be asked,
what could have given rise to, or have been the origin of it? To this
I should answer, that I never give myself much trouble about enquiring
into the origin of fables, for that although they may have had their
foundation in some true event, which fiction, or the want of rightly
understanding, may have contributed so to disfigure, that no likeness of
the real and true event may ever have been discernable in them; still
fables have most commonly no other beginning, than in the invention of
the deceiver who takes it into his head to fabricate them; and this is
most frequent, when such an inventor has an interest in their passing for
truth; which without doubt was the case, with respect to the instance
we have been treating of. What pleasanter life, could an idle man of
talents, who was cautious, and well versed in history, and who could
speak eight or nine languages, lead, than that of wandering about the
world, and pretending to be the Jew we have been speaking of? He might
travel through all the kingdoms of Christendom, be well entertained,
and might have a free access even to the thrones of princes, and be
furnished at freecost, not only with every thing that was necessary for
him, but even with the superfluities of life, by persons of all ranks and
conditions, who might be induced to do all this, either from motives of
curiosity, or piety. What greater stimulus than this was necessary, to
excite the first man who practised this cheat, to feign such a story? and
what other incentives did it require, to cause other vagrants, who were
disposed to follow the same trade, to adopt the same pretence?

XVII. But if you are desirous of being informed of any thing more
respecting this matter, than what may be deduced from the common origin
of an infinite number of fables; I mean, if you are desirous of knowing
any particular principle, from which it is probable this story of the
Wandering Jew was derived; I will inform you, that it is not unlikely,
it might have originated from a remote true fact, and from a modern
fable, which was a disfiguration of that fact. The true fact, agreeable
to scripture, tradition, and the authority of the holy fathers, is the
preservation of the prophet Elias upon earth till the end of the world.
Upon this true foundation, the Mahometans erected a fable, which Herbelot
gives us a relation of, in his Bibliotheca Orientalis, page 932. See
the word Zerib. and for which relation, he quotes the author of a book
intitled Nighiaristan; under which title, there are many Persian books;
and Herbelot informs us, that Nighiaristan in the Persian language,
signifies a walk where people assemble to amuse themselves, or a place
of public entertainment and diversion; but he does not tell us the
particular book with this title, from whence he extracted the story,
which is as follows.

XVIII. In the sixth year of the Hegira, just after the Arabs had taken
the city of Holvan or Hulvan in Syria, three hundred cavaliers, who
were returning together from that expedition, a little before night,
encamped between two mountains. Their Chief, who was named Fadhilah,
ordered, that they should conformable to the Mahometan rites, repeat
the evening prayer, which begins with God is great; but they had no
sooner pronounced these words with an audible voice, than they heard them
repeated again from a quarter where no body appeared, nor could they
devise how, or by whom they were repeated, and thought at first that the
repetition was made by an echo; but upon finding that not only the words
at the beginning of the prayer, but all the other sentences also, were
repeated clearly and distinctly, they began to suspect, that this must be
done by some person whom they could not perceive. Upon which, Fadhilah
turning himself to the place from whence the repetition came, said in a
loud voice, _You who repeat our words, if you are of the order of the
angels, God be with you; but if you are one of the other sort of spirits,
I conjure you to depart; but if you are a man like myself come forth
and let me see you, that I may have the satisfaction of surveying your
person, and of conversing with you_. When he had made an end of speaking
these words, an old bald-headed man with a staff in his hand, who had
much the air of a Dervis, came forth, and stood before him, and upon
being asked his name by Fadhilah, said his name was Zerib. Bar. Elia.
and that he had taken up his abode in that quarter by the order of Jesus
Christ, who had appointed him to remain upon earth till the time of his
second coming. Fadhilah then asked him, when that second coming would
be? to which he replied, when men and women should mix together without
shame or distinction, as if they were of one sex; when the abundance of
provisions should not lower their price; when the poor, on account of
the total extinction of charity, should find no body to administer to
their distress; when the holy scriptures should be scoffed at and made a
joke of, and the mysteries contained in them, be derided in ridiculous
couplets; and when the temples dedicated to the true God, should be
occupied by idols; then we might conclude, the final day of judgment was
near at hand; and having said this, he disappeared.

XIX. There is involved in this story, a manifest inversion of that
part of the sacred text, which speaks of the snatching away of Elias,
in consequence of which, and its being corroborated by other parts
of the holy scripture, many of both Christians and Jews think alike,
with respect to the continuance of that prophet upon earth, until the
end of the world. Elias was destined to this near nine hundred years
before the coming of Christ; and this Mahometan account attributes this
destination of him to have been made by our Saviour; which is a shocking
anachronism. But we should not be surprized at this gross ignorance
of the Mahometans; who, together with their false prophet, in their
expositions of the scripture, confound times and persons, in the most
extravagant manner that can be conceived. In the third sura or chapter of
the alcoran, Mahomet identifies Mary the sister of Moses, and Mary the
mother of Christ, as one and the same person; the first of whom was much
more anterior to the last, than Elias was to Christ; and agreeable to the
seventeenth sura or chapter, according to the exposition given of it by
their famous commentator Gelaledin, the invasion of Palestine by the army
in which Goliah was, was a punishment, for the Israelites having put to
death Zacharias the father of John the Baptist, and the invasion of it by
Nebuchadnezzar, was for their having killed the Baptist himself.

XX. At sight of these, and other monstrous inversions of both the old and
new testament, which are very frequent in the alcoran, and the writings
of the Mahometan commentators, I have been inclined to think, that it
is probable some Mahometans, may have confounded John the Baptist with
John the Evangelist, and may have made two distinct sayings of Christ,
applicable to one and the same person, although one of them alludes
to the Baptist, and the other to the Evangelist. Christ said of the
Baptist (Matt. cap. ii.) _Ipse est Elias, qui venturus est_; and of the
Evangelist (John cap. xxi.) _Sic eum volo manere, donec veniam_. Which
words, the other disciples understood to amount to a decree of Christ’s,
that he should continue alive to the final day of judgment. From this
confounding different persons in one and the fame, might originate
among the blind Mahometans, the fiction or belief, that Elias by the
appointment of Christ, was to remain alive upon earth till the final day
of judgment.

XXI. The persuasion then, that Elias was the person of whom our Saviour
pronounced, _Sic eum volo manere, donec veniam_, might possibly give
rise to the Mahometan Nighiaristan story, which upon being published,
might put it into the head of some artful fellow, to assume the character
of a Wandering Jew, and under that disguise, to apply this prediction
delivered by Christ to himself.

XXII. But you will please to remember, that I observed before, there was
no occasion to rummage disfigured histories to seek for the origin of
numberless fables, as the imagination of man, is prodigiously fertile in
bringing forth these productions, and is capable of creating the whole of
a lie, without the auxiliary assistance of an atom of truth.

GOD keep you.


FINIS.




FOOTNOTES


[1] I apprehend this should not be understood in so extensive a sense as
father Feyjoo represents it, for that the expression in Aulus Gellius is
_a reviver of obsolete words_.

[2] It seems as if the power and extent of these empires was not well
calculated, when it is asserted that either of them exceeded that of the
Roman empire.

[3] Tamerlane’s extending his conquests further than ever Alexander did
his, is very uncertain; and the enumeration the author immediately gives
of them, differs from the account given us by Herbelot of this matter,
who is a writer exceedingly well versed in Oriental history.

[4] The author in this place is very hyperbolical; for, it is certain,
that so far from the power of the Turks exceeding that of the Roman
empire when it was at its height, the court of Constantinople does not
now command a third part of the countries which were formerly subject to
Rome.

[5] There is no difficulty in supposing this heroic action was performed
by different people, there having been innumerable instances of those who
have found themselves in situations where it was laudable to exert it.

[6] This last declaration savours strongly of a heathenish fiction.

[7] There is no learned man at present who defends this chimera: Bayle,
although a protestant, confutes it demonstratively in his Critical
Dictionary.

[8] The author should not place among those, whose opinion ought to have
weight in history, a man, who deals like a mountebank, in nostrums and
secrets.

[9] We read in many authors, the various opinions that prevailed with
respect to the death of Don Carlos; but in very few, that Queen Isabel of
France was poisoned by her husband Philip the Second; and her being with
child at the same time he was said to have done it, is a circumstance
that gives the tragedy an air of incredibility. We ought to conclude, in
order to give this transaction a face of probability, that Philip the
Second was a very barbarous prince: but as I have my doubts with respect
to his deserving that character, I conjecture this was a calumny invented
by the malice of some strangers.

[10] The mistress of Francis the First, both before and after marriage,
and whose behaviour, with regard to her, gave scandal to all Europe.




ERRATA.


Page 4, line 10, _for_ Cato, _read_ Cæno.

Page 72, line 9, _for_ was, _read_ were.

Page 83, line 3, _for_ Clildren, _read_ Children.

Page 181, line 7, _for_ those, _read_ the conversations.

Page 218, line 10, _for_ to print, _read_ to point out.

Page 226, line 1, _for_ compared to them, _read_ compared to the moderns.

Page 264, line 22, _for_ misfortunes, _read_ sensitive feelings.

=Transcriber’s Note:= The errata have been corrected, along with a few
other minor printing errors.

If the Reader shall find any mistakes or inaccuracies, which are not
pointed out in the foregoing Errata, the Translator will be much obliged
to him for communicating them to the persons who sell this book; as
the Critical Reviewers from such premises, without assigning any other
reason for their opinion, have taken occasion to be very severe, and the
Translator thinks very unfairly so, on the merit of the translation of
the six Essays, made from the same author, and by the same hand these
are, which were published about six months ago; and an editor of a
monthly publication, intituled, The Town and Country Magazine, who is
pretty well known to be the echo of the Critical Review in these matters,
has, after their example, thought fit, in a very laconic dogmatical
way, to pronounce that it is a very indifferent translation from a very
excellent work. But notwithstanding the arbitrary manner in which these
people have taken upon them to pronounce this damning sentence, the
translator has been told, they understand very little, if any thing at
all, of the language from whence the translation was made.

_N.B._ The above requisition having been annexed to this volume when
it was published singly, immediately after six of the Essays in the
foregoing volumes which were published by themselves had made their
appearance; and which were the object of the above criticism; the
Translator has thought it right to let it remain where it is; that
the world may be apprized of the candour and impartiality of those
Publications, the Critical Review, and Town and Country Magazine; and to
judge how far they may be relied on as faithful reporters, and competent
judges of the merit of works, on which, they take upon themselves to
pronounce absolute and arbitrary sentences of condemnation.


END OF VOL. III.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESSAYS, OR DISCOURSES, VOL. 3 (OF 4) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


