The Project Gutenberg eBook of Notes from Calais base, and pictures of its many activities
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Notes from Calais base, and pictures of its many activities

Author: C. E. Montague

Release date: June 14, 2025 [eBook #76295]

Language: English

Original publication: London: T. Fisher Unwin, Ltd, 1918

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES FROM CALAIS BASE, AND PICTURES OF ITS MANY ACTIVITIES ***





NOTES
from CALAIS BASE

AND PICTURES OF ITS MANY ACTIVITIES


                           By C. E. MONTAGUE

                     LONDON: T. FISHER UNWIN, Ltd.
                        1, ADELPHI TERRACE, W.C.
                                  1918




                      Printed in Great Britain by
                            THE AVENUE PRESS
                     (L. UPCOTT GILL & SON, LTD.),
                                LONDON.




                           TRAINING IN FRANCE


Of course all our troops are trained before they go to France, whether
the individual soldier goes out with his battalion or in a draft sent
from its reserve battalion at home to reinforce it. But when
reinforcements are landed in France they are put through a further
course of instruction, before they go up to join their regiments at the
Front.

This final period of instruction is very short; it is tightly packed
with work; it assumes that the men already know their work and only need
to do it with greater finish; and it is given by the best experts the
British Army possesses in trench warfare as it is carried on to-day.
That is, really to-day, and not as it was carried on six or even three
months ago.


                           Training Schools.

For these infantry training schools at the base are in constant living
contact with the Front. The instructors come fresh from the trenches,
and if the latest experience gained by the Army on the Somme or before
Cambrai leads to a change in the recognised technique of bomb-throwing
or the cutting out of an unnecessary movement in the bayonet exercise,
the officers and non-commissioned officers who instruct can show the
young soldier, from their own experience, just how the improvement will
help him at the crisis of a scrimmage.

Thus the course may be compared with the short final period of very
exacting coaching in which “racing polish” is put on a boat’s crew which
has already undergone a long training. Or it may be compared with the
“post-graduate courses” in a university, at which the latest results of
special research are imparted by original researchers to students whose
previous ordinary training enables them to profit by this higher
teaching.


                            Trench Warfare.

The men under instruction have to learn—or else show that they know
already—everything that a soldier in trenches must know in order to
protect himself and endanger the enemy. They are “put through it” in the
ordinary parade movements in close order, in open order work, in bayonet
fighting, musketry and bombing. There is not much time for each subject,
but none is wasted; the men are intensely keen to get up to their
regiments, and they know that they cannot go till they are passed as
qualified; the instructors teach with the zest of veterans relating
their own experiences to recruits.


                            No Idle Moments.

There is not a vacant moment in which to be bored. Work is knocked off
for an hour towards mid-day to let the men eat the rations which the
drafts have brought in their haversacks from their quarters at the base
depôt camp of the division to which their battalion belongs. But a band
begins to play from the moment of dismissing, and it also gives
priceless help in keeping up march discipline and smartness on the few
route marches for which there is room in the course.


                          Defence against Gas.

A detail, which needs care and gets it, is instruction in self-defence
against gas. Lachrymatory gas is comparatively a trifle. The men are
practised in walking through an open trench full of the heliotrope smell
of the gas, and come out shedding tears and laughing at the far end. The
more serious poison gas is let loose in a tunnel-like chamber through
which every officer and man bound for the Front must pass. The foul
stuff in the chamber is some hundred times as dense as any gas to be met
in actual warfare. But if the man’s gas mask is in order, and he uses it
as he has been told, he suffers no inconvenience while passing through
or afterwards, and thenceforward no German gas has any terrors for him.


                            Varied Lessons.

The photographs bring out many interesting details in the training
course. One of them shows, in a night scene, how skilfully the general
atmosphere of the Front, as well as the details of trenches and craters,
is reproduced for purposes of instruction. Another shows
non-commissioned officers receiving instruction by the help of “picture
targets” in the indispensable art of describing any point in a landscape
exactly and tersely. In a photograph of the bayonet fighting course the
Indian soldiers’ firm balance of the body and excellent carriage of the
head are noticeable.


                            Sandbag-Filling.

Speed in sandbag-filling, for trench fortification purposes, is
extremely important; in some battalions it is encouraged by systematic
competitions, the competitors working in pairs. Note, in the photograph
of men aiming or loading, in a lying position, the uniformity with which
their heels are kept down. In a badly trained draft several heels would
be sticking up, inviting enemy bullets.


                             Swedish Drill.

The photographs of Swedish drill or “physical exercise”—as one out of a
soldier’s many forms of physical exercise is formally called—do less
than justice to that admirable part of our present military training.
Its object is not to produce a rigid protrusion of the chest or a
poker-like straightness of figure, but to give every separate muscle in
the body its share of work and development, and also to give a free,
easy balance and elasticity to the whole. There is still, in the New
Army, so much of the tradition, or instinct, of the old one that the men
will insist on “throwing a chest” when confronted with a camera on a
parade ground. The value of Swedish drill is realised later when sterner
conditions demand the “negotiation” of trenches, fences and breastworks.


                               En Route.

The photograph of troops disembarking in France, prior to boarding the
train for “Somewhere in France,” needs no explanation. Railway
accommodation is not luxurious, but a good soldier is generally a great
boy, and it is an unfailing source of boyish pleasure to our troops in
France to be restrained by no railway bye-laws and to be allowed to
travel, in adventurous discomfort, in or on every sort of closed or open
truck except an ordinary passenger carriage.

In the few cases where men who are not sick or wounded travel by
passenger train, there is a noticeable tendency among the gayer spirits
to travel on the footboard or on the roof. A genial array of smiling
faces, indicative of high spirits, may generally be observed among the
troops _en route_ for the Front.




                        THE CARE OF THE WOUNDED


The first thing to do with a wounded man is to “first-aid” him. This, of
course, is done chiefly to check dangerous bleeding, prevent the
aggravation of unset fractures, and, generally, to enable the patient to
travel with as little risk and pain as possible to a place where his
injuries can be more completely dealt with.

The next thing to do is to get him out of the trench. (If he has been
wounded in No Man’s Land, he must first be got back into the trench.) If
he can walk out, he does. During some of the chief engagements on the
Somme in 1916 many seriously wounded men walked astonishing distances to
dressing-stations in order to leave the ambulances and stretchers for
others in still worse case.


                        Removal from the Trench.

If a man wounded in or near the firing trench cannot walk, he may have
to be carried on a stretcher for a mile or more along a deep, narrow
communication trench with scores of right-angled turns and a few more
irregular incidental twists. It may have an uneven and slippery floor,
perhaps a foot or two under water at its lower-lying parts.

Four strong men, used to the job, find it extremely hard work to carry a
stretcher case along such a trench. They may repeatedly have to raise
the stretcher well above their heads, almost at arm’s length, so as to
clear the walls of the trench at an awkward turning. To overcome this
difficulty a trolley stretcher, suspended from a mono-rail running above
the trench almost at the surface level, is used in such trenches as
permit of its passage. It saves an immense amount of tedious labour and
much lessens the discomfort of wounded men.


                     The Advanced Dressing-Station.

Arrived at an advanced dressing-station, a patient can be immediately
operated upon, if this be necessary to save life. Or his wound may be
one of those which, though grave, are likely to do better for some delay
before operation. Just whatever is necessary at the moment is done; the
recognised precautions against the states technically known as shock and
collapse are taken; and then the patient is sent on at once to a
casualty clearing station, with its ampler space and larger equipment.
Probably he will ultimately pass from the C.C.S. to a general, or
stationary, hospital more remote from the Front, and perhaps to a
hospital in England.


                           The Eye Hospital.

If a case presents any special difficulty it will be sent to a specially
equipped ward or to a specialist hospital. A typical hospital of the
kind is the Army Eye Hospital, near the coast, commanded by a London
oculist of distinction. Part of its equipment is a magnet of great
power, which begins to draw out of the eye any fragments of metal that
are in it as soon as the patient enters the room.

By combining the use of instruments with this extricatory power of the
magnet the sight of many men with severe eye-wounds is saved; the
hospital possesses a remarkable collection of jagged fragments and sharp
splinters of metal thus cut and coaxed out of eyes. Or a man with a
rather intractable fracture of the thigh may be sent to one of the
special wards photographed here, where the limb, and his whole body, can
be slung at any angle that is convenient.


                            Ingenious Aids.

In the British Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, near the French coast,
there was lying, throughout last winter, an Australian soldier whose
life, in the opinion of the surgeons, had only just been saved by the
perfection of a special kind of bed which someone had given to the
hospital. The man had been deeply and very dangerously wounded in the
back, in such a way that his wounds could not have been dressed in an
ordinary bed without such changes of position as would themselves have
been injurious.

By an ingenious mechanism the special bed could be hoisted, tilted and
inclined till it was in any desired plane and at any convenient height,
and any portion of the patient’s body could be reached without turning
him over.


                          A Perfect Hospital.

This Hospital of St. John is perhaps the most perfect we have in France.
It is housed in good wooden huts, amply spaced out and admirably planned
for convenience in working and administration; each wooden ward is
light, airy, cheerful in colour and provided with every imaginable aid
to cleanliness and good order. One of its special belongings is a
cardiograph, or apparatus for recording on a chart, by the help of
electricity, all the movements of the heart, so that in cases of
irregular action of the heart the evenly serrated line produced on the
paper by a normal heart action is varied with spasmodic upward leaps or
downward collapses.


                          Varied Conveyances.

Between the front and the base a wounded man may travel, for some part
of the way, in any one of a large variety of conveyances. The ordinary
stretcher and the overhead trolley have been mentioned. The wheeled
stretcher, balancing like a dog-cart between two large bicycle wheels,
or between two smaller ones with pneumatic tyres, is extremely useful
for saving jolts and labour. Its chief sphere of action is between the
rear ends of communication trenches and the points, perhaps a mile or
two farther on, beyond which it is not advisable for motor ambulances to
go. But of course it can only be used to advantage where the ground to
be traversed is not completely broken up by shell fire, mines or bombs.


                         Narrow-Gauge Railways.

An excellent way of transporting casualties—where it is available—is by
the narrow-gauge Decauville railways which now carry stores and
ammunition up from many of our full-gauge railheads to the front line,
or near it. A photograph shows two ambulance trolleys accommodating four
laden stretchers. A similar trolley is used at some casualty clearing
stations to convey patients from the wards to the Red Cross train by
which they are to be evacuated. Such contrivances are sometimes invented
independently, in slightly different forms, by the staffs of different
clearing stations or hospitals. Like the combatants, the medical
officers are constantly devising new methods and new apparatus to meet
the changing needs of active service.


                           Motor Ambulances.

The motor ambulance, to carry four stretcher patients, is the regular
means of conveyance from a few miles behind the front line to the
casualty clearing stations at the railheads. “Sitting wounded” travel
either in motor ambulances, with the interior arranged to receive them,
or in motor lorries—usually in the former. From the casualty clearing
stations the wounded go to the base, as a rule, either by train or by
canal.


                            Water Transport.

For cases requiring special ease of movement and quiet the broad,
square-built French canal boats make excellent travelling hospitals.
Nearly all the rivers of Northern France are canalised, and these
waterways are kept up free of toll by the State, so that water transport
is almost as available as transport by rail. A photograph shows what
roomy wards the ordinary French canal boat provides. The boats in
British use are usually towed in pairs by small tugs. During the battle
of 1916 the big red crosses on the boats’ sides were to be seen
everywhere on the Somme.


                           Red Cross Trains.

The equipment of Red Cross trains is more generally known and several
improvements have been made in it during the war. With its operating
theatre, kitchen, store-room and staff accommodation, a Red Cross train
is now a travelling hospital rather than a vehicle plying between one
hospital and another.




                        THE ARMY’S PETROL SUPPLY


In the early part of the war the petrol needed for the motor transport
of the British Expeditionary Force was shipped from England in tins,
ready for use. When the growth of the Army made more exacting demands on
shipping, it was decided to economise sea transport by making, filling
and packing the tins in France.


                         Transplanting a Works.

To do this, it was necessary to transplant the existing works from
England to France. But it was also necessary not to interrupt the
supply; for, without petrol, a modern army would be like a modern nation
without coal. So one half of the plant in England was dismantled and
re-erected in France, the other half undertaking the whole work of
supply until the first half was in working order in France. Then the
second half followed across the Channel. The whole migration took twelve
weeks.

Of course, the Army does not run the risks of having only one base depôt
of petrol. At each of its depôts every process is carried out that is
needed for the transfer of a gallon of petrol from a tank steamer lying
at a port to the divisional lorry or staff car by which it is used. The
first thing to do is to make receptacles for its conveyance. At each
depôt there is one factory for making tins and another for making the
cases or boxes in which the tins are packed. A single depôt employs more
than 200 men and boys on these two kinds of work.

The photographs will suggest the power and precision of the machinery
which they use—one machine for cutting out the tin, another for shaping
the cans, a third for rolling the edges on, a fourth for soldering, a
fifth for stamping, and so on. A leaky tin is, of course, worse than
useless, so every can has to be tested by air.


                           Filling the Tins.

The finished and tested can is placed on an endless belt at the factory,
and travels upon the belt to the filling-house. A French woman, girl, or
boy takes a tin in each hand and fills them with petrol, which has been
conveyed in pipes from the tanks at the port to the tanks at the depôt,
and thence flows by gravitation to the filling-house. These Frenchwomen
are extremely industrious and cheerful workers, and deserve the good
wages they get.


                                Packing.

From their hands the filled tins pass to another endless belt to be
packed in wooden boxes. The photographs show some of the men and
machines employed in making these boxes. As soon as the boxes are filled
with tins the covers are nailed down, an elevator transports the boxes
to a “gravity conveyor,” on which they descend to the “loading
platform.” Thence lorries take them to the store, where they are stacked
until their time comes to go up by train to the front.


                           Returned Empties.

The rule is that every empty tin or case must be returned to the depôt.
About seven out of every ten do return. Of the rest, a few may have been
lost or destroyed by accident; a few may have become casualties of war;
a few may have been diverted by human frailty into some other service,
as company water-jars; and a few may have found their way to some other
part of the front and be still serving the cause there.

Wherever they go, near the Front, the eye of desire is cast on the
wooden cases. Either as building material, as furniture, or as firewood,
they are treasures that would tempt a saint.


                                Repairs.

When a tin returns from the Front it is first superficially inspected.
If damaged past repair, it has the brass screw in the opening removed,
and then the tin may be used for making paths or for building up tiers
of seats in an outdoor lecture theatre at a training school, or in some
other secondary occupation. If apparently sound, it is first cleaned by
one more machine, and then filled and stacked upside-down for 10
minutes, with other returned tins, in order that small leaks may be
detected.

If it leaks it goes to the can-testing workshop, is tested under
pressure, has the defective spot marked on it in white chalk, and goes
forward to the soldering shop. After repair here it is tested again,
and, when perfect, is issued for re-filling. A typical can-repairing
shop employs 26 men, 126 women, and 67 boys.

The men who do the box-making and tin-making were, and still are,
employees of the company who supply the petrol. They have been enrolled
in the Army, and wear khaki, but are still paid piece rates. The women
who fill the tins are also employees of the company.

The line across which the petrol passes from the company’s hands into
those of the Army is just outside the doors of the filling sheds. Here
the Army Service Corps men take the full cases over, and give a receipt
for each case, in the form of a brass disc, to the company’s
representatives. Conversely, the Army Service Corps hand in the empty
cases and tins to the company’s men, and receive similar receipts for
them. A balance between these two sets of receipts is struck at the
close of business by the officers on both sides.




                         A GIANT COBBLER’S SHOP


The biggest cobbler’s shop in the world is at one of the British Army’s
bases in France. It mends the boots of about as many persons as live in
Liverpool or Glasgow. But nearly all the persons whose boots it mends
are adult men living in the open, most of them using their feet on wet
or rough ground for the greatest part of each day. So it has to mend
2,800 boots a day.


                       The Worn Boots’ Departure.

It would be too much to ask that, after the mending, every man should
get his own boots back. Even if that could be done, he would have to
wear strange boots meanwhile; for, unlike the soldiers of some other
countries, the British soldier does not bring two pairs of boots into
the field, and does not want to, having enough weight to carry without.
So, when his boots need repair, he hands them in to his company
quartermaster-sergeant and sees them no more.

They depart from him into the general stock of still serviceable, though
not new, army clothing, just as his shirt does when he comes out of
trenches, has a hot shower-bath, and puts on somebody else’s shirt which
has been disinfected and washed at the Divisional Laundry.


                          The Receiving Room.

The damaged boots go, higgledy-piggledy, into a sack, with others. The
sack goes to the rail-head, with or without the help of a battalion
transport cart and a divisional motor lorry. From the rail-head the sack
goes, without trans-shipment, to a siding outside the back door of the
base repair depôt, and the boots are emptied out on the floor of what
may be called the receiving room.

Here they are first roughly sorted out and cleaned of the mud which
often encases them. This is done by women. Thence they are passed on to
an expert shoemaker, to be tried for their life. He does nothing but
diagnose the condition of boot after boot. He picks up each boot, looks
it over for a couple of seconds with a swift, judicial glance at sole,
heel, uppers and welt, and throws it down on his right or on his left.


                               Bootlaces.

The boots thrown on his right are not worth repair. But even they are
worth something. They go to another room where women cut out of each
boot two round pieces of the leather over ankle bone on each side. The
women do this all day. Everybody here does some one special thing all
day. These discs of leather are passed on to another sub-workshop, full
of women, who lay each disc on a board, stick a kind of awl through its
middle, put a very sharp knife to its edge, and then make it revolve
round the awl in such a way that the knife cuts an excellent bootlace—a
quite straight one, too, strange to see—out of the circle of leather,
paring it down and down till nothing of it is left.


                            Nothing Wasted.

Of what remains of the boot itself the softer parts are combined with
other ingredients to form a useful manure. The more intractable and less
succulent heel is carried to the furnace room where the power needed for
the machinery is generated. A boot heel has been found to make excellent
fuel, a large furnace not being particular about its food. Thus no part,
even of the most decrepit boots, goes to waste. It is like the drowned
man in the _Tempest_—

                    Nothing of it that doth fade,
                    But all doth suffer a sea change
                    Into something rich and strange.

From the judgment chamber those boots which are not despaired of pass to
a place where another body of experts assess the amount of repair
required by each boot. To each boot one of them attaches the kind and
quantity of leather required to mend it—perhaps a new sole, or a sole
and a heel, or what not. The boot, together with this allowance of
material, is then placed in a pigeon hole, one out of a great case of
pigeon holes. From this it is taken, in its turn, by another shoemaker—a
soldier in khaki, like all the other men here—who goes to work on it.


                          Division of Labour.

But he does not do the whole job. One man pares down the new sole or
heel to the dimensions of the particular boot in hand. Another man, or
woman, holds the boot and the sole in contact with a machine which sews
on the sole in about the time in which you could sprint 100 yards.
Another person and another machine drive in nails all round the sole
almost as fast as you could draw your finger along the line of
nail-heads that they trace.

It would be tedious to go through all the other stages of repair. But
one may hark back to mention one which was forgotten in its place. Just
after leaving the seat of judgment where, as it were, the sheep were
separated from the goats, each boot to be mended was handed over to an
expert who put it on a last and simply banged it back, with a heavy
hammer, into the original shape of a new boot.

The effect of this skilful violence seems miraculous to the layman.
Boots which for months have been taking a heavy list to port or
starboard emerge from the ordeal, to all appearance, absolutely upright,
although anyone who has worn a boot down to one side until the lower
part of the upper is in contact on one side with the ground knows how
incorrigible the deformity seems.


                      Return of the Renewed Boots.

The end of it all is that the boots, completely mended and re-shod
with iron heels, go to a woman who bathes them in oil till the leather
has drunk its fill. Thus they are both softened and re-armed against
the wet. They are now ready for reissue to troops. They go again into
a sack, are carried back to the railway siding and make the return
journey to the Front, where the sack will be opened by some
quartermaster-sergeant, and an order will go round some company for
any men in need of new boots to report at the quartermaster’s stores.


                             The Employees.

Of the 2,400 persons employed in this huge cobbler’s shop, 1,500 are
women and girls, all French. It thus helps to absorb the labour
displaced in France by the derangement of the cotton, linen and woollen
industries at and near the seat of war in the North. The women and girls
earn higher wages than they did before the war. They are extremely
cheerful workers, sing most of the time, and look up at the occasional
British visitors to the place with amused curiosity. To each group of
them there is assigned as a friend and adviser some educated and
motherly Englishwoman, a volunteer.


                         A Model Organisation.

The workmen are all British and shoemakers by trade. They have either
enlisted specially for the work or been combed out of ordinary
battalions on account of their special usefulness here. The officers
were experts in boot trade management before joining the New Army. The
whole place is a model of industrial organisation. There is nowhere in
it any trace of the makeshift and rough-and-ready methods for which the
difficulties of war are sometimes made an excuse elsewhere. The minute
economies that are practised in all the processes of repair are enough
to put to shame any visitor who has not done his very utmost to save his
country money.

The place described is not the only one of its kind at the British bases
in France. Great as it is, it could not mend all the boots of more than
two million men. But in each of the Army’s giant cobbler’s shops the
same methods prevail.




                           TRAINING IN FRANCE


  AMIDST DEADLY FUMES OF GAS—ON THE TRAINING GROUND

  GOING THROUGH THE LACHRYMATORY DUG-OUT

  NIGHT DRILL UNDER FIRST LINE CONDITIONS

  AN INSTRUCTION CLASS AT THE LANDSCAPE TARGET

  INDIAN TROOPS AT BAYONET EXERCISE

  A LESSON IN SANDBAG-FILLING

  AT MUSKETRY PRACTICE—PRONE POSITION

  PREPARING FOR PHYSICAL EXERCISE

  PHYSICAL EXERCISE

  TROOPS DISEMBARKING

[Illustration: AMIDST DEADLY FUMES OF GAS—ON THE TRAINING GROUND]

[Illustration: GOING THROUGH THE LACHRYMATORY DUG-OUT]

[Illustration: NIGHT DRILL UNDER FIRST LINE CONDITIONS]

[Illustration: AN INSTRUCTION CLASS AT THE LANDSCAPE TARGET]

[Illustration: INDIAN TROOPS AT BAYONET EXERCISE]

[Illustration: A LESSON IN SANDBAG-FILLING]

[Illustration: AT MUSKETRY PRACTICE—PRONE POSITION]

[Illustration: PREPARING FOR PHYSICAL EXERCISE]

[Illustration: PHYSICAL EXERCISE]

[Illustration: TROOPS DISEMBARKING]




                        THE CARE OF THE WOUNDED


  THE OVERHEAD TROLLEY FOR BRINGING WOUNDED THROUGH THE TRENCHES

  CARRYING WOUNDED IN A TRENCH: A DIFFICULT TURN

  OUTSIDE AN ADVANCED DRESSING-STATION

  THE VENTILATING TUNNELS OF AN ADVANCED DRESSING-STATION

  SPECIAL WARD OF A HOSPITAL FOR FRACTURES OF THE THIGH

  A WARD OF ST. JOHN’S AMBULANCE BRIGADE HOSPITAL

  A WHEELED STRETCHER

  A WHEELED STRETCHER WITH PNEUMATIC TYRES

  AMBULANCE TROLLEYS USED IN THE OPEN

  AN AMBULANCE BARGE FOR CONVEYANCE OF VERY BADLY WOUNDED TO THE COAST

  INTERIOR OF A HOSPITAL BARGE

  AN AMBULANCE WITH HEATING-PIPE UNDER SEAT

[Illustration: THE OVERHEAD TROLLEY FOR BRINGING WOUNDED THROUGH THE
TRENCHES]

[Illustration: CARRYING WOUNDED IN A TRENCH: A DIFFICULT TURN]

[Illustration: OUTSIDE AN ADVANCED DRESSING-STATION]

[Illustration: THE VENTILATING TUNNELS OF AN ADVANCED DRESSING-STATION]

[Illustration: SPECIAL WARD OF A HOSPITAL FOR FRACTURES OF THE THIGH]

[Illustration: A WARD OF ST. JOHN’S AMBULANCE BRIGADE HOSPITAL]

[Illustration: A WHEELED STRETCHER]

[Illustration: A WHEELED STRETCHER WITH PNEUMATIC TYRES]

[Illustration: AMBULANCE TROLLEYS USED IN THE OPEN]

[Illustration: AMBULANCE BARGE FOR CONVEYANCE OF VERY BADLY WOUNDED TO
THE COAST]

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF A HOSPITAL BARGE]

[Illustration: AN AMBULANCE WITH HEATING-PIPE UNDER SEAT]




                        THE ARMY’S PETROL SUPPLY


  CUTTING SHEET TIN FOR MAKING CONTAINERS

  MAKING THE ROUGH TIN INTO CANS

  ROLLING-ON THE EDGES

  SOLDERING TINS BY MACHINERY

  BUSY AT THE STAMPING MACHINES

  TESTING THE CANS BY AIR

  INTERIOR OF A FILLING-HOUSE

  AN ENDLESS BELT CONVEYING THE FILLED TINS

  FRENCH WORKPEOPLE PACKING THE PETROL TINS INTO BOXES

  SOME FRENCH EMPLOYEES OUTSIDE THE FILLING-HOUSE

  MAKING BOXES BY MACHINERY

  IN THE BOX-MAKING DEPARTMENT

[Illustration: CUTTING SHEET TIN FOR MAKING CONTAINERS]

[Illustration: MAKING THE ROUGH TIN INTO CANS]

[Illustration: ROLLING-ON THE EDGES]

[Illustration: SOLDERING TINS BY MACHINERY]

[Illustration: BUSY AT THE STAMPING MACHINES]

[Illustration: TESTING THE CANS BY AIR]

[Illustration: INTERIOR OF A FILLING-HOUSE]

[Illustration: AN ENDLESS BELT CONVEYING THE FILLED TINS]

[Illustration: FRENCH WORKPEOPLE PACKING THE PETROL TINS INTO BOXES]

[Illustration: SOME FRENCH EMPLOYEES OUTSIDE THE FILLING-HOUSE]

[Illustration: MAKING BOXES BY MACHINERY]

[Illustration: IN THE BOX-MAKING DEPARTMENT]




                         A GIANT COBBLER’S SHOP


  SORTING THE BOOTS

  CUTTING OFF TOPS OF OLD BOOTS TO MAKE INTO LACES

  NAILING SOLES BY MACHINERY

  REPAIRING RUBBER BOOTS

  GIRLS IN THE RUBBER-BOOT REPAIRING SHOP

  ROLLING-BOILERS FOR WASHING WATERPROOF SHEETS

[Illustration: SORTING THE BOOTS]

[Illustration: CUTTING OFF TOPS OF OLD BOOTS TO MAKE INTO LACES]

[Illustration: NAILING SOLES BY MACHINERY]

[Illustration: REPAIRING RUBBER BOOTS]

[Illustration: GIRLS IN THE RUBBER-BOOT REPAIRING SHOP]

[Illustration: ROLLING-BOILERS FOR WASHING WATERPROOF SHEETS]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 ● Typos fixed; non-standard spelling and dialect retained.
 ● Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES FROM CALAIS BASE, AND PICTURES OF ITS MANY ACTIVITIES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


