The Project Gutenberg eBook of The horror in the burying-ground
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The horror in the burying-ground

Author: Hazel Heald
        H. P. Lovecraft

Illustrator: Margaret Brundage
        Virgil Finlay

Release date: May 18, 2025 [eBook #76113]

Language: English

Original publication: Indianapolis, IN: Popular Fiction Publishing Company, 1937

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HORROR IN THE BURYING-GROUND ***






                   The Horror in the Burying-Ground

                            By HAZEL HEALD

               _A bizarre and outré story of a gruesome
              happening in the old town of Stillwater--a
               blood-chilling tale of a double burial._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                         Weird Tales May 1937.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]

    Four years ago Hazel Heald made her bow to the readers of Weird
    Tales with an eery story called "The Horror in the Museum," which
    established her at once among the most popular writers of weird
    fiction. She followed this with "Winged Death," a story of the
    African tse-tse fly, and another tale of a weird monster from
    "the dark backward and abysm of time." The story published here,
    "The Horror in the Burying-Ground," is as weird and compelling as
    anything this talented author has yet written. We recommend this
    fascinating story to you, for we know you will not be disappointed
    in it.


When the state highway to Rutland is closed, travelers are forced to
take the old Stillwater road past Swamp Hollow. The scenery is superb
in places, yet somehow the route has been unpopular for years. There
is something depressing about it, especially near Stillwater itself.
Motorists feel subtly uncomfortable about the tightly shuttered
farmhouse on the knoll just north of the village, and about the
white-bearded half-wit who haunts the old burying-ground on the south,
apparently talking to the occupants of some of the graves.

Not much is left of Stillwater, now. The soil is played out, and most
of the people have drifted to the towns across the distant river or to
the city beyond the distant hills. The steeple of the old white church
has fallen down, and half of the twenty-odd straggling houses are empty
and in various stages of decay. Normal life is found only around Peck's
general store and filling-station, and it is here that the curious stop
now and then to ask about the shuttered house and the idiot who mutters
to the dead.

Most of the questioners come away with a touch of distaste and
disquiet. They find the shabby loungers oddly unpleasant and full of
unnamed hints in speaking of the long-past events brought up. There is
a menacing, portentous quality in the tones which they use to describe
very ordinary events--a seemingly unjustified tendency to assume
a furtive, suggestive, confidential air, and to fall into awesome
whispers at certain points--which insidiously disturbs the listener.
Old Yankees often talk like that; but in this case the melancholy
aspect of the half-moldering village, and the dismal nature of the
story unfolded, give these gloomy, secretive mannerisms an added
significance. One feels profoundly the quintessential horror that lurks
behind the isolated Puritan and his strange repressions--feels it, and
longs to escape precipitately into clearer air.

The loungers whisper impressively that the shuttered house is that
of old Miss Sprague--Sophie Sprague, whose brother Tom was buried
on the seventeenth of June, back in '85. Sophie was never the same
after that funeral--that and the other thing which happened the same
day--and in the end she took to staying in all the time. Won't even be
seen now, but leaves notes under the back-door mat and has her things
brought from the store by Ned Peck's boy. Afraid of something--the old
Swamp Hollow burying-ground most of all. Never could be dragged near
there since her brother--and the other one--were laid away. Not much
wonder, though, seeing the way crazy Johnny Dow rants. He hangs around
the burying-ground all day and sometimes at night, and claims he talks
with Tom--and the other. Then he marches by Sophie's house and shouts
things at her--that's why she began to keep the shutters closed. He
says things are coming from somewhere to get her sometime. Ought to
be stopped, but one can't be too hard on poor Johnny. Besides, Steve
Barbour always had his opinions.

Johnny does his talking to two of the graves. One of them is Tom
Sprague's. The other, at the opposite end of the graveyard, is that of
Henry Thorndike, who was buried on the same day. Henry was the village
undertaker--the only one in miles--and never liked around Stillwater.
A city fellow from Rutland--been to college and full of book learning.
Read queer things nobody else ever heard of, and mixed chemicals for no
good purpose. Always trying to invent something new--some new-fangled
embalming-fluid or some foolish kind of medicine. Some folks said he
had tried to be a doctor but failed in his studies and took to the next
best profession. Of course, there wasn't much undertaking to do in a
place like Stillwater, but Henry farmed on the side.

Mean, morbid disposition--and a secret drinker if you could judge by
the empty bottles in his rubbish heap. No wonder Tom Sprague hated him
and blackballed him from the Masonic lodge, and warned him off when
he tried to make up to Sophie. The way he experimented on animals was
against nature and Scripture. Who could forget the state that collie
dog was found in, or what happened to old Mrs. Akeley's cat? Then there
was the matter of Deacon Leavitt's calf, when Tom had led a band of
the village boys to demand an accounting. The curious thing was that
the calf came alive after all in the end, though Tom had found it as
stiff as a poker. Some said the joke was on Tom, but Thorndike probably
thought otherwise, since he had gone down under his enemy's fist before
the mistake was discovered.

Tom, of course, was half drunk at the time. He was a vicious brute
at best, and kept his poor sister half cowed with threats. That's
probably why she is such a fear-racked creature still. There were only
the two of them, and Tom would never let her leave because that meant
splitting the property. Most of the fellows were too afraid of him to
shine up to Sophie--he stood six feet one in his stockings--but Henry
Thorndike was a sly cuss who had ways of doing things behind folk's
backs. He wasn't much to look at, but Sophie never discouraged him any.
Mean and ugly as he was, she'd have been glad if anybody could have
freed her from her brother. She may not have stopped to wonder how she
could get clear of him after he got her clear of Tom.

       *       *       *       *       *

Well, that was the way things stood in June of '86. Up to this point,
the whisperers of the loungers at Peck's store are not so unbearably
portentous; but as they continue, the element of secretiveness and
malign tension grows. Tom Sprague, it appears, used to go to Rutland
on periodic sprees, his absences being Henry Thorndike's great
opportunities. He was always in bad shape when he got back, and old
Doctor Pratt, deaf and half blind though he was, used to warn him about
his heart, and about the danger of delirium tremens. Folks could always
tell by the shouting and cursing when he was home again.

It was on the ninth of June--on a Wednesday, the day after young Joshua
Goodenough finished building his new-fangled silo--that Tom started out
on his last and longest spree. He came back the next Tuesday morning,
and folks at the store saw him lashing his bay stallion the way he did
when whisky had a hold of him. Then there came shouts and shrieks and
oaths from the Sprague house, and first thing anybody knew Sophie was
running over to old Doctor Pratt's at top speed.

The doctor found Thorndike at Sprague's when he got there, and Tom was
on the bed in his room, with eyes staring and foam around his mouth.
Old Pratt fumbled around and gave the usual tests, then shook his head
solemnly and told Sophie she had suffered a great bereavement--that her
nearest and dearest had passed through the pearly gates to a better
land, just as everybody knew he would if he didn't let up on his
drinking.

Sophie kind of sniffled, the loungers whisper, but didn't seem to
take on much. Thorndike didn't do anything but smile--perhaps at the
ironic fact that he, always an enemy, was now the only person who could
be of any use to Thomas Sprague. He shouted something in old Doctor
Pratt's half-good ear about the need of having the funeral early on
account of Tom's condition. Drunks like that were always doubtful
subjects, and any extra delay--with merely rural facilities--would
entail consequences, visual and otherwise, hardly acceptable to
the deceased's loving mourners. The doctor had muttered that Tom's
alcoholic career ought to have embalmed him pretty well in advance, but
Thorndike assured him to the contrary, at the same time boasting of
his own skill, and of the superior methods he had devised through his
experiments.

It is here that the whispers of the loungers grow acutely disturbing.
Up to this point the story is usually told by Ezra Davenport, or Luther
Fry, if Ezra is laid up with chilblains, as he is apt to be in winter;
but from now on old Calvin Wheeler takes up the thread, and his voice
has a damnably insidious way of suggesting hidden horror. If Johnny Dow
happens to be passing by there is always a pause, for Stillwater does
not like to have Johnny talk too much with strangers.

Calvin edges close to the traveler and sometimes seizes a coat-lapel
with his gnarled, mottled hand while he half shuts his watery blue
eyes.

"Well, sir," he whispers, "Henry he went home an' got his undertaker's
fixin's--crazy Johnny Dow lugged most of 'em, for he was always doin'
chores for Henry--an' says as Doc Pratt an' crazy Johnny should help
lay out the body. Doc always did say as how he thought Henry talked too
much--a-boastin' what a fine workman he was, an' how lucky it was that
Stillwater had a reg'lar undertaker instead of buryin' folks jest as
they was, like they do over to Whitby.

"'Suppose,' says he, 'some fellow was to be took with some of them
paralyzin' cramps like you read about. How'd a body like it when they
lowered him down and begun shovelin' the dirt back? How'd he like it
when he was chokin' down there under the new headstone, scratchin' an'
tearin' if he chanced to get back the power, but all the time knowin'
it wasn't no use? No, sir, I tell you it's a blessin' Stillwater's got
a smart doctor as knows when a man's dead and when he ain't, and a
trained undertaker who can fix a corpse so he'll stay put without no
trouble.'

"That was the way Henry went on talkin', most like he was talkin' to
poor Tom's remains; and old Doc Pratt he didn't like what he was able
to catch of it, even though Henry did call him a smart doctor. Crazy
Johnny kept watchin' of the corpse, and it didn't make it none too
pleasant the way he'd slobber about things like, 'He ain't cold, Doc,'
or 'I see his eyelids move,' or 'There's a hole in his arm jest like
the ones I git when Henry gives me a syringe full of what makes me feel
good.' Thorndike shut him up on that, though we all knowed he'd been
givin' poor Johnny drugs. It's a wonder the poor fellow ever got clear
of the habit.

"But the worst thing, accordin' to the doctor, was the way the body
jerked up when Henry begun to shoot it full of embalmin'-fluid. He'd
been boastin' about what a fine new formula he'd got practisin' on
cats and dogs, when all of a sudden Tom's corpse began to double up
like it was alive and fixin' to wrassle. Land of Goshen, but Doc says
he was scared stiff, though he knowed the way corpses act when the
muscles begin to stiffen. Well, sir, the long and short of it is, that
the corpse sat up an' grabbed a holt of Thorndike's syringe so that
it got stuck in Henry hisself, an' give him as neat a dose of his own
embalmin'-fluid as you'd wish to see. That got Henry pretty scared,
though he yanked the point out and managed to get the body down again
and shot full of the fluid. He kept measurin' more of the stuff out
as though he wanted to be sure there was enough, and kept reassurin'
himself as not much had got into him, but crazy Johnny begun singin'
out, 'That's what you give Lige Hopkins's dog when it got all dead an'
stiff an' then waked up agin. Now you're a-goin' to get dead an' stiff
like Tom Sprague be! Remember it don't set to work till after a long
spell if you don't get much.'

"Sophie, she was downstairs with some of the neighbors--my wife
Matildy, she that's dead an' gone this thirty year, was one of them.
They were all tryin' to find out whether Thorndike was over when Tom
came home, and whether findin' him there was what set poor Tom off.
I may as well say as some folks thought it mighty funny that Sophie
didn't carry on more, nor mind the way Thorndike had smiled. Not as
anybody was hintin' that Henry helped Tom off with some of his queer
cooked-up fluids and syringes, or that Sophie would keep still if she
thought so--but you know how folks will guess behind a body's back.
We all knowed the nigh crazy way Thorndike had hated Tom--not without
reason, at that--and Emily Barbour says to my Matildy as how Henry was
lucky to have ol' Doc Pratt right on the spot with a death certificate
as didn't leave no doubt for nobody."

When old Calvin gets to this point he usually begins to mumble
indistinguishably in his straggling, dirty white beard. Most listeners
try to edge away from him, and he seldom appears to heed the gesture.
It is generally Fred Peck, who was a very small boy at the time of the
events, who continues the tale.

Thomas Sprague's funeral was held on Thursday, June seventeenth, only
two days after his death. Such haste was thought almost indecent in
remote and inaccessible Stillwater, where long distances had to be
covered by those who came, but Thorndike had insisted that the peculiar
condition of the deceased demanded it. The undertaker had seemed
rather nervous since preparing the body, and could be seen frequently
feeling his pulse. Old Doctor Pratt thought he must be worrying about
the accidental dose of embalming-fluid. Naturally, the story of the
"laying out" had spread, so that a double zest animated the mourners
who assembled to glut their curiosity and morbid interest.

Thorndike, though he was obviously upset, seemed intent on doing his
professional duty in magnificent style. Sophie and others who saw the
body were most startled by its utter lifelikeness, and the mortuary
virtuoso made doubly sure of his job by repeating certain injections at
stated intervals. He almost wrung a sort of reluctant admiration from
the town-folk and visitors, though he tended to spoil that impression
by his boastful and tasteless talk. Whenever he administered to his
silent charge he would repeat that eternal rambling about the good luck
of having a first-class undertaker. What--he would say as if directly
addressing the body--if Tom had had one of those careless fellows
who bury their subjects alive? The way he harped on the horrors of
premature burial was truly barbarous and sickening.

       *       *       *       *       *

Services were held in the stuffy best room--opened for the first time
since Mrs. Sprague died. The tuneless little parlor organ groaned
disconsolately, and the coffin, supported on trestles near the hall
door, was covered with sickly-smelling flowers. It was obvious that
a record-breaking crowd was assembling from far and near, and Sophie
endeavored to look properly grief-stricken for their benefit. At
unguarded moments she seemed both puzzled and uneasy, dividing her
scrutiny between the feverish-looking undertaker and the life-like body
of her brother. A slow disgust at Thorndike seemed to be brewing within
her, and neighbors whispered freely that she would soon send him about
his business now that Tom was out of the way--that is, if she could,
for such a slick customer was sometimes hard to deal with. But with her
money and remaining looks she might be able to get another fellow, and
he'd probably take care of Henry well enough.

As the organ wheezed into _Beautiful Isle of Somewhere_ the Methodist
church choir added their lugubrious voices to the gruesome cacophony,
and everyone looked piously at Deacon Leavitt--everyone, that is,
except crazy Johnny Dow, who kept his eyes glued to the still form
beneath the glass of the coffin. He was muttering softly to himself.

Stephen Barbour--from the next farm--was the only one who noticed
Johnny. He shivered as he saw that the idiot was talking directly to
the corpse, and even making foolish signs with his fingers as if to
taunt the sleeper beneath the plate glass. Tom, he reflected, had
kicked poor Johnny around on more than one occasion, though probably
not without provocation. Something about this whole event was getting
on Stephen's nerves. There was a suppressed tension and brooding
abnormality in the air for which he could not account. Johnny ought not
to have been allowed in the house--and it was curious what an effort
Thorndike seemed to be making to look at the body. Every now and then
the undertaker would feel his pulse with an odd air.

The Reverend Silas Atwood droned on in a plaintive monotone about the
deceased--about the striking of Death's sword in the midst of this
little family, breaking the earthly tie between this loving brother and
sister. Several of the neighbors looked furtively at one another from
beneath lowered eyelids, while Sophie actually began to sob nervously.
Thorndike moved to her side and tried to reassure her, but she seemed
to shrink curiously away from him. His motions were distinctly uneasy,
and he seemed to feel acutely the abnormal tension permeating the air.
Finally, conscious of his duty as master of ceremonies, he stepped
forward and announced in a sepulchral voice that the body might be
viewed for the last time.

Slowly the friends and neighbors filed past the bier, from which
Thorndike roughly dragged crazy Johnny away. Tom seemed to be resting
peacefully. That devil had been handsome in his day. A few genuine
sobs--and many feigned ones--were heard, though most of the crowd
were content to stare curiously and whisper afterward. Steve Barbour
lingered long and attentively over the still face, and moved away
shaking his head. His wife, Emily, following after him, whispered that
Henry Thorndike had better not boast so much about his work, for Tom's
eyes had come open. They had been shut when the services began, for she
had been up and looked. But they certainly looked natural--not the way
one would expect after two days.

When Fred Peck gets this far he usually pauses as if he did not like to
continue. The listener, too, tends to feel that something unpleasant
is ahead. But Peck reassures his audience with the statement that what
happened isn't as bad as folks like to hint. Even Steve never put into
words what he may have thought, and crazy Johnny, of course, can't be
counted at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was Luella Morse--the nervous old maid who sang in the choir--who
seems to have touched things off. She was filing past the coffin like
the rest, but stopped to peer a little closer than anyone else except
the Barbours had peered. And then, without warning, she gave a shrill
scream and fell in a dead faint.

Naturally, the room was at once a chaos of confusion. Old Doctor Pratt
elbowed his way to Luella and called for some water to throw in her
face, and others surged up to look at her and at the coffin. Johnny Dow
began chanting to himself, "He knows, he knows, he kin hear all we're
a-sayin' and see all we're a-doin', and they'll bury him that way"--but
no one stopped to decipher his mumbling except Steve Barbour.

In a very few moments Luella began to come out of her faint, and could
not tell exactly what had startled her. All she could whisper was, "The
way he looked--the way he looked." But to other eyes the body seemed
exactly the same. It was a gruesome sight, though, with those open eyes
and that high coloring.

And then the bewildered crowd noticed something which put both Luella
and the body out of their minds for a moment. It was Thorndike--on
whom the sudden excitement and jostling crowd seemed to be having
a curiously bad effect. He had evidently been knocked down in the
general bustle, and was on the floor trying to drag himself to a
sitting posture. The expression on his face was terrifying in the
extreme, and his eyes were beginning to take on a glazed, fishy
expression. He could scarcely speak aloud, but the husky rattle of his
throat held an ineffable desperation which was obvious to all.

"Get me home, quick, and let me be. That fluid I got in my arm by
mistake ... heart action ... this damned excitement ... too much ...
wait ... wait ... don't think I'm dead if I seem to ... only the
fluid--just get me home and wait ... I'll come to later, don't know how
long ... all the time I'll be conscious and know what's going on ...
don't be deceived...."

As his words trailed off into nothingness old Doctor Pratt reached him
and felt his pulse--watching a long time and finally shaking his head.
"No use doing anything--he's gone. Heart no good--and that fluid he got
in his arm must have been bad stuff. I don't know what it is."

A kind of numbness seemed to fall on all the company. New death in the
chamber of death! Only Steve Barbour thought to bring up Thorndike's
last choking words. Was he surely dead, when he himself had said he
might falsely seem so? Wouldn't it be better to wait awhile and see
what would happen? And for that matter, what harm would it do if Doc
Pratt were to give Tom Sprague another looking over before burial?

Crazy Johnny was moaning, and had flung himself on Thorndike's body
like a faithful dog. "Don't ye bury him, don't ye bury him! He ain't
dead no more not Lige Hopkins's dog nor Deacon Leavitt's calf was when
he shot 'em full. He's got some stuff he puts into ye to make ye seem
like dead when ye ain't! Ye seem like dead but ye know everything
what's a-goin' on, and the next day ye come to as good as ever. Don't
ye bury him--he'll come to under the earth an' he can't scratch up!
He's a good man, an' not like Tom Sprague. Hope to Gawd Tom scratches
an' chokes for hours an' hours...."

But no one save Barbour was paying any attention to poor Johnny.
Indeed, what Steve himself had said had evidently fallen on deaf ears.
Uncertainty was everywhere. Old Doc Pratt was applying final tests and
mumbling about death certificate blanks, and unctuous Elder Atwood
was suggesting that something be done about a double interment. With
Thorndike dead there was no undertaker this side of Rutland, and it
would mean a terrible expense if one were to be brought from there,
and if Thorndike were not embalmed in this hot June weather--well,
one couldn't tell. And there were no relatives or friends to be too
critical unless Sophie chose to be--but Sophie was on the other side
of the room, staring silently, fixedly and almost morbidly into her
brother's coffin.

Deacon Leavitt tried to restore a semblance of decorum, and had poor
Thorndike carried across the hall to the sitting-room, meanwhile
sending Zenas Wells and Walter Perkins over to the undertaker's house
for a coffin of the right size. The key was in Henry's trousers pocket.
Johnny continued to whine and paw at the body, and Elder Atwood busied
himself with inquiring about Thorndike's denomination--for Henry had
not attended local services. When it was decided that his folks in
Rutland--all dead now--had been Baptists, the Reverend Silas decided
that Deacon Leavitt had better offer the brief prayer.

It was a gala day for the funeral-fanciers of Stillwater and vicinity.
Even Luella had recovered enough to stay. Gossip, murmured and
whispered, buzzed busily while a few composing touches were given to
Thorndike's cooling, stiffening form. Johnny had been cuffed out of the
house, as most agreed he should have been in the first place, but his
distant howls were now and then wafted gruesomely in.

When the body was encoffined and laid out beside that of Thomas
Sprague, the silent, almost frightening-looking Sophie gazed intently
at it as she had gazed at her brother's. She had not uttered a word for
a dangerously long time, and the mixed expression on her face was past
all describing or interpreting. As the others withdrew to leave her
alone with the dead she managed to find a sort of mechanical speech,
but no one could make out the words, and she seemed to be talking first
to one body and then the other.

And now, with what would seem to an outsider the acme of gruesome
unconscious comedy, the whole funeral mummery of the afternoon was
listlessly repeated. Again the organ wheezed, again the choir screeched
and scraped, again a droning incantation arose, and again the morbidly
curious spectators filed past a macabre object--this time a dual array
of mortuary repose. Same of the more sensitive people shivered at the
whole proceeding, and again Stephen Barbour felt an underlying note of
eldritch horror and demoniac abnormality. God, how life-like both of
those corpses were ... and how in earnest poor Thorndike had been about
not wanting to be judged dead ... and how he had hated Tom Sprague ...
but what could one do in the face of common sense--a dead man was a
dead man, and there was old Doc Pratt with his years of experience ...
if nobody else bothered, why should one bother oneself?... Whatever Tom
had got he had probably deserved ... and if Henry had done anything to
him, the score was even now ... well, Sophie was free at last....

As the peering procession moved at last toward the hall and the outer
door, Sophie was alone with the dead once more. Elder Atwood was out
in the road talking to the hearse-driver from Lee's livery stable,
and Deacon Leavitt was arranging for a double quota of pall-bearers.
Luckily the hearse would hold two coffins. No hurry--Ed Plummer and
Ethan Stone were going ahead with shovels to dig the second grave.
There would be three livery hacks and any number of private rigs in the
cavalcade--no use trying to keep the crowd away from the graves.

Then came that frantic scream from the parlor where Sophie and the
bodies were. Its suddenness almost paralyzed the crowd and brought back
the same sensation which had surged up when Luella had screamed and
fainted. Steve Barbour and Deacon Leavitt started to go in, but before
they could enter the house Sophie was bursting forth, sobbing and
gasping about "That face at the window!... that face at the window!..."

At the same time a wild-eyed figure rounded the corner of the house,
removing all mystery from Sophie's dramatic cry. It was, very
obviously, the face's owner--poor crazy Johnny, who began to leap up
and down, pointing at Sophie and shrieking, "She knows! She knows!
I seen it in her face when she looked at 'em and talked to 'em! She
knows, and she's a-lettin' 'em go down in the earth to scratch an' claw
for air.... But they'll talk to her so's she kin hear 'em ... they'll
talk to her, an' appear to her ... and some day they'll come back an'
git her!"

Zenas Wells dragged the shrieking half-wit to a woodshed behind the
house and bolted him in as best he could. His screams and poundings
could be heard at a distance, but nobody paid him any further
attention. The procession was made up, and with Sophie in the first
hack it slowly covered the short distance past the village to the Swamp
Hollow burying-ground.

Elder Atwood made appropriate remarks as Thomas Sprague was laid
to rest, and by the time he was through, Ed and Ethan had finished
Thorndike's grave on the other side of the cemetery--to which the crowd
presently shifted. Deacon Leavitt then spoke ornamentally, and the
lowering process was repeated. People had begun to drift off in knots,
and the clatter of receding buggies and carry-alls was quite universal,
when the shovels began to fly again. As the earth thudded down on
the coffin-lids, Thorndike's first, Steve Barbour noticed the queer
expressions flitting over Sophie Sprague's face. He couldn't keep track
of them all, but behind the rest there seemed to lurk a sort of wry,
perverse, half-suppressed look of vague triumph. He shook his head.

       *       *       *       *       *

Zenas had run back and let crazy Johnny out of the woodshed before
Sophie got home, and the poor fellow at once made frantically for
the graveyard. He arrived before the shovelmen were through, and
while many of the curious mourners were still lingering about. What
he shouted into Tom Sprague's partly-filled grave, and how he clawed
at the loose earth of Thorndike's freshly-finished mound across the
cemetery, surviving spectators still shudder to recall. Jotham Blake,
the constable, had to take him back to the town farm by force, and his
screams waked dreadful echoes.

This is where Fred Peck usually leaves off the story. What more, he
asks, is there to tell? It was a gloomy tragedy, and one can scarcely
wonder that Sophie grew queer after that. That is all one hears if the
hour is so late that old Calvin Wheeler has tottered home, but when he
is still around he breaks in again with that damnably suggestive and
insidious whisper. Sometimes those who hear him dread to pass either
the shuttered house or the graveyard afterward, especially after dark.

"Heh, heh ... Fred was only a little shaver then, and don't remember no
more than half of what was goin' on! You want to know why Sophie keeps
her house shuttered, and why crazy Johnny still keeps a-talkin' to the
dead and a-shoutin' at Sophie's windows? Well, sir, I don't know's I
know all there is to know, but I hear what I hear."

Here the old man ejects his cud of tobacco and leans forward to
buttonhole the listener.

"It was that same night, mind ye--toward mornin', and just eight hours
after them burials--when we heard the first scream from Sophie's house.
Woke us all up--Steve and Emily Barbour and me and Matildy goes over
hot-footin', all in night gear, and finds Sophie all dressed and dead
fainted on the settin'-room floor. Lucky she hadn't locked her door.
When we got her to she was shakin' like a leaf, and wouldn't let on by
so much as a word what was ailin' her. Matildy and Emily done what they
could to quiet her down, but Steve whispered things to me as didn't
make me none too easy. Come about an hour when we allowed we'd be goin'
home soon, that Sophie she begun to tip her head on one side like she
was a-listenin' to somethin'. Then on a sudden she screamed again, and
keeled over in another faint.

"Well, sir, I'm tellin' what I'm tellin', and won't do no guessin' like
Steve Barbour would a done if he dared. He always was the greatest
hand for hintin' things ... died ten year ago of pneumony....

"What we heard so faint-like was just poor crazy Johnny, of course.
'Taint more than a mile to the buryin'-ground, and he must a got out
of the window where they'd locked him up at the town farm--even if
Constable Blake says he didn't get out that night. From that day to
this he hangs around them graves a-talkin' to the both of them--cussin'
and kickin' at Tom's mound, and puttin' posies and things on Henry's.
And when he ain't a-doin' that he's hangin' around Sophie's shuttered
windows howlin' about what's a-comin' some day to git her.

"She wouldn't never go near the buryin'-ground, and now she won't come
out of the house at all nor see nobody. Got to sayin' there was a
curse on Stillwater--and I'm dinged if she ain't half right, the way
things is a-goin' to pieces these days. There certainly was somethin'
queer about Sophie right along. Once when Sally Hopkins was a-callin'
on her--in '97 or '98, I think it was--there was an awful rattlin' at
her winders--and Johnny was safe locked up at the time--at least, so
Constable Dodge swore up and down. But I ain't takin' no stock in their
stories about noises every seventeenth of June, or about faint shinin'
figures a-tryin' Sophie's door and winders every black mornin' about
two o'clock.

"You see, it was about two o'clock in the mornin' that Sophie heard the
sounds and keeled over twice that first night after the buryin'. Steve
and me, and Matildy and Emily, heard the second lot, faint as it was,
just like I told you. And I'm a-tellin' of you again as how it must a
been crazy Johnny over to the buryin'-ground, let Jotham Blake claim
what he will. There ain't no tellin' the sound of a man's voice so far
off, and with our heads full of nonsense it ain't no wonder we thought
there was two voices--and voices that hadn't ought to be speakin' at
all.

"Steve, he claimed to have heard more than I did. I verily believe he
took some stock in ghosts. Matildy and Emily was so scared they didn't
remember what they heard. And curious enough, nobody else in town--if
anybody was awake at that ungodly hour--never said nothin' about
hearin' no sounds at all.

"Whatever it was, was so faint it might have been the wind if there
hadn't been words. I made out a few, but don't want to say as I'd back
up all Steve claimed to have caught....

[Illustration: "Then there was that awful 'Comin' again some day,' in a
death-like squawk."]

"'She-devil' ... 'all the time' ... 'Henry' ... and 'alive' was
plain ... and so was 'you know' ... 'said you'd stand by' ... 'get rid
of him' and 'bury me' ... in a kind of changed voice.... Then there was
that awful 'comin' again some day'--in a death-like squawk ... but you
can't tell me Johnny couldn't have made those sounds....

"Hey, you! What's takin' you off in such a hurry? Mebbe there's more I
could tell you if I had a mind...."





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HORROR IN THE BURYING-GROUND ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


