The Project Gutenberg eBook of Field Book: Pennsylvanian Plant Fossils of Illinois
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Field Book: Pennsylvanian Plant Fossils of Illinois

Author: Charles William Collinson
        Romayne Skartvedt

Illustrator: Marie E. Litterer

Release date: July 6, 2021 [eBook #65776]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIELD BOOK: PENNSYLVANIAN PLANT FOSSILS OF ILLINOIS ***

                              _Field Book_
                PENNSYLVANIAN PLANT FOSSILS OF ILLINOIS


                           Charles Collinson
                           Romayne Skartvedt


                   _Illinois State Geological Survey
                         Educational Series 6_

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

                           STATE OF ILLINOIS
                DEPARTMENT OF REGISTRATION AND EDUCATION

                           First edition 1960
                             Reprinted 1966

                    ILLINOIS STATE GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
                           URBANA    ILLINOIS
                          John C. Frye, Chief

  Printed by Authority of State of Illinois, Ch. 127, IRS, Par. 58.25.




                              _Field Book_
                PENNSYLVANIAN PLANT FOSSILS OF ILLINOIS

                           Charles Collinson
                           Romayne Skartvedt

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

                  _Illustrations by Marie E. Litterer_




                                FOREWORD


    [Illustration: Illuminated T]

This field book is intended to guide beginners in their collection and
general classification of plant fossils. It illustrates the plant
fossils most commonly found in Illinois and relates them to the plants
of which they were a part. A list of publications that will furnish more
detailed identification of specimens is included. The book has been
prepared in response to numerous inquiries to the Illinois State
Geological Survey from amateur collectors.

Information has been drawn from numerous sources. The works of Hirmer,
Janssen, Lesquereux, Noé, and Langford have been particularly useful.

We are especially indebted to Dr. Robert M. Kosanke, paleobotanist at
the Illinois State Geological Survey, and Dr. Wilson N. Stewart,
professor of botany of the University of Illinois, for helpful
suggestions and use of their libraries.




                KEY TO PLANTS ILLUSTRATED ON TIME CHART


  1. _Foerstia._ These fossils may be the earliest known occurrence of
              bryophytes, although some authors have referred them to
              the brown algae. After Dawson.
  2. _Psilophyton._ A primitive vascular plant. After Dawson.
  3. _Lepidodendron._ After Hirmer.
  4. _Sigillaria._ After Hirmer.
  5. _Calamites._ After Hirmer.
  6. _Sphenophyllum._ After Fuller and Tippo.
  7. _Equisetum._ The only living genus of scouring rushes. After Fuller
              and Tippo.
  8. _Megaphyton._ An ancient true fern. After Hirmer.
  9. Modern tropical tree fern. After Fuller and Tippo.
  10. _Medullosa._ An ancient seed fern. After Stewart.
  11. _Williamsonia._ An extinct cycad-like tree. After Sahni.
  12. _Cycas._ A modern cycad. After Chamberlain.
  13. _Baiera._ A fossil leaf genus of ginkgo, whose only living
              representative is the species _Ginkgo biloba_, saved from
              extinction by careful cultivation in China. Several
              specimens of this “living fossil” were presented to this
              country by the Chinese and are now flourishing on many
              college campuses, including that of the University of
              Illinois. After Mägdefrau.
  14. _Cordaites._ After Grand Eury.
  15. _Lebachia._ A “transition conifer,” forerunner of present day
              conifers. After Mägdefrau.
  16. _Pinus._ Modern pine. After Mägdefrau.
  17. _Acer._ Common maple, an angiosperm whose leaves are also found
              among Tertiary fossils. After Mägdefrau.
  18. _Rosa._ The prairie rose, an angiosperm.
  19. _Campsis._ Trumpet vine, an angiosperm.

    [Illustration: _Geologic Time Chart_]

  _Time Units_
  _Era and Years_
    CENOZOIC “Recent Life”
      Pleistocene
      Pliocene
      Miocene
      Oligocene
      Eocene
      Paleocene
    MESOZOIC “Middle Life”
      Cretaceous
        70 million
          herbaceous lycopods
      Jurassic
        25 million
          yellow-green algae
          selaginellids
      Triassic
        30 million
          cycad-like plants
          Equisetum
    PALEOZOIC “Ancient Life”
      Permian
        25 million
          transition conifers
          pines, spruces, firs, etc.
          Equisetites
      Pennsylvanian
        25 million
          ferns related to modern families
          bryophytes
      Mississippian
        30 million
          seed ferns
          calamites
          cycads
      Devonian
        55 million
          cordaites
          sphenophyllids
          ancient ferns
      Silurian
        40 million
          psitopsids
          Foerstia
      Ordovician
        80 million
          red algae
          green algae
      Cambrian
        80 million
    PROTEROZOIC _and_ ARCHAEOZOIC ERAS
      4½ billion years
        blue-green algae
        chemosynthetic bacteria?
        NO CERTAIN FOSSILS KNOWN
  _Plants_
    Algae
      yellow-green algae
      brown algae
      red algae
      green algae
      blue-green algae
    Mosses
      bryophytes
      Foerstia
    Vascular Plants
      “Whisk Ferns”
        psitopsids
      Club-mosses
        scale and seal trees
        quillworts
        herbaceous lycopods
      Scouring Rushes, Horsetails
        Equisetites
        Equisetum
        calamites
        selaginellids
      Ferns and Seed Plants
        Ferns
          ancient ferns
          ferns related to modern families
        Gymnosperms
          Cycads
            seed ferns
            cycads
            cycad-like plants
          Ginkgo
          Conifers
            cordaites
            transition conifers
            pines, spruces, firs, etc.
        Flowering Plants




                              _Field Book_
                PENNSYLVANIAN PLANT FOSSILS OF ILLINOIS


                Charles Collinson and Romayne Skartvedt

    [Illustration: Illuminated P]

Plants that flourished 200 million years ago have made Illinois one of
the best known fossil collecting sites in the world. The unusual
abundance and preservation of these fossils in the northern part of the
state have brought collectors to Illinois from many countries, and
prized specimens from that area may be seen in science museums
throughout the world.

The remarkable fossils represent plants that lived during the geologic
period called the Pennsylvanian or Coal Age and are the result of
special geologic conditions that occurred repeatedly during the period.

At the beginning of the Pennsylvanian Period, Illinois was part of a
vast lowland that stretched for hundreds of miles to the north, south,
and west, and was bordered on the east by highlands. At times much of
the plain was swampy and, because the climate was relatively warm and
moist, great jungles of fast growing trees, shrubs, and vines covered
the landscape. As successive generations of plants lived and died, plant
material fell into the swamp waters and, protected there from decay,
accumulated.

Frequently during the period, seas spread over the swampy lowlands,
submerging the forests and covering them with mud. Each submergence
lasted only a short time, geologically speaking. When the seas withdrew,
the deposits of sand and mud left behind were cut by streams that
carried fresh sand and mud from the eastern highlands. The streams
eventually became clogged with sediments and when the lowland was again
depressed swamp conditions returned and forests grew afresh. Such a
cycle of deposition was repeated again and again during Pennsylvanian
time, and after burial each layer of plant material gradually lost most
of its liquids and gases and was slowly converted into one of the
numerous coal beds presently found in Illinois.

    [Illustration: Reconstruction of Pennsylvanian Coal-forming Swamp]

In some places in the state conditions existed that were especially
favorable for preservation of plants, and there delicately preserved
fossils are found in great numbers. In the most favorable areas, such as
in northern Illinois, the plants are preserved in stony nodules called
concretions, but they also may be found separately as molds, casts, or
petrifactions.

Molds (concave surfaces) and casts (convex surfaces) are fossilization
phenomena in which the actual plant, embedded in the surrounding
background rock, was dissolved, leaving a hollow space (mold) that
subsequently filled with other material. A cast was thus formed that
preserved the plant’s external features.

Most petrifactions are fossils in which silica, carbonate, or other
material permeated or replaced the internal structures of the plant and
preserved them so well that in most specimens the finest cellular
details can be observed. Compressions, another kind of petrifaction, are
the pressed carbonized remains of the plant itself.




                          PENNSYLVANIAN FLORA


    [Illustration: _Aphthoroblattina_]

    [Illustration: _Teneopteron_]

The far-reaching Pennsylvanian swamplands had abundant species of trees
and other plants that long since have become extinct. Today’s common
deciduous trees were not present; flowering plants had not yet evolved.
Instead, the tangled forests were dominated by giant ancestors of
presently existing club-mosses, horsetails, ferns, conifers, and cycads.
The undergrowth also was well developed, consisting mainly of ferns,
fernlike plants, _Sphenophyllum_, and small club-mosses. The plant
fossils give no indication of seasonal variations. The forests,
evidently always green, grew rapidly and abundantly, with foliage of
unprecedented size and luxuriance. Land animals were just beginning to
develop and included sluggish, salamander-like amphibians, large
primitive insects, and a few small reptiles. The insects flourished as
never before or since in the damp forests and attained remarkable size.
Insects more than four inches long were common and some are known to
have been more than a foot long with a wingspread proportionately broad.
Ancestors of the modern spiders, scorpions, centipedes (one fossil found
in Illinois was twelve inches long), cockroaches, and dragonflies are
represented by several hundred species.

The fossilized plants of Pennsylvanian time belonged to only a few main
categories: scale and seal trees, ancient scouring rushes (horsetails),
herbaceous _Sphenophyllum_, ferns, seed ferns, and cordaitean trees.




                          SCALE AND SEAL TREES
                               (Plate 1)


Scale and seal trees were abundant during the Pennsylvanian Period and
were important contributors to coal beds. Although distantly related to
the diminutive club-mosses and ground pines of the present, the trees
grew on straight, slender trunks to heights of more than a hundred feet.

    [Illustration: Reconstruction of _Lepidodendron_
    (after Hirmer)]

Scale trees were so called because their numerous, closely set, spirally
arranged leaves left scarred “cushions” on the branches and trunk,
making them appear scaly. Seal trees derived their name from the
signetlike appearance of their leaf cushions. The two best known types
belong to the genera _Lepidodendron_ (scale tree) and _Sigillaria_ (seal
tree), and fossils of both are common in Illinois.

_Lepidodendron_ had long, slender, somewhat tapering trunks. Some of the
trees reached heights of more than 100 feet and measured more than two
feet in basal diameter. The trunk ended in a spreading crown formed by
repeated dichotomous branching. The leaves were awl-shaped or linear,
ranging from one to 30 inches long.

The leaf cushions of _Lepidodendron_ are diamond-shaped, longer than
broad, and arranged in spiral rows around the trunk and branches. A
different name, _Lepidophyllum_, is used for fossils of the long,
bladelike leaf when it is found detached.

Spores were borne in long cylindrical cones at the tips of the branches.
Those cones referred, or assigned, to the genus _Lepidostrobus_ bore
both small spores (microspores) and large spores (megaspores) in the
same cones. Those in which only a large single spore, a somewhat
seedlike structure, was developed in a spore sac (sporangium) are
referred to the genus _Lepidocarpon_.

The rather commonly found genus _Stigmaria_ comprises so-called
“appendages” which, although stemlike in structure, apparently served as
roots for the scale and seal trees. These appendages are identified by
irregular spirals of circular scars (pits) that mark the attachment
points of former rootlets.

    [Illustration: Reconstruction of _Sigillaria_
    (after Hirmer)]

_Sigillaria_, although less common than _Lepidodendron_, was widely
distributed during the Pennsylvanian Period. It differed in growth habit
from _Lepidodendron_ in that it generally had fewer branches and not
uncommonly was unbranched. Some species also possessed a thicker trunk,
with hexagonal to elongate leaf cushions separated by vertical ribs. The
trunk was crowned, in the manner of the modern palm tree, by a cluster
of large, grasslike leaves.

The detached leaves of _Sigillaria_, extremely difficult to distinguish
from _Lepidophyllum_ (leaves of _Lepidodendron_), are referred to the
genus _Sigillariophyllum_ if preserved as compressions and to
_Sigillariopsis_ if preserved as petrifactions. Unbranched _Sigillaria_
trunks have been found that are more than 100 feet long and six feet in
diameter near the base, but the average height probably was closer to 50
feet.

    [Illustration: Reconstruction of _Calamites_
    (After Hirmer)]

Not all Pennsylvanian trees were large, however. Small forms are known,
including the important undergrowth genera _Lycopodites_ and
_Selaginellites_. In woody types the trunk consisted of an inner region
of conducting and supporting tissues, surrounding concentric cortical
layers, and an outer layer of corklike bark. Although the fossil
impressions of the various bark layers have been given separate generic
names, these are not commonly used.




                            SCOURING RUSHES
                               (Plate 2)


Although related to the small, inconspicuous horsetails of today, the
ancient scouring rushes of the Pennsylvanian Period grew to the size of
trees and were among the most widely distributed plant groups.

Some of these plants attained heights of 40 feet or more, but the
average was closer to 20 feet. The trunks were jointed and bore a whorl
of branches at the joints (nodes). Their small leaves also grew in
whorls at nodes along the smaller branches. Internodal regions were
ribbed in the same manner as present day horsetails. Fossils of the
trunks are assigned to the genus _Calamites_ and quite commonly are
preserved in sandstone and shale.

The leaf whorls are placed in the genus _Annularia_. One form commonly
found in Illinois has long, pointed, needlelike leaves and is given the
name _Asterophyllites_. _Calamostachys_, shown on plate 5, is one of the
most common calamite cones.




                             SPHENOPHYLLUM
                               (Plate 2)


The name _Sphenophyllum_ refers to both stems and leaves of this extinct
genus, which was related to the scouring rushes—note its resemblance to
_Annularia_.

A small herbaceous plant, _Sphenophyllum_ formed much of the swampy
undergrowth of the Pennsylvanian Period and is abundant among Illinois
fossils. It had a slender, ribbed stem bearing whorls of delicate,
wedge-shaped leaves, generally less than three-fourths of an inch long,
attached around the stem in multiples of three.

The cones of this group also are slender, delicate structures, bearing a
number of sporangia, and are correctly called _Bowmanites_, although
they also have been called _Sphenophyllostachys_. These fossil cones
frequently are found in Illinois.

_Sphenophyllum_ first appeared during the Devonian Period, some 300
million years ago, but did not become abundant until Pennsylvanian time.
The genus continued through the Permian but died out in Triassic time.




                                 FERNS
                            (Plates 1 and 3)


True ferns, like those living in today’s woodlands, were common in the
Pennsylvanian forests. Some species attained heights of 30 to 40 feet.
Their fronds (compound leaves divided into segments or leaflets)
commonly were five to six feet long.

    [Illustration: Portion of fern frond showing sori on lower side of
    leaflets]

True ferns do not produce cones or seeds, but spores, which develop in
cases called sporangia. The sporangia frond showing are attached in
clusters (sori) to the lower side or margins of the leaves. In modern
ferns the sporangia may also occur on fertile spikes.

The shape and position of the sori are used to identify modern ferns,
but because leaves that bear sori (“fertile” leaves) are rare among
fossil specimens, the number, shape, and attachment of the leaflets and
the pattern of the veins are more commonly used for identification.

    [Illustration: Reconstruction of _Megaphyton_
    (after Hirmer)]

Because fossils of complete fern plants have not yet been found,
separate names have been adopted for detached leaves, stems, and other
parts. For example, the fossil stems of some Pennsylvanian ferns found
in Illinois have been referred to two genera, _Megaphyton_, whose leaf
attachment scars are arranged in two vertical rows, one on either side
of the stem, and _Caulopteris_, whose leaf scars are arranged in a steep
spiral that becomes progressively flatter upward until near the top they
appear to be whorled. When the stem is a petrifaction, with internal
structures preserved, it is called _Psaronius_. The fronds are referred
to a number of genera, but those most commonly found in Illinois are
_Pecopteris_, _Asterotheca_, and _Ptychocarpus_.

    [Illustration: Venation of seed fern leaflets]

  _Pecopteris_
  _Asterotheca_
  _Ptychocarpus_




                               SEED FERNS
                               (Plate 4)


Seed ferns resembled true ferns in general, but they produced seeds,
borne on modified leaves. Where spore sacs and seeds are absent, the
leaves of seed ferns are difficult to distinguish from those of spore
ferns, although individual seed fern leaflets, called pinnae, are
somewhat larger.

    [Illustration: _Medullosa_ Reconstruction and original drawing by
    Wilson N. Stewart]

Seed ferns included vinelike plants in the undergrowth and trees such as
_Medullosa_. Some tree genera were very tall, with trunks more than two
feet in diameter. Unlike the true ferns, still living today, seed ferns
declined steadily after the close of the Pennsylvanian Period and
finally became extinct during Jurassic time. During Pennsylvanian time,
however, they were much more numerous and varied than true ferns.

    [Illustration: Venation of seed fern leaflets]

  _Alethopteris_
  _Odontopteris_
  _Mariopteris_
  _Neuropteris_
  _Linopteris_

Most of the common seed ferns found as fossils in Illinois can be
referred to the following leaf genera: _Alethopteris_, _Neuropteris_,
_Odontopteris_, _Linopteris_, _Mariopteris_ (which may be a true fern),
_Cyclopteris_, and _Spiropteris_. _Cyclopteris_ includes circular leaves
that occurred at the base of leaves referable to _Neuropteris_.
_Spiropteris_ includes young leaves that had not yet uncoiled and may
belong to either true ferns or seed ferns.




                               CORDAITES
                            (Plates 1 and 2)


    [Illustration: Reconstruction of _Cordaites_
    (after Hirmer)]

Cordaitean trees, forerunners of modern conifers such as pine and
spruce, were important during the Pennsylvanian Period for they were
distributed throughout the world. These trees, among the tallest plants
of the time, sometimes grew more than 100 feet high.

The cordaitean trunk was unbranched for three-fourths of the height of
the tree and was topped by dense branches bearing large, simple,
straplike leaves spirally arranged. The leaves had closely set parallel
veins and measured from half an inch to three feet or more long.

Internally, the structure of the trunks was similar to that of modern
pine trunks. Casts of the pith are referred to the genus _Artisia_. The
seeds were borne in clusters on branches in leaf axils.

The _Cordaites_ were major contributors to some coal beds.




                            FRUITING BODIES
                               (Plate 5)


Fossils representing many kinds of plant reproductive structures are
found in Pennsylvanian rocks, but unfortunately most of them are not
attached to any identifiable part of the parent plant and they cannot be
assigned definitely to a particular plant. Such fossils are referred to
genera and species solely on the basis of their own characteristics,
although, as in other fossil classifications, such “form genera” are
presumed to be parts of, or related to, the plants with which they are
found in habitual association.

A few such fossils, fairly common in Illinois, are illustrated on plate
5 to show their general shape and size. When attached to an identifiable
leaf or leaflet, the seed is referred to as the seed of that leaf genus.

For example, _Holcospermum_, a radially symmetrical seed with ribs and
grooves, _Codonotheca_, a stalked, spore-bearing, lobed “cup,” and
_Neuropterocarpus_, a flask-shaped seed with longitudinal ribs and
grooves, all have been associated with _Neuropteris_, a leaf genus.

    [Illustration: Mazon Creek Strip Mine Area Showing Distribution of
    Spoil Heaps. The small circular areas represent waste from
    underground mines.]

_Trigonocarpus_, commonly found as a cast of the internal part of a
seed, is a trimerously symmetrical body frequently associated with
_Alethopteris_. _Pachytesta_ includes preserved structures and outer
layers of a seed. _Carpolithes_ is a catch-all “genus” functioning as a
general term for seeds and seedlike forms whose plant group affinities
cannot be determined.




               COLLECTING AREAS FOR PENNSYLVANIAN PLANTS
                           Northern Illinois


Plant fossils can be found in almost any northern Illinois area where
Pennsylvanian rocks are exposed (see back cover), but in some places
they are much better preserved and more numerous than in others. Most of
the well known collecting areas and a few of the lesser known ones are
discussed below. Even though some of the localities were discovered many
years ago, they may indicate areas that are still favorable for
collecting.


Mazon Creek Area

Of all the fossils that have been found in Illinois, the most famous are
the plant remains from the world-renowned Mazon Creek area in the
northeastern part of the state. In this area in Grundy and Will
Counties, plant fossils are found in ironstone concretions in the lower
part of the Francis Creek Shale directly overlying the Colchester (No.
2) Coal.

Fossils were discovered in outcrops along Mazon Creek more than a
century ago and collections later were made from scores of conical spoil
heaps at underground mines. After coal stripping began in the 1920’s,
great numbers of specimens were collected.

In the stripping operations, the concretion-bearing beds are commonly
the last to be placed on the spoil heap. Weathering softens and removes
the shales and leaves the nodules concentrated on the surface. Each
season brings a new crop of concretions to the surface.

    [Illustration: _Plate 1_]

  _Calamites_ ⅓×
  _Stigmaria_ ⅖×
  _Lepidodendron_ ⅖×
  _Calamites_ ¹/₁₀×
  Fern Stem ⅔×
  _Caulopteris_ ¼×
  _Sigillaria_ ⅖×
  _Megaphyton_ ⅗×
  _Calamites_ ⅗×
  _Artisia_ ⅗×
  _Sigillaria_ sub-bark ⅗×

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

The concretions generally are oval to elongate and range from less than
an inch to a foot or more in maximum dimension. Only about one nodule in
ten contains plant remains.

Approximately 25 to 30 species have been found in this region. The
productivity of the area was shown by George Langford, Sr., a well known
midwestern fossil collector. He and his son split about 250 thousand
concretions during a 140-day period and obtained some 25 thousand plant
specimens. Fine specimens still can be collected in a few hours.

The plant collecting localities in Will and Grundy Counties along Mazon
Creek, four to six miles southeast of the town of Morris, were the first
to be well known. Ferns are especially abundant. Fossils of insects,
crustaceans, worms, and salamanders also have been found. Collecting
conditions vary considerably from season to season, and fossils are not
as easily obtained there as from the strip-mine spoil heaps.

Fossiliferous concretions may be found in a number of the strip mines in
the area, although probably most have come from the Northern Illinois
Coal Corporation mine between the towns of Braidwood and Wilmington.

In earlier years good collections were made from the spoil heaps of
underground mines. Especially notable are the mine dumps of the
Wilmington Star No. 7 mine, 2¼ miles west of Coal City, and Skinner No.
2 mine, two miles northeast of Braidwood.

In the vicinity of Morris on the northwest edge of the Mazon Creek area,
fossil ferns have been found along the north side of the Illinois River
and in the banks of the Illinois-Michigan Canal. About a mile north in
an area of strip mining, fossil-bearing concretions have been found in
shale and irregular sandstone layers.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

    [Illustration: _Plate 2_]

  _Sphenophyllum_ ⅗×
  _Lepidostrobophyllum_ ⅗×
  _Annularia_ ⅗×
  _Sphenophyllum_ 1×
  _Lycopodites_ ⅗×
  _Cordaites_ ⅗×
  _Asterophyllites_ ⅓×

Fossils in concretions also have been collected from a shaly limestone
at the south end of the Kankakee River bridge along the Grundy and Will
county line.


Bureau County

Some 40 miles downstream from Morris on the Illinois River, plant
fossils have been discovered in waste from the Spring Valley Coal Co.
mine 1. They also are found in black shale below the LaSalle Limestone
in a small gully in the southwest part of town, but at neither place are
they plentiful.


Knox County

A notable number and variety of well preserved plant fossils have been
produced from a locality along Court Creek in East Galesburg. The Rock
Island (No. 1) Coal is mined in the area and the fossils appear to have
come from the shale overlying it.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

Fossil plants also have been found in shales above the Colchester (No.
2) Coal in the vicinity of DeLong and with the Herrin (No. 6) Coal in
mines southeast of Victoria.


Mercer and Warren Counties

In northern Warren and southern Mercer Counties the sandstone underlying
the Rock Island (No. 1) Coal is termed the “Stigmarian” sandstone
because of numerous siliceous casts found in the bed. Many of the
fossils have been collected from an old mine dump and from ravines along
the Edwards River northeast of Aledo.

A number of representatives of _Sphenophyllum_, _Neuropteris_, and
_Annularia_ have been collected from ironstone concretions occurring in
shale that overlies the Colchester (No. 2) Coal about three miles
southwest of Alexis. They were found in a gully about a third of a mile
southeast of Center School.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

    [Illustration: _Plate 3_]

  _Pecopteris_ 1×
  _Ptychocarpus_ ⅗×
  _Pecopteris_ ⅗×
  _Mariopteris_ ⅗×
  _Asterotheca_ ⅗×
  _Spiropteris_ ⅗×
  _Pecopteris_ ⅗×

In the same general area but about three miles due south of Alexis,
fossil plants also may be found in the clay pits of the Hydraulic-Press
Brick Company and the Northwestern Clay Manufacturing Company.


Fulton County

Although there are numerous isolated occurrences of plant fossils
throughout the extensive strip mines and outcrops in Fulton County, no
exceptionally good collecting localities have been discovered.

Fern and cordaitean leaves have been collected along Mill Creek about a
mile northeast of Pleasantview where the fossils occur in the shale
overlying the Babylon Coal. In the same general area, impressions and
casts of _Stigmaria_, _Lepidodendron_, and _Cordaites_ have been found
in the Babylon Sandstone.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

Three miles north of Pleasantview, a quarter of a mile northwest of
Union School, several species of leaves have been collected from the
Browning Sandstone where it is exposed in a roadcut.

Farther east, there is a fairly good locality in the stream bluff of
Kerton Creek about 3¼ miles north and a quarter of a mile west of Bluff
City. There the plants are found about 18 feet below a coal bed.

Numerous fern impressions also are found in shale beds above the Herrin
(No. 6) Coal along the Middle Branch of Copperas Creek, six miles west
of Glasford. Other specimens may be found in these beds elsewhere in the
area.


McDonough County

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

In some of the small underground mines near Colchester, the shale
overlying the Colchester (No. 2) Coal contains ironstone concretions
similar to those from northeastern Illinois. More than 50 species of
plant fossils have been reported, but they were collected many years ago
from spoil heaps at the mines. Beds of the same age crop out widely in
other localities in western Illinois and may contain plant fossils.

    [Illustration: _Plate 4_]

  _Sphenopteris_ ⅗×
  _Linopteris_ ⅗×
  _Neuropteris_ ½×
  _Odontopteris_ ⅗×
  _Cycopteris_ ½×
  _Alethopteris_ ⅗×
  _Alethopteris_ ⅗×
  _Odontopteris_ ½×
  _Alethopteris_ ⅗×


Vermilion County

In outcrops about three miles below Georgetown on the Little Vermilion
River, a number of fossil plant species and one insect species have been
collected from shales overlying the Herrin (No. 6) Coal, locally called
the Grape Creek Coal. The fossils occur in concretions much like those
from Mazon Creek.

An occasional stem replacement or impression is found in the
concretionary shale above the No. 7 Coal in the strip mine area west of
Hillery. In fact, isolated fragmentary plant specimens are fairly common
in the Danville mining area, but no especially productive localities
have come to light.


Other Northern Illinois Localities

In addition to the counties listed above, a number of others have
produced plant fossils. For example, there are records of plant fossils
found southeast of Franklin in Morgan County, at Neelys in Peoria
County, and at a number of places in the southern and western parts of
Rock Island County. Local exploration is certain to turn up numerous
other collecting places at present unknown.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

    [Illustration: _Plate 5_]

  _Codonotheca_ ⅗×
  _Calamostachys_ 1×
  _Pachytesta_ ⅗×
  _Codonospermum_ ⅗×
  _Cordaicorpus_ ⅗×
  _Samaropsis_ ½×
  _Whittleseya_ 1×
  _Trigonocorpus_ ¼×
  _Holcospermum_ ⅗×
  _Neuropterocarpus_ ⅗×
  _Lepidostrobus_ ⅗×
  _Carpolithes_ ⅗×




                           Southern Illinois


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]


Lawrence County

Near the Lawrence-Richland county line, not far from the towns of
Berryville and Calhoun, there is an area rich in the fossil
petrifactions called “coal balls” in which cellular structures of stems
and roots generally are well preserved.


Saline, Pope, and Johnson Counties

Saline County has more recorded plant fossil localities than any other
southern Illinois county. Fossil plant collecting localities are
isolated but numerous in the area southwest of Harrisburg. Mine dumps,
such as in the area five or six miles northwest of Eddyville, and many
outcrops are available throughout the region. The fossils probably are
associated with the Murphysboro, Delwood, Willis, Reynoldsburg, and
Battery Rock Coals.

One especially good collecting area is on the south tributary of the
East Branch Cedar Creek about 6½ miles south of Stonefort. The fossils
are found in six feet of shale overlying the Battery Rock Coal horizon.


Perry and Jackson Counties

Near DuQuoin and Murphysboro, a variety of well preserved plant fossils
has been collected from shales overlying both the Herrin (No. 6) Coal
and the Murphysboro Coal. Nearly all have come from shaft mines that are
not easily accessible to the collector.

One currently good outcrop locality for collecting plant fossils from
the shale above the Murphysboro Coal is just southeast of Murphysboro.


Other Southern Illinois Localities

Other collecting localities have been recorded west of McLeansboro in
Hamilton County, northwest of Mt. Vernon in Jefferson County, near
Grayville in White County, and in the Friendsville area of Wabash
County. There is no doubt that careful search will turn up many more.

Almost anywhere in the large coal producing areas of southern Illinois
plant fossils can be found either in spoil heaps or in outcrops along
stream, road, and railroad cuts. The thick Pennsylvanian sandstones that
crop out in a belt extending through Gallatin, Saline, Williamson, and
Jackson Counties generally contain compressions or replacements of
trunks or other woody plant parts.




            SUGGESTIONS FOR COLLECTING PENNSYLVANIAN PLANTS


Where to Look for Plant Fossils

Pennsylvanian plants are most commonly found in shales directly
overlying coal beds. The shales are believed to be of nonmarine origin
like the coals and may contain fossils either in ironstone concretions
or on the bedding planes. The shale layers as well as the concretions
should be examined. Where the bed directly overlying the coal consists
of black slaty shale or limestone containing marine fossils, plant
remains are rarely abundant or well preserved.

Beneath the coals there generally is an underclay that is interpreted as
the material in which the coal forest grew. The underclay is in turn
underlain by a sandstone, and both are believed to be mostly nonmarine.
Stigmarian axes and “roots” are common in many of the underclays. Plant
fossils are common in the sandstone but generally are poorly preserved,
except in the local shaly lenses.

The best place to look for plant fossils in northern Illinois, except
for the strip mines of the Mazon Creek area, is probably in the spoil
heaps from shaft mines. The Colchester (No. 2) Coal has been extensively
mined by the longwall method. This technique causes the mine roof to
settle when the coal is removed, and the haulage ways are kept open by
removing the roof shale. Inasmuch as the roof shale is the Francis Creek
Formation of the Mazon Creek area, it may contain abundant plant-bearing
concretions. The shale is not everywhere fossiliferous, however, and in
many spoil heaps fossils are rare.

    [Illustration: Tools for Collecting]


Collecting Equipment

The collector of plant fossils should have the following tools and
equipment:

  ① Hammer—a bricklayer’s hammer will work well.
  ② One or two chisels, preferably one large and one small.
  ③ Knapsack or basket in which to carry specimens.
  ④ Newspapers and a roll of tissue paper for protecting fragile
              specimens.
  ⑤ Pencil and paper for labeling specimens and making notes about the
              collecting locality from which the fossils came. Much of
              the value of a particular fossil lies in knowing precisely
              where it was found and the layer of rock it came from.


Rules of Courtesy

When entering a collecting area every collector should observe several
rules carefully:

① For your own protection get permission to enter and collect on any
private property. Such action also will help to assure your welcome if
you wish to come back again.

② Leave the gates exactly as you find them, open or closed. Do not climb
fences that may break or sag under your weight; crawl under or go
around.

③ Don’t litter, even though far from any house or other buildings. Do
not disturb the owner’s equipment, stock, or planted areas.


Handling Specimens

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

The most successful way to split an ironstone concretion is to set it on
edge, long axis horizontal, on any fairly large rock and strike the
upper edge with the hammer. If the concretion is one that developed
around a fossil nucleus, it generally will split along the plane of
weakness, revealing the fossil. Sometimes one side of the concretion
will break off in the middle, in which case the remainder should be
tapped firmly but gently on the upper edge until the fossil is
completely uncovered. Pieces of the broken half should be glued together
neatly with waterproof cement so that the entire specimen can be
retained.

Fossils embedded in shale may be recovered by the same method or by
repeatedly tapping a chisel inserted along the bedding plane. If the
fossil is exposed, the matrix can be chiseled away by slow, painstaking
effort.

The usual method of wrapping plant-bearing nodules is to place the end
of a sheet of newspaper between the two halves of the nodule, fold the
paper over the nodule, and roll it up in the sheet.

    [Illustration: How to Wrap a Fossiliferous Concretion]

When several localities are visited in one collecting trip, the fossils
from each should be kept separate; cloth bags are convenient for this
purpose. Notes about the locality should be put in the same bag as
fossils from that locality so that there is no possibility of confusion.

Some fossils are so fragile or porous that they should be covered with a
hardening protective coat of crude gum arabic solution. (Refined gum
arabic will not serve.) This may be applied with a fine brush in
successive layers, or sturdier fossils may be dipped in it.

When a fossil is so delicate that the surface tension of the gum arabic
solution causes the fossil to “spread,” celluloid (not plastic)
dissolved in acetone should be substituted. Before this solution is
used, the specimen must be completely dry or the coating will become
cloudy or opaque.

If the specimen is pyritized, it should be sprayed with lacquer or
shellac to prevent disintegration. If these protective sprays are used
they must be applied to dry specimens during dry weather or the coating
will remain sticky.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                               REFERENCES


AN INTRODUCTION TO PALEOBOTANY. C. A. Arnold. McGraw-Hill Book Co., New
York, 1947, 433 p.

GRUNDY AND WILL COUNTIES. Frank H. Bradley. In Worthen et al., Geology
and Paleontology, Geological Survey of Illinois, vol. IV, 1870, p.
190-225.

PALMLIKE PLANTS FROM THE DOLORES FORMATION (TRIASSIC), SOUTHWESTERN
COLORADO. Roland W. Brown. United States Geological Survey Professional
Paper 274-H, 1956, p. 205-209.

CARBONIFEROUS INSECTS FROM THE VICINITY OF MAZON CREEK, ILLINOIS. F. M.
Carpenter. Illinois State Museum Scientific Paper 3, pt. 1, 1943, p.
7-20.

THE LIVING CYCADS. C. J. Chamberlain. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 1919, 172 p.

GUIDE FOR BEGINNING FOSSIL HUNTERS. Charles Collinson. Illinois State
Geological Survey Educational Series 4, 1956, 36 p. (Revised 1959, 40
p.)

HISTORICAL GEOLOGY. Carl O. Dunbar. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,
1949, 576 p.

COLLEGE BOTANY. Harry J. Fuller and Oswald Tippo. Henry Holt & Co., New
York, 1954, 993 p.

HANDBUCH DER PALÄOBOTANIK, BD. 1: _THALLOPHYTA, BRYOPHYTA,
PTERIDOPHYTA_. Max Hirmer. R. Oldenbourg, Munich and Berlin, 1927, 708
p.

SOME FOSSIL PLANT TYPES OF ILLINOIS. Raymond E. Janssen. Illinois State
Museum Scientific Paper 1, 1940, 124 p.

LEAVES AND STEMS OF FOSSIL FORESTS. Raymond E. Janssen. Illinois State
Museum Popular Science Series; v. 1, 1957, 190 p.

THE MAZON CREEK EURYPTERID: A REVISION OF THE GENUS _LEPIDODERMA_. Erik
N. Kjellesvig-Waering. Illinois State Museum Scientific Paper 3, no. 4,
1948, p. 3-46.

PLANTS OF THE PAST. F. H. Knowlton. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, N. J., 1927, 275 p.

THE WILMINGTON COAL FLORA FROM A PENNSYLVANIAN DEPOSIT IN WILL COUNTY,
ILLINOIS. George Langford. Esconi Associates, Downers Grove, Ill., 1958,
360 p.

THE MAZON CREEK, ILLINOIS, SHALES AND THEIR AMPHIBIAN FAUNA. R. L.
Moodie. American Journal of Science, 4th Series, v. 34, 1912, p.
277-285.

INTRODUCTION TO HISTORICAL GEOLOGY. Raymond C. Moore. McGraw-Hill Book
Co., Inc., New York, 1958, 656 p.

PENNSYLVANIAN FLORA OF NORTHERN ILLINOIS. A. C. Noé. Illinois State
Geological Survey Bulletin 52, 1925, 113 p.

PENNSYLVANIAN INVERTEBRATES OF THE MAZON CREEK AREA, ILLINOIS. Eugene S.
Richardson, Jr. Fieldiana: Geology, v. 12, 1956, p. 1-76.

REPORT ON THE CARR AND DANIELS COLLECTIONS OF FOSSIL PLANTS FROM MAZON
CREEK. Wilson N. Stewart. Illinois Academy of Science Transactions, v.
43, 1950, p. 41-45.

A RECENTLY DISCOVERED _PHLEGETHONTIA_ FROM ILLINOIS. W. D. Turnbull and
Priscilla F. Turnbull. Fieldiana: Zoology, v. 37, 1955, p. 523-535.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                     EDUCATIONAL EXTENSION PROGRAM


The Educational Extension Section of the Illinois State Geological
Survey reaches the public through a number of channels, including
nontechnical publications, rock and mineral collections for Illinois
schools and educational groups, lectures, exhibits, correspondence
involving identification of rocks and minerals, news items for the
press, and field trips.

During each year six field trips are given, in widely separated parts of
the state, for teachers, students, and laymen. The general program is
especially designed to assist in teaching geological sciences and to
help make Illinois citizens aware of the state’s great mineral wealth.

                                        Illinois State Geological Survey
                                                        Urbana, Illinois

    [Illustration: ILLINOIS, Land of Lincoln]

    [Illustration: PENNSYLVANIAN OUTCROP AREA]

  Morris
  Braidwood
  Peoria
  Colchester
  Danville
  Springfield
  Duquoin
  Murphysboro
  Harrisburg
  Marion

                   _Illinois State Geological Survey
                         Educational Series 6_




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIELD BOOK: PENNSYLVANIAN PLANT FOSSILS OF ILLINOIS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


