The Project Gutenberg eBook of Marine bayonet training
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Marine bayonet training

Author: United States. Marine Corps

Release date: January 22, 2025 [eBook #75177]

Language: English

Original publication: Washington: USMC, 1965

Credits: Bob Taylor, Brian Coe and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARINE BAYONET TRAINING ***





DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY

HEADQUARTERS UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20380

  25 March 1965


FOREWORD


1. PURPOSE

FMFM 1-1, MARINE BAYONET TRAINING, is one of a series of Fleet Marine
Force Manuals covering the tactics and techniques to be employed in
operations and training by the operating forces of the Marine Corps. It
is made available to other Services for information and use as desired.
The purposes of FMFM 1-1 are:

 a. To introduce and describe the method of bayonet fighting employed
 by the Marine Corps.

 b. To describe positions and movements used by the bayonet fighter,
 and to treat his actions individually and as a member of a group, both
 on the offense and the defense.

 c. To set forth a program for bayonet training.


2. SCOPE

Beginning with a brief history of bayonet fighting and the evolution
to the present technique employed by the Marine Corps, individual and
group attack and defense are described. Training techniques, use of the
pugil stick, and construction of an assault course are included.


3. SUPERSESSION

This publication supersedes NAVMC 1135-AO3, BAYONET FIGHTING, dated 22
March 1957, copies of which may be destroyed without report.


4. CHANGES

Recommendations for improvements to this manual are invited. Comments
and recommended changes should be forwarded to the Coordinator, Marine
Corps Landing Force Development Activities, Marine Corps Schools,
Quantico, Virginia 22134.


5. CERTIFICATION

Reviewed and approved this date.

[Illustration: L.F. Chapman, Jr.]

  L. F. CHAPMAN, JR.
  Lieutenant General, U.S. Marine Corps
  Chief of Staff




DISTRIBUTION:


  2035/6025/6200/6300/6500/6800/7215/       (2)
  7506/7525-01                              (2)
  7255/7352/7508/7600 (less 7636)/7857      (3)
  2010/2088/3510/4000 (less 4125)/5000      (5)
  (less 5537-09 and 5612)/6600              (5)
  7373/7800-03,-04,-05/8145                 (5)
  1025/3000/3520/3530/6900/6903/6905/      (10)
  6910/6965/7000-48                        (10)
  7530 (less 7539)/7800-14,-15/7950/       (10)
  7970/8506/8511-02                        (10)
  2020/2060/3540/7380/7539                 (15)
  2030/3550/4125/5612/7636/7800-01,        (20)
  -02,-06,-09                              (20)
  2100                                     (25)
  7230-01                                  (30)
  7385/7391/7800-11                        (50)
  3700                                     (75)
  7800-12,-13                             (100)
  5537-09                                 (150)
  7315                                    (200)
  7230-04                                (4200)
  7000-02                                  (50)




MARINE BAYONET TRAINING

TABLE OF CONTENTS


  SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION

                                                         Paragraph  Page

  General                                                     101      1

  Principles of Bayonet Fighting                              102     10


  SECTION 2: POSITION AND MOVEMENTS

  General                                                     201     13

  The Guard Position                                          202     14

  Change of Direction                                         203     18

  Foot Movements                                              204     18


  SECTION 3: INDIVIDUAL ATTACK

  General                                                     301     23

  The Slash                                                   302     23

  The Vertical Butt Stroke                                    303     27

  The Smash                                                   304     31

  The Horizontal Butt Stroke                                  305     34

  The Jab                                                     306     38


  SECTION 4: INDIVIDUAL DEFENSE

  General                                                     401     43

  Parry Right                                                 402     43

  Parry Left                                                  403     44

  Block Against Slash                                         404     46

  Block Against Vertical Butt Stroke                          405     48


  SECTION 5: COMBINATION MOVEMENTS

  General                                                     501     51

  List of Movements                                           502     52


  SECTION 6: GROUP ATTACK AND DEFENSE

  General                                                     601     53

  Group Attack                                                602     53

  Group Defense                                               603     54


  SECTION 7: TRAINING

  General                                                     701     59

  Demonstration and Application of the Basic Fundamentals     702     60

  The Assault Course                                          703     62

  The Pugil Stick                                             704     73


  INDEX                                                               83




SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION


101. GENERAL

a. Evolution of the Bayonet.—The bayonet is the infantry weapon which
has changed the least during the development and refinement of weapons
of war during the last three hundred years. There are several suggested
origins of the bayonet. Some sources suggest that it derives from the
Baioniers, crossbowmen of the middle ages, who carried a large knife
or dagger to supplement their crossbows. Other sources credit the
smugglers of Basque with using a bayonet-type weapon as a last ditch
defense. Most English literature sources give the credit to Seigneur
Marecal de Puysegur who, in 1647, at Ypres, France, ordered his troops
to insert their daggers into the muzzles of their muskets after firing.
De Puysegur and his unit were from Bayonne, France, a town known for
dagger manufacture, hence the term bayonet.

(1) Early infantry commanders employed a warrior known as a pikeman,
armed with a knife attached to the end of a quarterstaff, to defend
the musketeers from an enemy charge while the musket was reloaded.
Reloading was a time consuming operation and the musketeer was
vulnerable during the time his weapon was empty. The pikeman stationed
himself in front of the musketeer and warded off any enemy assault with
his pike until the musketeer was again ready to fire. De Puysegur’s
development thus enabled the musketeer to assume both functions of
the “medieval fire team.” This so called plug bayonet was used for a
period of forty to fifty years. It consisted of a long dagger with a
tapered shaft which was inserted into the muzzle of the musket. The
taper was necessary since muzzle diameters were not standardized.
The plug bayonet fitted snugly into the muzzle of the musket and was
difficult to remove. This was necessary in order to prevent it being
withdrawn by the enemy. The musket could not be fired with the bayonet
inserted, a significant disadvantage. The plug bayonet lost favor when
it contributed to the defeat of the English at the hands of the Scots
at Killiecrankie, Scotland, in 1689. The English were ordered to fix
bayonets after firing a volley at the Scots. The British commander then
discovered that his troops were further from the Scots than he had
originally thought. He ordered bayonets detached and muskets reloaded.
Before loading could be accomplished the Scots closed with the English
and thoroughly routed them. The English commander, Hugh MacKay, having
noted the disadvantages of the plug bayonet, developed a modification
which came to be known as the ring bayonet. The ring bayonet was
similar to the plug bayonet, but the tapered shaft was inserted between
two rings fastened to the muzzle, allowing the musket to be fired
with the bayonet attached. There is some evidence that a similar
device was being used in France ten years prior to the engagement at
Killiecrankie, indicating that the ring bayonet was not an English
invention.

(2) The ring bayonet still left much to be desired. The lack of
standardization made a secure fit difficult, and the rings had a
tendency to stretch out of shape with use, rendering the bayonet
useless. This led to the next development of a new bayonet, known as
the socket bayonet. The socket bayonet was introduced in the early
1690’s. The lower part of the bayonet was shaped like an elbow, leaving
the blade well out of the line of fire and seating the bayonet firmly
on the barrel. Again, lack of standardization made it impossible to
produce a single model which would fit even a small number of the
weapons of one unit. Also, a sudden tug by an enemy would dislodge the
bayonet from the barrel. These difficulties led to further advancements
in bayonet design, in an attempt to find a rapidly attachable bayonet
which could be held securely to the barrel. One development made the
bayonet part of the musket itself. This was accomplished by splitting
the socket sleeve of the ring lengthwise permitting a wider opening
which could be hammered closed to obtain a snug fit. Experiments with
slots, rings, catches, clasps, springs, and other assorted devices were
made in an attempt to develop a more satisfactory bayonet.


(3) The bayonet as we know it today has its origins at the beginning of
the 19th century. Late in the 18th century a major bayonet modification
appeared, the sword bayonet. This has been the prototype for most
bayonets since that date. The now familiar knife blade bayonet came
into general use about the same time as the introduction of the
magazine rifle, just prior to the Civil War. There were a variety of
shapes and sizes ranging from the sword-like, 24-inch blade down to
the dagger-type, 10-inch blade. Typically, there were a variety of
short-lived variations and multiuse bayonets. There were saw-toothed
blades for use by engineer troops, saber-edged blades for use by the
cavalry, spade-shaped blades to help the infantryman dig in, and
bolo-knife blades for cutting through the jungles. In addition, there
was a ramrod/cleaning rod blade consisting of a long cleaning rod,
sharpened to a point at one end and folding under the barrel like the
old fashioned cleaning rod. None of these modifications were adopted
for long. At this point the rifleman had an instrument with which he
could protect himself as he reloaded his weapon. It served to protect
him and better his morale when rain had soaked his powder or wind had
blown the powder from his pan. He could now defend himself against the
sabre slashes of the cavalry or a charge by the infantry.

b. Development of Bayonet Fighting Techniques.—The bayonet was
developed to protect the musketeer while he reloaded his weapon,
a defensive mission. The tactics employed were an individual or
unit matter; there was no published doctrine for bayonet fighting.
However, as weapons improved and rapid fire, longer range weapons were
developed, the troops were more widely dispersed on the battlefield.
The percentage of time spent in close combat with the enemy was
reduced. As a result, the use of the bayonet, a close combat weapon,
was also reduced. There is little said about the use of the bayonet in
the American Civil War and Spanish-American War.


(1) The development of the machinegun and refinements in artillery
reversed the trend toward battlefield mobility and World War I was
a static conflict in which trench warfare was employed. There were
great concentrations of troops, sometimes in close proximity to one
another. The bayonet was extremely important in trench fighting, and
the experience gained in World War I led to the publication of the
first manuals on bayonet fighting doctrine. The bayonet was depicted
as an offensive weapon, used in assaulting enemy troops in trenches.
Many of the principles appearing in these manuals are still valid
today. Early doctrine pictured the bayonet as essential for successful
culmination of the attack. Artillery fire was capable of demolishing
enemy trenches, but this was undesirable since the trenches would have
to be redug to defend against the inevitable counterattack. Therefore
the only way to drive the enemy from his trenches without destroying
the trench and burying him was through the bayonet assault. The
doctrine set forth in these manuals regarding attitude, standardization
of movements, and practice for bayonet fighting was as follows:

(a) The bayonet fighter was given a firm knowledge of the underlying
principles of bayonet combat. The bayonet was regarded as an individual
weapon and each bayonet fighter was taught in such a manner as to take
advantage of his own physical characteristics. No attempt was made to
set down prescribed standards as to the position of feet or hands on
the weapon. Each bayonet fighter was left free to choose positions and
movements most natural to him.

(b) Instructors corrected individual errors, but took advantage of
any particular skill possessed by any individual. Instructors tried
to develop to the fullest degree the proficiency of the individual,
consistent with his physique and degree of development, but guarded
against attempting to make a precise parade or calisthenic drill of
bayonet training.

(c) Assumption of a vicious, aggressive attitude was the “spirit of
the bayonet.” An actual bayonet fight was depicted as lasting only
a few seconds during which time the bayonet fighter was to kill his
opponent or be killed himself. The necessity for aggressive action
was as obvious then as it is today. The enemy was to be forced on
the defensive; the battle was won if this was achieved. The attack
consisted of a succession of thrusts, cuts, feints, and butt strokes
delivered in succession and without pause, so as not to allow the
opponent to recover.

(d) The employment of teamwork in the bayonet assault was emphasized.
The assaulting troops remained on line. An individual who got too
far ahead and was killed before assistance could arrive was not
contributing to a successful assault. Similarly, an individual who
remained behind was useless in the assault.

(2) The individual attack movements described in early manuals closely
resemble those taught and employed today. Today’s system is somewhat
simpler and facilitates better balance of the bayonet fighter and
control of the weapon. Training consisted of individual familiarization
with the movements, the use of dummies, thrusting rings, and practice
in assaulting enemy trenches with troops on line. The latter category
received more emphasis. Dummies were placed in trenches and attacked
by bayonet fighters. The system of bayonet fighting taught to American
fighting men during World War II closely resembled that employed
during World War I. The basics of this system were established in 1905
and changed very little through the conduct of World Wars I and II.
Bayonets were employed during World War I principally in the assault of
enemy trenches, while, in World War II, their employment was extended
to include seizure of key enemy held terrain objectives.

(3) The bayonet fighting system currently taught and employed by the
Marine Corps was developed by Doctor Armond H. Seidler, professor in
the Department of Physical Education at the University of Illinois.
Dr. Seidler was a bayonet instructor in the U.S. Army during World War
II when the Biddle system was taught. He felt the movements of the old
system were awkward and difficult to execute, and often caused the
bayonet fighter to lose his balance. If the bayonet fighter failed to
disable his opponent with the first blow he was then frequently left
at the enemy’s mercy. Dr. Seidler was convinced that the movements
of the Biddle system were unnatural and this would result in their
being discarded in an actual bayonet fight, and the bayonet fighter
resorting to a disorganized attack on his enemy. Under the Seidler
system the guard position remains the basic position. All movements
begin from the guard position and each movement consists of an attack
and a recovery. The recovery is a return to the guard position. In
the execution of a movement, the two phases follow without deliberate
pause. This makes the entire movement a uniformly smooth action. The
attack may be continued without returning to the guard position, either
by repeating the same movement or utilizing another followup movement.
Followup movements are designed so that a blocked initial movement
sets the opponent up for the delivery of another killing blow without
the bayonet fighter having to return to the guard position and without
loss of balance.

c. The Importance of the Bayonet.—The importance of the bayonet cannot
be measured by the frequency of its use or the number of casualties for
which it accounts. It is indispensable because of the confidence it
breeds in the individual fighting man, and the willingness instilled
in him to close with the enemy and destroy him. Closing with and
destroying the enemy is the mission of the infantry, and the major
importance of the bayonet is that it allows the individual Marine to
accomplish this mission under a wide variety of conditions. The bayonet
is always loaded and always operative.

(1) The importance of assuming the offense as a principle of war
cannot be questioned. The bayonet is a symbol of the offense; of
aggressiveness. It gives the infantryman courage and confidence,
provided he is properly trained in its use. It gives individual
infantrymen a more offensive attitude, and better enables them to
accomplish their mission in the final assault. It gives them a means
of personal protection, contributing to their security and safety. In
addition to its offensive roles, the bayonet can serve as a last ditch
protective measure.

(2) In situations where friendly and enemy troops are mingled in
hand-to-hand combat, rifle fire may hit friendly personnel. However,
the bayonet is more selective and kills only the person into which
it is thrust. As long as the infantry closes with the enemy this
capability remains important. In situations of reduced visibility
the presence of the bayonet may discourage premature firing and the
tragedy which can result from it. For a discussion of the employment of
bayonets in the control of riots and civil disturbances, see FMFM 6-4,
Marine Rifle Company/Platoon.

(3) When stealth is required the bayonet is irreplaceable. It is
flexible, capable of being fixed to the end of the rifle or held as a
knife, silent and deadly. It gives the riflemen two capacities, bullets
and blade. Bayonet drill is an excellent physical conditioner. The
bayonet assault course is strenuous exercise and develops a combination
of fitness and skill that contributes to the creation of total military
fitness.


102. PRINCIPLES OF BAYONET FIGHTING

The bayonet fighter should be aggressive, ruthless, savage, and
vicious. Herein lies the key to success with the bayonet. He must never
pause in his attack until he has killed his enemy. He must follow
each vicious attack with another, remembering that if he does not
kill his opponent, his opponent will kill him. Hesitation, delay, and
excess maneuvering may result in death. The primary aim of the bayonet
fighter is to get his blade into the enemy. All defensive moves, butt
strokes, and footwork drive towards this end. They are actions taken
to enable the bayonet fighter to sink his blade, for it is the blade
that kills. He aims for the vital areas of the enemy. The throat is
the best target, but the belly and chest are also vulnerable. When the
enemy seeks to protect one vital area, he attacks another. He hacks,
cuts, and slashes the face, arms, and hands in order to get to the
vital areas. He makes maximum use of the rifle butt to open up vital
areas. He delivers the butt strokes hard and close in, then kills with
the blade. If the opponent gives no opening, he makes one by parrying
his weapon. If required, the bayonet fighter protects himself through
blocks and parries. The rifle and bayonet make a good shield. The
best defense is not to allow the opponent to take the offensive. The
successful bayonet fighter strikes the first blow and follows up with
the kill. Training and practice are the only way to attain proper
form, accuracy, agility, and speed with the rifle and feet. Practice
and training in these traits lead to coordination, balance, speed,
and endurance. The bayonet fighter must continue to practice these
movements until they become second nature, and his attack as natural as
running.




SECTION 2: POSITION AND MOVEMENTS


201. GENERAL

a. The basic starting and recovery position in bayonet fighting is the
guard position. From this position all movements can originate. This
includes movements to attack an enemy, which will be covered in section
3; movements to change direction; and movements of the feet. These
movements are natural, instinctive, and easy to teach and execute. They
bear a close resemblance to the established athletic skill of boxing.
Although the hands are held in a relatively fixed position, the arm and
foot movements, feinting, speed, and balance are markedly similar. In
this system, the rifle and bayonet are used as a club or quarterstaff,
as well as a spear. There is no sportsmanship in bayonet fighting. The
opponent must be destroyed, not merely defeated.

b. Descriptions of movements will state approximate distances. These
distances may be adjusted to suit the individual. All movements
described are for a right-handed bayonet fighter.

c. The rifle and bayonet in the hands of a trained Marine become a
deadly combination of spear, sword, club, and shield.


202. THE GUARD POSITION

a. General.—As in boxing the basic position of the bayonet fighter is
the GUARD position. The bayonet fighter in this position is relaxed
and alert. The initial attack movement begins from this position. Each
movement consists of an attack and a recovery. The recovery is in fact
a return to the guard position. In executing a movement the phases
follow each other without a deliberate pause, thus making the entire
movement a uniformly smooth action. The attack may be continued without
returning to the guard position by repeating the same movement or
utilizing another movement. In the guard position the bayonet fighter
is ready to move into the attack to ward off his enemy. Figures 1 and
2 illustrate front and side views of a bayonet fighter in the guard
position.

b. Position of the Feet.—The feet are spread apart about shoulder
width. The left foot is about 6 inches forward of the right, in line
with the right instep.

[Illustration: Figure 1.—Guard Position—Front View.]

[Illustration: Figure 2.—Guard Position—Side View.]

c. Position of the Body.—The body is held erect or bent slightly
forward from the hips, if this is more comfortable. The knees are
slightly bent, and the weight is evenly balanced on the balls of
both feet. The right elbow is slightly forward of the right hip in a
relaxed, natural position and the right forearm is held approximately
parallel to the deck depending on the size of the individual. The
head is held high permitting continuous eye contact with the opponent.
The opponent’s facial expression, especially the eyes, may give the
bayonet fighter warning of his intentions, but the bayonet fighter must
also keep the opponent’s feet and hands in view through peripheral
vision.

d. Position of the Hands.—The hands grip the rifle firmly, but not
tensely. The left hand grasps the rifle just below the upper sling
swivel, under the sling. The right hand holds the small of the stock
behind the trigger guard.

e. Position of the Rifle.—The rifle is held so it bisects the angle
made by the neck and the left shoulder. It is held a sufficient
distance from the chest to contribute to the balance of the bayonet
fighter, usually 10 to 15 inches. The right arm is bent slightly
providing a firm, solid position. The extended position of the arms
protects the bayonet fighter’s body against an attacker’s blows and
permits ready parry movements. In the guard position the rifle is held
as in port arms, except that the sling and cutting edge of the blade
face the opponent.

f. The Growl.—A yell or growl can be effective prior to an attack to
temporarily stun the opponent and cause him to freeze momentarily.
This yell or growl should be a short, loud, vicious noise, executed
in much the same manner as a tiger growls just before he pounces
on his victim. The yell or growl adds a feeling of aggressiveness,
self-confidence, and force to each attack movement.


203. CHANGE OF DIRECTION

a. General.—The whirl is used to face an opponent not positioned
directly to the bayonet fighter’s front. Whirl movements are executed
by pivoting on the foot of the side to which the change of direction is
to be made. The rifle and bayonet are held in the guard position during
the execution of the whirl.

b. Execution of the Whirl.—It is possible to whirl 180° to the right or
left, pivoting on the foot closest to the opponent. It is not necessary
to whirl the entire 180° if stopping short of that distance permits the
bayonet fighter to face his opponent.


204. FOOT MOVEMENTS

a. General.—Proper foot movements must be utilized in order to enable
the bayonet fighter to maintain balance and maneuverability of his body
at all times, and thus retain the capability of delivering effective
attack movements. The feet are picked up and set down with a slight
stomp in the shuffle. They are not slid along the ground. On the
battlefield there are numerous obstacles to trip the bayonet fighter
who slides his feet. One foot is kept on the deck at all times.
Never bring the feet together as this results in vulnerability to the
slightest attack or push. The shuffle is used to the front or either
side.

b. Shuffle Right.—To shuffle right, step to the right about 15 inches
with the right foot, and follow with the left foot. To move to the
right front, execute a partial whirl to the right and then shuffle
forward in the desired direction. Figure 3 illustrates steps involved
in the shuffle right movement.

[Illustration: Figure 3.—Shuffle Right.]

c. Shuffle Left.—To shuffle left, follow the same procedure for shuffle
right, except move the left foot to the left and follow with the right.
To move to the left front execute a partial whirl to the left and
then shuffle forward in the desired direction. See figure 4 for an
illustration of the shuffle left movement.

[Illustration: Figure 4.—Shuffle Left.]

d. Shuffle Forward.—To shuffle forward, step about 15 inches forward
with the left foot and follow with the right foot to assume the guard
position. See figure 5 for an illustration of the shuffle forward.

[Illustration: Figure 5.—Shuffle Forward.]




SECTION 3: INDIVIDUAL ATTACK


301. GENERAL

There are five basic attack movements; the slash (to include the
horizontal slash), vertical butt stroke, smash, horizontal butt stroke,
and jab. The movements described for hands, feet, and body are done
simultaneously, both in the attack and during recovery to the guard
position.


302. THE SLASH

a. Execution.—The slash is executed in the following manner:

(1) Assume the guard position.

(2) Step forward about 15 inches with the left foot, keeping the right
foot in place as a base. (See fig. 6.)

(3) Hold the right hand in place, extending the left arm almost fully,
while pulling back on the butt with the right arm. Swing the edge of
the bayonet forward and down in a slashing arc aimed at the opponent’s
neck area.

[Illustration: Figure 6.—Slash-Step Forward.]

(4) The step forward and the extension of the left arm are performed
simultaneously. The forward step adds force to the slashing movement.

(5) At full extension of the arms, when delivery of the blow is
complete, the bayonet should be flat. The left arm is extended, and the
right forearm is held along the stock of the rifle, approximately waist
high. (See fig. 7.)

b. Horizontal Slash.—There is a variation to this movement known as
the horizontal slash. The difference is that the bayonet fighter
steps forward with the left foot and rotates his body to the right
by pivoting on the right foot. At the same time bring the rifle and
bayonet to a relatively horizontal position in front of the body.
Simultaneously, the right arm is pulled across the body and a hooking
action is executed with the left arm. This slash is directed on a
horizontal plane at the opponent’s head, neck or side.

c. Recovery to the Guard Position

(1) Bend the left arm, pivoting the rifle in the right hand.

(2) Take a step forward with the right foot.

(3) Rotate the body slightly to the front.

[Illustration: Figure 7.—Slash-Delivery.]


303. THE VERTICAL BUTT STROKE

a. Execution.—The vertical butt stroke is executed in the following
manner:

(1) Assume the guard position.

(2) Step forward with the right foot about 15 inches. (See fig. 8.)

(3) Using the left hand as a pivot for the rifle, drive the right hand
forward and upward in an uppercut type motion. Aim the butt of the
rifle at the groin. If the opponent bends to avoid being hit in the
groin, his midsection and chin will protrude. In this event, carry the
stroke upward until contact is made with his midsection or chin along
the centerline of his body.

(4) Execute the step and uppercut motion at the same time to add force
to the blow. (See figs. 9 and 10.)

b. Recovery to the Guard Position.

(1) Pull the right hand back and down until the right elbow is again
slightly forward of the right hip in a relaxed, natural position.

(2) Step forward with the left foot and assume the guard position.

[Illustration: Figure 8.—Vertical Butt Stroke-Step Forward.]

[Illustration: Figure 9.—Vertical Butt Stroke to the Groin.]

[Illustration: Figure 10.—Vertical Butt Stroke to the Chin.]


304. THE SMASH

a. Execution.—The smash, frequently used as a followup to the vertical
or horizontal butt stroke, is executed as follows:

(1) Assume the guard position.

(2) Draw the left arm back to the neck area. The rifle is held with
sling up. The rifle is now over the left shoulder, parallel to the
deck. (See fig. 11.)

(3) Step toward the opponent about 15 inches with the right foot,
slamming the rifle butt into the opponent’s face by extending the arms
about 6 inches toward the target, the rifle remains parallel to the
deck. (See fig. 12.)

(4) Follow with the left foot after the blow has been struck. If
further extension of the arms is necessary, the bayonet fighter should
shuffle forward and again execute the smash.

b. Recovery to the Guard Position.—Step forward with the left foot
about 15 inches, assuming the guard position.

[Illustration: Figure 11.—Smash-Step Forward.]

[Illustration: Figure 12.—Smash-Delivery.]


305. THE HORIZONTAL BUTT STROKE

a. Execution.—The horizontal butt stroke is executed as follows:

(1) Assume the guard position.

(2) Step forward approximately 20 inches forward with the right foot,
using the left foot as a pivot point. (See fig. 13.)

(3) Simultaneously, bring the rifle butt across in a horizontal
arc, using the left hand as a pivot point. The right arm is almost
completely extended. This is a fast hooking action.

(4) During delivery the rifle is held flat on its side so the toe of
the rifle and the sling are pointed toward the target. If the rifle
is not held flat, it is possible that the stock will be broken by the
force of an aggressive butt stroke. (See figs. 14 and 15.)

(5) Aim the toe of the butt plate at the opponent’s head, neck, or side.

(6) The step, pivot, and blow should all occur simultaneously in order
to add force to the blow.

b. Recovery to the Guard Position.

(1) Step forward with the left foot.

(2) Bend the right arm, lowering the right hand to assume the guard
position.

[Illustration: Figure 13.—Horizontal Butt Stroke.]

[Illustration: Figure 14.—Horizontal Butt Stroke—Delivery to the Head.]

[Illustration: Figure 15.—Horizontal Butt Stroke—Delivery to the Side.]


306. THE JAB

a. Execution.—The jab is executed as follows:

(1) Assume the guard position.

(2) Move the left hand downward diagonally across the body, extending
the left arm fully. At this point the blade of the bayonet should be
flat, pointed toward the opponent. At the same time, pull the small of
the stock to the rear with the right hand until the cone of the stock
is opposite the hip bone and the right forearm is resting along the
flat of the stock with the sling turned out. (See fig. 16.)

(3) Aim the blade at the opponents midsection from the stomach to the
throat.

(4) Step forward about 15 inches with the left foot, pushing forward
with the shoulders, and thrusting the blade into the opponent. (See
figs. 17 and 18.)

b. Recovery to the Guard Position.

(1) Withdraw the blade and bring the right hand down and forward while
bringing the left hand back.

(2) Step forward with the right foot and assume the guard position.

[Illustration: Figure 16.—Jab Step Forward.]

[Illustration: Figure 17.—Jab to the Throat.]

[Illustration: Figure 18.—Jab to the Midsection.]




SECTION 4: INDIVIDUAL DEFENSE


401. GENERAL

At times the bayonet fighter may lose the initiative and the opponent
may move into the attack. Some defensive measures are therefore
necessary for protection and in order to permit the bayonet fighter
to regain the initiative. The basic defensive moves are the block and
parry. The parry is effective against the jab, while the block is used
against the slash and the vertical butt stroke. Timing, speed, and
judgment are key factors in handling defensive moves. The parry is done
either to the right or left, depending on the position of the incoming
blade. If the opponent’s blade comes in above the bayonet fighter’s
piece, the parry should be to the right. If it comes in below the
bayonet fighter’s piece, the parry should be to the left.


402. PARRY RIGHT

a. Execution

(1) If the opponent’s blade is thrust toward the bayonet fighter in a
position above the piece of the bayonet fighter, the parry will be to
the right.

(2) From the guard position, step forward about 7 inches with the left
foot, keeping the right foot as a base.

(3) Extend the left arm outward, to the right and down, engaging the
opponent’s weapon and forcing it to the right and down. This is done
by pulling the right hand back along the right hip. Ideally, the
opponent’s weapon is engaged at the balance of the bayonet fighter’s
weapon. The operating handle is pointed toward the deck after the
opponent’s weapon is engaged. (See fig. 19.)

b. Move into the Attack and Recovery.

(1) Move directly into the attack rather than returning to the guard
position.

(2) Deliver a jab, or step forward with the right foot and deliver a
vertical butt stroke.

(3) Recover to the guard position as prescribed in section 3.


403. PARRY LEFT

a. Execution.

(1) If the opponent’s blade is thrust toward the bayonet fighter in a
position below the piece of the bayonet fighter, the parry will be to
the left.

[Illustration: Figure 19.—Parry Right.]

(2) From the guard position, step forward about 7 inches with the left
foot, using the right foot as a base. Bring the rifle to a vertical
position with the right forearm nearly parallel to the deck.

(3) Snap the left hand forward to the left and down engaging the
opponent’s weapon anywhere between the back of the bayonet and the
balance of the bayonet fighter’s piece. The rifle will be nearly
horizontal with the operating handle up and the sling pointing toward
the opponent. (See fig. 20.)

b. Move into the Attack and Recovery.

(1) After the parry left, a slash can be delivered by stepping forward
with the left foot. A horizontal or vertical butt stroke can be
delivered by stepping forward with the right foot.

(2) Recover to the guard position as prescribed in section 3.


404. BLOCK AGAINST SLASH

a. Execution.

(1) From the guard position, thrust the rifle out and up. The weapon
stays in the same general position as in the guard position, but the
arms are now nearly at full extension.

(2) Push the balance of the rifle into the opponent’s rifle. (See fig.
21.)

[Illustration: Figure 20.—Parry Left.]

b. Move Into the Attack and Recovery.

(1) After the opponent’s slash is blocked he is overextended and off
balance.

(2) Counter with a slash or horizontal butt stroke.

(3) Recover to the guard position in the same manner as outlined in
section 3.


405. BLOCK AGAINST VERTICAL BUTT STROKE

a. Execution

(1) From the guard position, extend the arms out and down.

(2) The rifle is now nearly horizontal to the deck, and the arms fully
extended.

(3) Engage the opponent’s stock near the balance of the rifle. (See
fig. 22.)

b. Move into the Attack and Recovery

(1) Counter with a horizontal slash or horizontal butt stroke.

(2) Recover to the guard position in the same manner prescribed in
section 3.

[Illustration: Figure 21.—Block Slash.]

[Illustration: Figure 22.—Block Vertical Butt Stroke.]




SECTION 5: COMBINATION MOVEMENTS


501. GENERAL

Followup movements are attack movements which naturally and
harmoniously follow other attack movements. The followup movement is
executed from the completed position of the previous movement, rather
than after recovery to the guard position. To ensure a successful
attack a bayonet fighter follows each movement with another attack
movement until he has killed his opponent. All attack movements are
designed so that the attacker is in position to deliver another attack
movement should his initial attack not be successful. For example, if
the attacker delivers a slash which is blocked, he is in excellent
position to followup with a vertical butt stroke. Ideally, the followup
movement is executed in the same plane as the previous movement, and it
is in keeping with this principle that the followup movements listed in
the following paragraph are designed. The most important principle is
to follow the initial attack with another offensive action so that the
initiative is not lost. The key principle here is aggressiveness rather
than a memorized technique. Aggressiveness is the real spirit of the
followup attack. Show no mercy, for the enemy will show none.


502. LIST OF MOVEMENTS

The below listed combinations allow the best transition from one attack
movement to another with the least amount of wasted motion. This
enables the bayonet fighter to stay on the attack without having to
return to the guard position after an unsuccessful initial attack, thus
risking loss of the initiative.

a. Guard, slash, vertical butt stroke or horizontal butt stroke,
recover to guard position.

b. Guard, parry left, vertical butt stroke or horizontal butt stroke,
smash, slash, recover to guard position.

c. Guard, jab, vertical butt stroke, smash, slash, recover to guard
position.

d. Guard, parry right, jab, recover to guard position.

e. Guard, block slash, vertical butt stroke, smash, recover to guard
position.

f. Guard, block vertical butt stroke, slash or jab, horizontal butt
stroke, recover to guard position.

g. Guard, block vertical butt stroke, horizontal slash, vertical butt
stroke, smash, recover to guard position.




SECTION 6: GROUP ATTACK AND DEFENSE


601. GENERAL

a. All the individuals in group actions employ the same individual
movements previously described.

b. Teamwork is important in any endeavor, and especially in fighting.
The bayonet fighting team can use a few simple tactics to take
advantage of superior numbers before the enemy reinforces his position.
Teamwork can also be used to overcome a numerical advantage favoring
the enemy.


602. GROUP ATTACK

a. Two Against One.—Two Marines approach a single enemy. Unable to
anticipate his actions they advance directly forward but neither
converges on him. As the range closes, the enemy will turn his
attention toward one of the two. This Marine advances quickly toward
the enemy and engages him. The other Marine advances quickly toward the
enemy’s exposed flank and kills him. Should the enemy turn to guard
his exposed flank he exposes the other flank, and can be killed by the
Marine who first attacked him. In such a coordinated attack the Marine
who makes the kill is usually the one attacking the exposed flank.
The approach, attack, and kill are made in a very few seconds. The
importance of speed and aggressive action is obvious. (See fig. 23.)

b. Three Against Two.—Three Marines approach two opponents. The Marines
advance directly forward awaiting the enemy’s reaction. Two Marines
will be engaged. The third then moves swiftly to the exposed flank
of one of the enemy, usually the nearest to his position. As soon as
one enemy is killed, the other is attacked swiftly from his exposed
flank by the Marine who can reach him first. Should either enemy being
attacked on the exposed flank turn to defend that flank, he is swiftly
killed by the Marine who was originally making the frontal attack. (See
fig. 24).


603. GROUP DEFENSE

a. One Against Two.—When one Marine is engaged by two enemy opponents,
he immediately dashes to the outboard flank of the nearest enemy.
Should he allow himself to be caught between the two, he will be easily
killed. He always keeps an enemy between himself and the other enemy so
they can be engaged and killed one at a time. A savage attack and quick
disposal of one enemy, before the second can move to the aid of the
first, turns the tide. (See fig. 25.)

[Illustration:

  1. Approach

  2. Contact

  3. Alternate attack

Figure 23.—Two Against One.]

[Illustration:

  1. Approach

  2. Contact

Figure 24.—Three Against Two.]

[Illustration:

  1. Approach

  2. Contact

Figure 25.—One Against Two.]

b. Two Against Three.—When two Marines are engaged by three enemy,
both move to the outboard flanks of the enemy, leaving one enemy in
the middle. Each Marine savagely attacks and disposes of his adversary
before the enemy in the middle can act to help one of his companions.
Once one Marine has defeated his opponent he turns on the lone enemy
in the middle. Again, victory will go the side which acts swiftly and
aggressively. (See fig. 26.)

[Illustration: Two Against Three.

Figure 26.—Two Against Three.]




SECTION 7: TRAINING


701. GENERAL

a. In addition to introducing the student to the offensive and
defensive movements of bayonet fighting, the initial stages of training
should emphasize the development of speed, form, balance, timing,
coordination, and a vicious, aggressive attitude, all important
in bayonet fighting. The instructor works to develop a genuine
determination in his students; i.e., to gain the initiative from the
beginning and move in to kill the opponent. Each student yells and
growls as he executes his practice moves to get into the proper habit.
This gives the student the self-confidence and enthusiasm he needs.
The instructor tries to make the yell spontaneous, if possible, but if
students fail to perform properly, they are encouraged until they do so.

b. Future training rekindles the spirit of aggressiveness. Variety is
employed in training to avoid boredom and useless repetition. The use
of training aids such as the pugil stick and bayonet assault course
provide this variety, and are also extremely valuable as training
vehicles. Bayonet training should be as vigorous as possible in order
to contribute to the physical condition of the student. It should be
emphasized that bayonet fighting is not for the soft and paunchy.


702. DEMONSTRATION AND APPLICATION OF THE BASIC FUNDAMENTALS

a. The recommended sequence for demonstration and application of the
basic fundamentals of bayonet fighting is as follows:

 (1) Guard position and footwork.

 (2) Attack movements.

 (3) Defensive movements.

 (4) Combined movements.

 (5) Group attack and defense.

b. Each position and movement is explained in detail and demonstrated
by the primary instructor. Fundamentals and footwork, as well as attack
and defensive movements, are covered slowly and thoroughly.

c. After a thorough explanation and demonstration, the students move
slowly through everything covered in subparagraph a, above, in slow
motion, by the numbers, until they are thoroughly familiar with what
they have been taught. Speed is increased as the students become more
familiar with the movements until they are being conducted at full
speed. Timing, enthusiasm, and an aggressive spirit are maintained.

d. The whole sequence should be completed for one group of movements
before the next is taught. For example, the student should be
thoroughly familiar with the positions and footwork, and have mastered
them at the normal rate, before he is introduced to the attack
movements.

e. After individual movements have been mastered, combinations and
followup movements are taught. These movements are then practiced
by the students until they become second nature. The most effective
movement to follow another is influenced by the opponent’s reaction.
These movements are stressed and practiced until they become automatic.
The bayonet fighter cannot stop to consider his next move. It is
necessary that the student be able to deliver a forceful, aggressive
series of attack movements, accompanied by proper footwork, without
hesitation or indecision.

f. Practice of the attack and defensive movements against another
student at half speed facilitates correction of errors. The two
students correct one another, and secondary instructors move among the
students, assisting with corrections.

g. Throughout training the student should be relaxed to avoid rigidity.
The weapons should be held firmly, but not tensely. All phases of
bayonet fighting are practiced until they are executed instinctively.
The student should be able to strike at openings without thinking, and
remain in the attack until he has killed his opponent.


703. THE ASSAULT COURSE

a. Purpose.—The bayonet assault course is constructed in order to
achieve the following objectives:

(1) To familiarize the student with situations simulating those with
which he might be confronted in an actual combat situation.

(2) To aid in developing the student’s speed, strength, and endurance.

(3) To challenge the determination and will power of the student. These
qualities are extremely important.

(4) To provide a means for obtaining good bayonet fighting habits.

(5) To develop skill in bayonet fighting and make the various movements
instinctive and second nature.

b. Obstacles.—The model assault course presented in this publication
consists of ten obstacles. They are offered as examples of what can be
used. The number and type of obstacles included in any given course
depend on the ingenuity of the builders and local conditions. These
obstacles are attacked with a mockup rifle which should resemble the
M-14 rifle in weight and dimensions.

(1) Obstacle number 1 represents an enemy in the guard position. The
student executes a parry right, steps forward, and executes a jab. (See
fig. 27.)

[Illustration: Figure 27.—Obstacle 1.]

(2) Obstacle number 2 represents an enemy in the guard position. The
student executes a parry right, steps forward and executes a vertical
butt stroke. (See fig. 28.)

[Illustration: Figure 28.—Obstacle 2.]

(3) Obstacle number 3 represents an opponent in a position best suited
for attack by the smash. The student steps forward and delivers the
smash. (See fig. 29.)

[Illustration: Figure 29.—Obstacle 3.]

(4) Obstacle number 4 is a target for a vertical butt stroke. (See fig.
30.)

(5) Obstacle number 5 represents an opponent running toward the bayonet
fighter. The student executes a jab so that the blade penetrates the
center of the obstacle. The instructor emphasizes the importance of
withdrawing the blade before moving on. (See fig. 31.)

[Illustration: Figure 30.—Obstacle 4.]

[Illustration: Figure 31.—Obstacle 5.]

(6) Obstacle number 6 is a target for a smash. (See fig. 32.)

[Illustration: Figure 32.—Obstacle 6.]

(7) Obstacle number 7 represents an enemy’s head and shoulders
protruding from a foxhole. The student slashes at the tire portion of
the obstacle. (See fig. 33.)

(8) Obstacle number 8 is a target for a horizontal butt stroke. The
student executes the horizontal butt stroke, hitting the bag on top of
the post. (See fig. 34.)

[Illustration: Figure 33.—Obstacle 7.]

(9) Obstacle number 9 represents an enemy behind an embankment. The
student charges over the embankment, turns to face the enemy, executes
a jab, then withdraws. (See fig. 35.)

(10) Obstacle number 10 is a training aid which can be used in
connection with either basic or advanced bayonet drill. It is
inexpensive and versatile. The trainee has his choice of methods of
attack and can utilize all accepted bayonet movements against this
obstacle. It can be used to introduce a “free” movement within an
established course, depending on the individuals speed or position, or
to constitute an entire course, utilizing assistant instructors to call
different methods of attack in order to vary the trainees approach to
the aid. (See fig. 36.)

[Illustration: Figure 34.—Obstacle 8.]

[Illustration: Figure 35.—Obstacle 9.]

c. Construction.—The ten obstacles are constructed from readily
available materials. They consist mostly of old auto tires, canvas, and
2 by 4 inches and 4 by 4 inches lumber. Obstacles 1, 2, and 10 have
moving wooden arms which are not difficult to construct. The obstacles
should be set far enough apart to allow maneuvering between them. The
assault course can be laid out in any available terrain, and should be
at least 200 to 300 meters in length. Rugged terrain provides excellent
physical conditioning facilities. Natural obstacles such as streams,
ridges, thick foliage, etc., can be used to make the course more
difficult. Artificial obstacles such as wire entanglements, log walks,
hurdles, and fences can also be added.

[Illustration: Figure 36.—Obstacle 10 (Combination Obstacle).]

d. Safety Precautions.—Students should first run the assault course
at a moderate pace, and increase their speed as their technique and
physical condition improve. The instructor ensures that discipline
and control are maintained. The instructor and his assistants station
themselves along the course to observe the method of attack and make
necessary corrections. In addition, the following safety precautions
should be observed:

(1) Ensure that the bayonet is securely attached to the weapon before
beginning the assault course.

(2) Caution personnel to remain in the line of obstacles. Serious
injury can result if personnel are permitted to zigzag through the
course.

(3) Do not permit personnel to attack the first obstacle until
preceding personnel have reached the third obstacle.

(4) When the last obstacle is completed, personnel should be directed
to return by specific routes to the designated marshalling area,
remaining at least 5 yards away from the closest obstacle.

e. Demonstration and Application.—The first phase of the assault course
training includes a demonstration of the technique of attacking each
obstacle by the instructor. The instructor then runs the entire course
employing the correct movements on each obstacle. The students then
practice their movements on the individual obstacles. When the students
have gained sufficient proficiency they move through the entire assault
course.


704. THE PUGIL STICK

a. General.—The execution of the movements of bayonet fighting in
response to a verbal command from instructors are kept to a minimum.
This type of training is necessary to teach the movements, but once
they have been learned the student must automatically execute them in
response to the movements of his opponent. There is no substitute for
practical application when learning a skill. Actual bayonet fighting is
not practical because of the hazards involved. However, bouts employing
the pugil stick bear a close resemblance to actual bayonet fights,
and can be employed without serious injury to either contestant.
The student sees for himself the importance of assuming the attack
immediately, as well as the importance of aggressiveness and ferocity.
He sees which combinations of blows are successful, and learns to
understand the result of his making a mistake in an actual bayonet
fight. Here he learns the meaning of the term “kill or be killed.”

[Illustration: Figure 37.—The Pugil Stick Material.]

b. Construction.—See figure 37.

(1) Materials for construction of the pugil stick include the following:

 (a) An octagonal stick 1¾ inches in diameter and 44 inches long.

 (b) Two canvas bags 10 inches long, one 6 inches in diameter and one 8
 inches in diameter.

 (c) Chopped foam rubber and cotton padding.

 (d) A roll of foam rubber 15 inches wide.

 (e) Tape, wire, and tacks.

(2) Method of Construction.

 (a) Cut grooves ½-inch deep in the stick as shown in the diagram (see
 fig. 37). Taper the stick at the hand grips to approximately 1¼ inches
 in diameter.

 (b) Fill the bags with chopped foam rubber and cotton.

 (c) Wire and tack the bags to the end of the stick. Tighten the wire
 into the grooves at the end of the stick. The stick should extend 6
 inches into the bag, leaving 4 inches of overlap and making the total
 length of the pugil stick 52 inches, the length of the M-14 rifle with
 bayonet.

 (d) Cover the wire and tacks with tape.

 (e) Wrap foam rubber around the center of the stick, leaving only the
 6 to 8 inches of tapered hand grip exposed. Secure the foam rubber
 padding with tape.

(3) Size of Pugil Stick.—The pugil stick should be approximately the
same length and weight as the M-14 rifle with bayonet attached. This
enables the bayonet fighter to train with a weapon which closely
approximates the weapon he uses in an actual combat situation.

c. Safety Equipment and Precautions

(1) Whenever engaged in a pugil stick bout, the student should be
equipped with the following:

 (a) A football helmet with full bird cage face mask.

 (b) Lacrosse gloves.

 (c) Protective cup athletic supporter.

(2) Instructors in charge of pugil stick bouts see that proper bayonet
fighting procedures are followed by students engaged in bouts. The
proper bayonet fighting grip is employed at all times. The pugil stick
is not used as a baseball bat. In no instance do the hands leave the
pugil stick. Neither throwing or swinging is allowed. Pugil stick
fighters refrain from hitting their opponent with the center portion of
the pugil stick.

(3) Instructors ensure that protective equipment is properly secured
before the bout begins. Bouts will be stopped whenever one participant
becomes completely defenseless, after a telling blow has been struck,
when equipment becomes loosened or knocked off, or when the pugil stick
is being used improperly. Students are instructed to stop all action
when the whistle is blown.

d. Regulations for Bouts

(1) Students are normally paired off so that opponents are of
approximately equal height and weight.

(2) Each bout is officiated by an instructor with a whistle.

(3) Contests continue until one contestant has scored a killing blow.
A killing blow is one delivered solidly to the head, neck, groin, or
midsection with the blade end of the pugil stick; and to the head,
groin, or neck with the butt end of the stick. If a killing blow is
struck in the first few seconds of the bout, for training purposes
the bout may be continued for a prescribed period of time. The winner
will be the individual who struck the most killing blows in the time
allotted. Time limits may be set by the instructor, taking into
consideration the physical condition of the students and the time
available.

(4) Instructors periodically remind students that basic attack
movements and combinations are most effective. Instructors also
continually emphasize aggressiveness. They ensure that all trainees
yell and growl while engaged in a bout.

(5) Short bouts, with rapid changing of equipment, retains enthusiasm
and interest.

(6) Bouts begin with both contestants in the guard position and about 5
yards apart. (See figs. 38 and 39.)

(7) No score occurs if a student removes either hand from the weapon to
throw or swing at his opponent. (See fig. 40.)

[Illustration: Figure 38.—On Guard With Pugil Stick.]

[Illustration: Figure 39.—Square Off With Pugil Stick.]

[Illustration: Figure 40.—Vertical Butt Stroke With Pugil Stick.]

(8) A round-robin type elimination is effective in getting all students
into bouts, and emphasizing the importance of aggressive action in
winning. The winners of each bout are allowed to fight again after a
brief rest, until they are defeated. This provides one winner in the
end, with appropriate personal recognition.

e. Demonstration and Application.—All movements, offensive, defensive,
and combinations are demonstrated with the pugil stick. The student
is then given the opportunity to go through the movements with the
pugil stick in slow motion, and then at normal speed. After gaining
proficiency in all movements the students are given an opportunity
to practice what they have learned against a target. An artificial
stationary target offering resistance further develops timing and
coordination. Heavy bags, similar to the type used by boxers in
training, can be used effectively to train bayonet fighters. (See
fig. 41.) After the student has attacked the dummies, allowing him
the sensation of attacking a solid target, and practicing the attack
movements, he is then ready for bouts against other students.

[Illustration: Figure 41.—Stationary Targets for Pugil Stick Training.]




INDEX


  Paragraph Page


  A

  Assault course 703 62
    Construction 703c 70
    Demonstration and application 703e 72
    Obstacles 703b 63
      figs. 27-36 63-71
    Purpose 703a 62
    Safety precautions 703d 70

  Attack, group 602 53
    Three against two 602b 54
    Two against one 602a 53


  B

  Bayonet:
    Evolution of 101a 1
    Importance 101c 9

  Bayonet fighting techniques:
    Change of direction 203 18
    Combination movements 501 51
    Development of 101b 4
    Foot movements 204 18
    Group attack 602 53
    Group defense 603 54
    Guard position 202 14
    Individual attack 301 23
    Individual defense 401 43
    Principles of 102 10

  Biddle system 101b(3) 8

  Blocks:
    Against slash 404 46
      fig. 21 49
    Against vertical butt stroke. 405 48
      fig. 22 50


  C

  Change of direction 203 18
    General 203a 18
    Whirl, execution of 203b 18

  Combination movements 501 5

  Combination obstacle fig. 36 71

  Construction of obstacles 703c 70

  Construction of pugil stick 704b 73

  Course, assault 703 62


  D

  Defense, group 603 54
    One against two 603a 54
    Two against three 603b 54

  Direction, change of 203 18


  E

  Evolution of the bayonet 101a 1


  F

  Foot movements 204 18
    General 204a 18
    Shuffle forward 204d 20
      fig. 5 21
    Shuffle left 204c 19
      fig. 4 20
    Shuffle right 204b 19
      fig. 3 19


  G

  Group attack 602 53
    Two against one 602a 53
      fig. 23 55
    Three against two 602b 54
      fig. 24 56

  Group defense 603 54
    One against two 603a 54
      fig. 25 57
    Two against three 603b 54
      fig. 26 58

  Growl 202f 17

  Guard position 202a 14
      figs. 1 & 2 15 & 16
    Position of body 202c 14
    Position of feet 202b 14
    Position of hands 202d 17
    Position of rifle 202e 17


  H

  Horizontal butt stroke 305 34
    Execution figs. 13-15 35-37
    Obstacle fig. 34 69
    Recovery to guard position 305b 34

  Horizontal slash 302b 25


  I

  Importance of bayonet 101c 9

  Individual attack 301 23
    Horizontal butt stroke 305 34
      figs. 13-15 35-37
    Horizontal slash 302b 25
    Jab 306 38
      figs. 16-18 39-41
    Slash 302 23
      figs. 6 & 7 24 & 26
    Smash 304 31
      figs. 11 & 12 32 & 33
    Vertical butt stroke 303 27
      figs. 8-10 28-30

  Individual defense 401 43
    Block against slash fig. 21 49
    Block against vertical butt stroke 405 48
      fig. 22 50
    Parry left 403 44
      fig. 20 47
    Parry right 402 43
      fig. 19 45


  J

  Jab 306 38
    Execution figs. 16-18 39-41
    Obstacles fig. 27 63
      fig. 31 66
      fig. 35 69
    Recovery to guard position 306b 38


  M

  Movements:
    Combination 501 51
    Foot 204 18
      General 204a 18
    Individual attack 301 23


  O

  Obstacles 703b 63
      figs. 27-36 63-71
    Construction of 703c 70


  P

  Parry left 403 44
    fig. 20 47

  Parry right 402 43
    fig. 19 45

  Pugil stick 704 73
    Construction 704b 73
      fig. 37 74
    Employment figs. 38-40 78-80
    Regulations for bouts 704d 76
    Safety equipment and precautions 704c 75


  S

  Seidler, Dr. Armond H. 101b(3) 8

  Slash 302 23
    Execution 302a 23
      figs. 6 & 7 24 & 26
    Obstacle fig. 30 66
    Recovery to guard position 302c 25

  Smash 304 31
    Execution figs. 11 & 12 32 & 33
    Obstacles fig. 29 65
      fig. 32 67
    Recovery to guard position 304b 31


  T

  Training 701 59
    Assault course 703 62
    Demonstration and application, basic principles 702 60
    General 701 59
    Pugil stick 704 73


  V

  Vertical butt stroke 303 27
    Execution figs. 8-10 28-30
    Obstacles fig. 28 64
      fig. 30 66
    Recovery to guard position 303b 27


  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents,
  U.S. Government Printing Office
  Washington, D.C., 20402 - Price 35 cents




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 6 Changed: make a precise parade or calisthentic
            to: make a precise parade or calisthenic

  pg 6 Changed: Assumption of a vicious, aggessive
            to: Assumption of a vicious, aggressive

  pg 17 Changed: temporarily stun the oponent
             to: temporarily stun the opponent





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARINE BAYONET TRAINING ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


