The Project Gutenberg eBook of Memoir on the Dodo (Didus ineptus, Linn.)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Memoir on the Dodo (Didus ineptus, Linn.)

Author: Richard Owen

Contributor: William John Broderip

Release date: April 25, 2025 [eBook #75956]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Taylor and Francis, 1866

Credits: Charlene Taylor, Robert Tonsing, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIR ON THE DODO (DIDUS INEPTUS, LINN.) ***


[Illustration: PLATE. I.

  R Savary pinx.   M&N Hanhart. imp.   J Erxleben lith

  DIDUS.]




                                 MEMOIR
                                   ON
                                THE DODO

                       (_Didus ineptus_, +Linn.+).

                                   BY
                          RICHARD OWEN, F.R.S.,

                                 WITH AN
                         HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION

                               BY THE LATE
                      WILLIAM JOHN BRODERIP, F.R.S.

                                 LONDON:
      PRINTED BY TAYLOR AND FRANCIS, RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET.
                                  1866.




                                   TO

                  THE HON. ADOLPHUS F. O. LIDDELL, Q.C.


  +My dear Neighbour+,

If our accomplished and lamented friend, Mr. +Broderip+, had been
spared to see the evidences of the extinct bird of the Mauritius
described in the following pages, he would probably have taken a more
direct share in the present work, and he certainly would have felt
equal pleasure with myself in inscribing it to you, in whose society we
so often enjoyed pleasant and instructive discourse in the sylvan walks
and tranquil shades of Sheen.

                                           Believe me,
                                               Very sincerely yours,
                                                           RICHARD OWEN.

 Sheen Lodge, Richmond Park,
      August 1866.



                                CONTENTS.


                                                                    Page

  § 1. Historical Introduction                                         1

  § 2. Description of the Skeleton                                    21

           Vertebræ                                                   22

           Ribs                                                       25

           Pelvis                                                     27

           Sternum                                                    29

           Scapular Arch                                              31

           Bones of the Wing                                          32

           Bones of the Leg                                           33

           Skull                                                      35

  § 3. Comparison of the Skeleton                                     41

  § 4. Conclusion                                                     49




                                   ON
                                THE DODO
                       (_Didus ineptus_, +Linn.+).

                     § 1. _Historical Introduction._


The Dodo has long been one of the “Curiosities of Natural History,”
through the singularity of its recorded shape, and the paucity of the
material evidences of the bird. The head and foot in the Ashmolean
Museum at Oxford, and the foot in the British Museum, were all the
parts of the bird known to the author of the admirable article “+Dodo+”
at the date of its publication in the ‘Penny Cyclopædia’[1].

The history of the bird to that date is so conscientiously and
exhaustively worked out by my lamented friend, that, instead of
paraphrasing or amplifying it, I here give it in Mr. Broderip’s own
words.

“_Written and Pictorial Evidence._—In the voyage to the East Indies, in
1598, by Jacob Van Neck and Wybrand van Warwijk (small 4to, Amsterdam,
1648), there is a description of the _Walgh-vogels_ in the Island of
Cerne, now called Mauritius, as being as large as our swans, with large
heads, and a kind of hood thereon; no wings, but, in place of them,
three or four black little pens (pennekens), and their tails consisting
of four or five curled plumelets (pluymkens) of a greyish colour. The
breast is spoken of as very good, but it is stated that the voyagers
preferred some Turtle-doves that they found there. The bird appears
with a tortoise near it (fig. 1), in a small engraving, one of six
which form the prefixed plate.

“In the frontispiece to De Bry (Quinta Pars Indiæ Orientalis, &c.,
M.DCI.), surmounting the architectural design of the titlepage, will be
found, we believe, the earliest engravings of the Dodo. A pair of these
birds stand on the cornice on each side, and the following cut (fig. 2)
is taken from the figure on the left hand.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.

  Tortoise and Walgh-vogel, of the Mauritius (Van Neck and Wybrand,
  1598). From plate 2 of Van Neck’s Voyage.

  Fig. 2.

  Dodo
  (De Bry, 1601).]

“In De Bry’s ‘Descriptio Insulæ Do Cerne a nobis Mauritius dictæ’
is the following account:—‘Cærulean Parrots also are there in great
numbers, as well as other birds; besides which there is another larger
kind, greater than our swans, with vast heads, and one half covered
with a skin, as it were, hooded. These birds are without wings, in
the place of which are three or four rather black feathers (quarum
loco tres quatuorve pennæ nigriores prodeunt). A few curved delicate
ash-coloured feathers constitute the tail. These birds we called
_Walck-Vögel_, because the longer they were cooked the more unfit
for food they became (quod quo longius seu diutius elixarentur, plus
lentescerent et esui ineptiores fierent). Their bellies and breasts
were nevertheless of a pleasant flavour (saporis jucundi) and easy of
mastication. Another cause for the appellation we gave them was the
preferable abundance of Turtle-doves which were of a far sweeter and
more grateful flavour.’ It will be observed that the bill in De Bry’s
figure is comparatively small.

“Clusius, in his ‘Exotica’ (1605), gives a figure, here copied” (note
¹, p. 4), “which, he says, he takes from a rough sketch in a journal of
a Dutch voyager who had seen the bird in a voyage to the Moluccas in
the year 1598.

“The following is Willughby’s translation of Clusius, and the section
is thus headed: ‘The Dodo, called by Clusius _Gallus gallinaceus
peregrinus_, by Nieremberg _Cygnus cucullatus_, by Bontius _Dronte_.’
‘This exotic bird, found by the Hollanders in the island called Cygnæa
or Cerne (that is the Swan Island) by the Portuguese, Mauritius Island
by the Low Dutch, of thirty miles’ compass, famous especially for
black ebony, did equal or exceed a swan in bigness, but was of a far
different shape; for its head was great, covered as it were with a
certain membrane resembling a hood: beside, its bill was not flat
and broad, but thick and long; of a yellowish colour next the head,
the point being black. The upper chap was hooked; in the nether had
a bluish spot in the middle between the yellow and black part. They
reported that it is covered with thin and short feathers, and wants
wings, instead whereof it hath only four or five long black feathers;
that the hinder part of the body is very fat and fleshy, wherein for
the tail were four or five small curled feathers, twirled up together,
of an ash colour. Its legs are thick rather than long, whose upper
part, as far as the knee, is covered with black feathers; the lower
part, together with the feet, of a yellowish colour; its feet divided
into four toes, three (and those the longer) standing forward, the
fourth and shortest backward: all furnished with black claws. After
I had composed and writ down the history of this bird with as much
diligence and faithfulness as I could, I happened to see in the house
of Peter Pauwius, primary professor of physic in the University of
Leyden, a leg thereof cut off at the knee, lately brought over out
of Mauritius his island. It was not very long, from the knee to the
bending of the foot being but little more than four inches, but of a
great thickness, so that it was almost four inches in compass, and
covered with thick-set scales, on the upper side broader, and of a
yellowish colour, on the under (or back side of the leg) lesser and
dusky. The upper side of the toes was also covered with broad scales,
the under side wholly callous. The toes were short for so thick a leg:
for the length of the greatest or middlemost toe to the nail did not
much exceed two inches, that of the other toe next to it scarce came up
to two inches: the back toe fell something short of an inch and a half;
but the claws of all were thick, hard, black, less than an inch long;
but that of the back toe longer than the rest, exceeding an inch. The
mariners, in their dialect, gave this bird the name _Walgh-Vögel_, that
is, a nauseous or yellowish[2] bird; partly because after long boiling
its flesh became not tender, but continued hard and of a difficult
concoction, excepting the breast and gizzard, which they found to be of
no bad relish, partly because they could easily get many Turtle-doves,
which were much more delicate and pleasant to the palate. Wherefore it
was no wonder that in comparison of those they despised this, and said
they could be well content without it. Moreover, they said that they
found certain stones in its gizzard, ‘_and no wonder, for all other
birds, as well as these, swallow stones to assist them in grinding
their meat_.’ Thus far Clusius.

“In the voyage of Jacob Heemskerk and Wolfert Harmanz to the East
Indies, in 1601, 1602, 1603 (small 4to, Amsterdam, 1648), folio 19,
the Dod-aarsen (Dodos) are enumerated among the birds of the Island of
‘Cerne, now Mauritius’; and in the ‘Journal of the East Indian Voyage
of Willem Ysbrantsz Bontekoe van Hoorn, comprising many wonderful
and perilous things that happened to him’—from 1618 to 1625 (small
4to, Utrecht, 1649)—under the head of the ‘Island of Mauritius or
Maskarinas,’ mention is made (page 6) of the Dod-eersen, which had
small wings, but could not fly, and were so fat that they scarcely
could go.

“Herbert, in his Travels (1634), gives a figure or rather figures of
a bird that he calls ‘Dodo,’ and the following account:—‘The Dodo
comes first to our description, here, and in Dygarrois (and no where
else, that ever I could see or heare of, is generated the Dodo). (A
Portuguize name it is, and has reference to her simplenes), a bird
which for shape and rarenesse might be called a Phœnix (wer’t in
Arabia); her body is round and extreame fat, her slow pace begets that
corpulencie; few of them weigh lesse than fifty pound: better to the
eye than the stomack: greasie appetites may perhaps commend them, but
to the indifferently curious nourishment, but prove offensive. Let’s
take her picture: her visage darts forth melancholy, as sensible of
nature’s injurie in framing so great and massie a body to be directed
by such small and complementall wings, as are unable to hoise her from
the ground, serving only to prove her a bird; which otherwise might
be doubted of: her head is variously drest, the one halfe hooded with
downy blackish feathers; the other perfectly naked; of a whitish hue,
as if a transparent lawne had covered it: her bill is very howked and
bends downwards, the thrill or breathing place is in the midst of it;
from which part to the end, the colour is a light greene mixt with a
pale yellow; her eyes be round and small, and bright as diamonds; her
cloathing is of finest downe, such as you see in goslins; her trayne
is (like a China beard) of three or foure short feathers; her legs
thick, and black, and strong; her tallons or pounces sharp; her stomack
fiery hot, so as stones and iron are easily digested in it; in that and
shape, not a little resembling the Africk oestriches: but so much, as
for their more certain difference I dare to give thee (with two others)
her representation.’ (4th ed. 1677[3].)

“Nieremberg’s description (1655) may be considered a copy of that of
Clusius, and indeed his whole work is a mere compilation. As we have
seen above, he names the bird _Cygnus cucullatus_.

“In Tradescant’s catalogue (‘Musæum Tradescantianum; or, a
Collection of Rarities preserved at South Lambeth, near London, by
John Tradescant,’ London, 1656, 12mo), we find among the ‘Whole
Birds’—‘Dodar, from the island Mauritius; it is not able to flie being
so big.’ That this was a Dodo there can be no doubt; for we have the
testimony of an eye-witness, whose ornithological competency cannot be
doubted, in the affirmative. Willughby at the end of his section on
‘The Dodo,’ and immediately beneath his translation of Bontius, has
the following words: ‘We have seen this bird dried, or its skin stuft
in Tradescant’s cabinet.’ We shall, hereafter, trace this specimen to
Oxford.

“Jonston (1657) repeats the figure of Clusius, and refers to his
description and that of Herbert.

“Bontius, edited by Piso (1658), writes as follows: ‘_De Dronte_ aliis
_Dod-aers_.’ After stating that among the islands of the East Indies
is that which is called Cerne by some, but Mauritius ‘a nostratibus,’
especially celebrated for its ebony, and that in the said island a bird
‘miræ conformationis’ called _Dronte_ abounds, he proceeds to tell
us—we take Willughby’s translation—that it is ‘for bigness of mean
size between an ostrich and a turkey, from which it partly differs
in shape, and partly agrees with them, especially with the African
ostriches, if you consider the rump, quills, and feathers: so that it
was like a pigmy among them, if you regard the shortness of its legs.
It hath a great, ill-favoured head, covered with a kind of membrane
resembling a hood; great black eyes; a bending, prominent, fat neck; an
extraordinary long, strong, bluish-white bill, only the ends of each
mandible are of a different colour, that of the upper black, that of
the nether yellowish, both sharp-pointed and crooked. It gapes huge
wide as being naturally very voracious. Its body is fat, round, covered
with soft grey feathers, after the manner of an ostriches: in each
side, instead of hard wing-feathers or quills, it is furnished with
small, soft-feathered wings, of a yellowish ash-colour; and behind, the
rump, instead of a tail, is adorned with five small curled feathers
of the same colour. It hath yellow legs, thick, but very short; four
toes in each foot, solid, long, as it were scaly, armed with strong,
black claws. It is a slow-paced and stupid bird, and which easily
becomes a prey to the fowlers. The flesh, especially of the breast, is
fat, esculent, and so copious, that three or four Dodos will sometimes
suffice to fill an hundred seamens’ bellies. If they be old, or not
well boiled, they are of difficult concoction, and are salted and
stored up for provision of victual. There are found in their stomachs
stones of an ash colour, of divers figures and magnitudes; yet not bred
there, as the common people and seamen fancy, but swallowed by the
bird; as though by this mark also nature would manifest that these fowl
are of the ostrich kind, in that they swallow any hard things, though
they do not digest them.’

“It appears from Adam Olearius (Die Gottorfische Kunst Kammer, 1666),
that there was a head to be seen in the Gottorf Museum; but the figure
(tab. 13. f. 5) is very like that of Clusius. It is mentioned as the
head of the _Walch-Vogel_, and Clusius is referred to. In the plate the
head is shaded, and has a more finished appearance: the rest of the
bird is in outline[4].

“Grew (‘Musæum Regalis Societatis; or a catalogue and description of
the natural and artificial rarities belonging to the Royal Society,’
London, folio, 1681), at p. 68, thus describes the bird which is the
subject of our inquiry. ‘The leg of a Dodo; called _Cygnus cucullatus_
by Nierembergius; by Clusius, _Gallus gallinaceus peregrinus_; by
Bontius called _Dronte_, who saith that by some it is called (in
Dutch) _Dod-aers_, largely described in Mr. Willughby’s Ornithol. out
of Clusius and others. He is more especially distinguished from other
birds by the membranous hood on his head, the greatness and strength
of his bill, the littleness of his wings, his bunchy tail, and the
shortness of his legs. Abating his head and legs, he seems to be much
like an ostrich, to which also he comes near as to the bigness of his
body. He breeds in Mauris’s Island. The leg here preserved is covered
with a reddish-yellow scale. Not much above four inches long, yet
above five in thickness, or round about the joints, wherein, though
it be inferior to that of an Ostrich or Cassowary, yet, joined with
its shortness, may render it of almost equal strength.’ At p. 73,
there is the following notice:—‘The head of the Man of War, called
also Albitrosse; supposed by some to be the head of a Dodo, but it
seems doubtful. That there is a bird called the Man of War is commonly
known to our seamen; and several of them who have seen the head here
preserved, do affirm it to be the head of that bird, which they
describe to be a very great one, the wings whereof are eight feet over.
And Ligon (Hist. of Barbad. p. 61), speaking of him, saith, that he
will commonly fly out to sea to see what ships are coming to land, and
so return. Whereas the Dodo is hardly a volatile bird, having little
or no wings, except such as those of the Cassowary and the Ostrich.
Besides, although the upper beak of this bill doth much resemble that
of the Dodo, yet the nether is of a quite different shape; so that
this either is not the head of a Dodo, or else we have nowhere a
true figure of it.’ Grew then gives a very lengthened description of
the skull which is figured by him (tab. 6), and intituled ‘Head of
the Albitros,’ as it doubtless was. The leg above mentioned is that
now preserved in the British Museum, where it was deposited with the
other specimens described by Grew, when the Royal Society gave their
‘rarities’ to that national establishment. Grew was a well qualified
observer, and much of this description implies observation and
comparison; indeed, though he does not refer to it, there is no reason
for supposing that Grew was not familiar with Tradescant’s specimen.

“Charleton also (Onomasticon, 1688) speaks of the Dodo Lusitanorum
(_Cygnus cucullatus_, Willughby and Ray), and asserts that the Museum
of the Royal Society of London contained a leg of the Dodo. This was
evidently the leg above alluded to.

“We now proceed to trace the specimen which was in the Musæum
Tradescantianum. There were, it seems, three Tradescants, grandfather,
father, and son. The two former are said to have been gardeners to
Queen Elizabeth, and the latter to Charles I. There are two portraits
to the ‘Musæum,’ one of ‘Joannes Tradescantus pater,’ and the other of
‘Joannes Tradescantus filius,’ by Hollar. These two appear to have been
the collectors: for John Tradescant, the son, writes in his address,
‘to the ingenious reader’ that ‘he was resolved to take a catalogue
of those varieties and curiosities which my father had scedulously
collected and my selfe with continued diligence have augmented, and
hitherto preserved together.’ This John Tradescant, the son, must have
been the Tradescant with whom Elias Ashmole boarded for a summer when
Ashmole agreed to purchase the collection, which was said to have been
conveyed to Ashmole by deed of gift from Tradescant and his wife.
Tradescant died soon after, and Ashmole, in 1662, filed a bill in
Chancery for a delivery of the curiosities. The cause is stated to have
come to a hearing in 1664; and, in 1674, Mrs. Tradescant delivered up
the collection pursuant to a decree in Chancery, and afterwards (April,
1678, some say) was found drowned in her own pond. Ashmole added to
the collection, and presented it to the University of Oxford, where it
became the foundation of the Ashmolean Museum. That the entire ‘Dodar’
went to Oxford with the rest of Tradescant’s curiosities there can be
no doubt. Hyde (Religionis Veterum Persarum, &c., Historia, 1700) makes
particular mention of it as existing in the Museum at Oxford. There,
according to Mr. Duncan, it was destroyed in 1755 by order of the
visitors, and he thus gives the evidence of its destruction:—

“‘In the Ashmolean Catalogue, made by Ed. Llhwyd, Musæi Procustos,
1684 (Plott being the keeper), the entry of the bird is, “No. 29.
_Gallus gallinaceus peregrinus_, Clusii,” &c. In a Catalogue made
subsequently to 1755, it is stated “That the numbers from 5 to 46,
being decayed, were ordered to be removed at a meeting of the majority
of the visitors, Jan. 8, 1755.” Among these of course was included the
Dodo, its number being 29. This is further shown by a new Catalogue,
completed in 1756, in which the order of the visitors is recorded
as follows: “Illa quibus nullus in margine assignatur numerus a
Musæo subducta sunt cimelia, annuentibus Vice-Cancellario aliisque
Curatoribus ad ea lustranda convocatis, die Januarii 8vo, +a.d.+ 1755.”
The Dodo is one of those which are here without the number.’ (Duncan,
“On the Dodo,” Zool. Journ. vol. iii. p. 559.)

“We now come to the celebrated painting in the British Museum, a copy
of which, by the kind assistance of the officers of the zoological
department, who have given us every assistance in prosecuting this
inquiry, and who had it taken down for the purpose, we present to our
readers[5].

“It has been stated that the painting came into the possession of Sir
Hans Sloane, president of the Royal Society, and that it was bought
at his sale by Edwards, who, after publishing a plate from it in his
Gleanings, presented it to the Royal Society, whence it passed, as well
as the foot, into the British Museum. But Mr. Gray informs us that the
foot only came with the museum of the Royal Society described by Grew;
and that the picture was an especial gift from Edwards. Edwards’s copy
seems to have been made in 1760, and he himself says—‘The original
picture was drawn in Holland from the living bird brought from St.
Maurice’s Island, in the East Indies, in the early times of the
discovery of the Indies by the way of the Cape of Good Hope. It was
the property of the late Sir Hans Sloane to the time of his death; and
afterwards becoming my property I deposited it in the British Museum as
a great curiosity. The above history of the picture I had from Sir Hans
Sloane and the late Dr. Mortimer, secretary to the Royal Society.’

“M. Morel (Ecrivain Principal des Hôpitaux au Port-Louis de l’Isle de
France) writes as follows in his paper ‘Sur les oiseaux monstrueux
nommés Dronte, Dodo, Cygne Capuchonné, Solitaire, et Oiseau de Nazare,
et sur la petite Isle de Sable à 50 lieues environ de Madagascar.’
‘These birds, so well described in the second volume of the ‘History
of Birds,’ by M. le Comte de Buffon, and of which M. de Borame has
also spoken in his ‘Dictionary of Natural History,’ under the names
of Dronte, Dodo, Hooded Swan (Cygne Capuchonné), Solitary or Wild
Turkey (Dinde sauvage) of Madagascar, have never been seen in the
isles of France, Bourbon, Rodriguez, or even the Seychelles lately
discovered, during more than sixty years since when these places have
been inhabited and visited by French colonists. The oldest inhabitants
assure every one that these monstrous birds have been always unknown
to them.’ After some remarks that the Portuguese and Dutch who first
overran these islands may have seen some very large birds, such as
Emeus or Cassowaries, &c., and described them each after his own manner
of observing, M. Morel thus proceeds: ‘However this may be, it is
certain that for nearly an age (depuis près un siècle) no one has here
seen an animal of this species. But it is very probable that before
the islands were inhabited, people might have been able to find some
species of very large birds, heavy and incapable of flight, and that
the first mariners who sojourned there soon destroyed them from the
facility with which they were caught. This was what made the Dutch
sailors call the bird ‘Oiseau de dégoût’ (Walck-Voegel), because they
were surfeited with the flesh of it.... But among all the species of
birds which are found on this isle of sand and on all the other islets
and rocks which are in the neighbourhood of the Isle of France, modern
navigators have never found anything approaching to the birds above
named, and which may be referred to the number of species which may
have existed, but which have been destroyed by the too great facility
with which they are taken, and which are no longer found excepting upon
islands or coasts entirely uninhabited. At Madagascar, where there are
many species of birds unknown in these islands, none have been met with
resembling the description above alluded to.’ (Observations sur la
Physique pour l’an 1778, tom. xii. p. 154, notes.)

“Mr. Duncan thus concludes his paper above alluded to:—‘Having applied,
through the medium of a friend, to C. Telfair, Esq., of Port Louis,
in the Mauritius, a naturalist of great research, for any information
he could furnish or procure relating to the former existence of the
Dodo in that island, I obtained only the following partly negative
statement:—

“‘That there is a very general impression among the inhabitants that
the Dodo did exist at Rodriguez, as well as in the Mauritius itself;
but that the oldest inhabitants have never seen it, nor has the bird
or any part of it been preserved in any museum or collection formed in
those islands, although some distinguished amateurs in natural history
have passed their lives on them, and formed extensive collections.
And with regard to the supposed existence of the Dodo in Madagascar,
although Mr. Telfair had not received, at the time of his writing to
Europe, a reply to a letter on the subject which he had addressed to a
gentleman resident on that island, yet he stated that he had not any
great expectations from that quarter; as the Dodo was not mentioned
in any of his voluminous manuscripts respecting that island, which
contained the travels of persons who had traversed Madagascar in all
directions, many of them having no other object in view than that of
extending the bounds of natural history.’

“We close this part of the case with the evidence of one evidently well
qualified to judge, and whose veracity there is no reason to doubt. If
this evidence be, as we believe it to be, unimpeachable, it is clear
not only that the Dodo existed, but that it was publicly exhibited in
London. The lacunæ in the print represent the spaces occasioned by a
hole burnt in the manuscript.

“In the ‘Sloane MSS.’ (No. 1839, 5, p. 108, Brit. Mus.) is the
following interesting account by L’Estrange in his observations on
Sir Thomas Browne’s ‘Vulgar Errors.’ It is worthy of note that the
paragraph immediately follows one on the ‘Estridge’ (Ostrich).

“‘About 1638, as I walked London streets I _saw the_ picture of a
strange fowl hong out upon a cloth canvas and myselfe with one or two
more Gen. in company went in to see it. It was kept in a chamber, and
was a great fowle somewhat bigger than the largest Turkey Cock and so
legged and footed but stouter and thicker and of a more erect shape,
coloured before like the breast of a yong Cock Fesan (pheasant), and on
the back of dunn or deare coulour. The keeper called it a Dodo and in
the ende of a chimney in the chamber there lay an heap of large pebble
stones whereof hee gave it many in our sight, some as big as nutmegs,
and the keeper told us shee eats them (conducing to digestion) and
though I remember not how farre the keeper was questioned therein yet I
am confident that afterwards she cast them all agayne[6].’

“_Evidence arising from Remains._—The only existing recent remains
attributed to the Dodo are, a leg (fig. 4) in the British Museum,
and a head (fig. 3) (a cast of which is in the British Museum), and
a leg in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford, the relics most probably of
Tradescant’s bird. Whether the leg formerly in the museum of Pauw be
that at present in the British Museum may be, perhaps, doubtful, though
we think with Mr. Gray that they are probably identical; but that the
specimen in the British Museum did not belong to Tradescant’s specimen
is clear, for it existed in the collection belonging to the Royal
Society when Tradescant’s ‘Dodar’ was complete.

“In the ‘Annales des Sciences’ (tome xxi. p. 103, Sept 1830) will
be found an account of an assemblage of fossil bones, then recently
discovered, under a bed of lava, in the Isle of France, and sent to the
Paris Museum. They almost all belonged to a large living species of
land-tortoise, called _Testudo indica_, but amongst them were the head,
sternum, and humerus of the Dodo. ‘M. Cuvier,’ adds Mr. Lyell in his
‘Principles of Geology,’ ‘showed me these valuable remains at Paris,
and assured me that they left no doubt in his mind that the huge bird
was one of the gallinaceous tribe[7].’”

[Illustration: Fig. 3.

  Head of Dodo (specimen in the Oxford Museum), one-third nat. size.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.

  Foot of Dodo (specimen in the British Museum), one-third nat. size.]

The bones in question were obtained from a cavern in the Island of
Rodriguez (Desjardins, Analyse des Travaux de la Soc. d’Hist. Nat. de
l’Ile Maurice, 2ᵈᵉ année), and belong to the Solitaire (_Pezophaps_),
a large extinct brevipennate bird, allied to the Dodo. The other
evidences from remains, cited by Broderip, also relate to the Solitaire.

Such was the history of the Dodo in 1837.

In the following year I visited Holland, chiefly with a view to
ascertain whether there might possibly be any remnant of the bird
preserved in the Natural History Museums of that country, and to
collect for my friend whatever other evidence, material, written or
pictorial, might have escaped his assiduous researches.

My visits to the museums at Leyden, Amsterdam, Utrecht, and the Hague,
during which I received every requisite aid from the accomplished
Professors and Curators, were productive of only negative results.
The little other information I was able to obtain was communicated to
Mr. Broderip, who incorporated it in the following “Supplement to his
History.”


    “_Additional evidence relative to the Dodo. By_ +W. J. Broderip+,
                             _Esq., F.R.S._

  “The interest which attaches to any communication relative to an
  extinct, and, at one time, a doubted species, must be my apology
  for offering the following addition to the evidences of the
  existence and habits of the Dodo.

  “My old and valued friend Professor Owen presented me, on his
  return from Holland some time since, with a short thick volume,
  bearing on its titlepage (not without black letter) the following
  promise:—

  “‘C. Plinii Secundi Des wijdt-vermaerden Natuurkondigers vijf
  Boecken.


                        _Handelen van de Nature._

      I. Van de Menschen.
     II. Van de viervoetige en Kruypende Dieren.
    III. Van de Vogelen.
     IV. Van de Kleyne Beestjes of Ongedierten.
      V. Van de Visschen, Oesters, Kreeften, &c.

  “‘Hier zijn by-gevoeght de Schriften van verscheyden andere oude
  Authueren de Natuur der Dieren aengaende. En nu in desen laetsen
  Druck wel het vierde part vermeerdert, uyt verscheyden nieuwe
  Schrijvers en eygen oudervindinge: en met veel Kopere Platen
  verziert t’Amsterdam, By +Abraham Wolfgangh+, 1662.’

  “The frontispiece presents the artist’s notion of the Garden of
  Eden, with a very Dutch Adam and Eve, the latter with the apple
  in her hand, while the serpent twined round the tree looks sly
  and satisfied. Our first parents are surrounded by beasts, and in
  the foreground is represented a piece of water with waterfowl and
  ‘ill-shaped fishes.’

  “The superscription is ‘C. Plinius S. Van de Menschen, Beesten,
  Vogelen en Visschen.’

  “Mr. Strickland, in his elaborate work on ‘The Dodo and its
  Kindred[8],’ in which he has done me the honour to adopt the
  arrangement and the information collected in my article ‘Dodo,’ in
  the ‘Penny Cyclopædia[9],’ gives some addenda in his postscript
  to Part I. of his and Dr. Melville’s book. ‘The first of these,’
  writes Mr. Strickland, ‘is a rare edition of Bontekoe’s Voyage,
  kindly communicated to me by Dr. Bandinel, the Bodleian Librarian,
  entitled “Journael van de acht-jarige avontuerlijcke Reyse van
  Willem Ysbrantsz Bontekoe van Hoorn, gedaen nae Oost-Indien,”
  published in quarto at Amsterdam, by Gillis Joosten Zaagman. There
  is no date; but from a narrative introduced at the end, it must be
  subsequent (probably by a year or two) to 1646. The narrative is
  nearly a verbatim version of the other Dutch editions of Bontekoe;
  and the only variation of text which concerns us, is in the
  statement that the underside of the Dodo dragged along the ground,
  which is here qualified thus:—“sleepte haer de neers _by na_ (i.
  e. _almost_) langs de Aerde.” But what gives a peculiar interest
  to this volume is, that it contains (alone of all the editions of
  Bontekoe which I have seen) a figure of the Dodo, which I here
  present.’ Then follows the cut.

  “‘This highly ludicrous representation,’ continues Mr. Strickland,
  ‘is more like a fighting cock than a Dodo; and the black letter
  of the Dutch text omits to tell us whether this design was due to
  the pencil of Bontekoe or his publisher Zaagman, or whether it was
  copied from some contemporary painting now forgotten. But there can
  be no doubt that this figure refers to the true Dodo of Mauritius,
  and not to the “Solitaire” of Bourbon, with which Bontekoe
  confounded it.

  “‘We may regret that the rudeness of the original woodcut leaves
  us in the dark as to the nature of the object on which the Dodo
  appears about to feed. This figure would pass equally well for a
  testaceous mollusk, or for an arboreal fruit; so that the problem
  of the Dodo’s food seems as far from a solution as ever.’

  “In Wolfgangh’s publication, p. 480, is the following description:—

  “‘Op’t Eylandt Mauritius in Oost-Indien, als mede op sommige
  andere plaetsen gelijck mede in West-Indien, vindt men voegels soo
  groot als Swanen, die men Dodaersen of Dronten noemt, sy hebben
  groote hoofden, en daer op een velleken in manier van een Kapken,
  sy hebben geen vleugels, dan in plaetsvan dien, 3 of 4 swarte
  pennekens, en daer haer staert behoorde te staen, daer Zijn 4 of 5
  gekrulde Pluymkens, van graeuwachtige verwe. Sy hebben een dicke
  ronde Naers, daer uyt het schijnt, dat haer de naem van Dodaers
  toe gekomen is; in de maegh hebben sy gemeenlijck een Steen van
  een vuyst groot, dese is bruyn, graeuw van verwe, en vol gaetkens,
  en hollingheydt, doch soo hart als grauwe Bentemeer-steen. Het
  Boots-volck van _Jacob van Neck_, noemden se Walgh-vogels, om dat
  se die niet recht gaer of murrruw konden koken: of om datse soo
  veel Tortel-duyven konden bekomen, die leckerder smaeckten, datse
  van dese Dod-aersen de walgh kregen. Aen 3 of 4 van dese Vogels had
  al’t Scheeps volck van een Schip, voor een maeltijdt genoegh t’
  eeten: Dese Dod-aersen hebbense oock ingesouten en op de reys mede
  genomen.’

  “This description may be thus rendered:—

  “‘In the Island of Mauritius in the East Indies, as also in sundry
  other places, likewise in the West Indies, men find birds as big as
  swans, which they call _Dod-aerses_ or _Drontes_. They have large
  heads, upon the top of which is a skin (a little skin-membrane) in
  the shape of a cap (little cap). They have no wings, but in the
  place of them there are three or four black feathers; and there
  where the tail should be, there are instead four or five curling
  plumes of a greyish colour. They have a thick round rump, and
  from this it appears they got the name of Dod-aerses. In their
  stomachs they have commonly a stone as big as a fist; this stone
  is of a brown-grey colour, and full of little holes and hollows,
  but as hard as the grey Bentemer stone. The boat’s crew of _Jacob
  van Neck_ called them Walgh-vogels (surfeit birds), because they
  could not cook them till they were done, or make them tender; or
  because they were able to get so many turtle-doves which had a much
  more pleasant flavour, so that they took a disgust to these birds.
  Likewise it is said that three or four of these birds are enough
  to afford a whole ship’s company one full meal. Indeed they salted
  down some of them, and carried them with them on the voyage.’

  “At the top of the page in which this passage commences is
  printed ‘_Van de Dodaersen_.’ And immediately below it and above
  the description is a copper-plate of the bird, superscribed
  ‘_Dod-aers_,’ in engraved italics.

  “The engraving of the bird is identical in position and accessories
  with the woodcut given by Mr. Strickland; but the sharpness of
  the work and the nature of the plate make the whole much clearer.
  The object at which the Dodo is looking, as if about to feed,
  is manifestly a testaceous mollusk with a turbinated shell, and
  between that and the raised foot of the bird is a half-buried spiny
  _Echinus_.

  “The locality on which the Dodo is walking has the appearance of a
  strand which the tide has left dry.

  “Wolfgangh’s account confirms the opinion which I hazarded in the
  article ‘Dodo’ in the ‘Penny Cyclopædia.’

  “‘As to the stories of the disgusting quality of the flesh of the
  bird found and eaten by the Dutch, they will weigh but little
  in the scale when we take the expression to be, what it really
  was, indicative of a comparative preference for the turtle-doves
  there found, after feeding on Dodos _usque ad nauseam_. “Always
  partridges” has become proverbial, and we find from Lawson how
  a repetition of the most delicious food palls. “We cooked our
  supper,” says that traveller, “but having neither bread nor salt,
  our fat turkeys began to be loathsome to us; although we were never
  wanting of a good appetite, yet a continuance of one diet made us
  weary;” and again, “By the way our guide killed more turkeys, and
  two polecats, which he eat, esteeming them before fat turkeys.”’

  “It does not follow that because the Dodo is represented as looking
  at the _frutti di mari_, he is about to devour them. But if it
  be granted he is, the admission would not militate against the
  opinion of those who would place the Dodo between the Struthious
  and Gallinaceous birds. It is well known that the turkeys in
  America come down to the shore and feed upon the ‘fiddler’ crabs;
  and there would be nothing extraordinary in a quisquilious feeder,
  such as the Dodo probably was, varying its fruit and vegetable
  diet occasionally by resorting to such animal substances as it
  might find on the strand. Common poultry eagerly pick up insects
  and slugs in the fields, and, in the neighbourhood of tidal rivers
  and estuaries, may be seen availing themselves of the smaller
  _mollusca_ and _crustacea_ left by the retreating tide.

  “In my article ‘Struthionidæ[10]’ under the section ‘Didus,’ is
  inserted the following extract from a letter written to me by
  Professor Owen:—

  “‘Whilst at the Hague in the summer of 1848, I was much struck
  with the minuteness and accuracy with which the exotic species of
  animals had been painted by Savery and Breughel, in such subjects
  as _Paradise_, _Orpheus charming the beasts_, &c., in which scope
  was allowed for grouping together a great variety of animals.
  Understanding that the celebrated menagerie of Prince Maurice had
  afforded the living models to those artists, I sat down one day
  before Savery’s _Orpheus and the beasts_, to make a list of the
  species, which the picture evinced that the artist had had the
  opportunity to study alive. Judge of my surprise and pleasure in
  detecting in a dark corner of the picture (which is badly hung
  between two windows), the Dodo beautifully finished, showing for
  example, though but three inches long, the auricular circle of
  feathers, the scutation of the tarsi, and the loose structure of
  the caudal plumes. In the number and proportions of the toes and in
  general form, it accords with Edwards’s oil-painting in the British
  Museum; and I conclude that the miniature must have been copied
  from the study of a living bird, which, it is most probable, formed
  part of the Mauritian menagerie.’

  “I little thought, when, with his permission, I published this
  graphic product of my kind friend’s pen, what was in store for
  me. Not long afterwards, a friend informed me that he had seen a
  picture at a dealer’s painted by one of the Saverys, and that he
  was pretty sure there was a Dodo in one corner of it. I sent for
  the picture, and there, sure enough, in the right-hand corner, and
  consequently to the left of the spectator, was the bird, in all the
  beauty of its ugliness. The Dodo stands on one foot with its back
  to the spectator, and turning round its head, which is represented
  with the huge bill picking the other uplifted foot. Like all the
  rest of the birds in this picture, which bears the name of Roland
  Savery, the Dodo is highly finished. The picture is now in my
  possession[11].”

The figure 2 in Plate I. is a faithful copy of the bird as represented
in it.

Whilst on a visit to Sion House I was unexpectedly gratified by
finding, in a small oil-painting in the long gallery, an unequivocal
and original representation of the Dodo, in an attitude different
from that of any of the figures of the living bird by Roland Savery,
and evidently by another master. I lost no time in communicating
this additional evidence of the extinct bird to Mr. Broderip, and
in obtaining the permission of my noble host to make such use of the
painting as might best subserve the interests of Natural History. Mr.
Broderip communicated to the Zoological Society the following:—

    “_Notice of an Original Painting, including a Figure of the Dodo,
                          in the Collection of
          His Grace the Duke of Northumberland, at Sion House._

  [Illustration]

  “Professor Owen, at whose disposal the Duke of Northumberland
  placed the following additional pictorial evidence of the existence
  of the Dodo in the seventeenth century, has requested me to draw
  the attention of this Society to the highly interesting picture
  which the Duke has been so good as to send for the inspection
  of the Fellows. The size of the picture, which is in the finest
  preservation, is thirty-two inches by nineteen. It is executed
  in oil, and bears the following monogram and date. Mr. William
  Russell, with his usual discernment, detected in this monogram the
  signatures of Jean Goeimare and Jean David de Heem, and proved
  the correctness of his judgment by a reference to Brulliot[12].
  Jean Goeimare, who is not noticed by Descamps, Bryan, Sandrart,
  or Houbraken, is described by Brulliot as a Flemish artist who
  flourished at the commencement of the seventeenth century, and
  painted landscapes with many animals, executed with great care,
  but in rather a dry manner[13]. Of De Heem, the celebrated painter
  of still life, it would be superfluous to say anything. We may
  conclude, then, that in this joint production the landscape and
  animals were painted by Goeimare, and the shells by De Heem.

  [Illustration: Fig. 5.

    Dodo (from the painting by Goeimare, 1627, in Sion House).]

  “In this picture, which seems to have been intended as a record
  of rarities, the foreground represents a sea-shore from which
  the tide has retired, leaving empty shells of the following
  genera:—_Nautilus_, _Pteroceras_, _Strombus_, _Triton_, _Pyrula_,
  _Cassis_, _Cypræa_, _Conus_, _Mitra_, _Turbo_, _Nerita_, _Mytilus_,
  _Ostrea_, &c. Behind, on elevated ground, are two Ostriches; and
  below, to the right of the spectator, the Dodo is represented as
  in the act of picking up something from the strand” (fig. 5). “The
  head and body of the bird, covering an area as large as the palm
  of a man’s hand, are seen; but the legs are hidden. The painter of
  the Dodo, in _my_ picture” (Pl. I. fig. 2), “has given the only
  complete foreshortened back view of the bird known to me. In the
  Duke’s picture the head and body are presented to the spectator on
  a larger scale; and I have nowhere seen the hood or ridge at the
  base of the bill, from which the bird obtained the name of _Cygnus
  cucullatus_, so clearly represented. Near the Dodo are a Smew and
  other aquatic birds, and further off Hoopoes and Terns. In the
  distance is the ocean, with a sea-monster awaiting the attack of
  Perseus, who descends on a winged steed to the rescue of Andromeda
  chained to a rock. Those who have had occasion to describe and
  figure new species of Testacea, know how difficult it is to find
  a draughtsman who can give a correct design of the shell to be
  represented. Unless the artist, like Mr. G. B. Sowerby, jun., is
  aware of the internal structure of the shell, and acquainted with
  its organization, a lamentable failure is generally the result.
  In the picture before us, with one exception—and even in that
  the specimen may have been distorted—so accurate was the eye
  of the painter, that if he had been aware of the organization
  of each shell—knowledge which he probably had not—he could not
  have represented the objects more correctly. The _Nautili_[14],
  _Strombus gigas_, _Triton_, and _Pyrula_ are painted with great
  breadth and power, and all are drawn and coloured with wonderful
  truth; indeed a conchologist may name every species. One of the
  _Nautili_ is partially uncoated, to show the nacre, and the other
  dissected, to display the concamerations. None of the shells have
  the epidermis, and all are of the natural size. The artificial
  condition of these subjects, and especially of the _Nautili_,
  is, it must be allowed, rather out of place in an assemblage of
  testaceans left on the sands by the retired tide, unless we are
  to suppose that the sea-nymphs had been amusing themselves by
  polishing the specimens and displaying the internal structure of
  one of them; but this very treatment shows that the designs were
  accurately made from real objects then considered as rarities. With
  the exception of the Dodo, none of the natural objects represented
  are now rare. The shells, especially those whose _habitats_ are
  the seas of the Antilles, are at present very common; but at the
  date of the picture—the second year of the reign of our first
  Charles—the natural productions of the West Indies were not well
  known, and were, comparatively, very scarce. With the shells on the
  shore is the cranium of a carnivorous quadruped, apparently of the
  family _Canidæ_. The monster-cetacean in the distance has evidently
  no chance with the avenger who is coming down upon him mounted on a
  winged steed. But Pegasus, who, with other prodigies, sprang from
  the blood that dropped from Medusa’s head, as the conqueror who had
  cut it off with his harpe traversed the air with his gory trophy,
  immediately winged its flight to Helicon, there to become the pet
  of the Muses. The best version of this mythological story relates,
  that when Perseus afterwards killed the sea-monster and delivered
  Andromeda on the coast of Ethiopia, he effected his purpose by
  raising himself in the air through the aid of the wings and talaria
  given to him by Mercury, and not with the help of the winged horse
  on which most of the painters mount him.

  “Professor Owen informs me that Roland Savery’s picture containing
  the Dodo, in the Berlin collection, bears the date of 1626; and
  that the colour of the Dodo in the Duke of Northumberland’s picture
  resembles that of the portrait of the bird, of life size, by the
  same painter, now at Oxford. L’Estrange describes the hue of the
  back of the living Dodo which he saw exhibited in London ‘about
  1638,’ as of ‘dunn or deare colour.’”

The picture of the Dodo at Berlin by R. Savery, to which Mr. Broderip
refers, is copied in figure 1, Plate I. Another figure of the bird,
by the same artist, is introduced into a painting in the Imperial
Collection of the Belvedere at Vienna. Fig. 3, Plate I. of the present
work, is from the copy of this picture, transmitted by Dr. Tschudi to
Mr. Strickland, and given at p. 30 of the ‘Dodo and its Kindred.’ The
date of the picture is 1628.

We have thus evidence of figures of the bird being introduced into
paintings executed during the years 1626, 1627, and 1628. The
different attitudes and life-like actions of the Dodo, in these
representations, indicate that the artists had a living model before
them. Their original studies may, indeed, have been executed at some
period antecedent to the dates of the paintings into the subjects of
which this rare and curious bird is introduced; but the capital fact
remains, viz. that the figures given in Plate I. faithfully represent
the shape, colour, and attitudes of the now extinct brevipennate bird
of the Mauritius. Different conjectures have been propounded as to the
time, place, and other circumstances under which Roelandt Savery and
Jean Goeimare were enabled to execute their drawings or studies of the
living Dodo, and I had the satisfaction to find that Mr. Strickland
concurred in the conclusion at which I arrived after my researches in
Holland into the history and evidences of the bird.

“As Roland Savery was born in 1576, he was twenty-three years old when
Van Neck’s expedition returned to Holland, and as we are told by De Bry
that the Dutch brought home a Dodo on that occasion, it is possible
enough that Savery may have taken the portrait of this individual,
and that the design thus made may have been copied by himself and by
his nephew John in their later pictures. Or if we feel disposed to
doubt the correctness of De Bry’s statement, we may yet suppose, with
Professor Owen, that the menagerie of Prince Maurice supplied the
living prototype for Savery’s pencil. This opinion is corroborated by
the tradition recorded by Edwards, that the picture in the British
Museum was drawn in Holland from the living bird. It is far more
probable than the conjecture of Dr. Hamel (Bull. Ac. Petersb. vol. v.
p. 317), that Savery’s pictures were copied from the Dodo exhibited in
London, as this individual must in that case have lived in captivity at
least twelve years, from 1626 to 1638[15].”

With the view to test the tradition recorded by Edwards as to the date
and origin of the painting of the Dodo in the British Museum, I took a
copy of the outline of the bird and laid upon it outlines of the bones
of the Dodo subsequently to be described, as shown in Plate III., and
thus obtained proof that the painting truly represented the natural
size and shape of the _Didus ineptus_, and had no doubt been “drawn in
Holland from the living bird[16].” From the date of the first landing
of the Dutch on the Island of Mauritius, in 1598, to their colonization
of it in 1644, their ships frequently, perhaps annually, visited that
island, and, as recorded by most of the writers quoted by Broderip,
and testified by Van der Hagen, in 1607[17], their crews feasted on
Tortoises, Dodos, Doves, and other game, and also salted the Tortoises
and Dodos for consumption during the voyage to the spice-islands of
the Indian Archipelago. It is highly probable that more than one of
the strange birds of Prince Maurice’s Island would be brought alive
to Holland, and we know that a specimen was brought from that country
for exhibition in London in the year 1638. It is certain that through
the attacks of man, and those of the dogs, cats, and swine introduced
by the Dutch into the Mauritius, the slow and heavy flightless Dodos
were extirpated, probably before Leguat’s visit to the island in 1693.
The French colonists, who succeeded the Dutch in 1712, seem not to
have found any Dodos remaining in the island; their descendants and
successors have preserved no traditions of the living bird; and Baron
Grant, who resided in the Mauritius from 1740 to 1760, expressly states
that no such bird was to be found there at that time[18].

Mr. Broderip refers, in his History of the Dodo, to the notice by Adam
Olearius, in 1666, of the head of that bird in the museum of the Duke
of Gottorp.

This specimen was most unexpectedly discovered by Professor Reinhardt
in the Museum of Natural History at Copenhagen under the following
circumstances:—“In the summer of 1840 I happened to search through
a box wherein different natural-history objects were stored, which
had been presented by the ‘Kunstkammer’ to the Royal Natural History
Museum, and on this occasion I found a very large bird-cranium, which
attracted my attention partly through its size, partly through its
unusual and peculiar shape, and by a further examination and comparison
with the authenticated representations of the Dodo, I became persuaded
that it must have belonged to that remarkable bird.

“It is very well preserved, only wanting the left ‘os pterygoideum;’
and the ‘condylus occipitalis,’ together with the entire border of
the ‘foramen magnum’ are broken away; otherwise it is quite perfect,
so that an almost complete description of the osteology of the head
of this remarkable genus may be made out from it. Although I have
searched through Laurentz’s ‘Museum Regium’ and the MS. Catalogue of
the ‘Kunstkammer,’ I have nowhere been able to discover any notice of
such a cranium having ever been possessed by the Collection, and it
is therefore clear that it has preserved the present specimen quite
unwittingly, and it stands probably under one of the many numbers
given as referring to heads of unknown foreign birds. I have meanwhile
gradually come to the conclusion that this head is in all likelihood
the one called ‘Dodo’s head’ by Olearius in the year 1666, in his
description of the Gottorp Kunst-Museum, which, when that museum, at
least in part, was amalgamated with the Copenhagen Museum, found its
way there.” (Reinhardt, in ‘Kröyer’s Naturhist. Tidsskr.’ iv. pp. 71,
72 (1842)).

About ten years afterwards a portion of the bone of the upper beak of a
Dodo was discovered in the Imperial and Royal Museum of Natural History
at Prague[19].

Such, until the year 1865, was the sum of the remains of this large,
flightless, extinct bird which were known to have reached Europe.

The happy perception, by the Danish Professor J. Reinhardt, in
1843[20], of the resemblance of the beak of the Dodo to that of
the tropical Doves, generically separated by Cuvier under the name
_Vinago_, on account of their proportionately larger, more strongly
arched, and compressed beak than in other Pigeons, and the still closer
resemblance, in miniature, of the beak of the Samoan Dove to that
of the great Mauritian bird, which led Titian Peale to give to the
former the generic name _Didunculus_, directed the ornithologist and
ornithotomist to the family in which the most instructive comparisons
might be made; and the results of these, so far as relates to the head
and foot and the bones of those parts, published by the authors of the
above-cited work (p. 4), left little doubt of the “striking affinity
which exists between this extinct bird and the Pigeons”[21].

Whatever doubt, indeed, may have lingered in the minds of naturalists
as to this affinity will probably be finally set at rest by the results
of the comparison of the large proportion of the skeleton of the _Didus
ineptus_ which has at length been transmitted from the island of
Mauritius to London, under the following circumstances.

In 1863, I was favoured by Miss A. Burdett Coutts with an introduction
to the Bishop of Mauritius, then in this country, and I endeavoured
to interest his lordship in aiding or promoting the acquisition, by
the British Museum, of the zoological rarities of Madagascar, and
especially of any remains of the Dodo which might be discovered in the
island of Mauritius, to which his lordship was about to return.

How speedily and successfully the Bishop has fulfilled my latter desire
will be shown by the following letter, with which I was favoured in
November, 1865.

                                               “St. James, Port Louis,
                                                 “October 7, 1865.

  “+My dear Sir+,—when I had the pleasure of conversing with you for
  a short time in London two years ago, I promised to acquaint you
  with any facts or discoveries which might come to my knowledge,
  likely to interest you in connexion with Madagascar. I have not
  anything as yet to communicate definitely respecting that island in
  the way of natural history, but I have strong reasons to believe
  that a discovery has been made here recently which will gratify you
  very much. Mr. George Clark, who has for many years devoted himself
  to the work of teaching in this island with great success, is an
  ardent student of natural history, and has explored many parts of
  the island in search of information on the subject. From careful
  observation he was led to conclude that no remains of the Dodo were
  likely to be found in any of our watercourses, because of their
  steep descent and the immense rush of water which sweeps down them
  at times. But he had also frequently expressed his opinion that in
  certain marshes, with high banks of sand between them and the sea,
  such remains would probably be found. In one of these places he has
  found several of the bones of the Dodo (as he believes), and is now
  forwarding them home for your inspection[22].

  “At his request, I write these lines to ask for your kind care of
  his interests in securing any reward which may accrue to him. It
  would be a great pleasure to me to find that his discovery was
  really important, and likely to be useful to himself; for he
  has pursued these and similar investigations with an amount of
  intelligence, skill, and diligence, in his vacation-times (by no
  means extensive), which deserves much credit and encouragement.

  “The book which you kindly sent me on the Aye-Aye has been read
  by many, and especially by medical men, with much interest. I
  entrusted the other copy to Mr. John Douglas for the Society here.

                              “I remain, my dear Sir,
                                  “Your very faithful Servant,
                                      (Signed) “+Vincent N. Mauritius+.”
  “_Professor Owen._”

This letter was accompanied with the following “Statement” by Mr.
George Clark, Master of the Government School at Mahébourg, Island of
Mauritius:—

  “On the estate called ‘Plaisance,’ about three miles from
  Mahébourg, in the island of Mauritius, there is a ravine of no
  great depth or steepness, which, apparently, once conveyed to the
  sea the drainings of a considerable extent of circumjacent land,
  but which has been stopped to seaward, most likely for ages, by
  an accumulation of sand extending all along the shore. The outlet
  from this ravine having been thus impeded, a sort of bog has
  been formed, called ‘La Mare aux Songes,’ in which is a deposit
  of alluvium, varying in depth, on account of the inequalities of
  the bottom, which is formed of large masses of basalt, from three
  to ten or twelve feet. The proprietor of the estate a few weeks
  ago conceived the idea of employing this alluvium as manure; and
  shortly after, the men began digging in it; when they had got to
  a depth of three or four feet they found numerous bones of large
  tortoises, among which were a carapace and a plastron pretty nearly
  entire, as also several crania.

  “When I heard of this, it immediately struck me that the spot was
  one of the most likely possible to contain bones of the Dodo, and I
  gave directions to the men working there to look out for any bones
  they might find. Nothing, however, was turned up but a fragment of
  what I supposed to be the humerus of a large bird. This encouraged
  me to look further; and my search was rewarded by the discovery of
  several tibiæ, more or less perfect, two tarsi, one nearly perfect
  pelvis, and fragments of three others.

  “These were found imbedded in a black vegetable mould, the
  lighter-coloured specimens being near the springs. My reasons
  for believing these to be remains of the Dodo are:—the certainty
  that that bird once existed in Mauritius; the similarity of these
  bones to what the representations of the Dodo which I have seen
  would lead one to expect, particularly the breadth of the pelvis,
  the stoutness of the tibiæ and tarsi, and the shortness of the
  latter; the favourable nature of the spot in which they were found
  for the haunts of such birds when living—a sheltered hollow with
  two springs in it; the non-existence, actual or traditional, in
  Mauritius of any bird to which bones such as these could have
  belonged; the indubitable antiquity of these bones, proved by the
  deposit of alluvium which covered them.

  “During nearly thirty years that I have inhabited this colony, I
  have made frequent inquiries of old people as to the finding of
  the bones of large birds, and have offered liberal rewards for
  such; and I have consulted with the late Dr. Ayres as to the spots
  most likely to contain them. We agreed that the floods which sweep
  the hill-sides and the ravines in the rainy season would be most
  likely to carry any remains into the sea; and this would doubtless
  have been the case here, but for the stoppage occasioned by the
  sand-down.

                                        (Signed) “+George Clark.+ 1865.”

The above “Statement” was authenticated by the following testimony:—

  “Having visited the place with Mr. Clark, I can vouch for the truth
  of the facts herein mentioned.
                                      (Signed)  “+William Thomas Banks+,
                                            “Civil Chaplain, Mauritius.”

  “The Rev. W. T. Banks, Civil Chaplain at Mahébourg, in this
  diocese, and Mr. George Clark, Master of the Government School at
  Mahébourg, are well known to me, and deserving implicit credit for
  their statements as to matters of fact.

                       (Signed)  “+Vincent N. Mauritius.+ Oct. 6, 1865.”




            § 2. _Description of the Skeleton._ (Plate III.)

The bones of the Dodo (_Didus ineptus_, Linn.) discovered by Mr. Clark,
under the above circumstances, which have reached me up to the present
date (December 20th, 1865) are the following:—

              Name.                             Number of bones or parts.

  Cranium and lower jaw, in parts                          14
  Vertebræ and pelvis                                      30
  Ribs                                                     22
  Sternum                                                   2
  Scapular arch, in parts                                   7
  Humerus, ulna, radius                                     6
  Femora                                                    5
  Tibiæ                                                     6
  Fibulæ                                                    4
  Metatarsals                                               4
                                                          ———
  Total number of parts of skeleton of the Dodo           100
                                                          ===

The known characters of the skull and metatarsus of the _Didus ineptus_
served to identify those bones as belonging to that species: the
agreement in relative size, colour, condition, and locality left no
room for hesitation in referring the other bones in the above list to
the same species[23]. They belong, however, to four or five individuals
varying somewhat in size. With the bones of the Dodo were the end of
the lower jaw of a broad-billed Parrot, two bones (radius) of a small
Mammal, and part of the skull of a large Tortoise[24].

To the description of the Dodo’s bones I now proceed.


             _Vertebræ._ (Plates III., IV., V., VIII., XI.)

The dorsal vertebræ are chiefly represented, in this series of bones,
by three which are anchylosed together by their bodies and neural
arches (Pl. V. figs. 1–5): the posterior articular surface of the body
of the last of these vertebræ (ib., fig. 4, _c_) is subquadrate, longer
in the vertical than the transverse direction, concave vertically,
convex transversely, almost fitting, but being rather too small for,
the anterior articular surface of the body of the first of the sacral
series (Pl. VII. fig. 1, _c_). The difference is such as to indicate
that only one dorsal vertebra may have intervened; and I conclude that
the last of the three coalesced vertebræ is the penultimate dorsal.
The anterior articular surface of the foremost of the three (Pl. IV.
fig. 1, _c_) is 11 lines in transverse, and 4 to 5 lines in vertical
diameter: it is concave transversely for the middle three-fifths,
and convex transversely at the two outer fifths of its extent: it is
more or less convex vertically throughout its extent. The bodies of
these vertebræ are compressed and wedged-shaped, slightly expanded
at their coalesced ends, produced below into subquadrate hypapophyses
in the first and second (Pl. V. fig. 1, _hy_); while this process is
restricted to the fore part (ib. _hy_ 3), or may be represented only
by a slight anterior production of the lower edge of the wedge, in the
third (ib. fig. 5, _hy_ 3).

The hypapophysis of the first of the three expands at its termination
(Pl. IV. fig. 1, _hy_), with the hinder angle bent back to coalesce
with the front one of the next hypapophysis, which is somewhat longer,
and bent forward with a similar terminal expansion: a full elliptical
space is intercepted by this terminal confluence of these hypapophyses
(Pl. V. figs. 1 & 5, _hy_). Each vertebra shows an elliptical articular
cavity (ib. figs. 1 & 5, _p_, _p_ 3) for the head of the rib, near to
the anterior articular surface; the long axis of this costal surface
is directed from above obliquely downward and forward. The surface of
the rib’s tubercle cuts obliquely the lower part of the free end of the
diapophysis (Pl. IV. fig. 1, _d_).

The neural arch circumscribes a canal the anterior outlet of which (ib.
fig. 1, _n_) is oval with the small end downward, 5 lines in vertical,
and 3½ in transverse diameter: the sides of the neural canal slightly
project inward above the lower third: the posterior outlet (Pl. V. fig.
4, _n_) is more regularly elliptical in form, and rather narrower in
proportion to its vertical diameter. The neurapophysis sends off from
the outer and fore part of its base a stout process, which expands and
divides into zygapophyses (Pl. IV. fig. 1, _z_) and diapophyses (ib.
_d_); the articular surface of the former is of a full oval shape,
flat, looking obliquely upward and inward; the diapophyses extend
outward and a little backward: the articular surface for the tubercle
of the rib is transversely elliptical and nearly flat. The hinder
part of the neurapophysis expands into the postzygapophyses: these
have coalesced with the præzygapophyses in the succeeding vertebra
(Pl. V. fig. 2, _z_), as has happened also between this and the third
vertebra. In the last of the three vertebræ the postzygapophyses are
entire (ib. _z_ 3), and show very slightly concave, oval articular
surfaces, looking obliquely downward and outward (ib. fig. 4, _z_). The
conjugational foramina, continuously surrounded by bone, are a full
ellipse, and large, the anterior one (ib. figs. 1 & 5, _f_) being 5½
lines in vertical diameter; the second (ib. _f′_) is somewhat less:
these foramina are also rather larger in one of the specimens than in
the other. The length of the three coalesced dorsals is the same in
both, viz. 2 inches 3 lines. The neural spines have run together into a
continuous ridge in fig. 1, _ns_; in fig. 5 the summit is broken off in
both, leaving only the anterior angle of the foremost entire; in both
this inclines forward; the hinder border of the third vertebra (fig. 1,
_ns_) has the same vertical parallel as the back part of the centrum.
The anterior margin of the base of the spine shows a rough surface for
the attachment of ligament (Pl. IV. fig. 1, _ns_). A small foramen
behind the base of each of the coalesced zygapophyses (Pl. V. fig. 2,
_z_ _z_) leads to a canal descending to the neural one, and indicates
superiorly the limits of the otherwise continuously ossified neural
arches.

In the series of detached vertebræ, one (Pl. V. figs. 6 & 7) indicates
by its neural spine and hypapophysis a position at the base of the
neck. The centrum is barely an inch in length; its anterior surface
(ib. fig. 7, _c_) is narrow vertically, broad transversely; both
fore and hind surfaces indicate freedom and extent of flexure. The
hypapophysis has a broad, bituberculate base (ib. _hy_), but is limited
in fore and aft extent to the middle third of the under surface of the
centrum: its length is shown in fig. 6, _hy_. The parapophysis (fig. 7,
_p_) is slender, and expands at both attachments, with an indication of
a terminal surface. The diapophysis (_d_) has a larger costal surface:
it sends forward a convex ridge midway between the di- and zygapophysis
(_z_). The neural canal (fig. 7, _n_) has wider and more fully
elliptical outlets than the hinder dorsal vertebræ, in relation to the
greater extent of motion at the fore part of the series. I conclude
that a free pleurapophysis (_pl_) existed, indicating the present to be
the first of the dorsal series, as shown in Pl. III. The neural spine
is short, broad, obtusely pointed, with a vertically oblong syndesmotic
surface (fig. 7) before and behind. Each postzygapophysis (fig. 6,
_z′_) supports an anapophysial tubercle (_a_).

A cervical vertebra from a position just in advance of the above has
lost the neural spine, but retains the hypapophysis. This process
(ib. figs. 8 & 9, _hy_) is compressed and directed obliquely downward
and forward for an extent of 6 lines; the extremity is rounded:
the length of the centrum of this vertebra is 1 inch 3 lines; the
anterior articular surface is longest transversely, and concave in
that direction, convex vertically; the proportions and curvatures are
transposed in the posterior surface (fig. 9, _c_). The parapophysis
(ib. _p_) is continued from the anterior border of the centrum to the
middle; it is a depressed plate, confluent with the rib (ib. _d_).
The diapophysis forms a short, obtuse projection above its anchylosis
with the rib (ib. _pl_): this projects backward 7 lines in length,
terminating obtusely, and circumscribing a vertebrarterial foramen
(ib. _v_) of a full elliptic shape, 5½ lines in long diameter. The
surfaces of the præzygapophyses (_z_) are larger, and look more upward
and less inward, than in the preceding and the dorsal vertebræ: they
are very slightly concave. Those of the postzygapophyses (fig. 8,
_z′_), with a downward and slightly outward aspect, are in a similar
degree convex. The neural canal, as usual in the cervical series,
expands at its outlets, most so posteriorly (fig. 9, _n_); the middle
of the upper surface of the neural arch is impressed by an elliptical,
rough, ligamentous surface, which slightly rising in the middle is
the sole indication of a neural spine. The upper surface of each
postzygapophysis developes a tuberous anapophysis (figs. 8 & 9, _a_).

The three cervicals that succeed the axis show progressively sinking
neural spines, which subside in the six following vertebræ (Pl. III.).
The third cervical has also the hypapophysis (Pl. XI. fig. 3, _hy_).

In all the other cervicals of the present series the hypapophysis is
wanting, but each parapophysis developes a plate (Pl. V. figs. 10
& 11, Pl. VIII. fig. 1, _p_) to form the sides of the hæmal canal
through which the carotids ran; and the position of such vertebræ
in the cervical series is indicated, respectively, by the degree of
convergence of these processes, in none of which, where entire, have
they met so as to circumscribe the canal: in some of these vertebræ,
however, they are mutilated. They differ chiefly in the position and
shape of the anapophyses (fig. 10, _a_), which advance from above the
postzygapophyses (_z′_), converging towards the middle of the upper
surface of the neural arch, being arrested, save in one instance, at
the sides of the ligamentous surface occupying the common position of
the base of the neural spine.

In the axis vertebra (Pl. V. figs. 12 & 13) the posterior articular
surface, concave vertically, and 3 lines in that extent at its middle
part, is very convex transversely, being continued upon the sides of
the posterior part of the centrum; a thick obtuse hypapophysis (fig.
13, _hy_) descends below this surface: the anterior or odontoid surface
presents the usual form in birds; the odontoid process (ib. _x_) has
a pit at its apex. The prezygapophyses (fig. 12, _z_), of very small
size, project from the outer and fore border of the neural arch, with
their articular surface looking outward and slightly upward; a ridge is
continued from their back part to the base of the postzygapophyses: the
surface (fig. 13, _z′_) in these, 4½ lines in long diameter, is three
times the size of the anterior one; it is concave transversely, and
looks downward and a little outward. The anapophyses (ib. fig. 12, _a_)
are large tubercles rising above the articular surfaces. The base of
the neural spine, 9 lines in length (ib. _ns_), is coextensive with the
neural arch; the spine rises posteriorly to a height of 6 lines, with a
thickness of 2 lines, having a convex upper margin (Pl. III.).

The relative size and position of the cervical vertebræ, as coadjusted
in the position and degree of flexure of the neck represented in
Sir Hans Sloane’s life-size painting of the Dodo, in the British
Museum, are given in Plate III. with the varying proportions of the
pleurapophyses and other processes.


                       _Ribs._ (Plates III. & IV.)

The specimens of ribs include both vertebral and sternal portions;
that which appears to be the second or third on the right side (Pl.
IV. figs. 7, 7 _a_) is 4 inches 4 lines in length (following the outer
curve), and expands to a breadth of 7 lines at its lower part; the
interval between the articular surfaces of the head and tubercle is 6
lines. The appendage (ib. _a_) has coalesced with the middle of the
hind margin of the shaft. The neck is compressed, with a thin upper
margin; the lower one is continued with a curve upon a strong internal
buttress-like ridge (ib. _b_), which runs to near the fore part of
the flattened body of the rib, where it meets the ridge continued
from the tubercle, about 2 inches down the rib: there is a shallow
channel between these ridges, contracting to their confluence. The
inner surface of the rib is impressed by a deeper and broader channel
behind the buttress: the posterior border expands in the form of a
triangular plate, with a base of about an inch in extent, due to the
complete confluence there of the epipleural process. The anterior
border is thicker, and is almost straight. Towards the sternal end
the pleurapophysis contracts and thickens, terminating in a rough
syndesmotic elliptical surface, 3 lines by 2 (fig. 7, _f_), for the
attachment of the hæmapophysis or sternal rib.

A vertebral rib (ib. fig. 2) which is entire, measures 9 inches in
length (following the outer curve). The head and tubercle are at the
same distance as in the preceding, but the tubercle is broader. The
characters of the body of the rib are very similar; but it is narrower,
not attaining a breadth of 5½ lines at its lower end; the narrowing and
thickening to the articular surface for the sternal rib is more gradual.

A last vertebral rib is adapted, by the longitudinal extent and partial
division of the tubercle, to the vertebra which forms the first of
the coalesced series of sacrals; and the body of the rib, instead of
preserving the regular outward curve of the antecedent ones, is more
suddenly bent soon after it emerges beyond the margin of the ilium; the
lamelliform part thence continued is straighter, and, moreover, shows
upon its outer surface a flattened facet, indicative of pressure or
friction by the movements to and fro of the thigh over a rib in such
position. Beyond this surface the rib curves in a way not shown in the
other specimens; the distal end has the flat syndesmotic articular
surface to which had been attached a hæmapophysis not reaching the
sternum. In this last (eighth) free rib there is no epipleural process,
nor any definitely marked ligamental surface on the posterior margin
indicative of the attachment of such process.

The body of a posterior vertebral rib (Pl. IV. fig. 10) shows a
fracture which has been healed, with some irregular ossific deposit on
the inner surface. All the ribs have a pneumatic foramen (ib. figs. 2,
7, 8, _p_) at the fore part of the neck, near the base of the tubercle.

The eight left vertebral ribs (Pl. III.) and the five right ones do
not, either of them, constitute a consecutive series, but have come
from different individuals, of different sizes, as exemplified in the
third rib figured in Plates III. and IV.

The sternal ribs (P. IV. figs. 3 & 12) are characterized by the two
facets, nearly or quite meeting at an open angle, into which their
sternal end expands (ib. fig. 3, _c_). One of these ribs, which is
entire, shows the single, elliptic syndesmotic surface at the opposite
end (ib. _b_); it is 3½ inches in length, with a greatest breadth of 5
lines, and is straight. Another and longer specimen (ib. 12) shows a
moderate degree of curvature. A third specimen is 6 inches in length:
the proximal end has a breadth of nearly half an inch (the penultimate
rib in Pl. III.).

Five successive sternal ribs are indicated by gradational size and
curvature, and a sixth, which does not reach the sternum. Before
describing this bone I shall proceed with the account of the sacral
vertebræ, and the expanded hæmal arches of such as complete the pelvis.


                     _Pelvis._ (Plates III. & VII.)

The pelvis of the Dodo is chiefly remarkable for the flatness and great
breadth of the posterior half, corresponding with the characteristic
proportions of that part of the body in Pl. I. fig. 2, and in the old
woodcuts of the Dutch “Dodaersen”[25]. It includes sixteen coalesced
sacral vertebræ, with which the iliac bones are continuously confluent.

The first sacral shows the transversely extended and concave articular
surface of the centrum (Pl. VII. fig. 1, _c_); the subcircular pit (ib.
_p_) for the head of the rib is behind the middle of the side of the
centrum, at its upper part; the inferior surface is ridged lengthwise;
and a transverse low but sharp ridge defines the posterior boundary,
the depressions in front of which indicate the hindmost origins of the
subvertebral muscle (longus colli?). The anterior outlet of the neural
canal (ib. _n_) is subcircular in one specimen, vertically elliptic in
others, and 3 lines or less in transverse diameter. From the sides of
the neurapophyses stretch out the strong buttresses of bone which blend
with the under part of the ilia, giving off from the fore part of their
base the præzygapophyses (ib. _z_), and from the back part of their
apex the surface (ib. _d_), or part of it, for the tubercle of the last
moveable rib, the ilium in the latter variety affording the rest of
that surface. The fore part of the strong neural spine (ib. _ns_) is
roughened by a syndesmotic surface; it rises to a height of 14 lines,
curving forward, and is confluent at its summit with the approximated
anterior margins of the ilia. A continuous track of bone, forming a
smoothly obtuse longitudinal ridge, represents the summits of the
succeeding sacral spines (ib. fig. 2, _ns_) to the hindmost vertebra
of the series, without any trace of their primitive division; but this
track rises, posteriorly, above the shallow channel on each side, in
which are the foramina (ib. _o_), indicating most of the constituent
vertebræ.

The second sacral vertebra abuts against the ilium by a pleurapophysis
(ib. fig. 1, _pl_ 2), as well as a diapophysis (ib. _d_ 2); but the
former is a slender, straight filament, or narrow plate of bone,
confluent at both ends.

In the next two vertebræ the pleurapophysis (ib. _pl_ 3 & 4) assumes
more breadth and robustness, but is short and straight, abutting
against the inner surface of the ilium an inch in advance of the
acetabulum. The first of these rib-buttresses inclines forward, and is
completely confluent with the ilium; the thicker one (ib. _pl_ 4) has
retained part of its primitive ligamentous attachment to the ilium: the
proportions of both are subject to some variety.

These are succeeded by three or four vertebræ in which the
pleurapophysis is not developed, the attachment to the ilia being
by diapophyses only (ib. _d_ _d_), which are short slender lamellæ,
directed upward and backward; below and between them are the double
orifices for the separate motory and sensory roots of the sacro-spinal
nerves. In the next vertebra the pleurapophysis (ib. _pl_ 8) reappears,
longer but more slender than in the fourth sacral, extending obliquely
backward, and expanding at its extremity to abut against a prominence
on the underside of the ilium, opposite the hind part of the
acetabulum, with which prominence the rib has completely coalesced by
an expanded end. The under part of all these vertebræ is traversed by a
sharp median longitudinal ridge, which is more feebly and interruptedly
continued to near the end of the sacral series.

Eight vertebræ, abutting by diapophyses only (Pl. VII. _d d_) against
the ilia, succeed the one last described; their coalesced bodies are
less than half the breadth of those of the preceding vertebræ: they
gradually diminish in depth to the last, without loss of breadth. The
diapophyses proceed obliquely outward and backward, are lamelliform,
about 9 lines in length, and intercept oblong cavities of the same
extent and direction, into which open the orifices (ib. fig. 2, _o_)
noticed on the upper surface of that part of the pelvis. The articular
surface of the body of the last sacral is transversely elliptic, 4
lines by 2 lines, and very slightly convex. The outlet of the neural
canal, above it, is circular, and about a line in diameter, the whole
vertical extent of the last sacral being 5 lines, while that of the
first sacral is 2 inches 2 lines.

The ilium is divided, as usual, into two parts by the ridge on its
upper or outer surface (ib. fig. 2, _r_), extending obliquely backward
to behind the acetabulum—the anterior division being narrower and
concave, the posterior broader and convex but in a minor degree. The
anterior (slightly thickened) border of the ilium is curved with the
convexity forward, extending 8 or 9 lines in advance of the fore
part of the neural spine of the first sacral vertebra. The ilia
almost meet above that of the second and third sacrals, with which
they coalesce, and then diverge to the oblique boundary ridge, which
is thence continued, in some with an angular bend, more directly
outward. At this angle the bone is so confluent with the sacrum that
the orifices leading to the ileoneural canals[26] are almost or quite
obliterated. These canals are, here (ib. _i ï_), the longitudinally
extended cavities intercepted between the fore parts of the ilia and
the continuous coalesced sacral spines and diapophyses, widening to
their anterior outlets. The extent of that part of the ilium in advance
of the acetabulum is 3 inches 8 lines; the breadth at its middle part
is 2 inches. As the ilium approaches the acetabulum it increases in
thickness, and is grooved at the outer margin by a vessel which leaves
impressions of its ramifications upon the upper concave surface of
the bone (ib. fig. 2, +62+). The acetabulum (ib. _a a_) is circular,
11 lines in the diameter of its outlet, 9 or 10 lines in that of its
inner circumference, being widely open, as usual in birds, towards the
cavity of the pelvis; the trochanterian surface (ib. _t t_) above the
acetabulum is elliptic, with the long axis lengthwise, 9 lines by 6 in
its diameter, with its upper border sharp and produced; the anterior
border (ib. _b_) of the acetabulum is slightly produced; the position
of this articular cavity is about midway between the fore and hind ends
of the pelvis. The oblique external ridge of the ilium terminates in
the outer margin of the broader part of the bone (ib. _r′_), 7 lines
above the sharp and prominent margin of the trochanterian surface
(ib. _t_). The ilia have diverged from each other for the extent of an
inch and a half behind the beginning of the boundary line (ib. _r_),
which interval is occupied exteriorly by lateral ossification from
the neural spines to the diapophyses of that part of the sacrum: the
mesial borders of the ilia (ib. fig. 2, 62′) slightly converge to the
fifteenth sacral vertebra, where they are separated by an interspace
of 1 inch, and then again diverge to the last sacral; they coalesce
with the diapophyses (ib. fig. 2, _d_ _d_). The inner or under surface
of the ilium is thickened into a kind of buttress (ib. fig. 1, _e_),
terminating behind the ischiadic foramen. The breadth of the iliac
bones and intervening sacrals, 1 inch behind the acetabulum, is 5
inches; at the back part of the pelvis it is 4 inches. The outer border
of the posterior part of the ilium (ib. fig. 2, _g_) projects as an
obtuse ridge above the ischiadic foramen and the succeeding expanded
and confluent part of the ischium (ib. 63), which is vertically
concave externally: the ilium, ischium, and pubis (ib. fig. 1, 64)
have completely coalesced around the acetabulum. The pubis, which in
this part is 7 lines thick, contracts as it becomes free to a diameter
of 4 lines; it is smooth and convex below, and has been broken off
near the acetabulum on both sides; the fracture shows its pneumatic
structure. The ischium, as it recedes from the acetabulum, contracts
to a trihedral column, with a vertical diameter of 4 lines; it is
concave outwardly, convex inwardly, and suddenly expands below, about
an inch from the acetabulum, to form part of the posterior boundary of
the obturator foramen (ib. fig. 1, _f_), which is 9 lines in length,
and is situated one half in advance of, and the other half beneath,
the ischiadic foramen (ib. _m_). This latter is oval, with the large
end forwards, 1 inch 3 lines by 10 lines in its principal diameters.
Behind this foramen the ischium is confluent with the ilium for an
extent of 2 inches, or perhaps rather more, as the posterior margin of
the pelvis is not entire in any of my specimens. The inner surface of
the ischium forms a low, obtuse longitudinal ridge towards the pelvic
cavity, losing thickness as it recedes from the acetabulum. The chief
pneumatic foramina in the pelvis are on the inner surface, above the
acetabulum, behind the trochanterian articulation, and behind the iliac
confluence of the last sacral pleurapophyses,—also at the hinder part
of the ilium, on each side of the transverse buttress (ib. _e_) near
its posterior junction with the ischium. The prærenal fossa (between
_pl_ 4 & _pl_ 8, fig. 1) is deep and subdivided by the diapophysial
plates: the postrenal fossa is wide and shallow.


                 _Sternum._ (Plates III., IV., VI., XI.)

Of this instructive and determinative bone there are two specimens, the
one most entire (Pls. III., IV. fig. 4, & VI.) measuring in a straight
line, from the costal process to the hind border, 7 inches. The extreme
breadth between the lateral processes (Pl. IV. _h_) is 4½ inches; from
this diameter the bone contracts anteriorly to a breadth of 3½ inches
at the costal processes (ib. _d_), and posteriorly it contracts more
rapidly to an obtuse, horizontally flattened apex (Pl. VI. fig. 3).
The anterior border of the sternum (Pl. IV. fig. 4) is widely and
rather deeply emarginate at the middle (_e_), less deeply so on each
side: the breadth of the mid notch (_b_ _e_ _b_) is 1 inch 9 lines,
that of each side notch (_b_ _d_) is 1 inch 2 lines. The sternum is
deeply hollowed above (Pl. XI. fig. 4), correspondingly convex beneath
(ib.); the keel (_s_) is low and thick, commencing by a pair of broad
obtuse ridges (Pls. IV. fig. 4, & VI. fig. 1, _r_ _r_) from the mesial
ends of the outer walls of the coracoid grooves (ib. _b′_), which
gradually rise from the surface of the bone as they extend backward,
converging to form the beginning of the keel about 2 inches from the
anterior emargination (_e_): the keel gains a depth of ¾ of an inch at
the middle of the sternum, then gradually sinks to the level of the
bone, as it extends backward, at 1½ inch from the hind end (Pl. VI.
fig. 3), a little increasing in thickness as it subsides: its free
border describes a pretty regular convex curve (Pl. III.); it is thick,
flat, partially canaliculate: the sides of the base of the keel expand,
to be continued gradually into the body of the sternum (Pl. XI. fig.
4). Behind the costal surface (Pl. VI. _c_), on each side, extends a
lamelliform process (Pls. III. & VI. _h_), ½ an inch in breadth, upward
and a little outward, slightly expanding to its free termination,
which, however, is not entire in either specimen: the longitudinal
extent of this characteristic process, where it is best preserved, is
1 inch; it is conjecturally restored in Plate III.; it answers to the
ectolateral process (_h_) of the gallinaceous sternum (Pls. III. & XII.
fig. 3): there is no trace of an entolateral process (ib. _i_). The
thin margin of the Dodo’s breast-bone, behind the ectolateral process
(Pls. III. & VI. _h_), is entire and uninterrupted to the obtuse apex,
and the body of the sternum is imperforate: the notch (_f_) behind the
process (_h_) represents the ectolateral notch of the gallinaceous
sternum (Pl. XII. figs. 1 & 3, _f_). The costal border (Pl. VI. fig.
2, _c_) is 1 inch 9 lines in extent, and 6 lines across its broadest
part; it shows articular surfaces for five sternal ribs, of which the
four posterior (2–5) are bilobed, the anterior one (_c_ 1) simple,
and limited to the outer half of the border; the second sternum shows
some variety in this respect: the deep interspaces, in both, are
perforated by pneumatic foramina. The costal process (_d_)[27] in
advance of these surfaces expands, as it rises upward and a little
outward and forward, to the extent of nearly an inch; the hinder and
outer side is impressed by a concavity, continued from the costal
border; the inner side is smooth and convex: it is not quite entire on
either side. The coracoid grooves (Pl. IV. fig. 4, _b_ _b′_) are small
in proportion to the sternum, and are divided from each other by an
interspace of about an inch; the outer wall of the groove (_b′_), 9
lines in extent, is moderately produced and convex; it appears to be a
continuation of one of the initial ridges (_r_) of the keel: the inner
wall of the groove (_b_) is deeper, and is formed by the obtuse angle
of the anterior border of the sternum, between the medial and lateral
emarginations. External to each coracoid groove is a large elliptical
pneumatic foramen (_p_) or depression. There is no episternal process.
On the convex outer surface of the body of the sternum the “pectoral”
ridge (Pl. VI. fig, 1, _k_)[28] is feebly indicated, extending from
the outer end of the coracoid groove backward and inward to near the
posterior third of the keel. The concave surface of the sternum (ib.
fig. 2) shows a number of small pneumatic foramina, chiefly along the
middle line to near the posterior third. Behind the costal border the
substance of the sternum gradually increases in thickness from the
sharp lateral margins to the middle, above the base of the keel, and
shows there a fine pneumocancellous texture (Pl. XI. fig. 4).


                 _Scapular Arch._ (Plates III. & VIII.)

This consists of the scapula (Pl. VIII. figs. 6, 7, 8 & 9, 51),
coracoid (ib. figs. 4 & 5, 52), and clavicle (ib. 58), the latter
ending in a point and here tied by ligament to its fellow, to form
a furculum. I have received the elements of this arch in three
conditions:—one in which the bones, though of full size, are separate;
a second, in which the scapula and coracoid are confluent, but the
clavicle distinct; a third, in which the three bones are confluent
at the ends converging to the humeral articulation. The scapula (ib.
figs. 6, 7, 8 & 9, 51), 3 inches 7 or 8 lines in length, has the
usual sabre-shaped body, slightly expanding and decurved at its free
extremity, the breadth of which is 7 lines: it terminates obtusely:
varieties of shape are shown in figures 6 & 8. The outer surface of the
bone, at the two posterior thirds of its extent, is slightly concave
and marked by muscular attachments; the inner surface of that part is
smooth and slightly convex: the bone increases in breadth, with some
diminution of thickness, towards the articular end, and is remarkable
for sending off from the lower border, at 7 or 8 lines from that end,
a short process (ib. 51); between this process and the articulation
the breadth of the bone is little more than 3 lines; the breadth of
the articular end is 9 lines. Nearly one-half of it is occupied by the
almost flat, subcircular humeral surface (fig. 8, _a_), with a diameter
of 4½ lines, and directed upward, outward, and a little forward. From
this is continued an oblong, much narrower coracoidal surface, beyond
which the acromial process (fig. 6, _c_) extends forward, curving
toward the coracoid, and terminating obtusely.

The coracoid (ib. figs. 4, 5, 8 & 9, 52), averaging a length of 3
inches 7 lines, expands to a breadth of 1 inch 3 lines at its sternal
end (52), of which the articular surface (_e_) occupies an inch; the
non-articular part forms the outer angle (_m_), and extends in advance
of the pneumatic foramen (Pl. IV. fig. 4, _p_) at that part of the
breast-bone: the outer border which extends from this free angle to the
body of the bone, into which it subsides, at one-third of the extent
of the bone, is sharp; the inner border is obtuse to near the inner
angle (Pl. VIII. figs. 4 & 5, _n_). The outer surface of the expanded
sternal end is smooth and convex; the inner surface is flatter and
more irregular, perforated by pneumatic foramina; the diameter of the
subcylindrical part of the shaft is 4 lines: the extremes of difference
in the distal expansion of the coracoid are shown in figs. 4 & 8, 52,
Pl. VIII. A muscular ridge and rough surface (ib. fig. 9, _r_) mark
the back part below the middle of the shaft. The bone then expands
to its upper articular end, which is obliquely truncate from within
outward: it shows, first, the oblong surface for the scapula, which is
extended upon the inner prominence of that end; next, the larger and
full oval surface for the humerus (_h_), from which the thick, obtuse,
inner continuation of the scapular end projects inward, forward, with
a slightly upward curve, and shows the narrow oblong surface for the
articulation and ultimate confluence of the clavicle (58). The coracoid
unites with the scapula at an angle of 100°.

The clavicle (ib. figs. 4 & 5, 58), at its scapular end, is slightly
expanded, compressed, with an obtuse recurved termination articulating
with the above-named surface of the coracoid, and in one instance
coalescing therewith, and by extended ossification with the “acromion
scapulæ” (ib. figs. 8 & 9). As the clavicle descends it curves slightly
and contracts to a point. The angle at which the pair meet is shown in
figs. 4 & 5.


          _Bones of the Wing._ (Pls. III. & VIII. figs. 12–17.)

Of the humerus the series contains two specimens, both measuring 4
inches 3 lines in length, one right, and the other left (Pl. VIII.
figs. 12–14), but differing slightly in their proportions and in
colour—one being of the olive-brown tint with which most of the bones
are stained, the other black. The articular head (ib. _a_) is an
elongate oval convexity, with the larger end toward the radial side,
prominent toward the back and rather flattened toward the front of the
bone, which there swells out beyond the base of the articular surface.
The radial tubercle is small, and descends from the radial end of the
head for about 5 lines; the pectoral process (ib. _b_) is triangular,
obtuse, short, and bent, or directed toward the front side of the bone:
the ulnar tuberosity (ib. _c_) is more produced in that direction; it
is oblong, obtuse, with its base impressed by a large pit both above
(fig. 12, _h_) and below—the lower one (ib. _g_) being the deepest,
and perforated by a pneumatic foramen; the convex, broad, ulnar border
of this tuberosity has two slightly produced processes, an upper or
posterior (ib. fig. 12, _c_) and a lower and internal (ib. _g_), which
is the smallest. The breadth of the proximal end of the humerus, across
the tuberosities, is 1 inch 5 lines, beyond them the bone contracts
to a smooth subcylindrical shaft, showing at the back part of the
proximal third a longitudinal ridge (fig. 12, _r_), half an inch in
length; it gradually expands at the distal third to a breadth of 10
lines, where the articulations offer the usual avian characteristics
of the elbow-joint. The head of the humerus is occupied by a fine
cancellous structure: into the large vacuity below this, crossed in
the section figured (Pl. XI. fig. 5) by a transverse slender bar of
bone, the small pneumatic foramina at the bottom of the wide and deep
fossa for the axillary air-cell open. The part of the hollow proximal
end giving off the pectoral and other processes for the attachment of
muscles is strengthened by similar abutments. The pneumatic cavity of
the main part of the shaft of the humerus is simple, with a compact
wall thicker than at the ends of the humerus, but not exceeding that
which is characteristic of the long air-bones in birds. The portion
of the distal end chiefly serving for muscular attachments and the
antibrachial articulation are also cancellous.

The _radius_ (Pls. III. & XII. fig. 15) is a straight and slender bone,
3 inches 1 line in length, and 2 lines in chief diameter of the shaft.
The proximal articular surface is subcircular, 3 lines in diameter,
moderately concave; the distal end expands to the same extent, but is
compressed, as usual.

The _ulna_ (Pls. III. & VIII. figs. 16 & 17) is 3 inches 1 line in
length, of the usual ornithic character, with a well-defined, narrow,
elliptic, rough muscular depression, 8 lines in length (fig. 16, _c_),
extending upon the shaft from below the anterior or palmar angle of
the proximal articular surface. This bone has no pneumatic foramen;
the orifice for the medullary artery is above the middle of the same
palmar surface, the canal inclining distad. The shaft of the bone is
nearly straight; the back or anconal surface, which is slightly convex,
shows feeble impressions of the attaching ligaments of the alar plumes,
which are represented in all the figures of the entire or living bird.
A second ulna is 3 inches 3 lines in length.

There was no carpal or pinion bone in the collection of remains
submitted to me: this part of the wing is conjecturally restored in
dotted outline in Plate XV.


             _Bones of the Leg._ (Pls. III., IX., X. & XI.)

Of the five _femora_ in the above defined series of remains of the
Dodo, two measure 6 inches 3 lines in length; one (Pl. IX.) is 6 inches
4½ lines; the shortest is a little under 6 inches, with proportionate
differences in the diameter of the shaft. All of them show a small
pneumatic foramen (Pl. IX. figs. 1 & 2, _p_) on the inner side of the
anterior ridge of the great trochanter (ib. _c_), and on the same
transverse line with the head of the bone. This part shows an oblong
depression (ib. figs. 2 & 3, _a_) for the “ligamentum teres” at the
upper and back part. The articular surface on the same aspect of the
neck (ib. fig. 3, _b_), adapted to the trochanterian prominence of the
pelvis (Pl. VII. _t_), is well-defined. The trochanter (Pl. IX. fig. 1,
_c_) rises, ridge-like, above the level of the head, and is continued
from behind the middle of the articular surface on the neck, forward,
with a convex outline upon the fore and outer part of the shaft, where
it gradually subsides; a narrow intermuscular ridge (ib. fig. 1, _r_),
inclining to the middle of the fore part of the shaft, is continued
from the trochanterian one. The small trochanter (ib. fig. 3, _d_)
is a small subcircular tuberosity, in some specimens a ridge, 3 to 4
lines in length, on the inner side of the shaft, about an inch below
the head. The muscular impressions on the fore part of the bone are
well defined. A minute medullary canal (ib. fig. 3, _m_) perforates the
middle of the back part of the shaft; the popliteal fossa (ib. fig.
3, _o_) shows a few small pneumatic orifices; a triangular rough flat
surface divides the fossa from the outer condyle. Above the fibular
depression (ib. fig. 3, _g_) there is a well-defined, slightly raised,
rough surface (ib. _k_) for the head of the ectogastrocnemius muscle.
The ridge (ib. _n_) extending to the back part of the inner condyle is
not sharp; the rotular groove (ib. fig. 1, _p_) is deep and moderately
wide, with the inner boundary, formed by the narrow anterior part of
the inner condyle (ib. fig. 5, _e′_), most produced. The breadth of
this end of the longer femora is 1 inch 9 lines; the character of the
distal articular surface is shown in Pl. IX. fig. 5.

The head, neck, and great trochanter (Pl. XI. fig. 6) are occupied by a
pneumatic cancellous structure, with a thin compact wall on the upper
part and sides: this begins to gain thickness at the under part of the
neck and at the lower and back part of the trochanter, the compact wall
acquiring a thickness of a line at the beginning of the shaft, where
the cancellous structure is confined to the outer side of the pneumatic
cavity; this structure gives way to a few delicate filaments of bone
crossing the cavity of the major part of the shaft, and is not resumed
until the bone expands to form the distal condyles (ib. fig. 7).

The five _tibiæ_ of _Didus_ in the same collection range in length from
8 inches 8 lines to 9 inches. The procnemial ridge (Pl. X. figs. 1,
2, 4, _p_) is a triangular plate, with the base longest and the apex
rounded off: it inclines outwardly, and does not extend much more than
half an inch from the level of the proximal end of the bone: the length
of its base rather exceeds an inch: on its inner side a triangular
muscular surface is well defined by an irregular inferior line or ridge
(ib. fig. 2, _n_). The ectocnemial process (ib. figs. 1, 3, 4, _e_)
is thicker, shorter, and terminates roughly and obtusely. There is a
low, narrow ridge (ib. fig. 2, _g_), about half an inch in length, on
the inner side of the proximal end of the shaft, beginning about 9
lines below the articular surface at that end. The fibular ridge (ib.
figs. 1 & 3, _h_), beginning 1 inch 8 lines from the proximal end,
extends about 2 inches down the outer side of the shaft. The epicnemial
ridge (ib. figs. 1 & 4, _k_) is obtuse, and but little produced above
the upper articular surfaces or condyles (_t_ _d_) of the tibia: the
breadth of that end of the bone, in the longest specimen, is 2 inches 3
lines. The tendinal canal at the fore part of the distal end is bridged
by bone (ib. fig. 1, _l_), and is situated on the inner half of that
aspect of the shaft; the lower opening is subcircular and close to
the anterior end of the inner lower condyle (ib. _a_), which is more
produced forward than the outer one (ib. _b_). Their hind ends project
very little beyond the level of that aspect of the shaft of the tibia.
An intermuscular ridge (ib. fig. 1, _r_) strengthens into a tuberosity
(_r′_) at the inner side of the tendinal groove.

The cancellous structure in the tibia is limited to an extent of about
half an inch below the proximal articular surfaces (Pl. XI. fig.
8), and to about an inch and a half from the distal end of the line
(ib. fig. 9): the shaft is occupied by a large air-cavity, with a
compact wall of half a line in thickness at the upper third, gradually
increasing to about a line at the lower fourth, until the cancellous
structure is reestablished; the transverse direction of a plate of this
structure indicates the extent of the original distal epiphysis of the
tibia (fig. 8).

The _fibula_ (Pl. X. figs. 6–8) presents the usual ornithic characters
of the bone: it varies from 4 inches 4 lines to 4 inches 6 lines in
length, with a greatest proximal breadth of 8 lines. No adequate gain
would result from a detailed description or comparison of this bone;
and the rest of the bones of the foot have received every requisite
attention in this way in the excellent work on the Dodo and its
kindred, already quoted. A longitudinal section of the _metatarsus_,
taken in the direction from side to side (Pl. XI. fig. 10), shows
the loose cancellous texture of the common epiphysis of the three
long metatarsals, and the remnant of their contiguous coalesced walls
reduced to a thin lamella of bone. As the moiety of the bone figured is
the posterior one (of the left metatarsus), the usual oblique position
of the middle metatarsal (_iii_), with its proximal end nearer the back
part and its distal end nearer the fore part of the coalesced series,
produces a corresponding direction of the section, with narrowing and
termination of the exposed part of the medullary canal about one-third
from the distal end of that metatarsal. The medullary canal of the
outer metatarsal (_iv_) is wider and descends lower before the breaking
up of the inner surface into decussating lamellæ or filaments, than
that of the inner metatarsal (_ii_): the peripheral compact wall of the
inner is twice the thickness of that of the outer metatarsal. I may
remark that the more posterior position of the middle metatarsal at
its proximal end, from which and the corresponding part of the common
epiphysis the calcaneal process is developed, is related to the greater
share taken by the middle toe in the act of walking and scratching. I
will only remark that of the four metatarsals of as many Dodos in the
present series, one exceeds by a line the length of that figured in
plate xi. _op. cit._, and one falls short thereof to the same trifling
amount.


                  _Skull._ (Plates III. & XI. fig. 1.)

Of the skull of the Dodo, the series of bones transmitted to me include
the cranial part with the detached upper mandibular bone (more or
less mutilated) of two mature birds, and the lower mandible of three
individuals. In the latter the dentary elements (Pl. XI. fig. 1, 32),
confluent at the “gonys,” are distinct from the hinder halves of the
rami formed by the confluent, or perhaps connate, articular, surangular
and angular elements (ib. 31): if the “splenial” were ever distinct, it
has coalesced with the dentary, where its upper boundary is indicated
by a linear groove or series of small foramina.

In size, shape, and all other characters of these important evidences
of the specific nature of the remains from the Mahébourg morass[29],
they agree with those of _Didus ineptus_ detailed in the ‘Proceedings
of the Zoological Society’ for January 11th, 1848 (part xvi. pp. 2–8),
and in the work entitled “The Dodo and its Kindred,” pp. 76–96.

The occipital condyle (ib. 1) presents the same hemispheroid or
reniform shape, with the median vertical notch or depression above.
The upper margin of the foramen magnum is broad, as it were excised,
with the sides slightly prominent. The superoccipital foramen is
present in both specimens, as in the one originally described (Proc.
Zool. Soc. part xvi. p. 2). This foramen also exists in Owls and
Parrots, but not in all Pigeons; the _Didunculus_ (Pl. III. fig. 2)
shows no trace of it; I have also failed to find it in the skull of a
Crown-pigeon (_Goura coronata_). The superoccipital ridge is defined by
the subsidence of the surface beneath it being continued directly from
the upper, almost flat, smooth surface of the cranium: the middle part
of the ridge is more produced than the angles. In the great breadth of
the occipital surface compared with its depth, in its flatness from
side to side, and its aspect backward and a little upward, _Didus_ most
resembles _Dinornis_. The basioccipital curves downward, and unites
with the basisphenoid in developing the pair of larger tuberosities
(Pl. XI. fig. 1, 5), which terminate about ½ an inch below the
occipital condyle. There is nothing of this structure in the Columbine
cranium. In one of my Dodo’s skulls there is a pair of small tubercles
between the larger basioccipital ones; these are not developed in the
other cranium. The basisphenoid is subquadrate, and flattish below,
impressed by a shallow median longitudinal channel.

The hypoglossal nerve escapes by two small foramina on each side of
the base of the condyle; external to these is the vagal foramen; still
more external is the depression (ib. _a_) perforated below by the
entocarotid, glossopharyngeal, and sympathetic, above by the tympanic
vein. The entocarotid canal opens into the hind part of the sella or
pituitary fossa: the vagal canal begins within the skull, above the
hypoglossal foramina. The paroccipital carries the posterior surface
of the skull downward and outward to a much greater degree than in any
Dove, but to a less degree than in _Dinornis_. The Eustachian tubes
impress the outer and fore part of the basisphenoid.

The temporal fossæ (Pl. III.), in the present specimens, show the same
contraction in proportion to their depth by which the original skull
of the Dodo, compared with that of the _Dinornis_, ‘Proc. Zool. Soc.’
(1848, p. 3), differed from the larger extinct wingless bird. In the
approximation of the postorbital process to the mastoid, _Didunculus_
shows a closer resemblance to _Didus_ than does _Goura_, in which the
temporal fossa, besides being narrow, is shallow. The temporal muscle
appears to spread its origin above the fossa upon the sides of the
cranium, forward half an inch in advance of the postfrontal process,
and backward to the outer angle of the superoccipital ridge.

The parietal region is broad, flat, and short, as in _Dinornis_, not
convex as in Doves; it is also impressed at its middle part by a
shallow transverse groove, continued outward and forward of less depth
and definition, so as to mark off the convex interorbital part of the
swollen frontals.

The outer side of the mastoid is convex, smooth, overhanging the
tympanic cavity, and sending off a short process, the base of which is
defined in one cranium by a transverse ridge in front of the anterior
articular cup for the tympanic bone. A similar process is developed in
_Didunculus_, not in _Goura_, where it is barely indicated.

The presphenoid is compressed, but thickened and rounded below, where
the palatines and pterygoids at their junction with each other abut
against it: the pterygoid sends off a short process from the middle of
its hinder border; but this is not met by a corresponding “pterygoid
process” of the basisphenoid as in _Didunculus_.

The frontals are broad and convex, rising abruptly (as in _Didunculus_)
above the coalesced cranial ends of the nasals and premaxillary (Pl.
III.); in _Didus_ the breadth greatly exceeds the length of the
interorbital frontal convexity, as compared with _Didunculus_, and the
convexity reigns in the transverse as well as the antero-posterior
direction; in _Didunculus_, however, it is less concave transversely
than in _Goura_. In the breadth or thickness of the interorbital
septum _Didus_ resembles _Apteryx_ and _Palapteryx_ and shows the
same pneumatic cancellous structure. The posterior olfactory chambers
are partially divided, as in _Dinornis_, by an upper median septum;
each compartment, which is 7 lines across and an inch in length, is
perforated posteriorly by an olfactory foramen more than a line in
diameter, from which grooved impressions of ramifications of the nerve
diverge upon the hind and upper wall of the chamber: external to the
olfactory foramen is a longer one for the passage of a vein into the
fore and inner part of the orbit.

The cranial ends of the nasals and nasal process of the premaxillary
(Pl. XI. fig. 1, 22) are flat, depressed, thin plates; the latter at
its junction with the frontal is 6 lines broad, partially divided by
a median groove above and a ridge below, and by short linear fissures
from the nasals: the forward extension of these bones is feebly
indicated by linear grooves terminating at the outer margins of the
nasal branch of the premaxillary, about 4 inches from its vertical
end. The proportion of the base of the upper mandible attached to the
frontal contributed by the nasals is the same as that indicated in
the ‘Proc. Zool. Soc.’ _l. c._ The nasal branch of the premaxillary
presents a full elliptical transverse section where it quits the
maxillary processes, losing both depth and breadth as it recedes
to join the nasals; here it retains its breadth, viz. 6 lines, but
continues to be thinned off vertically to the plate above named joining
the frontal. The under surface of the narrower part of the stem is
angular, the upper one being gently convex.

“Where the nasal and maxillary processes diverge, there is a deep
groove externally, terminating in a canal directed forwards into
the rostral part or body of the premaxillary”[30]. This part is
subdecurved, pointed, roughened by irregular vascular perforations and
grooves, with a sharp alveolar border, which describes a sigmoid curve
lengthwise, and with a deeper concavity of the palatal surface than in
_Dinornis_ or _Didunculus_. Moreover the concavity is partially divided
lengthwise by a median ridge. The palatal surfaces of the maxillary
processes and maxillaries are narrow and very convex transversely,
intercepting a long narrow palato-nasal fissure. The outer side of the
maxillary process is deep vertically and slightly concave lengthwise—a
structure not known in _Didunculus_ or any Dove, and related, like
most other deviations from the Columbine cranial characteristics, to
the provision of unwonted strength of beak in the Dodo. The maxillary
branches of the premaxillary have completely coalesced with the
maxillaries, as these have with the palatines; and the halves of the
upper mandible here swell out laterally and more so vertically, the
maxillaries rising to combine with the outer divisions of the nasals,
and sending back a short process from their lower and lateral part to
join the malar. The inner surface of the maxillary process (Pl. XI.
fig. 1, 22*) is smooth and slightly convex vertically; both upper and
lower borders are obtuse and thick.

The palatines arch outward from their posterior attachments, are broad
and smooth mesially; the margin here is angular, with a slightly
produced obtuse apex, divided by a channel on the under surface of
the palatine from the outer convex border; the upper and outer ridge
extends forward to the maxillary; the inner one subsides before
reaching that bone. “The palatines form the posterior boundaries
of the naso-palatine aperture, and approximate each other at both
ends, but more closely posteriorly, yet here without meeting; whilst
in _Didunculus_ they coalesce before receiving the abutment of the
pterygoids.

“The tympanic bone is subquadrate, with the four angles produced, and
the upper and hinder are bifurcate, forming the double condyle for
the mastoid articulation”[31]. There is a larger pneumatic foramen,
communicating with the tympanic cavity, between the articulating
cavities for these condyles.

The brain is singularly small in the present species of _Didus_: and
if it be viewed as an index of intelligence of the bird, the latter
may well be termed _ineptus_. The length of the cranial cavity (Pl.
XI. fig. 1, _v_ _c_) is 1 inch 8 lines, its extreme breadth 1 inch
6 lines, its greatest height 1 inch (and this is at the cerebellar
fossa). The most remarkable feature in the cranial structure of _Didus_
is the disproportionate size of the brain-case to the important part
of the neural axis it contained and protected: some approximation to
this condition is made by _Dinornis_[32], the Owls, and a few large
Cockatoos, _e. g._ _Microglossum aterrimum_; but it is fully paralleled
only by the Elephant among air-breathing vertebrates, as may be seen
by comparing the section Pl. XI. fig. 1 with the figures of a similar
section quoted below[33].

Not only was the brain of very small proportional size in the present
large extinct bird, but the division of the cranial cavity appropriate
to the cerebrum proper is less in proportion to that for the cerebellum
and optic lobes, at least in vertical and longitudinal diameters, than
in any other known bird.

In the Elephant the thickness of the pneumatic diploë between the
fore part of the cerebral cavity and that of the outer cranial wall
equals the longitudinal diameter of the cavity containing the cerebral
hemispheres: in _Didus_ it exceeds that diameter. The thickness of the
pneumatic diploë above the cerebral cavity equals the vertical diameter
of that cavity in _Didus_: the diploë gradually decreases in thickness
as it approaches the foramen magnum. The disposition of the osseous
lamellæ forming the cells or cavities of the diploë is very different
in the Elephant and Dodo: they extend for the most part vertically
between the outer and inner tables of the skull in the proboscidian
mammal, leaving long and narrow interspaces; in the heavy ground-bird
they form a congeries of small subequal and subspherical air-cells, and
this structure obtains in the basal and lateral walls as well as in the
superior or “roofing” wall of the cranial cavity. The extent of this
cancellous structure at the sides of the cranial cavity may be known by
the ratio of the breadth of that cavity to the breadth of the cranium,
which is 3 inches and 8 lines at the broadest part of the brain, viz.
the prosencephalon. It would seem, at first sight, as if the poorly
developed brain of the Dodo had needed, on some account, unusual
protection; but the true explanation rests on the size, weight, and
power of the bill, and the concomitant necessity for adequate extent
of attachment of the facial to the cranial part of the skull, and of
the muscles from the trunk destined to sustain and wield the long and
heavy-beaked head. The cerebrum of the Dodo does not greatly, and by
no means proportionally, exceed the size of that part of the brain in
the Crown-pigeons (_Goura_). If the great Ground-dove of the Mauritius
gradually gained bulk in the long course of successive generations in
that uninhabited thickly-wooded island, and, exempt from the attacks
of any enemy, with food enough scattered over the ground, ceased to
exert the wings to raise the heavy trunk, then, on Lamarck’s principle,
the disused members would atrophy, while the hind limbs, through the
increased exercise by habitual motion on land, with increasing weight
to support, would hypertrophy.

In the long course of generations subject to this slow rate of
change, there would be nothing in the contemporaneous condition of
the Mauritian fauna to alarm or in any way to put the Dodo to its
wits; being, like other Pigeons, monogamous, the excitement, even, of
a seasonal or prenuptial combat, might, as in them, be wanting: we
may well suppose the bird to go on feeding and breeding in a lazy,
stupid fashion, without call or stimulus to any growth of cerebrum
proportionate to the gradually accruing increment of the bulk of
the body. Whatever part of the brain was concerned in regulating or
controlling muscular actions, might, indeed, be expected to show some
concurrent rate of increase with the growing mass of the voluntary
contractile fibres; and the size of the cerebellar division (Pl. XI.
fig. 1, _n_ _o_) of the cranial cavity accords with the generally
accepted physiology of the superincumbent mass of the epencephalon.
The lateral depression at the fore and under part of the side of the
postcerebral division of the cranial cavity indicates that the optic
lobes, like the eyes, remained almost stationary during the progressive
acquisition of the bulk that distinguishes the Dodo from the largest
existing Doves.

The proportions of _Didus_, _Pezophaps_, _Casuarius_, _Rhea_,
_Dromaius_, _Struthio_, _Aptornis_, _Cnemiornis_, _Palapteryx_,
_Æpyornis_, _Dinornis_, &c. among terrestrial birds, of _Notornis_
among the lake-haunting Coots, and of _Aptenodytes_ and _Alca impennis_
among seabirds, point to the disuse of wings in flight as the main
condition of increase of size in species of birds—the next condition
being absence of lethal enemies during the years requisite for such
course and rate of growth.

Let foes arise from whom a power of flight is the main condition of
escape, and the wingless giants of the feathered class soon succumb.
Among the genera above-cited, _Aptornis_, _Cnemiornis_, _Æpyornis_,
_Palapteryx_, _Dinornis_, _Didus_, and _Pezophaps_, with the largest
of the Auks, have thus passed away, while _Notornis_ and _Apteryx_ are
on the verge of extinction through the rapid increase of population
in the small island to which they are restricted. In sparsely peopled
continents, such as Africa, South America, and Australia, brevipennate
giants may still range the deserts, pampas, and unfrequented wilds. The
ascertained recent advent of Man in New Zealand, New Britain, Ceram,
Banda, Salwattie, Mauritius, Rodriguez, significantly points to the
conditions under which have come to pass, in lapse of time, so strange
an anomaly as a bird with the specially modified instruments of flight
reduced below the power of exerting that mode of locomotion, yet, as
a bird, retaining the conditions of the respiratory and tegumentary
systems of the volant class, of which it has become a degenerate
member. With the cessation of the chief of those conditions, viz. the
absence of enemies, such birds necessarily perish.

Refraining, however, from further indulgence in an easy and seductive
vein of speculation, I would recall attention to the notable
protuberance in the cranial cavity of the Dodo (Pl. XI. fig. 1, _o_)
developed towards the upper part of the vertical tentorium, contracting
at its lower part into the ridge dividing the prosencephalic from
the mesencephalic chamber. In the latter are the orifices for the
issue of the trigeminal nerve, the larger and posterior (ib. _tr_)
giving passage to the third and second divisions, and answering to the
combined foramen ovale and rotundum of mammals, and the smaller and
anterior foramen dismissing the first or orbital division of the fifth
nerve. At the upper part of the mesencephalic fossa the narrow groove
for the lateral venous sinus impresses and defines the back part of the
tentorial protuberance, above which it bifurcates, the lower branch
bounding or defining the wall of the superior semicircular canal and
the upper part of the primitive acoustic capsule. Below this arch is
an oblong cerebellar fossa (ib. _n_) which appears to have received
veins from the cranial diploë. Beneath this fossa, and just behind
the mesencephalic chamber, is the multiperforate internal auditory
depression. Next behind this is the outlet for the vagal nerve and
entojugular vein. Below this are the small precondyloid foramina. There
is a falcial ridge, low and thick, indicating the division of the
prosencephalic chamber into lateral compartments for hemispheres; and
this ridge shows a narrow groove as for a small longitudinal sinus. A
transverse linear groove abruptly defines the fore part of the ridge.

The vertically expanded anterior part of the premaxillary (ib. fig. 1,
22) has a large pneumatic cavity communicating by a reticulate wall
with the cells of a cancellous structure, larger than those of the
cranial diploë. The maxillary branch of the premaxillary (ib. 22*)
consists of a light open-work air-diploë, with a very thin outer case
of bone. The short symphysis mandibulæ shows a small cavity, surrounded
by more minutely cancellous structure and thicker compact walls,
especially at the upper and hinder parts.

Although some characters have been too much insisted on (_e.g._ the
“superoccipital foramen”) as exemplifying the affinity of the Dodo, the
more essential characters of the skull relate to its true Columbine
character, while the deviations from that part of the skeleton of
volant Doves are explicable in the adaptive developments needed for the
wielding of long, powerful, massive mandibles, serving most probably
to enable the bird to subsist on some proportion of animal diet, in
addition to such vegetable food as it might gain from the ground. Such
indiscriminate feeding doubtless rendered its flesh less palatable than
that of the winged Pigeons of the Mauritius to the Dutch navigators of
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.

But the affinities of _Didus_ will be more fully and decisively brought
out in the comparison of the, in this respect, more instructive and
light-giving parts of the skeleton.




                   § 3. _Comparison of the Skeleton._


The dorsal region of the vertebral column shows, in some birds, a
confluence of certain vertebræ: I have observed four to be so welded
together by both centrums and neural spines in _Phœnicopterus_, viz.
the second to the fifth dorsal inclusive, leaving the sixth free, which
articulates with the first costigerous sacral vertebra. In _Platalea_
three dorsals coalesce in advance of the antepenultimate free vertebra.
In the smaller diurnal birds of prey five dorsal vertebræ are usually
confluent, leaving one free vertebra for the lateral movements of the
trunk between such dorsal “sacrum” and the pelvic one. In Vultures,
Plovers, Bustards, Cranes, _Psophia_, _Cariama_, _Palamedea_, Auks,
Penguins, and in all flightless land-birds save the Dodo, no such
anchylosis takes place. The _Columbidæ_ are the species in which the
dorsal vertebræ, homologous and the same in number with those of
_Didus_, undergo the process of confluence into one mass of bone:
they are the three which immediately precede the last (moveable)
dorsal vertebra; and of these the two anterior develope, in _Goura_
and _Didunculus_, hypapophyses closely corresponding in shape and
proportion with those in the Dodo.

The chief difference which _Didus_ offers in the present region of the
vertebral column from that of _Columbidæ_ is in the greater number
of the vertebræ or segments which are typically completed by bony
hæmapophyses articulating with pleurapophyses and directly with their
mass of coalesced and expanded hæmal spines constituting the sternum.
Of these typical thoracic segments there were five in _Didus_ (Pl.
III.); _Didunculus_ (ib.) shows four; _Goura_ three. In both existing
genera these segments are succeeded by a single one, anchylosed to
the fore part of the sacrum, but with the pleurapophysis long and
moveable, with its hæmapophysis terminating in a point before reaching
the sternum, and extensively connected with the antecedent hæmapophysis
or sternal rib: in both genera two dorsal vertebræ in advance of the
typically complete one have moveable pleurapophyses terminating freely
in a point, with no hæmapophyses other than the costal processes of
the sternum may represent. In _Goura_, which has six pairs of moveable
or thoracic ribs, the second pair belong to the first of the three
anchylosed dorsal vertebræ: in _Didunculus_, which has seven pairs of
thoracic ribs, the second pair belongs to the free dorsal immediately
in advance of the anchylosed mass. Supposing _Didus_ to have had one
pair of ribs behind, and two pairs in front of those that directly
articulate with the sternum, as the vertebra Pl. V. fig. 7 indicates,
it would have had eight pairs of thoracic ribs; and I think this excess
of one pair beyond the formula in _Didunculus_ to be very probable in
the large-bodied, small-winged, extinct Ground-dove.

As far as the series of Dodo’s neck-vertebræ under my observation
exhibit such characters, the proportion of those with neural spines,
or with hypapophyses, or both, is the same as in the _Columbidæ_. In
this family, as in most birds, the greater part of the series want
both processes. The cervical parapophyses, descending to form the
sides of the carotid canal, do not meet, coalesce, and circumscribe
it in any cervical vertebra of _Goura_ or _Didunculus_; and not any
of the vertebræ of _Didus_, which I have yet received, shows such
circumscription of the hæmal canal. The majority of the cervicals in
_Didus_ (those, viz., that lack both neural spines and hypapophyses)
are broader and more massive in proportion to their length than in
the winged Doves. The third cervical in _Didus_ has both the above
processes, as in _Columbidæ_: the characters of the axis vertebra
in the same family are closely repeated in that of the Dodo. In the
Raptores the axis vertebra is shorter in proportion to its length,
and a greater proportion of the cervical vertebræ at both ends of the
series have both neural spines and hypapophyses.

The ribs of the Dodo are as broad, in proportion to their length, as in
Doves, but are relatively longer in proportion to the dorsal region,
encompassing a more capacious thoracic-abdominal cavity. The ribs
of the Vulture are more expanded than in _Didus_, especially where
they afford the extensive attachment to the epipleurals. But I shall
not dwell further on the comparative characters of this part of the
skeleton, as more decisive ones of the affinity of _Didus_ are afforded
by other parts.

In comparing the sternum of the Dodo with that of Doves of flight,
the first well-marked difference is in the adaptive development of
the keel in the last (Pl. III. fig. 2, _Didunculus_), and in the
provision for the concomitantly broader coracoids, the grooves for
which meet and run into each other across the fore part of the bone in
existing _Columbidæ_ (Pl. XII. fig. 2, _b_); consequently the inner
or upper wall of the confluent grooves forms a median prominence (ib.
_e_) at the front margin of the sternum, contrasting with the wide
notch at that part of the bone in the Dodo (Pl. IV. fig. 4). The next
difference, as compared with _Goura_ and most Pigeons, is the absence
of the entolateral processes (Pl. XII. fig. 3, _i_) in the Dodo’s
sternum: but _Didunculus_ singularly exemplifies its nearer affinity
to _Didus_ by a like absence of those processes; only the sternal
margins behind the ectolateral processes (ib. fig. 1, _h_), instead of
converging with a slight convexity to an obtuse apex, as in Pl. VI.,
describe a concavity, through an expansion of the posterior truncate
end of the breast-bone. The sternum of _Didunculus_ may be said to
show one pair of posterior notches (Pl. XII. fig. 1, _f_), that of
other Pigeons two pairs (ib. fig. 3, _f_ _f′_); but the sternum of
_Didus_, which is relatively broader, shows no other trace of the
anterior notch (Pl. VI. _f_) than is afforded by the rounded angle at
which the ectolateral process (_h_) rises from the bone. Although the
costal margin is relatively shorter in Doves of flight than in the
Dodo, again an intermediate condition is manifested by _Didunculus_
as compared with _Goura_, in which latter Dove there are articular
surfaces for three sternal ribs (Pl. XII. fig. 3, _o_ 1, 2, 3),
whilst in _Didunculus_ there are four (ib. fig. 1, _c_). _Didunculus_
also exhibits, more strongly than _Goura_, the obtuse ridges (ib.
fig. 2, _r_) converging like buttresses from the outer wall of the
coracoid groove to the fore part of the keel, where they subside. In
_Didunculus_ there is a pneumatic foramen exterior to the coracoid
groove, corresponding with _p_, fig. 4, Pl. IV., which I do not find
in the sternum of _Goura_; but in the Crown-pigeons the pneumatic
foramina along the middle line of the upper surface of the sternum are
conspicuous; they are confined to the fore part of that surface in
_Didunculus_ (Pl. XII. fig. 1).

In the direction of the ectolateral processes _Goura_ (ib. fig. 3, _h_)
is intermediate between _Didunculus_ and _Didus_. The pectoral ridge
on the outer surface of the sternum, continued backward from the outer
end of the coracoid groove, is adaptively better marked in Pigeons
of flight than in the Dodo; and the pair of ridges are more nearly
parallel in their backward course, not so convergent as in _Didus_.
In _Goura_ the subcostal ridge is better marked than in _Didunculus_.
In no Dove of flight is the body of the sternum so broad and hollow
as in _Didus_ (Pl. XI. fig. 4); in this respect the Vulture more
nearly resembles the Dodo, as it does also in the more convex anterior
contour of the keel: but the vulturine sternum does not lose breadth
as it extends backward; it is a square-shaped shield in birds of prey,
shorter in proportion to its breadth, with a greater extent of costal
process and margin, and with the ectolateral processes, when they
exist, extending backward as far as the hinder border of the bone. In
the thorough quest of resemblances to the Dodo’s sternum which I have
made through the class of Birds, I came upon an unexpected superficial
likeness to it in the sternum of a Night-jar (_Podargus humeralis_).
The ectolateral processes (Pl. XII. fig. 4, _h_) rise behind the
moderately extended costal borders, _c_; and beyond them the body of
the sternum converges to an obtuse end, with a contour similar to
that in _Didus_. Moreover the coracoid grooves are divided from each
other by a free concave border, less deep and extensive, indeed, than
in _Didus_, but as free from any trace of episternal projection. The
ectolateral processes, however, are extended backward to beyond the
sternal body; and this part usually shows a pair of small entolateral
notches, _f′_, of which one was present on one side in the specimen
figured.

Through the reduction of the coracoids in all flightless birds, there
is an interval between their sternal articulations: this is long
and concave in the Dodo, but is longest and most deeply concave in
_Apteryx_; it is long but almost straight in _Rhea_; in _Casuarius_ and
_Dromaius_ it is narrow but deeply notched; in _Struthio_ it developes
a short episternal process. In no Grallatorial sternum with both ecto-
and ento-lateral processes (as e.g. _Otis_, _Œdicnemus_, _Charadrius_)
do the former project, as in _Didus_ and the Rasores, immediately
behind the costal margin, but they are continued, parallel with the
keel, from the outer and posterior angle of the sternum, distant from
the costal margin. In old Plovers the entolateral process joins the
contiguous angle of the sternal body, and converts the inner notch into
a foramen.

In the breast-bone of the Dodo we plainly discern the Columbine
modification of the Gallinaceous type, simplified in the minor
development of those parts relating adaptively to the power of flight,
and expanded and excavated for the support of the larger gizzard with
its heavier grindstones[34].

In comparing the pelvis of _Didunculus_ and _Goura_ (Pl. XII. fig.
5) with that of _Didus_ (Pl. VII. fig. 1), the correspondences
are:—in the general shape, proportions and disposition of the ilia;
in the articulation therewith of the last pair of moveable ribs,
and of the short straight confluent pleurapophyses of the three
succeeding sacral vertebræ; then follow, as in _Didus_, three vertebræ
without pleurapophyses, these reappearing in the next two with their
extremities converging to abut against a prominence of the inner
surface of the ilium in the same relative position. The difference
here is in the two equal and more slender rib-buttresses, in place
of the single stronger one, which is the more common structure in
_Didus_; but in _Goura_ I have noted an instance in which it agreed
with the _Didunculus_ on the left side, and with _Didus_ on the right,
in the last-specified character. In the Crown-pigeons, also, there is
an indication of the transverse ridge marking off the under part of
the centrum of the first sacral from the rest, and those that follow
are less expanded than in the Dodlets; moreover in _Didunculus_ they
show a median canal instead of a ridge, while the ridge is feebly
indicated here and there and there is no canal in _Goura_. In neither
_Didunculus_ nor _Goura_ do the sacral centrums behind the last
rib-abutments diminish in breadth so suddenly as in _Didus_: in both
the winged Pigeons the hinder part of the pelvic cavity is relatively
deeper and narrower than in _Didus_; in both, also, the upper and
anterior concave tracks of the ilia are deeper; and in _Didunculus_
the mesial borders do not attain the neural crest, but leave a pair of
open longitudinal canals at that part of the pelvis; in _Goura_ those
margins reach the neural crest, but do not overtop it at any part.
In _Goura_ the acetabula are more in advance of a median position
than in _Didunculus_, _Columba magnifica_, or _Didus_. Although the
ischiadic foramina are completed by terminal confluence of the ilium
and ischium in _Dromaius_ and _Casuarius_, yet the length of those
foramina (which are unclosed) in _Struthio_ and _Apteryx_, concomitant
with the greater relative length of the pelvis, shows the difference of
_Didus_ from the cursorial Brevipennates in this part of the skeleton.
The ischia of the winged Pigeons resemble those of the Dodo; but the
inner longitudinal ridge is more strongly marked in _Didunculus_: in
the _Goura_ it is less developed than in _Didus_; the bone is longer
also in proportion to its breadth, and the ischiadic foramen is longer
and narrower: the proportions of that in _Didunculus_ are more like
those in _Didus_. In _Didunculus_ the pubis coalesces with the ischium
behind the small obturator foramen, but leaves a second or posterior
elongate ischio-pubic vacuity. The greatest amount of resemblances with
the pelvis of the Dodo is found in that of different members of the
Dove-tribe.

In comparing the pelvis of the Dodo with that of the Vulture (Pl. XII.
fig. 6), we find in the latter that the first two confluent sacral
vertebræ; supporting moveable ribs are succeeded by several with short
abutting ribs, the extent of this part of the sacrum being nearly
one-half of the whole, instead of one-fourth as in _Didus_ and the
Doves. The reappearance of rib-abutments after four ribless sacrals is
in the posterior third of the sacrum, and they are continued to the end
of that bone from the last four vertebræ of the series, constituting
a very marked difference, both as to number and the character of the
vertebræ in the sacral part of the pelvis.

With regard to the iliac bones, the anterior concave track occupies
two-thirds of the extent of the bone in _Vultur_, not one-half as
in _Didus_ and most Doves; the breadth of the posterior parts of
the ilia with the intervening sacrum in the Vulture is relatively
less than in the winged Doves, and differs in a greater degree from
that characteristic part in the sacrum of _Didus_. In _Ciconia_ the
antacetabular part of the pelvis is relatively longer, and the iliac
bones are more expanded anteriorly. In _Platalea_ the proportions are
more nearly those in _Didus_. In _Otis_ the ilia touch the fore part of
the sacro-spinal ridge, but leave both posterior and anterior apertures
of the ilio-neural canals widely open. In _Œdicnemus_ and _Charadrius_
they are grooves, the ilia not reaching the sacral spines. The external
concavity of the ilium is longer, narrower, and deeper, in most waders,
than in _Didus_. In _Eudyptes_ and _Aptenodytes_ the ilia are more
expanded anteriorly, but the whole pelvis is narrower and longer than
in _Didus_. The Gar-fowl (_Alca impennis_)[35], _Uria_, _Podiceps_,
and _Colymbus_, all show still longer and narrower proportions of the
pelvis.

In the Doves of flight the proportions and relative position of the
three compartments of the cranial cavity differ from those in the Dodo.
Both the pros- and mes-encephalic ones are proportionally larger than
the epencephalic; and the mesencephalic compartment lies more directly
below the prosencephalic one. A very thin stratum of finely cellular
diploë divides the two tables of the skull along the medial line of
the upper surface: it is thicker between the orbits. The falcial
ridge at the inner surface of the prosencephalic roof resembles that
in _Didus_. The tentorial ridge bifurcates halfway down, the front
portion dividing, almost horizontally, the pros- from the mesencephalic
compartment, the hinder and more obtuse ridge dividing, almost
vertically, the mes- from the epencephalic compartment. The angle
of bifurcation is slightly produced and obtuse, but represents very
feebly the tentorial tuberosity (Pl. XI. fig. 1, _o_) in the Dodo: from
it, in _Goura_, is continued backward the arch of bone formed by the
superior semicircular canal, above which is the groove for the venous
sinus, as in _Didus_. The internal auditory fossa is less deep than in
_Didus_: above it is a similarly vertically oblong cerebellar pit. The
nerve-foramina correspond with those in _Didus_: the entocarotid canal
opens into a rather deeper sella in _Columba palumbus_.

On comparing the cranial cavity, as exposed by a vertical longitudinal
section in the Dodo (Pl. XI. fig. 1), with that of a Dinornis similarly
exposed[36], the first difference is the smaller proportional depth
of the diploë in the larger wingless bird, which is not greater over
the prosencephalic than over the epencephalic compartment; next
may be noticed the larger relative size of the former compartment,
indicating the larger cerebrum of the Dinornis, then the absence of
the tentorial tuberosity, the sharper and more produced superior part
of the tentorial ridge arching transversely between the cerebrum and
cerebellum, the smaller internal auditory fossa, and the deeper sella:
the mesencephalic compartment, or cavity for the optic lobe, is less in
proportion to the prosencephalic compartment than in _Didus_; it holds,
however, a similar relative position: finally, the cerebellar pit,
above the internal auditory fossa, is wanting in the Dinornis.

The Dodo agrees with the Doves in possessing a slender furculum,
forming an acute angle: it resembles _Columba galeata_, more
especially, in the halves of that bone being united by ligament below,
and forming separate styles or “clavicles.”

The humerus of the Goura closely repeats most of the characters
described in that of the Dodo; but its length is proportionally
greater, being 3 inches 9 lines, nearly equal to that of the sternum or
pelvis, whereas the humerus of the Dodo is little more than half the
length of either sternum or pelvis. The processes for the attachment of
the muscles are, nevertheless, fully as strongly developed in _Didus_
(Pl. VIII. figs. 12 & 14) as in the volant Doves (Pl. XII. figs. 8 &
9, _Goura_); that, indeed, which is a ridge (_r_) on the back part of
the shaft in _Didus_, is a mere rough surface in _Goura_, and does not
show in _Didunculus_. The pneumatic fossa, which varies in depth in
the two humeri of the Dodo, is in both relatively larger and shallower
than in _Goura_. The pectoral process is thinner, but relatively rather
more produced, in _Didunculus_. The humerus in _Œdicnemus_, _Otis_,
and _Charadrius_ has a more longitudinally extended, thinner, and more
produced pectoral ridge than in _Didus_ and the _Columbidæ_; there is a
more marked ectocondyloid tuberosity, which in _Charadrius_ becomes a
pointed process.

There is nothing to be gained by giving the details of the more
striking differences which the humerus presents in Penguins, Auks,
and birds of prey, as compared with that bone in the Dodo; but a few
words may be recorded of the comparison of the humerus of the Dodo
with that of the flightless bird of New Zealand so nearly approaching
to it in size, which bird is described in the 5th volume of the
‘Transactions’ of the Society under the name of _Cnemiornis_ (p. 395,
pl. 66. figs. 7–10). In that extinct species, although the humerus is
5½ inches in length, the parts indicative of the forces by which it
was worked are comparatively feebly developed. The ulnar tuberosity
is narrower, thicker, more obtuse, and its base has neither the upper
nor lower excavation; it rises above the articular head, which is less
prominent and narrower than in _Didus_; the pectoral ridge is shorter
and situated lower down upon the shaft, not on the same level with
the radial tuberosity as it is in _Didus_; the distal articulation is
of the same size as in _Didus_, but neither the radial nor the ulnar
convexity is so prominent or well-defined.

The ulna of the Dodo is shorter absolutely, and much more so
proportionally, than in the Goura and most other volant Doves. In
these it exceeds the humerus by about one-fourth its own length; in
_Didunculus_ (Pl. III.) it is a little longer than the humerus; in the
Dodo (ib.) it is shorter than the humerus. The length of the ulna in
_Goura coronata_ is 4 inches 6 lines; it is more bent than in the Dodo;
the quill-tubercles, seven or eight in number, are more prominent;
nevertheless the rough depression for the insertion of the chief flexor
is less deep and less defined. The plumed winglet of the Dodo would
seem, therefore, to have been frequently and forcibly moved.

In comparing the femur of the Dodo with that of the largest Dove, the
bone appears gigantic. The length of the femur in _Goura coronata_
(Pl. XII. fig. 11) is but 3 inches 3 lines, and it is more slender in
proportion to its length than in the Dodo; it, however, repeats the
few characteristics, if they may be so termed, of the Dodo’s femur. It
has the pneumatic foramen in the same position, perhaps proportionally
larger; it has the same large oblong surface for the ligament at
the head of the bone; the great trochanter has the same form and
disposition, but is not quite so much produced anteriorly; there is a
slight depression instead of a ridge for the trochanter minor; the fore
part of the inner condyle is relatively thicker and less produced. The
femur in _Otis_ and _Œdicnemus_ has a thicker and shorter trochanter
major, & more narrow and shallow rotular channel; it is shorter in
comparison with the tibia, and more especially with the metatarsus,
than in _Didus_ and the Doves.

The femur of _Aptornis otidiformis_[37] is of the same size as that
of the Dodo; but it has no pneumatic foramen, the head is more
hemispheroid and inclined forward, the ligamentous pit is deeper and
more circular, the supracervical articular surface is not defined from
that of the head, there is a wider and deeper depression at the fore
part of the proximal end of the femur, and a more prominent tuberosity
on the back part; the ridge continued from the back part of the
shaft to that of the inner condyle is more produced and sharper in
_Aptornis_, the fore part of the same condyle is less produced.

The femur in _Cnemiornis_[38] and _Dinornis_[39] is much thicker, in
proportion to its length, than in either _Aptornis_ or _Didus_. In
_Pezophaps_ the great trochanterian ridge rises higher above the neck,
and the shaft has a more uniform thickness, with the inner contour less
concave, than in _Didus_.

The characters which have been noted at the proximal and distal ends of
the tibia of _Didus_ are repeated in those of the tibia of the _Goura_.
The difference in size is more marked than in the femur; the length of
the tibia of _Goura coronata_ is 4 inches 7 lines, and its shaft is
more slender, in proportion to its length (Pl. XII. fig. 13), than in
_Didus_ (Pl. X.). The tendency to a trihedral form of the shaft is less
marked in _Goura_; the anterior prominences of the distal condyles are
thicker in proportion to the intervening fossa.

In the Vulture the fibular ridge is more parallel with the long axis of
the shaft than in _Didus_; the tendinal canal is less cylindrical, has
an oblique course from the middle of the anterior surface towards the
inner condyle; the fore parts of both distal condyles are less produced
and less convex; the distal end is narrower from before backwards
in proportion to its breadth; both extremities of the bone are less
expanded in proportion to the shaft than in the Dodo.

In the great Plover (_Œdicnemus crepitans_) the tibia, as in other
Grallæ, is longer in proportion to its thickness than in _Didus_; the
epicnemial process rises higher above and projects further in front of
the condylar surfaces before it divides into the pro- and ectocnemial
plates; and these are relatively more produced. The fibular ridge is
shorter in proportion to the length of the tibia, is more prominent,
and more parallel with the axis of the shaft. The distal condyles
project further backward than in _Didus_. The tibia in _Charadrius_,
_Otis_, _Tantalus_, _Grus_, _Ciconia_, _Mycteria_, _Porphyrio_, opposes
similar or equivalent differences to those in _Œdicnemus_, against the
affinity of _Didus_ to any of those Grallæ.

In the comparison of the tibia of this extinct flightless bird with
that of the _Cnemiornis_, the wonderful development of the plates
and processes at the proximal end of the bones in the New Zealand
bird is strikingly manifested. In _Cnemiornis_ the fibular ridge runs
in a line with the shaft, and does not incline from above obliquely
forward as in _Didus_ and the Doves; the ridge on the outer side of the
distal fourth of the bone is stronger and sharper in _Cnemiornis_; the
tendinal canal is transversely elliptical, medial in position, with a
slight inward inclination; the intercondyloid fossa is much wider in
_Cnemiornis_. The differences, indeed, in all the characters of the
tibia, as compared with _Didus_, in the Vultures, Plovers, Penguins,
and terrestrial flightless birds tend to render more instructive
and convincing the resemblances which Pigeons present in the same
characters to the extinct Mauritian bird.




                           § 4. _Conclusion._


The affinities or place in nature of the Dodo being thus determined by
the characters of its skeleton, but few words remain to be said on the
bearings of present knowledge of this species upon other zoological
generalizations.

The researches and observations of naturalists have been carried out to
such an extent as to support the conclusion that the _Didus ineptus_
does not now live in any part of the world, and that it never existed
save in that part of which the island of Mauritius may be a remnant.
Consequently the species there originated; and the most intelligible
conception of its mode of origin is that to which I have alluded in the
description of the brain-case (p. 39).

The Dodo exemplifies Buffon’s idea[40] of the origin of species
through departure from a more perfect original type by degeneration;
and the known consequences of the disuse of one locomotive organ and
extra use of another indicate the nature of the secondary causes that
may have operated in the creation of this species of bird, agreeably
with Lamarck’s philosophical conception of the influence of such
physiological conditions of atrophy and hypertrophy[41]. The young of
all Doves are hatched with wings as small as in the Dodo: that species
retained the immature character. The main condition making possible the
production and continuance of such a species in the island of Mauritius
was the absence of any animal that could kill a great bird incapable
of flight. The introduction of such a destroyer became fatal to the
species which had lost such means of escape[42]. The Mauritian Doves
(_Columba nitidissima_ and _C. meyeri_) that retained their powers of
flight continue to exist there.

As I have no reason to offer why one kind of Pigeon should have
retained and another lost its powers of flight, nor am able to adduce a
particle of evidence of the hypothetical degrees of diminution of the
wing-bones to their stunted proportions in _Didus_, any more than in
_Dinornis_, I feel that in the foregoing remarks I lay myself open to
the rebuke of fellow-labourers who may think with the able authors who
last treated of the present subject.

They warn their readers to “beware of attributing anything like
_imperfection_ to these anomalous organisms, however deficient they may
be in those complicated structures which we so much admire in other
creatures. Each animal and plant has received its peculiar organization
for the purpose, not of exciting the admiration of other beings, but
of sustaining its own existence. Its perfection, therefore, consists,
not in the number or complication of its organs, but in the adaptation
of its whole structure to the external circumstances in which it is
destined to live. And, in this point of view, we shall find that every
department of the organic creation is equally perfect, the humblest
animalcule or the simplest conferva being as completely organized with
reference to its appropriate habitat and its destined functions as Man
himself, who claims to be lord of all. Such a view of the creation is
surely more philosophical than the crude and profane ideas entertained
by Buffon and his disciples”[43].

Nevertheless the truth, as we have or feel it, should be told. In
the end it may prove to be the more acceptable service. The _Didus
ineptus_, L., through its degenerate or imperfect structure, howsoever
acquired, has perished. What have the stigmatizers of Buffon to offer
in lieu of his theory as applied to the origin of this species of bird?
They begin by asking, “Why does the whale possess the germs of teeth
which are never used for mastication? and why was the Dodo endowed
with wings at all, when those wings were useless for locomotion?
This question,” they own, “is too wide and too deep to plunge into
at present.” They nevertheless proceed to remark, “These apparently
anomalous facts are really the indications of laws which the Creator
has been pleased to follow in the construction of organized beings;
they are inscriptions in an unknown hieroglyphic, which we are quite
sure mean _something_, but of which we have scarcely begun to master
the alphabet. There appear, however, reasonable grounds for believing
that the Creator has assigned to each class of animals a definite
type or structure, from which He has never departed, even in the most
exceptional or eccentric modifications of form. Thus, if we suppose,
for instance, that the abstract idea of a Mammal implied the presence
of teeth, and the idea of a Bird the presence of wings, we may then
comprehend why in the Whale and the Dodo these organs are merely
_suppressed_, not wholly _annihilated_”[44].

This notion of type-forms or centres, unfortunately, has not merely
relation to abstract biological speculations or theories, but to
practical questions on which the true progress of Natural History
vitally depends. If such types do exist, the National Museum, it is
argued, may be restricted to their exhibition: and so our legislators
and the public were assured by the Professor of Natural History in
the Government School of Mines[45], when the question was before the
“House” four years ago. I have let slip no suitable occasion[46]
to combat and expose what has seemed to me to be both an erroneous
and mischievous view, most obstructive to the best interests of the
science; and, standing alone as I seemed to do on this point in the
array of evidence before the “Parliamentary Committee on the British
Museum, 1860,” I was glad to find my views on type-forms adopted
and paraphrased by the President of the British Association in his
Inaugural Address at the Meeting at Nottingham[47], in the present year.




                       DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.


                                PLATE I.

Ideal Scene in the island of Mauritius before its discovery, in 1598,
by the Dutch, founded on:—

  Fig. 1. Picture of the Dodo, by Roelandt Savery, 1626, in the
            Royal Gallery of Berlin.

  Fig. 2. Fac-simile of R. Savery’s Picture of the Dodo, in the
            possession of the late Wm. J. Broderip, Esq., F.R.S. (no
            date).

  Fig. 3. Picture of the Dodo, by R. Savery, 1628, in the
            Imperial Collection of the Belvedere, Vienna.

          Each figure is coloured, and of the exact size, as in the
            original paintings.


                                PLATE II.

  Two views of the Dodlet (_Didunculus strigirostris_, Peale;
            _Gnathodon_, Jardine), natural size, from the living
            bird, obtained at the Samoan or Navigators’ Islands,
            and transmitted from Sydney, New South Wales, by
            George Bennett, M.D., F.L.S.[48], to the Gardens of
            the Zoological Society of London, in 1864, where the
            paintings, of which the above are fac-similes, were made
            for the present work. A sketch of the dried head of the
            Dodo in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, of rather less than
            half the natural size, is introduced into the picture,
            now in the Author’s possession[49].


                               PLATE III.

  Fig. 1. Side view of the skeleton of the Dodo (_Didus
            ineptus_, L.), with an outline of the bird as represented
            in the oil-painting presented to the British Museum by
            Edwards, Naturalist and Librarian of the Royal Society,
            into whose possession it came at the decease, in 1753,
            of Sir Hans Sloane, P.R.S., with the statement, or
            tradition, that the painting had been made, of the
            natural size, from a living specimen of the Dodo, in
            Holland. The bones represented in profile, of the natural
            size[50], testify to the accuracy of the form and
            proportions of the Dodo given in the painting.

  Fig. 2. An outline of the Samoan Dove or Dodlet (_Didunculus
            strigirostris_, Peale; _Gnathodon strigirostris_,
            Jardine[51]), of the natural size, from the specimen sent
            by Dr. G. Bennett, and living, in 1864, in the Gardens
            of the Zoological Society of London, with a view of the
            skeleton, corresponding with that of the Dodo.


                                PLATE IV.

  Fig. 1. Front view of the fourth (or first of the three
            confluent) dorsal vertebræ (centrum and neural arch).

  Fig. 2. Vertebral rib, or pleurapophysis, of the same
            vertebra, front view.

  Fig. 3. Sternal rib, or hæmapophysis, of the same vertebra:
            _a_, outer side; _b_, upper or pleural end; _c_, lower or
            sternal end; _d_, front margin; _e_, inner surface.

  Fig. 4. Front view of sternum, or connate mass of hæmal
            spines, including that of the same (fourth dorsal)
            vertebra.

  Fig. 5. Inner surface of an anterior pleurapophysis, with
            coalesced appendage, _a_.

  Fig. 6. Oblique view of ditto, ditto.

  Fig. 7. Anterior pleurapophysis, with appendage, _a_, front
            view: _c_, capitular end; _d_, tubercular end; _f_, hæmal
            end; 7 _a_, outer surface; 7 _b_, inner surface.

  Fig. 8. An anterior pleurapophysis, front view.

  Fig. 9. Posterior surface of the upper end of a posterior
            pleurapophysis: 9 _a_, body and lower end of ditto.

  Fig. 10. Part of a pleurapophysis which has been broken and
            healed.

  Fig. 11. Lower end of a posterior dorsal pleurapophysis, with
            connate rudiment of appendage, _a_.

  Fig. 12. Hæmapophysis.


                              PLATE V[52].

  Fig. 1. Fourth, fifth, and sixth dorsal vertebræ, anchylosed,
            side view.

  Fig. 2. Ditto, ditto, upper view.

  Fig. 3. Ditto, ditto, under view.

  Fig. 4. Ditto, ditto, back view.

  Fig. 5. Ditto, ditto, mutilated, of another Dodo.

  Fig. 6. Anterior dorsal vertebra, side view.

  Fig. 7. Ditto, front view; _pl_, outline of heads of floating
            rib.

  Fig. 8. Penultimate cervical vertebra, side view.

  Fig. 9. Ditto, back view.

  Fig. 10. Middle cervical vertebra, upper view.

  Fig. 11. Ditto, under view.

  Fig. 12. Axis, or second cervical vertebra, upper view.

  Fig. 13. Ditto, under view.


                                PLATE VI.

  Fig. 1. Under view of sternum.

  Fig. 2. Upper or inner view.

  Fig. 3. Back view.


                               PLATE VII.

  Fig. 1. Under or inner view of pelvis.

  Fig. 2. Upper or outer view of pelvis.


                               PLATE VIII.

  Fig. 1. Middle cervical vertebra, upper view.

  Fig. 2. Fifth cervical vertebra, upper view.

  Fig. 3. Fourth cervical vertebra, under view.

  Fig. 4. Right coracoid and clavicle.

  Fig. 5. Left coracoid and clavicle.

  Fig. 6. Right scapula, outer view.

  Fig. 7. Right scapula, inner view.

  Fig. 8. Left moiety of scapular arch, outer view.

  Fig. 9. Ditto, inner view.

  Fig. 10. Upper articular end of right coracoid.

  Fig. 11. Lower ditto.

  Fig. 12. Left humerus, anconal or back surface.

  Fig. 13. Left humerus, ulnar or inner surface.

  Fig. 14. Left ditto, palmar or front surface.
              A. Ditto, proximal or upper end.
              B. Ditto, radial side of upper half.
              C. Ditto, distal end.

  Fig. 15. Right radius.

  Fig. 16. Right ulna, inner or radial side.

  Fig. 17. Ditto, outer or ulnar side.


                                PLATE IX.

  Fig. 1. Left femur, front view.

  Fig. 2. Ditto, inner view.

  Fig. 3. Ditto, back view.

  Fig. 4. Ditto, upper end.

  Fig. 5. Ditto, lower end.


                                PLATE X.

  Fig. 1. Left tibia, front view.

  Fig. 2. Ditto, inner view.

  Fig. 3. Ditto, back view.

  Fig. 4. Ditto, upper end.

  Fig. 5. Ditto, lower end.

  Fig. 6. Left fibula, outer view.

  Fig. 7. Ditto, inner view.

  Fig. 8. Ditto, upper view.


                                PLATE XI.

  Fig. 1. Longitudinal vertical section of mutilated skull.

  Fig. 2. Ditto of third cervical vertebra.

  Fig. 3. Ditto of lower cervical vertebra.

  Fig. 4. Transverse vertical section of sternum.

  Fig. 5. Longitudinal section of humerus.

  Fig. 6. Ditto of upper end of femur.

  Fig. 7. Ditto of lower end of femur.

  Fig. 8. Ditto of upper end of tibia.

  Fig. 9. Ditto of lower end of tibia.

  Fig. 10. Ditto of metatarsus.


                               PLATE XII.

  Fig. 1. Sternum of _Didunculus_, upper view.

  Fig. 2. Ditto, front view.

  Fig. 3. Sternum of _Goura_, upper view.

  Fig. 4. Sternum of _Podargus humeralis_, under view.

  Fig. 5. Pelvis of _Goura_, under or inner view, half natural size.

  Fig. 6. Pelvis of _Gyps_ (Vulture), under or inner view, half natural
          size.

  Fig. 7. Left moiety of scapular arch, _Goura_.

  Fig. 8. Left humerus of _Goura_, anconal surface.

  Fig. 9. Ditto, palmar surface of upper end.

  Fig. 10. Ditto, palmar surface of lower end.

  Fig. 11. Right femur of _Goura_, front view.

  Fig. 12. Ditto, back view of upper end, and back view of lower end.

  Fig. 13. Right tibia and fibula of _Goura_, front view.

All the figures are of the natural size, save when otherwise expressed.
The letters are explained in the text.


                                THE END.


      PRINTED BY TAYLOR AND FRANCIS, RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET.

[Illustration: PLATE. II.

  E. W. Robinson pinx  M & N Hanhart, imp.  J. Erxleben, lith.

  DIDUNCULUS.]

[Illustration: From Nat on Stone by J. Erxleben.

  M. & N. Hanhart, imp.

  DIDUNCULUS STRIGIROSTRIS. _Jde_  DIDUS INEPTUS. _L._]

[Illustration: _PL. IV._

  _E. W. Robinson del._  _W. West imp._]

[Illustration: PLATE. V.

  From nat on Stone, by J. Erxleben.  M & N. Hanhart, imp.]

[Illustration: _PL. VI._

  _E. W. Robinson del._  _W. West imp._]

[Illustration: PLATE. VII.

  J. Smit. lith.  M & N. Hanhart. imp.]

[Illustration: PLATE. VIII.

  From nat on Stone, by J. Erxleben.  M. & N. Hanhart, imp.]

[Illustration: PLATE. IX.

  _Fig 1_

  _Fig 2_

  _Fig 3_

  _Fig 4_

  _Fig 5_

  J. Smit lith.  M & N. Hanhart, imp.]

[Illustration: PLATE. X.

  _Fig 1_

  _Fig 2_

  _Fig 3_

  _Fig 4_

  _Fig 5_

  _Fig 6_

  _Fig 7_

  _Fig 8_

  J. Smit. lith.  M. & N. Hanhart imp.]

[Illustration: PLATE. XI.

  J. Smit. lith.  M. & N. Hanhart. imp.]

[Illustration: PLATE. XII.

  from nat on stone, by J. Erxleben.  M & N Hanhart imp.]


                               FOOTNOTES:

[1] By +William John Broderip+, Esq., F.R.S. The part containing the
article was published in 1836, the volume (ix.) appeared in 1837.

[2] “So in Willughby, but the print is somewhat indistinct, and
there maybe error. In the original the words are ‘_Walgh-Vogel_,
hoc est, nauseam movens, partim quod’ &c., the word therefore is an
interpolation.”

[3] These and other grotesque figures, which may be seen, copied, in
Strickland’s History of the Dodo (‘Dodo and its Kindred,’ 4to, 1848),
from the old authors cited by Broderip, are mere matters of curiosity,
and are here omitted as devoid of scientific value.

[4] This head, in the condition of a skull, has subsequently been
discovered at Copenhagen.—R. O.

[5] The outline of the Dodo in this painting is given, of the natural
size, in Pl. III. of the present work; the reduced woodcut (_tom. cit._
p. 51, copied by Strickland, _op. cit._ p. 28) is, therefore, not here
reproduced.—R. O.

[6] “This curious statement is extracted in the recent edition of Sir
Thomas Brown’s works by Wilkins: published by Pickering.” [8vo, 1836,
vol. i. p. 369, vol. ii. 173. The reference, in Strickland (_op. cit._
p. 22), to vol. i. p. 369. is to a Letter by Sir Hamon L’Estrange to
Dr. Browne, not containing any allusion to the Dodo.—R. O.]

[7] Art. +Dodo+, Penny Cyclopædia, vol. ix. p. 62 (1837).

[8] “London, 4to, Reeve and Co., 1848.”

[9] “Vol. ix. p. 47 (1837).”

[10] “Penny Cyclopædia, vol. xxiii. (1842).”

[11] Transactions of the Zoological Society of London, vol. iv. part
vi. p. 183.

[12] “Dict. des Monogrammes, 1 partie, pp. 201, 274.”

[13] “I am indebted to Mr. Russell for this information.”

[14] “_Nautilus pompilius._”

[15] _Op. cit._ p. 30.

[16] Edwards’s ‘Natural History of Birds and other Rare and undescribed
Animals,’ &c., 4to, vol. vi. pl. 294, 1760.

[17] “Pendant tout le temps qu’on fut là, en vécut de tortues, de
dodarses, de pigeons, de perroquets gris, et d’autre chasse, qu’on
allait prendre avec les mains dans les bois.... La chair des tortues
terrestres étoit d’un fort bon goût. On en sala, et l’on fit fumer,
dent on se trouva fort bien, de même que des dodarses qu’on sala.”
(Recueil des Voiages de la Compagnie des Indes Or., vol. iii. pp. 195,
199, quoted by Strickland, _op. cit._ p. 17.)

[18] ‘History of the Mauritius,’ p. 145*, compiled from the Baron’s
papers by his son.

[19] See Annals of Nat. Hist. ser. 2. vol. vi. p. 290 (1850).

[20] “Es war in 1843, dass ich auf den Gedanken kam, dass der Dodo eine
anomale Taubenform sei; ich überzeugte mich bald dass diese Auffassung
die einzig richtige sei, und fing an eine Arbeit über diesen Gegenstand
vorzubereiten. In 1845 wurde ich aber von meiner Regierung beauftragt
eine Reise um die Welt mit einem dänischen Kriegsschiff mitzumachen;
meine Arbeit musste also vorläufig bei Seite gelegt werden. Schon
vor meine Abreise hat ich aber mehrere sowohl dänische wie fremde
Naturforscher mit meiner Ansicht bekannt gemacht, und der Beweis das es
sich so verhält wird Owen finden können:—

  “1. in den Forhandlingar de Scandinaviske Naturforskers Möde, i
  Kjöbenhavn, 1847, p. 948: und

  “2. in Sundevall, Arsberättelse om Framstegen i vertebrerade
  Djurens Naturalhistoria og Ethnographien, 1845–50, p. 254.”—_Letter
  from_ Prof. +J. Reinhardt+ _to_ Dr. +Albert Günther+.


[21] Reinhardt, quoted by Strickland, _op. cit._ p. 41 (see also p. 70).

[22] This Collection was purchased by the Trustees of the British
Museum for the sum of £100.

[23] So determined, subsequent sets of bones transmitted from
Mauritius, and from which I was privileged to select the most perfect
specimens for the present memoir, got into the market and were sold
by auction since the present memoir was in type, as bones certified
by me to be of the Dodo. I have to express my sincere and grateful
acknowledgements to those _gentlemen_ into whose hands these lots
have fallen, who have forborne their own advantage and refrained from
rushing into print with figures from inferior specimens to anticipate
the appearance of a Memoir communicated to the Zoological Society of
London, January 9th, 1866, and notified in the ‘Proceedings of the
Zoological Society’ for January 1866 as destined “to be published
entire in the Society’s Transactions,” and therefore necessarily
awaiting the lithographing of “illustrations,” which every true
promoter of science for its own sake must have desired to see as
complete as the best-selected materials would permit to be given.—R.
O., June 1866.

[24] In the quaint print, in folio 3, of the “Narration Historique
du Voiage faict par les huict Navires d’_Amsterdam_ au mois de Mars
l’An 1598. soubs la conduitte de l’admiral Jaques Corneille Necq,”
&c., the first-named object, No 1, “Sont Tortues qui se tiennent sur
l’haut pays, frustez d’aisles pour nage, de telle grandeur, qu’ils
chargent ung homme et rampent encore fort roidement, prennent aussi des
Ecriuisses de la grandeur d’un pied qu’ils mengent. 2. Est ung oiseau,
par nous nommé _Oiseau de Nausée_, à l’instar d’une _Cigne_, ont le cul
rond, couvert de deux ou trois plumettes crespues, carent des aisles,
mais en lieu d’icelles ont ilz trois ou quatre plumettes noires, des
susdicts oiseaux avons nous prins une certaine quantité, accompaigné
d’aucunes tourturelles et autres oiseaux, qui par noz compaignons furēt
prins, la premiere fois qu’il arrivoyent au pays, pour chercher la plus
profonde et plus fraische Riviere, et si les navires y pourroyent estre
sauvez, et retournerent d’une grande joye, distribuant chasque navire,
de leur Venoison prins, dont nous partismes le lendemain vers le port,
fournismes chasque navire d’un Pilote de ceux qui au paravant y avoyent
esté, avons cuict cest oiseau, estoit si coriace que ne le povions
asses boviller, mais l’avons mengé a demy cru. Si tost qu’arrivames
au port, envoya le Vice-Admiral nous, avecq une certaine troupe au
pays, pour trouver aucun peuple, mais n’ont trouvé personne, que des
Tourturelles et autres en grande abondance, lesquels nous prismes et
tuames, car veu qu’il n’y eust personne qui les effraia, n’avoient
ilz de nous nulle crainte, tindrēt lieu, se laisserent assomer. En
sōme c’est un pays abōdant en poissō et oiseaux, voire tellemēt
qu’il excella tous les autres audit voyage.”—_Le Second Livre de la
Navigation des Indes Orientales_, fol., 1601. The Tortoise and Dodo in
fig. 1, p. 1, of the present work, are taken from the print, p. 3, of
the above work and edition.

[25] See, especially, Bontekoe’s figure, copied by Strickland, in the
title-page and at p. 63 of the above-cited work.

[26] Owen, ‘Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ 1866, vol. ii. p. 32.

[27] Called “hyosternal” in the Geoffroyan determination of parts of
the bird’s sternum.

[28] The intermuscular ridges (‘pectoral,’ ‘subcostal,’ ‘carinal’) are,
with other parts of the bird’s sternum, here named as defined in my
‘Anatomy of Vertebrates,’ vol. ii. pp. 16–23.

[29] “La Mare aux Songes.”

[30] Proc. Zool. Soc. _l. c._ p. 5.

[31] Proc, Zool. Soc. _l. c._ p. 6.

[32] Zool. Trans. vol. iv. pl. 24. fig. 4.

[33] Odontography, pl. 146. fig. 1; Anat. of Vertebrates, vol. ii. p.
439. fig. 296.

[34] The habit of the Dodo to avail itself of extraneous crushers to
a gallinaceous or struthious degree, is attested by the quotation, p.
8, not the least interesting of the fruits of the extensive research
of the learned and conscientious author of the Article +Dodo+, in the
‘Penny Cyclopædia.’

[35] Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. v. pl. 51.

[36] Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. iv. pl. 24. fig. 4.

[37] Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. v. pl. 65. fig. 3.

[38] Trans. Zool. Soc. vol. v. pl. 65. fig. 1.

[39] Ibid. fig. 5.

[40] Histoire Naturelle &c., 4to, tom. xiv. “Dégénération des Animaux:”
1760.

[41] Philosophie Zoologique, 8vo, 1809, tom. i, chaps. 3, 6, & 7.

[42] Agreeably with the principle of the “contest for existence” by
which I explained the extinction of the species of _Dinornis_, Trans.
Zool. Soc. vol. iv. p. 14, 1851.

[43] Strickland and Melville, ‘The Dodo and its Kindred,’ 4to, 1848, p.
34.

[44] _Op. cit._ p. 34.

[45] See letter in ‘The Times’ of May 21st, 1862, advocating the
limitation of the National Museum of Natural History to “six rooms,”
signed +Thomas H. Huxley+, F.R.S.

[46] Reply to the above in ‘The Times’ of May 2nd, 1866, and in both
editions (1861, 1862) of my ‘Discourse on the Extent and Aims of a
National Museum of Natural History.’ “Some naturalists urge that it
is only necessary to exhibit the type-form of each genus or family.
But they do not tell us what is such ‘type-form.’ It is a metaphysical
term, which implies that the Creative Force had a guiding pattern for
the construction of all the varying or divergent forms in each genus
or family. The idea is devoid of proof; and those who are loudest in
advocating the restriction of exhibited specimens to ‘types’ have
contributed least to lighten the difficulties of the practical curator
in making the selection.” (Ed. 1862, p. 24; see also pp. 26–34.)

[47] “The doctrine of typical nuclei seems only a mode of evading the
difficulty. Experience does not give us the types of theory; and,
after all, what are these types? It must be admitted there are none in
reality. How are we led to the theory of them? Simply by a process of
abstraction from classified existences. Having grouped from natural
similitudes certain natural forms into a class, we select attributes
common to each member of the class, and call the assemblage of such
attributes a type of the class. This process gives us an abstract idea;
and we then transfer this idea to the Creator, and make Him start with
that which our own imperfect generalization has derived.” (Address,
&c., by +William R. Grove+, Esq., Q.C., M.A. 8vo, London, 1866: p. 31.)

[48] See Dr. Bennett’s excellent notes on the living _Didunculus_, in
the ‘Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London,’ 1864, p. 139.

[49] To my friend Dr. Bennett I owe the first specimens of the
_Nautilus pompilius_, impregnated uterus of the Kangaroo and
Ornithorhynchus, the young Ornithorhynchus, and other rare subjects
of early Memoirs. Natural History owes much to this accomplished and
indefatigable Observer.

[50] The scapular arch is rotated in advance of the ribs to show the
character of the anterior dorsal vertebræ.

[51] See also Gould, ‘Birds of Australia,’ part 22 (March, 1846).

[52] I beg to return my acknowledgments to the Trustees of the
Liverpool Museum for the opportunity of figuring two specimens, in this
Plate, from the collection of Dodos’ bones in that Museum.



                          Transcriber’s Notes:

  • Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).
  • Text enclosed by pluses is in small caps (+small caps+).
  • Blank pages have been removed.
  • Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected.
  • Page 33 refers to Plate XV, it does not exist, nor could I find an
    image with a “dotted outline” of a bone.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MEMOIR ON THE DODO (DIDUS INEPTUS, LINN.) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


