The Project Gutenberg eBook of The history of Tabby, a favourite cat
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The history of Tabby, a favourite cat
        As related by herself to her kitten

Author: E. Smyth

Release date: July 4, 2025 [eBook #76440]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Didier and Tebbett, 1809

Credits: Carla Foust and The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net ((This file was produced from images generously made available by the Toronto Public Library))


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF TABBY, A FAVOURITE CAT ***


[Illustration]




  THE HISTORY OF

  TABBY

  _A FAVOURITE CAT_.

  AS RELATED BY HERSELF TO HER KITTEN.

  By E. SMYTH.

  London:

  PUBLISHED FOR DIDIER AND TEBBETT,

  At the Juvenile Library of English, French, and Italian
  Books, and Repository of Instructive Games,
  No. 75, St. James’s-Street, Pall-Mall.

  1809.


  C. Spilsbury, Printer,
  Angel-Court, Skinner-Street, London.




THE

HISTORY OF TABBY.


One fine autumnal evening, Tabby seated herself in an old tree, and
watched, with parental delight, the frolics of her favourite and
youngest kitten, as it ran round and round after the leaves which had
fallen. With all a mother’s tenderness, she imagined no kitten like her
own; and thought to herself, how happy will that family be that gets my
child: for no rat or mouse will dare to approach a dwelling defended
by so active and diligent a cat. At length the little animal, having
fatigued herself, came to its mother, and sat herself beside her. ‘Oh,
my dear mother,’ said she, ‘how much I wish you would come and play
with me; you cannot think how delightful it is to run after, and try
to catch the fallen leaves, the wind blows them so delightfully along;
and then, just as you imagine you are sure of catching them, puff comes
a gust of wind, and blows them farther off than ever. I am sure, if
you would but once try, you would be so much charmed with it, that you
would never want any other amusement; and I should never after see you
come out to sit moping in a tree, looking, for all the world, like an
owl in an ivy-bush.

‘Alas, my child!’ replied Tabby, ‘my time for play is now over; all
that remains for me to do now, is to give the best advice in my power
to my dear children. If ever you should arrive at my great age, (which
few cats do), you will find, that even running about in an orchard will
not give so much satisfaction as sitting in a quiet and secure place.
When I was a kitten, no young creature could be more frolicsome than
I was: any thing served to amuse me; many an hour have I passed in
running round and round after my tail, trying to catch it, to the great
entertainment of my young Misses and Masters, and their companions.’
Here the kitten burst into a violent fit of laughter, and said, how
queer it would look to see her old, grave mother, running after her
tail.--‘You forget, I was then as little as yourself.’--‘But, dear
mother, you have often promised me you would relate your adventures,
and how you came into this family, where you are so much loved: do,
pray tell me now; you have always put me off, by saying I was yet too
young, and that I should not attend to the moral instruction which
might be gained from it. Oh! if you would but begin, you should see how
carefully I would attend; even if a young mouse were to run close past
me, I would not catch it, so very anxious am I to hear you.’

‘As you so earnestly desire it, my child, I shall willingly relate it,
particularly as I think I shall not live much longer: this cough of
mine grows worse and worse; this next winter I shall never be able to
struggle through; but I shall die happy, having now fulfilled every
duty, given all my children a good education, and seen them happily
settled in the world. As for you, my dear, if I should die before you
are provided with a mistress, our present one will, I am sure, never
part with you, out of respect to my memory; but, should fate ordain a
separation, I shall, with a contented mind, give you up. I know our
dear lady, unlike the generality, never sends a kitten but where she
well knows it will be properly taken care of: it will be the last
painful struggle I shall have, and I hope I shall conduct myself with
firmness.’

The poor kitten, very much affected by these words of its mother, put
its paws round her neck, and sobbed aloud: ‘Indeed, indeed, my dearest
mother, I never will leave you; if they want to send me away, I will
run and hide myself in a dark hole, where they will never think of
looking for me. I am sure, I never can be happy unless I am with you;
and as to your dying, no, I will not think of that; you, who are so
very fat and handsome as to be the admiration of every one who sees
you, surely you may live many years yet. How many cats do we see much
older than you, enjoying good health and spirits; then do not, dearest
mother, distress yourself and me too, by talking of such melancholy
things.’

‘Far be it from me, to damp the spirits of my darling; yet much I could
say of the uncertainty of life; besides the various scenes I have gone
through, have broken a naturally good constitution; but, as I see you
are now so much distressed, I shall leave it until another opportunity,
and begin now to tell you my adventures.’

‘I was born in a pretty little cottage in Hertfordshire; I remember
I had two sisters, but they were soon taken away, and what became of
them I could never hear: but there is every reason to suppose they were
barbarously drowned, as I afterwards found was the common practice with
unfeeling people. However, my mother did not seem to feel the loss
very severely, but all her affection centered in me: she never left me
but to get food. The first human face I ever saw was that of our sweet
mistress, Miss Phœbe, who was then a very little girl; she took me,
for the first time, out of the closet in which I was born; and after
saying the most flattering things as to my beauty, asked the cottager
if she might then take me home. The cottager, who was formerly Miss
Phœbe’s nurse, replied that I was yet too young to leave my mother; but
that, as soon as I was able to feed and keep myself clean, she would
bring me to the hall, for she had kept me on purpose for her. Miss P.
kissing me affectionately at the same time, replied, ‘No, no, Betty,
you must not carry her, but I will come myself to fetch it; for no one
will take so much care of it as I shall. I will bring a little basket
for her, with some flannel in it, that it may lie soft; for it is to
be my own cat, and I am to feed it and take care of it entirely; so,
mind you do not let any one else take it. But now you must go to your
mother, you darling beauty, said she to me, and laid me gently down by
my mother.’

‘I intend, my child,’ continued the old cat, ‘to give you a faithful
account of my faults, as well as virtues, that you may know it is
possible to conquer all failings, and that wicked actions always meet
with punishment. No sooner was I left to myself, than I began to think
I was of very great consequence, and that I must be the most beautiful
creature in the world; for so Miss Phœbe had said several times,
and I did not, at that time, know young ladies indulged themselves
in such a careless way of speaking, as to say what was not strictly
true. My kind mother, whose attention to me was unremitted, I used
to feel so grateful to, and used to say to her, if you should ever
be a little kitten, when I am a great cat, I will lick you, and feed
you, as carefully as you now do me: but now I thought it was her duty
to attend me: that, as I was so very beautiful, I should not do any
thing for myself. I looked upon my mother as a mean sort of cat, whose
mistress wore a stuff gown, and lived in a little cottage, while mine
was dressed in a white frock and pink sash: thus was my little silly
heart puffed up with pride. My mother wanted soon after to teach me how
to wash myself: I said there was not any occasion for me to learn, as
I knew very well I should always have some person to attend upon me.
What, in the name of wonder, said she, has put this into your foolish
head? Who but your mother, do you think, will ever love you enough to
wash you? I then told her what my young mistress had said, and that I
was going to live at the hall. My mother replied, with much anger, and
do you suppose you will be suffered to be dirty there? I well know
all the family at the hall, and am certain no cat will be suffered to
remain there, unless she be very clean; and as to Miss Phœbe washing
you, it is out of all reason; she is engaged with her lessons most of
the day, and though she and her sisters may take delight in playing
with you, while you are young, you will soon grow a great cat, and
then you may depend upon it, no young lady will wash you; and unless
you learn to do it while you are young, depend upon it you never
will do it properly when old. But such a wicked kitten was I, that I
did not mind what my good mother said, and would not even try to do
as she wished me. One day, after she had been severely reprimanding
me, she went out, saying, that unless I repented of my folly before
her return, she would take no more notice of me. I then thought what
a fine spirited thing it would be for me to run away, and go to the
hall alone: accordingly I came to the cottage door, and saw, at what
I thought a very little distance, the large white house which I knew
must be the hall; I thought it would be a very easy matter for me to
walk there. I, therefore, unperceived by my old mistress, who was
spinning at the door, set off, pleasing myself with thinking how vexed
my mother would be when she missed me; how delighted Miss Phœbe would
be to see me, and what grand things I should see. But, after walking
through two or three fields, I began to feel very much fatigued; and,
to my astonishment, the house did not look much nearer than when
I first set out. After some further consideration, I thought I had
better return, confess all to my dear mother, who, I hoped, would
pardon me upon my amendment; but how true it is that when once we do
wrong, we cannot tell where we shall stop. Just as I turned round,
with an intention of going home, what should I see but two boys, who
were looking for bird’s nests, just in the path that I must go. I had
heard my mother relate such dreadful things which had been done to her
by boys, that though these were the first I ever saw, I felt almost
frightened to death, lest they should see me. I set off running as
fast as possible, and never stopped to look behind me until I found
myself in the back court of the hall. I found my enemies were quite out
of sight. I now looked about, hoping to see my mistress; but nothing
like her could I see, and heartily did I repent my obstinacy, which
had brought this fatigue and trouble upon me. While I was in this
situation, a new and more terrible enemy approached: this was a large
pointer dog, who, the instant he saw me, ran up; I retreated with my
face towards him, setting up my back, keeping my eyes steadfastly upon
him, and my claws ready to stick in his face; till, on a sudden, I felt
myself falling through the bars of the cellar window, and in an instant
was thrown with violence upon a heap of coals; the blow was so great as
to deprive me for some time of all recollection. When I recovered, I
found myself in dreadful agony; my poor eyes were so filled with small
coals that I could not open either of them; I suspected my leg was
broken, for I could not move it in any direction. In this distress,
I called aloud for my dear, my tender mother; but, alas! I called in
vain; she was far away, and could not hear how bitterly I reproached
myself for my mis-conduct. My cries, at length, reached the family,
and I heard some one calling, ‘Puss, puss, poor pussey.’ I called out,
as plainly as I could speak, ‘Here am I, do pray come and help me: I
cannot help myself, or I would come to you.’ Soon I had the happiness
of hearing the cellar door open, and my mistress say, ‘Indeed, Henry,
the sound came from here, and we must look well. She then again called
Pussey; but whether the sudden joy of hearing her, or that my violent
pain and fatigue had entirely exhausted me, I cannot tell; but I could
not utter a word. In vain I opened my mouth, the words died away; how
great was my agitation while I heard them looking for me, and sometimes
coming close up to me. I suppose the dark colour of my skin, together
with the little light admitted into the cellar, prevented their seeing
me. I heard them regretting their ill success, and at last giving up
all hope, I heard them slowly ascend the stairs and shut the door after
them. When I heard the noise of its shutting, no words can describe my
agony; but soon a kind of stupor came over me; and I entirely lost all
sense and feeling: of course I should then have died, but that soon a
servant came to fetch some coals, and was surprised to see a poor dead
kitten lying there; she brought it up in her hand, and, seeing Master
Henry, said, ‘Oh, Sir, here is the poor kitten we have heard mewing all
the morning; I dare say it fell through the cellar window, and it is
now dead.’ Henry took me in his hand, and finding my heart yet beat, he
ran to his sisters, and told them the circumstance, desiring they would
instantly get a little warm milk and water to wash the dirt and blood
from me, and some flannel to rub me with. They set themselves to work
diligently to recover me, all but Miss Eliza; she said it was cruelty
to try to recover a poor creature who had a broken leg, was blind, and
bruised all over; and as Phœbe was going to have a kitten from Betty
(for I was so disfigured Miss Phœbe did not know me), that one would
be quite plague enough at a time; for her part, she would have it shot
directly, to put it out of its pain, if it were still living.’

‘Henry replied in a grave tone, ‘Ah, Eliza, suppose that you had fallen
out of the window, and broken your leg, how would you like people to
say you had better be shot, and not take any pains to recover you?’
‘But,’ said Eliza, ‘I am of more consequence than any kitten. Can a
kitten do such things as I do? Can it play on the piano, can it draw,
can it dance, can it--.’

‘Here her brother interrupted her and said, ‘It would perhaps be better
for you not to know any of these fine things, if they are to make you
hard-hearted; besides, it is not by your own merit, but Mamma’s kind
instructions, that taught you all these things; but how different is
the conduct of our dear Mamma, who can do all these things much better
than you, yet how kind she is? She would not hurt a fly; so far from
hurting it, that if she saw one in danger, she would assist it.’

‘I was by this time so much recovered, as to lick my gentle mistress’s
hand; she was delighted with this proof of my amendment, and as I
seemed to stand in need of warmth, she sat with me on her lap under
her pin-a-fore all day. Never was a mother more attentive than this
darling girl was to me; and though she sat in the room where her
brothers and sisters were playing the most delightful games, she never
left me to join them. To this nursing I owe my life. I now got better
and stronger every day. They soon discovered that I was Betty’s kitten,
and determined I should now stay, when I had strength enough to lap a
little milk.’

‘My mistress’s mamma said to her, ‘I am uneasy, my love, at your
sitting so much; exercise is very necessary for young people to
preserve their health. While your kitten stood in such great need of
you, I would not say any thing, but now it is well enough to be left
by itself. If you make it a comfortable bed, we will walk together
to Beach Park, and then you may tell your friend Susan Richmond the
addition we have to our family, and ask her to come and see it.’

‘Phœbe immediately prepared to go with her mamma, and, after making me
a soft warm bed in her doll’s cradle, and tenderly kissing me, she went
out with her mamma.’

‘I shall now give you an account of the family: Mrs. Meade was a
most tender-hearted charitable woman; her earnest wish was to make
her children happy, by making them good; all her time she devoted
to their instruction. Miss Eliza, the eldest, was very quick in her
learning, but the cause was, she was more forward than most girls of
her age; she was proud of her own abilities, and did not consider the
great advantages of her mother’s instruction. She considered every
one who was not so learned as herself, quite beneath her, and instead
of joining at the different games of her brothers and sisters, would
sit, with a book in her hand, continually interrupting them with, ‘How
foolish it is of you to spend all your time in play; if you knew how
much pleasanter it is to read, you would always do it.’

‘I once heard Henry say to her, after she had plagued them some time,
‘True, Eliza, reading is a most delightful thing, and I am as fond of
it as you can be; but still I don’t think it necessary to read all day:
you know, all work and no play makes Jack a dull boy. Play heartily
when you do play, and work when you do work; that’s my motto. Now, had
you been reading heartily, and was as much delighted with your book as
you say you are, you would not look off your book so often to tell us
so.’

‘Henry was, next to Eliza, a fine bold spirited boy, and yet
tender-hearted; so good to all the animals, that he was the universal
favourite: nor did he confine his goodness to animals, but all the
poor, for miles round, blessed him as he passed, and said he was the
picture of his excellent mother. He had a garden, which he cultivated
himself; the produce of which he took to the old cottagers in the
neighbourhood, visited them, and did every good in his power for them.’

‘It was a pleasant night, when he went into the farm yard; all the
animals came flocking round him; the pigeons would alight upon his
shoulders and hat, and were not frightened away even by the dogs, who
came barking and jumping about him. Animals which, at any other time,
would fight with each other, approached him at the same time without
fear, knowing they should not be hurt in his presence. But do not
suppose he neglected his learning to attend us. No, his tutor, Dr.
Smythe, said he was the most diligent young gentleman he ever had
under his care.’

‘The next was Miss Clara, a sweet gentle girl; but as she was very
unhealthy, she frequently went to stay with her aunt Dutton, at
Brighton, for the benefit of sea-bathing. She was very industrious, and
painted flowers very beautifully. It was she who drew that picture of
me, which you see over the nursery fire.’

‘The next was master Augustus, who was rather too headstrong, and who
continually run himself into danger, notwithstanding all his good
mother could say. One time he was nearly drowned by going, contrary
to her command, into the water. Another time, when some workmen were
repairing the roof of the house, he took it into his head to mount the
ladder, but soon he grew giddy, and fell from it. One time he fell
into the well, but fortunately there was not much water. In short,
he was a great deal of trouble to his excellent mother; but he had,
notwithstanding, a good heart, and is now so good, so diligent, as to
be the delight of all his friends.’

‘The youngest was Miss Phœbe. Of her goodness I need not say any thing;
her conduct to me puts her character in the most amiable view. But
to return to myself. When I awoke, and found myself alone, I began,
as I now often did, to think of my dear mother, and regret I had not
profited by her instruction. What will become of me, said I, when my
mistress grows tired of me? What shall I do? When I get well, she will
not think then of attending me with such care.’

‘In the midst of these cogitations, I thought I heard my mother’s
voice. I listened with attention, and was almost certain it was she.
She entered the room, saying, as she entered, ‘My child, my dear child,
are you here?’--‘Yes, here I am, my kindest, best of mothers; here is
that ungrateful kitten who left you because you wanted to teach it to
be useful, but who will now gladly receive your instructions. She came
to me, and a most tender scene followed.’

‘I now soon got quite well, and, with my curious jumps and frolics,
diverted all the family. My mother was constantly giving me the best
advice, and particularly cautioned me against jealousy; entreating that
I would never let my savage appetite conquer me so far as to destroy
any favourite bird. But, alas! dear mother, you little thought I should
be guilty of so great a sin as I soon after committed.’

‘Master Henry had two beautiful dormice given him; he attended them
with the greatest care; they lived in a small trunk lined with moss and
cotton, and with small holes pierced in it, to admit the air. I had
often seen them as he cleaned out the box, and longed to devour them.
Why, said I, should those little mice be taken so much care of? They
were never intended for any other purpose than as food for cats; then,
why are they not given to me? They are now so fat they can scarcely
walk: then I will have them: my mother cannot expect I should refrain
from mice, though they are favourites. From that time I watched my
opportunity to get them: one day, when the gentlemen were playing with
them, I entered unperceived, and hid myself under a chest of drawers.’

‘Augustus,’ said Henry, ‘I think it must be very uncomfortable for
these poor things to be always confined, and as this is a very warm
day, I will leave the top of the box off, then they may run about the
room, if they like: they are now so tame, that I know they will come
to me when I want them; we will take care not to shut the cat in, and
will keep the key in our pockets until our return. They searched all
the room, as they supposed, for me, and thinking all secure, locked the
door, and ran down stairs.’

‘Oh, my child! I must pass over the scene of murder which ensued: even
at this day, the remembrance of it agitates my soul. As I was making
an end of my bloody repast, upon the head of the second mouse, the
door unlocked: I attempted to hide myself as before, but they saw me.
Poor Augustus burst into a flood of tears:--‘Oh, my dear dormice, what
a dreadful death have you come to! Why, why did I leave the lid off
the trunk?--But the nasty cat shall suffer for this!’ So saying he
took a great stick from the shelf, and was running towards me, when
Henry stopped his arm. ‘No, Augustus, do not beat the cat for what
is natural for it to do. How will she know what you are beating her
for? She could not know they were different from other mice: it is we
who deserve punishment; we have killed our dormice by leaving them so
carelessly, who ought to have searched every corner; if we had, we
must have seen the cat. I am quite as sorry as you can be, but I will
not commit an act of injustice, by beating the cat. Let us now go down
to the parlour: poor Susan will be disappointed, after walking from
Beech-Park to see them.’

‘They then left me, overwhelmed with confusion. I felt so much
gratitude to Henry for his kindness, that I determined never to be
guilty of the like offence again. I wish all children would reflect how
much better it is to use us poor animals with kindness, than cruelty:
had these gentlemen beaten me, I should have thought that sufficient
punishment; as it was, I determined their mildness should not be
misapplied, and longed for an opportunity of shewing my reformation.
One soon offered: I told you my master was fond of pigeons; one
day, when he was in the loft, where they were kept, I passed; but,
determined to keep out of temptation, I was going down stairs, when
I saw a large black rat, with eyes of fire. My ambition was excited
to attack so noble a foe: besides the glory of conquest, I was urged
by hunger, for my mistress had that day ordered the servant to give
me my dinner, which she had neglected: it was now evening, and I had
not eaten since early in the morning. I did not spring upon the rat,
without giving him warning, as, I am sorry to say, is too often the
case with our species, but gave him timely notice, by spitting and
swearing; but, though he was of the largest size, and I not yet at
my full growth, the coward fled. I pursued close upon him, without
regarding whither he led me; he ran into a hole, and I took the watch
before it, ready to seize him the moment he came out. At last my hunger
got the better of my glory, and I determined, reluctantly, to give up
my prey, and get something to eat; but, to my surprise, I found myself
in the very loft where all the pigeons were, the door locked, and no
creature near. I searched round and round for a place to creep through,
but, alas! no one presented itself. My master, I knew, would not visit
his pigeons until the next night; how was I, hungry as I then was,
to wait so long without food? Young pigeons were all round; what an
opportunity for a feast! I approached one, but checked myself: here was
a glorious time to establish a good name! If I die, cried I, how will
my memory be honoured; and if I live, I must be happy in the esteem of
all the family.’

This delightful thought supported me in the midst of all my sufferings:
when Henry came the next night, I called to him--‘Here am I, almost
starving in the midst of your pigeons, yet I have not hurt one of
them.’--He did not seem to understand me; but said to the servant, who
was with him, ‘Oh, Thomas, when I was obliged to leave you, last night,
did I not charge you, not to let that tormenting cat in? Here has
she been all night; and, of course, all my beautiful pigeons will be
devoured, as my dormice were. Get away, Puss,’ said he to me, ‘though
I scarcely ever struck an animal in my life, I fear I shall you, I
loved my birds so much.’ I would not, however, go down stairs, but
waited on the outside of the door to hear what he would say, when he
found his birds safe. My master could scarcely believe it possible;
but, after examining, and finding all safe, he said the kindest things
of me. Even Thomas, who had always treated me unkindly, even he
praised:--‘Well,’ said he, ‘I will believe now that a cat has sense;
and I will take care that she shall always be well fed for the future.’

‘Henry carried me down into the parlour, where he got plenty of nice
meat for me; and told all the family what I had done. Never shall I
forget the joy I felt; I was caressed by all the family in turn: Miss
Eliza, for the first time, patted my back, and said I was almost as
wise as Ulysses’s dog.’--‘What story is that, sister?’ said Augustus.
‘A certain Grecian general, who went to the siege of Troy, was so long
absent, and met with so many troubles, that, at his return, no one knew
him, none but his faithful dog, who was so overjoyed at again seeing
his master, that, after licking his hand, and looking in his face with
affection, he expired at his feet.’

‘I am glad to hear you remember what you read, my dear; that story has
always been a favourite one of mine, though I cannot see any parallel
between our cat and your Grecian’s dog.’

‘From this time I was a great favourite, and was often honoured by
having a little cream out of Mrs. Mead’s own saucer. Many people who
came to visit Mrs. M. were told the story, and they never failed to
give me marks of approbation.’

‘One day, when my mistress was repeating it to a lady, ‘It reminds
me,’ said she, ‘of a very strange circumstance, which fell under my own
observation, and is an undoubted fact. Miss W--, of W-- Hall, had a
cat of which she was very fond: the poor child was taken ill, and the
cat used to sit all day at the chamber-door, uttering most distressing
mews; at last, upon the earnest entreaty of Miss W--, she was let in.
The poor cat seemed to know what was the matter, and would watch its
mistress night and day: it could scarcely even be prevailed upon to
eat, and grew quite thin: at last Miss W-- died, and they did not like
to drive the poor thing away, but soon after the funeral they lost
the cat, and could not imagine what had become of it, until Mrs. W--,
one morning, walking in the church-yard, to indulge her melancholy
reflections at the tomb of her daughter, found the poor cat stretched
out, dead, upon the grave of her kind mistress.’

‘After this, I was often in danger. I have been pursued by dogs, and
more cruel school-boys; I have had kicks and scolds from the servants,
when they were out of humour, or I was troublesome. Once, Master Henry
had two young gentlemen to spend the holidays with him: I soon found
they were very different from my dear Master Henry; but whenever they
took hold of me, I defended myself with my claws and teeth. This made
them think of a way of disarming me; they got me into their own room;
and, in spite of my cries and entreaties, cut off my claws so close to
my feet, that they were dreadfully painful, and put me to very great
inconvenience: I could not climb a tree, catch a mouse, nor even hold
my prey: nothing they could have done was so great a plague as this.
It was very long before they grew again, and they were never so strong
or so sharp as my first. The only resistance I could now make was by
biting; but they soon deprived me of that, by breaking and pulling out
all my teeth. Ah, my child! it is impossible to describe the torture
I then endured: it put me quite into a fever. I told my mistress, as
plainly as I could speak, what had happened, and who had so cruelly
treated me. What was my indignation, when I heard these boys say, they
thought the butcher’s boy must have done it; and the Meades, who were
unsuspicious, never thought any one in the house guilty. I was tenderly
fed for some time upon soft bread and milk, and at last recovered from
the pain; but what a mutilated, helpless creature have I been ever
since!’

‘Another time, when I was dreaming a delightful dream, I felt myself
rudely seized hold of by these boys, whose name was Arnold, and heard
them say,--‘Now we will have some fine sport with this creature, as she
can neither bite nor scratch; and, as that lukewarm Henry is so fond
of it, let us put it into his bed, that he may have enough of her.’
Then they put a cap upon my head, wrapped me up in a long cloth, so
that I could not move any of my legs, and in this condition, tied me
with a rope into Henry’s bed. What was his surprise at seeing me! He,
however, untied me instantly, and took off my bandages: but my poor
legs were so cramped with my position, it was some time before I could
use them. Henry rubbed them gently with his hands, which relieved me
greatly.--‘Poor Puss,’ said he, ‘you have been cruelly used, but you
never shall be so again; who could think that the Arnolds, who appear
so tender, should be guilty of such a thing as this? I now think they
must have cut off your poor claws and teeth. You shall stay in my room
to-night; to-morrow I shall tell my mother.’

‘I do not know whether they had any proof of their guilt, but the next
day, as I sat in the window, I had the pleasure of seeing the carriage
go off with them, and I have never seen them more: since that time, we
have never had any cruel boys here.’

‘But, dear child, I fear I have tired you; it is such a pleasure to an
old cat to chatter, that I forget how time goes.’

‘Indeed, mother,’ said the kitten, ‘I am not tired in the least, but
could sit all night to hear you. Do tell me some more of your troubles.’

‘I think I have related all the most material things; but if I remember
any more, I shall tell you another time: at present I find myself
hoarse with talking so much: and see, the night has overtaken us; I
should not have staid out so long, for I fear I shall wet my feet with
the dew:’ so saying she jumped from the tree, followed by her kitten,
and reached the Hall in safety.


THE END.


  C. Spilsbury, Printer,
  Angel-Court, Skinner-Street, London.

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber’s note


Minor punctuation errors have been changed without notice.

Spelling was retained as in the original except for the following
changes:

  Page 4: “approach a dwelliug”              “approach a dwelling”
  Page 18: “wito her lessons”                “with her lessons”
  Page 34: “would aways do”                  “would always do”
  Page 48: “much better it s to”             “much better it is to”
  Page 55: “my dear; tha”                    “my dear; that”
  Page 61: “I heard these boy”               “I heard these boys say”





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF TABBY, A FAVOURITE CAT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


