The Project Gutenberg eBook of The slide valve, simply explained
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The slide valve, simply explained

Author: William John Tennant

Editor: J. H. Kinealy

Release date: July 16, 2025 [eBook #76510]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Spon & Chamberlain, 1899

Credits: deaurider, Matthew Everett and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SLIDE VALVE, SIMPLY EXPLAINED ***





                                  THE
                              SLIDE VALVE,
                           SIMPLY EXPLAINED.


                    BY W. J. TENNANT, ASSO. M.I.M.E

                       REVISED AND MUCH ENLARGED

                        BY J. H. KINEALY, D. E.,

     _Professor of Mechanical Engineering in Washington University;
         M. Am. Soc. Mech. Engrs. Author of “Steam Engines and
            Boilers;” “Low Pressure Steam Heating Charts.”_

                           ------------------

         FULLY ILLUSTRATED WITH ORIGINAL DRAWINGS AND DIAGRAMS.

                           ------------------

                          SPON & CHAMBERLAIN,
                     12 CORTLANDT STREET, NEW YORK.
                                 1899.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




         Entered according to Act of Congress in the year 1899,
                         BY SPON & CHAMBERLAIN,
      in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, Washington, D.C.

       ---------------------------------------------------------




THE BURR PRINTING HOUSE, NEW YORK, U. S. A.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PREFACE.


This work is based upon notes and diagrams which were prepared by the
writer with no more ambitious object, originally, than to help his
railway students toward the obtainment of clear _general_ notions upon
the important subject of the slide valve.

For practical demonstration of the functions and operation of the slide
valve, a large sectional model engine, with provision for variation of
the operation of its parts, is very valuable; but it seems to the writer
to be desirable that each student should have in his own possession a
model to cogitate upon, and that his model should give him, graphically,
results which should be not merely qualitative, but also, in some
degree, _quantitative_, to enable him to institute comparisons between
the actions of different valves operated under varying conditions. With
this end in view, the writer conceived the idea of using on a base-board
a rotary disc to represent a crank-shaft, together with the idea of
obtaining concentric circular diagrams of results (see fig. 21, for
instance) by using a crank-arm marked on the disc as an index-finger,
and recording on the base-board the beginnings and ends of the arcs
swept through by the crank in the various distribution-periods.
Following upon this, it was thought that the eccentric and its rod could
be eliminated by bringing the disc under the valve and fixing upon the
valve a rigid slotted arm to extend down across the face of the disc and
engage a pin on the latter, so that rotation of the disc would cause
reciprocation of the slotted arm and the valve. This promised, however,
to be unmechanical and expensive, and was discarded in favor of the
model described in Chapter I., which comprises the simple method of
correlating (as described in Chapter II.) the movements of valve and
crank-shaft by scales adjacent to each, so that the reading given by the
valve on the valve-scale at any position of the valve would show what
position on the eccentric-scale the eccentric ought correspondingly to
occupy. The fact that this involved a step-by-step adjustment of the
valve and shaft alternately was found in practice to be advantageous
rather than the reverse.

As to the diagrams and sketches, the writer has sought, in some of them,
to clear up graphically some of the incidental minor difficulties
related to the subject; see, for instance, figs. 12 and 13, illustrating
“Order of Cranks,” fig. 22 on “Width of Port”; also compare figs. 23,
24, and 25, “Double-ported Valve,” and see fig. 37, which last is in
effect a graphical summary of results from nearly all the different
examples which precede it.

Fig. 36, which concerns the reversal of an engine in motion under steam,
will probably have a special interest to students of the locomotive.

                                                                W. J. T.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CONTENTS.


                                                      PAGE

             INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN EDITION,           1


                              CHAPTER I.
             THE SIMPLE SLIDE,                           5


                              CHAPTER II.
             THE ECCENTRIC A CRANK. SPECIAL MODEL TO
               GIVE QUANTITATIVE RESULTS,               13


                             CHAPTER III.
             ADVANCE OF THE ECCENTRIC,                  20


                              CHAPTER IV.
             DEAD CENTRE. ORDER OF CRANKS. CUSHIONING
               AND LEAD,                                24


                              CHAPTER V.
             EXPANSION—INSIDE AND OUTSIDE LAP AND
               LEAD; ADVANCE AFFECTED THEREBY.
               COMPRESSION,                             31


                              CHAPTER VI.
             DOUBLE-PORTED, MULTIPLE ADMISSION AND
               PISTON VALVES,                           43


                             CHAPTER VII.
             THE EFFECT OF ALTERATIONS TO VALVE AND
               ECCENTRIC,                               57


                             CHAPTER VIII.
             NOTE ON LINK MOTIONS,                      66


                              CHAPTER IX.
             NOTE ON VERY EARLY CUT-OFF, AND ON
               REVERSING GEARS IN GENERAL,              73

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                   INTRODUCTION TO AMERICAN EDITION.


There is no more important part of the steam-engine than the valve—the
part which determines when and for how long the steam shall be admitted
to the cylinder, how long it shall stay there and how long it shall be
allowed for leaving. And the principles which should govern the
construction of the valve of an engine in order that the steam shall be
properly admitted and released are the same for American, English,
French and German engines. The principles of their construction and
action are the same, but the details vary. The action of every
steam-engine depends upon its valve, and hence it is important that
every engineer of whatever country should be thoroughly conversant with
the principles of the construction of valves of different types; should
know the meaning of “lap,” “lead,” “advance,” etc.; and should know how
a change of one of these will affect the others and the admission and
release of the steam. One of the best ways to learn all about valves and
valve motions is to study them with the aid of sectional models, made so
that the inside as well as the outside of the parts may be seen, but
such models are difficult to obtain except at considerable cost.
Diagrams, such as are so freely used in this work, rank next to models
in utility and as a means of enabling one to thoroughly understand the
workings of the different parts of machines. The use of diagrams
requires no knowledge of mathematics, and enables explanations to be
presented in a clear, concise manner. From an educational point of view,
diagrams possess an advantage which models do not, as they make one
think more. Their use gets one in the habit of forming mental pictures
of the parts of the machines discussed, and thus enables one to more
readily and quickly think out the effect of a change in one part on
other parts. And this ability to picture in the mind the various
relations of the parts to one another is absolutely necessary in order
that these relations may be thoroughly understood. The man who is
accustomed to work out his problems from diagrams and drawings, reasons
from cause to effect and from effect to cause; while the man who must
have a model to work with, works on the “cut-and-try” method.

This little book is confined strictly to an explanation of the
principles which underlie the action of the different types of slide
valves. The plain, simple D-valve, as it is called in this country,
without lap or lead, is first taken up and discussed; and gradually lap
and lead are introduced, and the effect of each upon the admission, the
cut-off, the release, and the compression is fully worked out and shown.
Then other types of slide valves are taken up and discussed. The advance
is made step by step, from the most simple form of slide valve to the
more complicated forms used for attaining certain results not so easily
attained by the use of the simple forms.

The form of multi-ported valve shown in fig. 25 is so much like the
Giddings valve used on the Russell and some other single-valve engines,
that any one reading the explanation given here will have no trouble in
understanding the Giddings valve (shown in fig. 26).

The multiple admission valve is used to such an extent in America that
it is but proper that a few words should be said of it, and that the
most common form of multiple admission valves should be discussed. And
hence the Straight Line and the Woodbury valves are shown in figs. 27
and 28.

There are so many engines in this country in the front rank of
automatic, high-speed engines which use piston-valves, that a treatise
on slide valves would be incomplete without some mention of this type of
slide valve. The form of piston-valve shown in fig. 30, in which the
steam is admitted at the middle and exhausted at the ends, is well known
to all engineers who have used an Ide or an Ideal engine. The valve used
on these engines is shown in fig. 31.

Many American engineers prefer engines on which the cut-off may be
changed without in any way affecting the lead, release, or compression,
and, therefore, the description of the Meyer valve will be read with
interest. Many will recognize at once in the valve used on the Watertown
engine the Meyer valve in almost its original form, and in the valve of
the Buckeye engine (shown in section in fig. 39), the Meyer valve in a
modified form.

                                                    J. H. KINEALY, D.E.,
                                  Prof. of Mech. Eng., Washington Univ.,
                                                          St. Louis, Mo.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            THE SLIDE VALVE.




                               CHAPTER I.

                           THE SIMPLE SLIDE.


The slide valve has always been regarded by the writer as the _pons
asinorum_ of the student of the steam-engine. His own early attempts at
crossing that bridge were greatly facilitated by the simple little
device to be presently submitted to the reader; with the aid of this
expedient the student may easily obtain clear notions upon all the
functions and operations of the slide valve, at a nominal cost, and with
but a small expenditure of time and trouble.

It is necessary that at the outset the nature of the construction above
alluded to should be clearly appreciated, for the reason that many of
the explanations given in the succeeding pages are referred thereto.

In passing, it may be remarked that much of the difficulty which the
ordinary student experiences in the study of valves and valve gear
arises because he approaches the subject with a false impression that it
is of necessity a difficult one; this idea is generated on the one hand
in the atmosphere of mystery which in the shop is made to surround the
matter, and on the other hand by the somewhat formidable aspect of most
of the geometrical treatises on the subject. If the beginner can bring
himself to believe that the slide valve is nothing more complex than a
sliding shutter with a cavity in its face, travelling backwards and
forwards over three ports, the outermost of which are alternately opened
to steam and placed in communication with the central exhaust-port, he
will have made a satisfactory commencement.

Take a piece of stout white cardboard and upon it set out an enlarged
copy of fig. 1.[1]

[Illustration: FIG. 1.—Explanatory Diagram.]

-----

Footnote 1:

  See also fig. 41.

The upper portion of this diagram represents a section taken at right
angles to the port-face through a set of steam and exhaust-ports as
ordinarily arranged; the graduated ring beneath the section will receive
consideration later.

Postponing for the moment the further investigation of fig. 1, reference
should here be made to figs. 2, 3, and 4.

Fig. 2 shows, in perspective, a cylinder and valve-chest with parts
removed to make clear the manner in which the two steam-ports
(S_{1}S_{2}) at the upper ends of the two outer passages (P_{1}P_{2})
afford a communication between the valve-chest (VC) and the opposite
ends (C_{1}C_{2}) of the cylinder (C), and to show the passage from the
central exhaust-port (EP) to the outlet (O) at which the exhaust steam
is discharged. The relationship between this view and the upper part of
fig. 1 will be obvious upon a comparison of the two.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.—Perspective Section of Steam-Engine Cylinder.]

A typical slide valve is shown in section, in its place above the ports
in fig. 2, and separately in figs. 3 and 4. From these latter, the large
ratio of the width to the length of the valve is apparent, and it will
be seen from fig. 2 that the ports are correspondingly made wide and
short. This arrangement enables a small linear movement of the valve to
effect the uncovering of a large area of port, and to secure free
passage for the steam with but a small amount of valve-travel, and so to
reduce to a minimum the work unavoidably wasted in overcoming friction
between the port-face and the valve heavily loaded by the pressure of
steam upon its back.

[Illustration: FIGS. 3 and 4.—Separate Views of the Slide Valve.]

Let us return now to fig. 1. Draw, near the edge of a strip of
moderately stiff paper, the section of the elementary form of slide
valve illustrated by fig. 5, taking its dimensions from the ports of
fig. 1, so that the two views agree in the manner indicated. By sliding
this diagram backwards and forwards across the ports of fig. 1, the
following explanation of the action of this, the simplest form of slide
valve, will be readily appreciated.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.—Section of Slide Valve.]

This valve has first to open one port to steam, and when the steam thus
admitted has forced the piston towards the opposite end of the cylinder,
to put the same port in communication with the exhaust, while opening
the other port to the steam which effects the return movement of the
piston. The duration of the admission of steam is the same as that of
the exhaust, the admission, owing to the dimensions of the valve in
relation to the ports, necessarily taking place on one side of the
piston simultaneously with the occurrence of exhaust from the other side
(see fig. 6). The travel of this rudimentary valve equals twice the
amount to which the port is opened to steam. It happens to open each
port fully in this case (although this is rarely the case with modern
slide valves), so that the “travel” equals twice the width of
steam-port: _twice_, because (starting with the valve in its central
position, as shown in fig. 5) it has to move to the right, say, by an
amount equal to the _width_ of _the left-hand_ port, in order to open
that port fully to steam, and then it moves back again and travels to
the other side of the central position by an equal amount, in order to
open the equally dimensioned right-hand port to steam. In fig. 6 the
valve is shown at the two extremes of its travel, in full lines at one
end, and in dotted lines at the other end.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.—Section showing Position of Slide Valve in
relation to Steam and Exhaust-Ports.]




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER II.

   THE ECCENTRIC A CRANK. SPECIAL MODEL TO GIVE QUANTITATIVE RESULTS.


The necessary travel of the valve is given to it by means of an
eccentric, which is keyed upon or formed as part of the crank-shaft. The
eccentric is, in effect, a crank, whose throw equals the amount of
eccentricity of the sheave. This may not be obvious; let us investigate
a little. Suppose that we have a big crank-shaft, and want to put a
little crank in the middle of it (for this is what happens in the case
of a steam-engine, the travel of the valve being such that a crank of
the usual ___|‾‾|___ form would be disproportionate to the shaft of
which it formed part—like fig. 7, perhaps). Now, that such a shaft would
be extremely weak at the pin goes without saying. Imagine, that to
lessen the weakness the crank-pin of this little crank is made of
greater diameter, as in fig. 8, or even more so, as in fig. 9; still we
get the same result, which is that the _throw_ of the crank remains the
same, and equals the distance of the centre of the crank-pin from the
centre of the crank-shaft—_i.e._, the amount that this crank-pin is
“_ex-centric_,” out of centre, and _the eccentric sheave being simply an
exaggerated crank-pin_ we get back to our original statement that it is
virtually a crank whose throw equals the half-travel of the valve, which
in turn equals the amount of eccentricity of the sheave.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.—Half-travel of Valve.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8.—Half-travel of Valve.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9.—Half-travel of Valve.]

Being fixed to the crank-shaft and moving with it, always in a fixed
relationship to the main crank, the eccentric operates the valve in the
necessary accordance with the movement of the crank and piston, as will
presently be explained.

Returning now to fig. 5, it must be understood that a valve of the type
exemplified therein must be in the _middle_ of its travel whenever the
piston is at _either end_ of its stroke. The reason for this must be
clearly appreciated for the sake of what follows hereafter; it may be
arrived at very easily with the aid of fig. 1. Put a disc of card in the
circle provided in that figure, and let it turn about a drawing-pin
stuck through its centre; this disc is the equivalent of a crank-shaft.
A crank-arm (C) may be permanently marked upon it in ink, as in fig. 10;
another arm, which may be marked upon it in pencil, will serve to
represent a “valve-crank,” the equivalent of the eccentric by which the
valve is to be operated.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.]

Actual connection between that valve-crank and the valve being dispensed
with, some means for making the movement of the valve correspond
accurately with that of its crank must be provided. This provision is
made by the numbered scales[2] in fig. 1; the circular scale within
which the card disc revolves is numbered in correspondence with scales
on the ports, and to these latter an arrow on the strip of paper which
carries the valve is adjusted (see also fig. 10). To find the position
in which to mark the arrow on the valve, put the latter in the centre of
its travel and mark the arrow-head just above the “0” on the No. 1
scale. When the disc is turned, the end of the eccentric-arm or
valve-crank travels with it around the circular scale. When the
eccentric-arm is moved step by step around the circle to the various
numbered graduations, the valve must be moved step by step to bring its
arrow-head to the corresponding numbers on the horizontal scale on the
ports. Thus the eccentric and valve, although not moved simultaneously,
as they would be if a rod connected them, are kept in accurate
relationship whilst moved independently. If the reader will now read the
preface, which he has probably skipped, he will the more readily
appreciate the principle of this arrangement.

-----

Footnote 2:

  The horizontal scales on the port-faces are obtained by projecting up
  equidistant circumferential marks from various circles having
  different valve-cranks for their radii. The scale (No. 1) is for the
  elementary form of valve, without lap; it serves also for link-motion
  in mid-gear; No. 2 is for a valve having outside lap; and No. 3 is for
  link-motion “linked up.” The student need not, unless he pleases,
  trouble himself to investigate the construction of the diagram, which
  is drawn to scale, so that if copied accurately it will serve to give
  him the demonstrations desired.

Further, taking the main crank-arm (C) as an index-finger, the position
of its end at the points of cut-off, release, etc., with different
valves and eccentrics, may be marked in pencil on the circular scale, or
better, on a piece of tracing-paper interposed between the disc and that
scale; by this means the student will obtain circular diagrams enabling
him to compare the results due to different settings and proportions of
gear, and he will also discover in what manner those results are
affected by individual elements of the mechanism in any given example.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER III.

                       ADVANCE OF THE ECCENTRIC.


Assume a horizontal engine, with the main crank moved into a horizontal
position so that the piston would be at, say, the left-hand end of its
stroke. Assume also that the engine is at rest, and put the valve in the
centre of its travel (as in fig. 5), when its faces exactly cover the
steam-ports and its cavity covers the bridges and the exhaust-port; the
first movement of the valve is wanted to be to the _right_, in order to
admit steam to the left-hand end of the cylinder to move the piston also
to the right, no matter whether the crank-shaft is to have negative or
positive rotation. Now, a valve of this pattern evidently will not admit
steam to the cylinder to _start_ the movement of the piston (supposing
that the engine has not yet been started), which will therefore have to
be helped by some external agency; admitting this as a point which shall
be touched again presently, place the crank next, so that the piston
would be at the opposite end of its stroke; the valve, which had to move
to the right as explained, must have come back into the position whence
it started, and be in readiness to move equally to the _left_,
afterwards returning once more to the central position by the time that
the piston gets back to the left-hand end of the cylinder. Hence we see
that, whenever the piston is at either end of its stroke, this valve
must be in the middle of its travel.

If this be granted, we may proceed further:—Having the piston at the
right-hand end of its stroke, for instance, draw a line on the disc at
right angles with the crank (see fig. 10); this will represent two
“eccentric-arms” of the necessary throw if each arm equals in length the
half-travel of the valve; either of them at present suits the position
of the valve, which is in the middle of its travel. Choose, now, the
direction in which your crank-shaft shall rotate; let us suppose, for
example, that it shall have “right-handed” rotation, and place an arrow
on the disc to indicate the direction of rotation. Under these
conditions the upper eccentric will _follow_ the crank round, operating
the valve to close the right-hand port and open the left-hand one,
admitting steam to stop the engine. Cross this upper arm out, then, for
manifestly we have to use the lower eccentric, which, going ahead of the
crank, will cause the valve to open the right-hand port when required.
But now conversely, suppose that the engine is to be run in the opposite
direction; the upper eccentric (represented by the crossed-out line) now
goes ahead of the crank, and gives the valve motion in the right
direction, consequently the lower one must now go out of use, for under
the altered conditions of working it tends to move the valve in the
wrong direction. The deduction from this reasoning is, that in whichever
direction an engine runs, the eccentric used for the time being must be
set in advance of the crank, and that advance must be _at least 90°_.

If it were less than 90° the wrong port would be opened—the port at the
opposite end of the cylinder to that at which the piston might happen to
be. This effect may be shown by purposely giving the eccentric less
advance.

The amount which the angle between the eccentric and the crank exceeds
90° is the “angle of advance”; and the distance which the valve is moved
from midposition when the piston is at the end of the stroke is the
“linear advance.”

Because of the necessity for different settings of the eccentric for
different directions of rotation of the crank, engines required to be
reversible usually have either:

  (1) Means for shifting the position of a single eccentric upon the
        shaft, that it may always be placed so as to lead the crank. Or

  (2) Two eccentrics fixed upon the crank-shaft so that one of them is
        always ahead of the crank in whichever direction it rotates,
        mechanism being arranged in connection with the eccentrics, so
        that the valve can be driven by the leading eccentric, or
        operated by the conjoint action of both eccentrics. Or

  (3) Radial or other special valve gears.

The simple form of slide valve shown in fig. 10 does not permit of the
economical use of steam, inasmuch as it allows steam at full pressure to
follow the piston for the whole of the stroke, and does not admit of the
use of its expansive properties, for the simple reason that, at the
instant the admission of steam ceases, the exhaust of the same body of
steam must immediately commence, as may be clearly seen from the
circular diagram.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER IV.

           DEAD CENTRE. ORDER OF CRANKS. CUSHIONING AND LEAD.


It is desirable at this point to clear the ground by touching for a
moment upon one or two elementary matters which, if not now explained,
might cause confusion subsequently.

_Dead Centres._—A crank is said to be “on the centre” or “on the dead
centre” when the connecting-rod and crank are in line, and this occurs
twice in every revolution, as shown in fig. 11.

[Illustration: FIG. 11.—Dead Centre—Connecting Rod and Crank in Line.]

_Right-hand Crank to Lead._—The phrases “right-hand crank to lead,” or
“left-hand crank to lead,” are sometimes used, and are confusing to
beginners; the “leading” crank is that one which leads _when the engine
is running ahead_. In most two-crank engines one of the cranks will be a
quarter of a revolution (or _less_ than _half_ a revolution, where the
cranks are not set at 90 degs.) in advance of its neighbour, and will,
therefore, _lead_ it in the direction in which it should go. Of course,
that neighbour might be said to lead the other by being _three-quarters_
of a revolution in advance (or _more_ than _half_ a revolution, where
the cranks are not set at 90 degs.), and this is where a little
confusion sometimes arises; the leading crank must always be taken as
that one which is _less than half a revolution in advance of its fellow
when the engine is running ahead_, and in locomotives and similar
engines is “left-hand” or “right-hand,” according as it lies to the left
or right of a spectator looking from behind the crank-shaft towards the
cylinders. (See fig. 12, which shows two arrangements of the driving
cranks of an English locomotive. The cylinders are supposed to be to the
right of the wheels.)

[Illustration: FIG. 12.—Order of Cranks.]

The accompanying diagram (fig. 13) will perhaps serve to make clear
without further explanation the meaning of the expression, used with
reference to three-crank marine engines, of “order of cranks, high,
intermediate, low,” or “order of cranks, high, low, intermediate,” as
the case may be.

[Illustration: FIG. 13.—Order of Cranks.]

Let us revert here to one of the points previously noted, which was that
the simple valve, when we had it in connection with an eccentric set 90
degs. in advance of the crank, would not admit steam to the cylinder at
the exact commencement of the stroke, _i.e._, when the crank is on
either of the “dead centres.”

Keeping this fact in mind, we will consider the matters of

_Cushioning and Lead._—It has long been found desirable (especially in
quick-running engines) that the motion of the returning piston should be
opposed as it arrives at either end of its stroke, so that the moving
weights of piston, piston-rod, and connecting-rod may be “cushioned,” to
prevent injurious stresses and to conduce to easy running. To use a
homely illustration, one might say that just in the same way is it
desirable, when striking out from the shoulder, to have one’s adversary
within range, that he may provide the necessary “cushioning,” and so
prevent stresses in one’s arm and possible dislocations.

This “cushioning” is provided in part by checking the exit of the
exhaust steam, as will be shown later, and in part by setting the
eccentric a little more than 90 degs. (fig. 14) in advance of the crank,
so that the valve commences to open the port to admit steam in front of
the returning piston before it arrives at the end of its stroke,
continuing to open the port as the piston comes to a rest, and is
started on the return stroke.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

The amount to which the port is found to be open when the piston is at
the end of its stroke is called the “lead” of the valve, and it would be
expressed as “one-eighth of an inch lead,” or “three-sixteenths of an
inch lead.” etc., as the case might be. To set this valve for lead, keep
the piston at the end of its stroke, and set the eccentric back until
the valve is opened to the desired lead; then the eccentric would be
fixed in its newly-found position, as shown in fig. 14. The radius of
the “eccentric-arm,” which is the lighter of the two radial lines on the
disc in fig. 14, is equal in length to one-half of the travel of the
valve, and therefore does not reach the edge of the disc, at which,
however, there is a short guiding-mark in the line of the eccentric-arm
“produced.” By using this guiding-mark and moving the arrow-head of the
valve over the scale on the ports, in correspondence with the movement
of the guiding-mark on the edge of the disc within the circular scale,
the valve, the main crank (C), and the eccentric can be operated in
concord, very much as if they were mechanically connected.

The explanation just given of the meaning of lead, and of its effect,
should be borne in mind, as we shall presently have to consider it in
conjunction with other matters, for, as has been said, there is
something more than “lead” employed in the production of cushioning.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                               CHAPTER V.

      EXPANSION—INSIDE AND OUTSIDE LAP AND LEAD; ADVANCE AFFECTED
                          THEREBY—COMPRESSION.


_Expansion._—In order that the expansive properties of steam may be
utilised, it must be cut off before the piston arrives at the end of its
stroke, and on being cut off _must not be allowed to commence exhausting
immediately_, but must be confined in the cylinder, in order that by
expanding it may force the piston further before it. The old valve, as
we have seen it, did not allow this, and to effect it the faces of the
valve are lengthened, so that after the steam is cut off by the edge
(_a_) of the valve (fig. 15) the steam is confined, and expands in the
cylinder until the edge (_b_) arrives at _c_, when exhaust immediately
commences. Now put the piston at the end of its stroke, and put the new
valve in a central position (fig. 16). The distance that the valve, when
in this central position, _overlaps the outer edge_ of the steam-port,
is called the “outside or steam lap,” or more commonly the “lap” of the
valve, that is, the distance _d a_ (fig. 16).

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

The first thing noticeable is that this valve must be given considerably
more travel than the old one, as, to open fully each port to steam, we
have to bring the edge _a_ to _c_, first for one end of the valve and
then for the other, so that the travel of this valve must be _twice the
distance from a to c_—_i.e._ (lap _plus_ port-opening) × 2, whereas for
the old valve it was the distance from _d_ to _c_ which had to be
multiplied by two to give the travel.

Increased travel means increased throw of the eccentric, and we draw on
the disc in fig. 16 two longer eccentric-arms than before (the bolder
dotted lines) for the forward and backward eccentrics. We want “lead”
with this valve, and we must therefore give each eccentric more advance
than the 90 degs. shown. Now with the old valve we give each eccentric
an advance upon the 90 degs. which was determined solely by the lead, no
lap being then in question; but we now have a lap to deal with,
therefore each eccentric must be set on past 90 degs. until it first has
drawn edge _a_ of the lap to the outer edge of the port, and then still
further until the edge _a_ gives the necessary “lead.” Hence we see that
the linear advance of the eccentric = _lap plus lead_, so as to draw the
valve out of its central position by that amount.

_Travel_, then, depends upon _outside lap and port-opening_, and lead
does not affect it.

_Advance_ depends upon _lap and lead_.

The advance of the eccentric is usually stated by specifying the angle
of advance or the number of degrees _exceeding 90 degs._ that the
eccentric is in advance of the crank—for instance, “an angle of advance
of 10 degs.” means 90 degs. + 10 degs. = 100 degs. in advance of the
crank.

The line of travel of the valve is sometimes inclined to the line of
travel of the piston; in such cases, one of which is illustrated in fig.
17, the angle of advance must, of course, be measured from a line at
right angles to the valve-travel line, and not at right angles to the
line of piston-travel, as we have hitherto assumed.

[Illustration: FIG. 17.—Engine in which the Line of Travel of Valve is
Inclined in Relation to that of the Piston.]

We must now carefully consider the further results obtained by the use
of a valve having lap and giving lead, and whose eccentric of _greater
throw_ is advanced accordingly.

We should expect cut-off to take place earlier than with the old valve,
for the eccentric is advanced, and the edge _a_ (fig. 15) would arrive
at _e_ a little earlier than would the edge _d_ of the old valve, even
without advance of the new eccentric.

This seen, we can understand that in causing the edge _a_ (fig. 18) to
reach the edge _e_ earlier in the stroke of the piston than it otherwise
would do, we shall have hastened all the other operations so that they
must occur earlier in the stroke (not necessarily by exactly the same
amount for each, however, as we shall see further on), hence the edge
_b_ (fig. 18) arriving earlier at _c_, exhaust will commence before the
piston completes its stroke, and also in returning to the _right_ (fig.
19) the valve is earlier, and instead of the exhaust lasting during the
whole of the return stroke some of it will be shut in by _b_ and
compressed before the returning piston until the edge _a_ arrives at
_e_, whereupon the lead commences coming in on and reinforcing the
compressed steam. Thus it is that compression and lead _together_ affect
the cushioning, and consequently the piston is eased in stopping, and
the return stroke is commenced without injurious shock or jar. A similar
operation, of course, takes place at the opposite end of the cylinder
when the piston arrives there.

[Illustration: FIG. 18.]

[Illustration: FIG. 19.]

The distribution-diagram for a valve with lap, lead, and a suitable
eccentric is given in fig. 20, which should be compared carefully with
figs. 10 and 14.

[Illustration: FIG. 20.]

_Inside Lap_, exhaust lap, or “cover” as it is sometimes called, is
possessed by many slide valves, and it is the amount that the valve when
in its central position overlaps the _inner_ edges of the steam-ports.
Conversely,

_Inside Lead_ is the amount of space left, in certain cases, between the
inner edge of the valve and the inner edge of the steam-port when the
valve is in its central position.

The amount of inside lap does not affect the setting of the eccentric,
neither does it necessitate any alteration in the travel of the valve.
With a given cut-off, steam is confined longer in the cylinder by a
valve having inside lap because of the lengthening of the valve-face due
to the inside lap, and compression will commence earlier and will be of
longer duration from the same cause; exhaust being shortened in two
ways—by the amount added to the duration of expansion at its end, and by
a similar amount added to the compression at the commencement thereof.

Inside lead may be considered as something taken off the exhaust edge of
the valve, and in effect, exactly the opposite to exhaust lap, for, as
may easily be seen, it shortens expansion and compression by reason of
the shortening of the valve-face, and lengthens the exhaust at
commencement and end by the amounts by which the operations of expansion
and compression are shortened. The left-hand side of the valve in fig.
21 has inside lap, whilst the right-hand side has inside lead, and the
circular distribution-diagram below compares the distribution in the
case of valves having inside lap and inside lead with the distribution
for an ordinary valve such as was considered with reference to fig. 20.
By reference to the lower portion of fig. 21, it may be seen that the
operations of admission and cut-off are unaffected, as they are
performed by the outer edges of the valve; but

[Illustration: FIG. 21.]

                          { is shorter and exhaust earlier
                          {   with inside lead.
             Expansion    {
                          { is longer and exhaust later
                          {   with inside lap.

                          { is later and shorter with
                          {   inside lead.
             Compression  {
                          { is earlier and longer with
                          {   inside lap.

From this it will be obvious why many express locomotives are given
inside lead, and why many good engines have inside lap.

_Free Exhaust._—In order to give as free a passage as possible to the
exhaust steam, so that it may leave the cylinder easily, and not have to
be forced out by the returning piston and cause back pressure thereupon,
it is customary to make the steam-ports wider than the amount to which
they are open to steam. _This must on no account be confused with inside
lead_, which is quite a distinct matter. The effect of having wide ports
is that the exhaust may be opened to any extent up to the half-travel of
the valve, although the steam-opening may be much smaller, as may be
understood from the exaggerated diagram (fig. 22), whence also should be
seen that this widening of the port does not affect the _duration_ of
expansion or of any other operation of the valve, neither does it
necessitate any allowance in the setting of the eccentric. It simply
provides a free exhaust.

[Illustration: FIG. 22.]




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER VI.

         DOUBLE-PORTED, MULTIPLE ADMISSION, AND PISTON VALVES.


_Double-ported Valves._—In large marine engines using considerable
quantities of steam per stroke, and consequently requiring a large
amount of port-opening, the ordinary slide valve would require an undue
amount of travel. To obviate this, each end of the cylinder may have two
steam-ports, both ports opening into one passage as shown, and a
double-ported valve. The double-ported valve is virtually a combination
of two slide valves in a single casting (fig. 23), one valve for the
inner set of steam-ports and the exhaust-port, the other valve being
halved, as it were, for each outer steam-port. The exhaust cavity of
each of the outer “half-valves” having a passage leading to the exhaust
cavity of the inner valve, both the valves exhaust into the central
port, which is widened accordingly. The fig. 23 is merely diagrammatic,
to enable the principle of this valve to be easily borne in mind; the
next drawing (fig. 24) shows in section a double-ported valve as
actually constructed, with the exception that the valve-spindle and its
chamber are omitted in order that the form of the valve may be more
clearly shown. The section is taken in two planes, one upon the
longitudinal centre line of the valve, and the other (the left-hand half
of the valve) a little to the near side of the centre line. Fig. 25
shows a sectional view of a double-ported valve in perspective.

[Illustration: FIG. 23.—Diagram showing Flow of Steam and Exhaust
through a Double-ported Slide Valve.]

[Illustration: FIG. 24.—Vertical Section through a Double-ported Slide
Valve.]

[Illustration: FIG. 25.—Perspective view (in Section) of a Double-ported
Slide Valve.]

Now, any movement given to the “inner valve” is given, of course, to the
outer one, so that if the inner valve be moved so as to give, say, 2
ins. of port-opening, the outer valve gives at the same time another 2
ins. of port-opening; therefore, with a given movement of a
double-ported valve we get double the amount of port-opening that we
should have obtained with the ordinary valve. Hence the travel of the
double-ported valve = (lap + half the two port-openings) × 2; whereas
that of the ordinary valve = (lap + the port-opening required) × 2.

The inner and outer valves of the double-ported construction, acting
simultaneously, have each the same amount of lap; but they give the lead
between them, and the eccentric is set with a linear advance equal to
_one_ of the laps and _one_ of the lead-openings. The distribution of
steam with this valve is similar to that of the ordinary valve whose
distribution-diagram was shown in fig. 20. The different periods are of
the same duration in the example chosen, but the operations of cutting
off steam and of opening exhaust are performed by the edges of the inner
and outer valves instead of by a single edge as in the ordinary valve.

A valve very similar to the double-ported valve, shown in fig. 23, is
the Giddings valve used on the Russell engines and some other automatic
high-speed engines in America. By its peculiar construction, this valve
obviates the necessity of double steam ports, yet it is so much like the
double-ported valve that it may be noticed here rather than under the
head of multiple admission valves, where it might be said to properly
belong. This valve accomplishes exactly what the double-ported valve
does, and in pretty much the same way. The Giddings valve in fig. 26
shows steam being admitted to the right-hand end of the cylinder and
exhausted from the left-hand end. The travel of this valve is, as in the
case of the double-ported valve = (lap + half the port opening required)
× 2. The valve should be set with a linear advance equal to the lap plus
one-half the required lead.

[Illustration: FIG. 26.—The Giddings Valve.]

                       MULTIPLE ADMISSION VALVES.

In America, the type of engine known as the automatic high-speed engine
is very much used. These engines have a wide range of cut-off, from
almost 0 to ¹⁄₂ stroke, and in order to avoid a long valve and a long
travel and to secure a quick admission and cut-off of the steam,
recourse is had to multiple admission valves. These valves are so
constructed that when one of them is moved from midposition, a distance
equal to, say, ¹⁄₁₆ of an inch more than the steam lap, the width of the
opening for the steam to pass through into the cylinder is ¹⁄₁₆
multiplied by the number of admissions of the valve. Thus, if the valve
is a _double_ admission valve, and it is moved ¹⁄₁₆ plus the steam lap
from midposition, the port is opened a distance equal to 2 × ¹⁄₁₆ = ¹⁄₈
of an inch. Double admission valves are quite common and there are also
a number of quadruple admission valves used. They are made as flat
valves and as piston valves, but all are made with a common object in
view, that is, to secure an early cut-off and quick opening and closing
of the ports with a valve whose length and travel shall be short.

One of the best-known forms of double admission valves is the “Straight
Line” or “Sweet” valve, which was invented by Professor John E. Sweet,
formerly of Cornell University, and first used by him on the Straight
Line engines. This valve is now used by a large number of manufacturers
of automatic high-speed engines. The valve is shown in section in fig.
27, where _a_ is the “cover plate,” and _b_ is the valve, proper. The
valve, _b_, moves back and forth between the cover plate, _a_, and the
valve seat. The cover plate rests on pieces called “distance pieces,”
placed at the sides of the valve. These distance pieces are made of such
a thickness that while the cover plate cannot touch the valve, it is so
close to it as to make a steam tight joint between the plate and the
valve. Therefore, the valve acts as a piston of rectangular
cross-section, moving back and forth between the cover plate and the
valve seat. The result of its peculiar construction is that a balanced
flat valve is secured; a valve which works with very little friction, as
there is no surface upon which the steam can act so as to press the
valve against the valve seat. The cover plate is kept in place by the
pressure of the steam against its back, aided by one or two small
springs inserted between the plate and the steam-chest cover.

[Illustration: FIG. 27.—The Straight Line Valve.]

This valve should be set so that the distance the valve is from
midposition when the piston is at the end of its stroke, or the linear
advance, shall be equal to the steam lap plus one-half the desired lead.
The travel of the valve is equal to twice the sum of the steam lap and
one-half the maximum opening of the port for steam, or 2 × (steam lap +
¹⁄₂ maximum opening of port for steam).

In the case of a quadruple admission valve, such as the Woodbury valve
shown in fig. 28, the travel is equal to twice the sum of the steam lap
and one-fourth the maximum opening of the port for steam, or 2 × (steam
lap + ¹⁄₄ maximum opening of port for steam).

[Illustration: FIG. 28.—The Woodbury Valve.]

The different phases of the movement of a multiple admission valve are
just the same as for the ordinary slide valve, the only difference being
in the suddenness with which the ports are opened and closed.

_Piston Valves._—It may be readily seen that between the ordinary flat
slide valve and the valve-seat considerable friction is set up, because
the steam pressure on the back of the valve is only partly balanced by
the varying pressure in the cylinder steam-passages acting upon small
portions of the area of the “rubbing” or under-side of the valve; but by
making the port-faces cylindrical and making the faces of the valve in
the form of pistons, the pressure is given no surface upon which to
press in the direction of the valve-seat; or, in the case of hollow
piston valves (an example of which will be presently illustrated),
although the steam has access to the interior of the tube, pressure on
parts thereof is balanced by an equal pressure in an opposite direction
upon exactly opposite parts, and therefore is confined to stressing the
valve and has no tendency to force any part of it on to the valve-seat.

In the plain piston valve shown (fig. 29) the faces are formed by the
two valve pistons, which work in a cylinder wherein steam and exhaust
openings are made.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.]

Sometimes the steam-supply enters _between_ the two pistons, as in figs.
30 and 31, exhaust taking place into the spaces at the ends of the
valve, which spaces are connected by passages formed in the valve, which
is tubular, as shown. In such valves the steam-lap must be put upon the
_inner_ edges of the valve pistons, for the steam and exhaust edges have
their positions reversed; and the lead will also be given by the inner
edges.

[Illustration: FIG. 30.]

[Illustration: FIG. 31.—The Ide Valve.]

The eccentrics for a valve with internal steam-supply must be placed 180
degs. in advance of the positions which they would occupy if the valve
were of similar proportions, but with _external_ steam-supply, for the
reason that the internally supplied valve must be moving _up_, for
instance, when the ordinary valve would be moving _down_, and _vice
versa_.

If the valve be an externally supplied valve, but driven from one end of
a two-armed rocking-shaft, the valve gear actuating the other end, as in
American locomotive practice, the eccentrics must, for obvious reasons,
be set 180 degs. in advance of their usual position.

Fig. 30 is given by the kind permission of Messrs. W. Denny & Company,
the well-known Clyde ship-builders, and it possesses many points of
interest, one of which is that the packing in the valve-spindle
stuffing-box below the valve, and not shown in the drawing, is subject
only to the influence of the temperature and pressure of exhaust steam,
instead of to that of the higher temperature and pressure of the supply
steam; this is a matter of importance, having in view the high pressures
of steam which are now used.

Further, it may be seen that the upper piston of the valve is of greater
area than the lower one, and that the high-pressure steam entering
between the two pistons will consequently exert a total pressure upward
upon the larger piston greater in amount than the downward pressure
exerted upon the lower and smaller one; thus the valve has a tendency to
rise, so long as steam is on. This upward tendency balances wholly or in
part the downward tendency due to the weight of the valve, which has not
to be lifted by the valve gear, which may be of a lighter character than
usual, and give less trouble in working, owing to diminution of wear and
tear. The valve-spindle of the ordinary flat valve is sometimes
prolonged (where the valve works vertically) to end in a small piston
exposed to steam pressure, and acting so as to balance the weight of the
valve.

In the “Joy” assistant-cylinder, a balance-piston is provided with
special passages which, in the movement of the valve-spindle, are
brought opposite ports in the assistant-cylinder wall, so that steam is
let in to propel the balance-piston up or down, and thereby assist the
valve gear in each stroke. The balance-piston acts as its own exhaust
valve in sliding over exhaust-ports in the assistant-cylinder wall.

Fig. 31 shows the piston valve used in America on the well-known Ide and
Ideal engines. It is very similar to the valve shown in fig. 30, and has
the same advantages which have been pointed out as belonging to that
valve. As, however, it is principally used on horizontal engines, the
two pistons are made of the same diameter, in order to secure a
perfectly balanced valve.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER VII.

           THE EFFECT OF ALTERATIONS TO VALVE AND ECCENTRIC.


_Advance of the Eccentric._—It should here be established that to any
given example of valve, ports, and eccentric (leaving the piston out of
consideration for a moment) belongs a certain cycle of operations, the
occurrence of these operations and their _duration, expressed in
fractions of a revolution of the rotating eccentric_, being constant for
a given case,[3] but the fraction of stroke traversed by the _piston_
between or during any of these operations of the valve will depend upon
_where_ in the stroke of the piston the cycle of operations is started,
taking any convenient operation as being the commencement of the cycle,
for the speed of the piston rises from _nil_ at the commencement of its
stroke to a maximum near the middle, falling again to _nil_ at the end.

-----

Footnote 3:

  To make the idea clear one might plot these operations round a circle
  representing one revolution of the eccentric, when it would be seen
  that the operations of the _valve_ could be considered quite
  independently of those of the piston—then it would remain to show what
  the piston might do, or have done upon it, by comparing its motion
  under varying conditions with the _unvarying_ operations of the valve,
  in the manner explained later.

Now we may go on to consider the effect of increasing the advance of an
eccentric beyond that which it would ordinarily have (fig. 32). If we
suppose our eccentric and valve to give us a cut-off at C and an exhaust
at E, expansion lasting 0.17 of the stroke (as shown in full lines, fig.
32), and that by advancing the eccentric we get a cut-off at C^1 0.14
earlier, we must not expect to find that exhaust also will be 0.14
earlier (dotted lines, fig. 32), for although the exhaust edge of the
valve always gives exhaust at a certain constant period of time later
than steam is cut off by the steam edge, yet in that interval the speed
of the piston slackens less in this second case than in the first
example, and it therefore travels through a greater distance than in the
same time-interval taken later in the stroke in the first case. Hence,
with increased advance we get _earlier_ cut-off, with expansion of
_lengthened duration_ because _exhaust is not earlier in the same
degree_, neither are all the other operations performed by the valve,
although they each commence earlier and last longer in the stroke, lead
included, but admission, of course, excepted. _The idea may, perhaps, be
more easily grasped by keeping the eccentric and valve in view at an
unaltering standard of reference, and when it is desired to consider the
effect of advancing the eccentric, to imagine instead that it is the
setting of the main crank which is altered_—which in effect is the same
thing, and is, perhaps, easier to reason out.

[Illustration: FIG. 32.]

_Lengthening or Shortening the Eccentric Rod—Shifting the Valve on its
Spindle._—Starting with the valve in its central position, and
lengthening or shortening the eccentric rod or shifting the valve on its
spindle, or combining both operations in the same sense, the distance
between the centre of the crank-shaft and the centre of the valve is
altered, and the travel of the valve is shifted bodily to the right or
left, _i.e._, the valve when in the centre of its travel (the extent of
travel remaining of course unaltered) will be either further from or
nearer to the crank-shaft than before, while the position of the ports
remains unaltered; therefore the arrow upon the valve at its centre (see
fig. 16) lies to the right or left of the centre line of the port-face,
and, that arrow being no longer appropriate as a pointer at mid-travel
to the zero of the scale on the ports, we must adopt as our index-finger
the graduation mark made adjacent to the arrow and lying over the said
zero, in order that when the disc may indicate that the valve should
move, say, from 0 to 6 the new mark or index-finger, and not the arrow,
may be given that movement.

If the valve had previously been properly set for lead, and the
alteration shifted it ¹⁄₈ in. to the left, for example, we should find
that the lead at the left-hand end would be diminished by that amount,
and that subsequently, at cut-off, release, and compression, for both
ends of the cylinder, the valve would always be found ¹⁄₈ in. to the
left of its proper position. The result would be, as shown in fig. 33,
that: At left-hand of cylinder (see lines of dashes):—

            Lead decreases       } earlier, these operations
            Cut-off takes place  }   taking place
            Exhaust commences    }   as the valve moves
                                 }   _towards_ the left.

  Compression commences later, this operation taking place as the valve
    moves _from_ the left.

  At right-hand end of cylinder (see lines of dots):—

            Lead increases       } later, because when
            Exhaust commences    }   effecting them the
            Cut-off takes place  }   valve is moving
                                 }   _from_ the left.

[Illustration: FIG. 33.]

Compression commences earlier, for it occurs whilst the valve is moving
_to_ the left. The alterations at opposite ends being in opposite sense.
(The normal distribution is shown by _full lines_ for comparison.) And
although the commencement of the operations is advanced and retarded by
the same amount of error, operating in opposite sense on opposite sides
of the piston, yet there is a difference in the work done upon the
opposite sides because of the commencement of the two cycles of
operation at different times, whence we infer differences in the speeds
of the piston, in the quantities of steam admitted, and in the
expansion-curves.

In some cases such a difference is desirable, and with the working
diagram suggested in Chapter I. another series of results may be
obtained by using the ordinary valve for distribution on one side of the
piston, and for the other side using a differently-proportioned valve
with a different index-pointer, as though opposite ends of one valve
were differently proportioned, as in certain large vertical engines.

_Adding Extra Lap to a Valve._—In some cases cut-off may be wanted
earlier in the stroke, permanently, with expansion of longer duration.
Under such circumstances more lap may be added to the valve. If this be
done, and the valve with its extra lap be re-set by giving the eccentric
greater advance in order to get the same lead as before (travel of valve
remaining unaltered), the steam-ports will not be opened to so great an
extent as formerly, and will close earlier, partly because of the added
lap,[4] and partly because of the increased advance. The increased
length of the valve-face will, after cut-off, confine the steam longer
in the cylinder, and it should be obvious (the effect of advancing the
eccentric having already been shown with reference to fig. 32) that in
addition to the earlier commencement and lengthened duration of
expansion, the exhaust and compression will begin somewhat earlier
because of the increased advance, and the compression will be of longer
duration because of the increased length of the valve-face.

-----

Footnote 4:

  To assure one’s self of this, take an extreme case and imagine an
  excessive amount of lap to be added. In such a case, with travel
  unaltered, the ports might not be opened to steam at all, the valve
  simply sliding backwards and forwards without uncovering them; now,
  taking this lap off piecemeal the port would first be opened to an
  exceedingly small degree and instantly shut again, the amount and
  duration of opening increasing with each successive removal of lap.

_General._—It is here seen that in altering either the outside or the
inside laps with intent to affect only the steam admission with the
former, or only the exhaust with the latter, we must _perforce_ affect
other things. For instance, we alter the outside lap, with the
intention, say, of simply making cut-off earlier or later as the case
may be—but having altered the lengths of the valve-faces, they will
alter the duration of expansion and of compression, and the alteration
necessitated in the advance of the eccentric in order that the lead may
remain unaltered has its own effect in addition. This interdependence,
which is often inconvenient, is characteristic of the slide valve worked
by an eccentric, and has led to the use of valve gears and valves which
permit, more or less, of the independent regulation of some or all of
the various operations in the distribution of steam. Some of these gears
are used with a slide valve (as in the case of the Joy and other
well-known valve gears), while others operate special valves.




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                             CHAPTER VIII.

                         NOTE ON LINK MOTIONS.


_The Link Motion._—In engines whose duty _frequently_ varies, as in the
familiar case of a locomotive, permanent alteration of lap would not
meet the requirements of the case, for the amount of expansion should be
susceptible of ready variation at any time, in accordance with
alterations in the weight of train, gradients, and weather. The link
motion, in addition to being a reversing gear, is also a “variable
expansion” gear. A precise analysis of any given case of link motion is
a somewhat difficult operation, but, speaking broadly, the link motion
may be said to provide what is virtually an eccentric of different throw
and advance for each degree of expansion. Although, actually, the same
two eccentrics remain constantly in use, the link motion may be so
adjusted as to have an effect on the valve _similar to that which would
ensue_ upon the substitution, one for another, of different eccentrics
as stated. Assuming that the lowest range of expansion is being used,
the valve will have the travel, cut-off, and lead due for the most part
to the throw of the actual eccentric and to its position with relation
to the crank, almost as in the case of an eccentric whose rod is
directly connected to the valve-spindle; now, as the link is raised (an
operation sometimes termed “linking-up”) its centre gets nearer to the
block on the end of the valve-spindle than it was before (_i.e._, nearer
to “mid-gear”), and we get in effect:—

                              { A series of eccentrics of
     _With link motion_       {   decreasing throw, but of
     _having “open” rods._    {   increasing angular and
                              {   linear advance.

                              { A series of eccentrics of
                              {   decreasing throw and of
                              {   increasing angular, but
     _With link motion_       {   decreasing linear advance;
     _having “crossed” rods._ {   throw, therefore, decreasing
                              {   more rapidly than in the
                              {   case of the link motion
                              {   with “open” rods.

Take the case of a partially linked-up motion with open rods; we shall
find that because the throw of the eccentric is lessened, the travel of
the valve to the right and left of its central position will be
diminished, and the ports will not be opened so wide to steam or
exhaust; because of the increased advance of the eccentric, steam will
be cut off earlier, compression and lead will also be earlier, expansion
and compression lasting longer, and exhaust and admission being
shortened. The difference between working in full gear and linked up is
shown by the diagram in fig. 34.

[Illustration: FIG. 34.]

Below are diagrams showing the effect of putting the link motion in
“mid-gear” (fig. 35) and of putting the link motion into “back gear”
(fig. 36) while the engine is running ahead, as for a locomotive, but it
will be understood that the effect of the compression shown in the
latter will be modified by the lifting of the valve from its face, with
the result that some compressed air and steam will go up the exhaust.

[Illustration: FIG. 35.]

[Illustration: FIG. 36.]

The set of diagrams forming fig. 37 is intended to give a comparative
view of the effect upon the distribution of steam, of differently
arranged valves and eccentrics. The operations taking place upon only
one side of the piston are shown, except in that section of the diagram
which concerns a shifted valve, in order to avoid confusion. The upper
line of each diagram, being read from left to right, shows the
operations which take place on the forward stroke, those of the return
stroke being read from right to left upon the lower portion of each
diagram.

[Illustration: FIG. 37.]




------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              CHAPTER IX.

     NOTE ON VERY EARLY CUT-OFF, AND ON REVERSING GEARS IN GENERAL.


_Very early Cut-off._—Theoretically there is no limit to the range of
cut-off which may be obtained from an ordinary slide valve, but a
moment’s consideration will show that if we require a valve to cut off
steam very early in the stroke of the piston so as to cause it to expand
throughout an increased fraction of that stroke, the _lap_ must be
considerably increased beyond that which is usual, if the valve-face is
to be enabled to keep the steam confined in the cylinder for a
sufficient period after cut-off is effected.

As a consequence of increased lap, the _travel_ of the valve, made up of
_lap plus the required port-opening_, will need to be increased
correspondingly; the _linear advance_ (the sum of lead plus an
_increased_ lap) will be increased also, and the valve will therefore
come back earlier into its central position (where compression begins)
than would the normal valve, so making compression begin earlier and
last longer than before. In an unbalanced valve, this increased travel,
together with the abnormal compression, cannot be tolerated, so that for
obtaining an early cut-off without too much compression, with a sliding
valve, gear of the “separate cut-off slide,” or Meyer type, is employed.
This is characterised by a cut-off plate or plates on the back of a main
slide valve, which may have the usual exhaust cavity, and in addition
possesses supply steam-conduits leading through the valve from the back
to the “lap-edges” (fig. 38). Exhaust and compression are timed by the
edges of the central exhaust cavity; lead is given by the “lap-edges,”
but cut-off is controlled by movement of the cut-off plates on the back
of the moving main valve, so that though a “lap-edge” may not at any
time have closed one of the steam-ports proper, a cut-off plate worked
by a separate eccentric can close the appropriate steam-conduit above
referred to, and so stop the current of steam flowing past the lap-edge
to the still open port. Moreover, by a suitable setting of the
eccentrics of the main and cut-off valves, it is possible to arrange
that, at the instant of cut-off, the two valves shall be moving in
opposite directions, and so shall effect a sharp cut-off, whereby
wire-drawing is reduced.

[Illustration: FIG. 38.—Slide Valve, with Cut-off Plate on back.]

With the model referred to in the earlier chapters, the action of a
Meyer or similar gear can be readily investigated if an extra
eccentric-arm be added to the crank-pin disc and an extra travel-scale
marked upon the baseplate.

In fig. 39 is shown the “Buckeye” valve used in America on the Buckeye
engine; _a_ is the main valve, which determines the admission, release
and compression of the steam; and _b_ is the small auxiliary valve which
rides on the top of the main valve _a_, and which effects the cut-off.
This valve is constructed so as to have all the advantages of a
perfectly balanced valve as well as those of the Meyer valve. There are
two faces between which the main valve slides steam tight, and the small
valve works on a face inside of the main valve, as shown in the figure.
Steam is exhausted past the outer edges of the main valve. In order that
steam may enter the cylinder, the port in the main valve must be in
communication with the steam port and at the same time it must not be
covered by the auxiliary valve _b_. In the figure the valves are shown
in such a position as to admit steam to the left-hand end of the
cylinder and to allow it to exhaust from the right-hand end, as
indicated by the arrows.

[Illustration: FIG. 39.—The Buckeye Valve.]

Each valve is moved by its own eccentric, quite independently of the
other. By changing the advance or eccentricity, or both, of the
auxiliary valve, the cut-off may be changed as desired, without in any
way affecting the motion of the main valve. And as the main valve
determines the admission, release, and compression of the steam, it is
possible, with this valve, to change the cut-off as desired without
affecting these at all.

_The Trick or Allen Valve._—In connection with the subject of early
cut-offs the Trick or Allen valve may be mentioned. It is made with a
passage-way through the back of the valve, as shown in fig. 40, adapted
to deliver an extra supply of steam into the port by rendering available
an additional proportion of the area thereof, when the narrow
port-opening given by the lap-edge alone, during linked-up working, is
found to wire-draw the steam. Whilst the lap-edge _a_, for instance,
uncovers the edge _b_ of the right-hand port, the left-hand end of the
Trick passage becomes uncovered by moving beyond the edge _c_ of the
port-face, so that a current of steam flows from left to right through
that passage to join the stream passing the edge _a_. The total area of
the two supply-streams flowing into the right-hand port being
practically twice that which would be available were the Trick passage
absent.

[Illustration: FIG. 40.]

The occurrence and duration of the operations of steam-distribution are
exactly the same with this valve as with an ordinary slide-valve of
corresponding proportions, the distinctive feature of the valve having
no effect upon them so far as their timing is concerned.

_Reversal._—It may be of interest to consider the question—“Why do we
need _reversing_ gears?” The gears in common use are nearly all variable
expansion gears, as well as being _reversing_ gears, but it is desired
to consider now only the question of reversing. Are reversing gears
really needed? Suppose that one could have a transparent cylinder and
valve-chest, so that movement of the piston and valve could be clearly
seen. Suppose also that the connecting-rod, crank, valve gear, and
fly-wheel could _not_ be seen. We look into the cylinder and see valve
and piston reciprocating regularly, and in harmony with one another. We
turn away, and before we look again, the engine, let us assume, has been
reversed without our knowledge; yet when we turn again to the engine
there are the piston and valve reciprocating just as they were at first
(_although they must have “changed step,” as we shall presently find_),
and, look as intently as we may, with nothing else visible we shall be
unable to tell that the engine has been reversed. The valve is doing now
exactly what it did before, performing its operations in the same order.
Why have we had to employ reversing gear? Solely because—when the engine
ceases to run _ahead_ for instance, stopping at half-stroke the piston
and valve will be in a certain position, and will have been moving in
certain directions relatively to one another. And to reverse the
_piston’s_ motion, we want the valve

_Firstly_—To take up a new position on the port-face, so as, for
example, to give steam where it had previously given exhaust, and thus
we get reversal of the _engine_; and

_Secondly_—To move away from that new position, after the engine has
started astern, in the same direction as that in which it was moving
when the engine was running ahead. And seeing that the valve gear
derives motion from the crank-shaft directly or indirectly, we cannot
give the valve motion in this _same_ direction from an engine now moving
reversely, unless we also reverse the _gear_. And thus we may conclude
that a reversing gear is needed simply for the purpose of regulating the
direction of the first motion of the valve after stopping (_i.e._, for
“changing the step”), for after it next reaches the end of its travel
its motion will be in all respects just as it was when the engine ran
ahead,—so that, if we had a single-cylinder engine and never stopped it
except on the dead centres, we could drive its valve _by a separate
valve-engine always running one way_, and our main engine would, if
pushed off by hand, run equally well either ahead or astern, whilst
served by a valve having lap, lead, and travel as is customary. It is
hoped that this little speculation may not appear unprofitable, for it
has a bearing on the action of the reversing slides in radial valve
gears such as those of Hackworth, Walschaert, and Joy.

[Illustration: FIG. 41.]

  FIG. 41 SHOWS ENLARGED KEY-VIEW OF CARDBOARD CRANK-DISC, WHICH SHOULD
    TURN WITHIN THE CIRCLE DRAWN IN THE CENTRE OF FIG. 1.

The arm marked C is the crank-arm, and serves as an index finger in the
recording and reading of results.

The mark 1 is the index-mark for the forward eccentric to operate a
valve without lap.[5]

The mark 2 is the index for a forward eccentric set for lead, using a
valve without lap.[5]

The mark 3 is for a forward eccentric for a valve with lap and lead run
in “full gear.”[6]

The mark 4 is for a forward eccentric for a valve with lap and lead run
with a link motion partially “linked up.”[6]

The mark 5 is for a valve with lap and lead run with the link motion in
mid-gear.[5]

The mark 6 is for a backward eccentric for a valve with lap and lead,
run with a link motion partially linked-up.[6]

The mark 7 is a backward eccentric for a valve with lap and lead run in
“full gear.”[6]

The mark 8 is for a backward eccentric set for lead, using a valve
without any lap.[5]

The mark 9 is for a backward eccentric for a valve without lap.[5]

-----

Footnote 5:

  Used with No. 1 travel-scale, fig. 1.

Footnote 6:

  Used with No. 2 travel-scale, fig. 1.

The radial lines between the centre of the disc and the small circles
represent the actual throw assumed for the various eccentrics and their
angular position in relation to the crank; where the actual throw is not
sufficient to enable the arms to reach the edge of the disc, the
throw-lines are produced to the edge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         =Transcriber’s Notes=

 • Missing or obscured punctuation was silently corrected.
 • Typographical errors were silently corrected.
 • The “0” in fig. 1 was transcribed as the number zero to represent the
   center of the scale, and the “O” in fig. 2 was transcribed as the
   letter O to represent the outlet.
 • Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).
 • Superscripts are written using a caret (^) followed by the text
   enclosed in braces (^{superscript}).
 • Subscripts are written using an underscore (_) followed by the text
   enclosed in braces (_{subscript}).





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SLIDE VALVE, SIMPLY EXPLAINED ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


