The Project Gutenberg eBook of Travels and discoveries in North and Central Africa, Vol. 2 (of 5)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Travels and discoveries in North and Central Africa, Vol. 2 (of 5)
        being a journal of an expedition undertaken under the auspices of H.B.M.'s Government, in the years 1849-1855

Author: Heinrich Barth

Illustrator: Johann Martin Bernatz

Release date: June 16, 2025 [eBook #76317]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Longman, Brown, Green, Longmans & Roberts, 1857

Credits: Galo Flordelis (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/Getty Research Institute and Smithsonian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRAVELS AND DISCOVERIES IN NORTH AND CENTRAL AFRICA, VOL. 2 (OF 5) ***

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

CONFLUENCE OF BÉNUË AND FÁRO.

June 13th. 1851.]

                        TRAVELS AND DISCOVERIES
                                   IN
                       NORTH AND CENTRAL AFRICA:
                                BEING A
                        JOURNAL OF AN EXPEDITION
                               UNDERTAKEN
               UNDER THE AUSPICES OF H.B.M.’S GOVERNMENT,
                              IN THE YEARS
                               1849-1855.

                                   BY
                       HENRY BARTH, PH.D., D.C.L.
        FELLOW OF THE ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL AND ASIATIC SOCIETIES,
                               _&c. &c._

                            IN FIVE VOLUMES.
                                VOL. II.

                                LONDON:
              LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, LONGMANS, & ROBERTS.
                                 1857.

                _The right of translation is reserved._


                                LONDON:
                     Printed by SPOTTISWOODE & CO.
                           New-street Square.




                                CONTENTS
                                   OF
                           THE SECOND VOLUME.

                               * * * * *


                             CHAPTER XXII.

                                                                    Page

  Separation of the Travellers. — The Border Districts of the
  Independent Pagan Confederation. — Tasáwa                            1

Dissembling of the Chief. — His steadfast Character. — Mr. Richardson’s
Health. — Separation. — Different Roads to Kanó. — Animated
Intercourse. — Native Warfare. — The First Large Tamarind-tree. —
Villages and Wells. — Separation from Mr. Overweg. — Improved Scenery.
— Encampment at Gozenákko. — Lively Camp-scene. — Native Delicacies. —
Revenues of Tasáwa. — Astounding Message. — Visit to Tasáwa. — The
Market in Tasáwa. — Náchirá, Ánnur’s Estate. — Character of the People
and their Dwellings. — Intrigue defeated. — Counting Shells. — A Petty
Sultan. — Dyeing-Pits.

                              CHAP. XXIII.

  Gazáwa. — Residence in Kátsena                                      32

An African Dandy. — My Protector Elaiji. — Camp-life. — Fortifications
and Market of Gazáwa. — March resumed. — Desolate Wilderness. — Site of
Dánkama. — Struggle between Islámism and Paganism. — Encampment near
Kátsena. — Estimate of Salt-caravan. — Negro Horsemen. — Equestrian
Musicians. — The Governor of Kátsena. — Detained by him. — The
Governor’s Wiles. — Disputes. — Who is the “Káfer?” — Clapperton’s
Companion. — The Tawáti Bel-Ghét conciliated. — Extortionate Demands. —
Subject about the Káfer resumed. — The Presents. — Promenade through
the Town. — The Governor’s Wishes. — Taking Leave of him.

                              CHAP. XXIV.

  Háusa. — History and Description of Kátsena. — Entry into Kanó      69

The Name Háusa. — Origin of the Háusa Nation. — The seven States. —
Origin of the Town of Kátsena. — The Mohammedan Missionary Ben Maghíli.
— Kings of Kátsena. — The First Moslim. — The Oldest Quarter. —
Magnitude of the Town. — Its Decline. — Salubrious Site and Favourable
Situation of Kátsena. — Departure from Kátsena. — Wild State of the
Country. — Shibdáwa. — Rich Scenery. — Kusáda. — The Bentang Tree. —
Women with Heavy Loads. — Beehives. — Gúrzo. — Approach to Kanó. —
Straggling Villages. — Composition of our Troop. — First View of Dalá.
— Entering Kanó.

                               CHAP. XXV.

  Residence in Kanó. — View of its Interior. — Its History and
  Present State. — Commerce                                           97

My Situation in Kanó. — Debts. — Projects. — The Commissioner. —
Difficulties. — Sickness. — Interior of Kanó; Animated Picture. — The
Quarters of the Conquered and the Ruling Race. — The “Serkí” and the
Gháladíma. — The Audience. — Presents. — Plan of Kanó. — Street-groups.
— Industry. — View from Mount Dalá. — Acquaintances in Kanó. —
Meditated Departure. — Historical Sketch of Kanó. — Growth of the Town.
— The Quarters of the Town. — Ground-plan of my House. — Population. —
Commerce. — Various Kinds of Zénne. — Export of Cloth. — Grand
Character of Trade. — Produce. — The Guinea-fowl Shirt. — Leather-work.
— Kola-nut. — Slaves. — Natron, Salt, Ivory-trade. — European Goods in
Kanó. — The South American Slave-traders. — Small Quantity of Calico. —
Silk. — Woollen Cloth. — Beads. — Sugar. — Fire-arms. — Razors. — Arab
Dresses. — Copper. — The Shells and the Dollar. — Markets of Kanó. —
Revenues. — Administration. — The Conquering Tribe.

                              CHAP. XXVI.

  Starting for Kúkawa. — The Frontier-district                       148

Leaving Kanó quite by myself. — My Trooper. — Get off later. — Domestic
Slavery. — Gezáwa. — My Runaway Servant ʿAbd Allah. — The Sheríf and
his Attendants. — Mules in Negroland. — Kúka Mairuwá. — Insecurity. —
Scarcity of Water. — Natron-trade. — Endurance and Privations of the
Traveller. — Arrival at Gerki. — Take Leave of Háusa. — Gúmmel. —
Housebuilding. — Antidote. — Market at Gúmmel. — Magnitude of Ilóri. —
Two Spanish Dollars. — Depart from Gúmmel. — Benzári. — The Rebel Chief
Bokhári. — His Exploits. — The Governor of Máshena. — Letter-carrier’s
Mistake. — Curious Talisman. — Manga Warriors. — Wuëlleri. — Scarcity
of Water again. — Town of Máshena. — State of the Country. — Cheerful,
Out-of-the-way Place. — Álamáy. — Búndi and the Gháladíma. — The Kárda.
— Route from Kanó to Álamáy by way of Khadéja.

                              CHAP. XXVII.

  Bórnu Proper                                                       197

 Intercourse. — Change of Life in Negroland. — Region of the Dúm-palm.
— The Kúri Ox. — The River Wáni. — Enter Bórnu Proper. — Zurríkuló. —
News of the Death of Mr. Richardson. — Sandy Downs. — Déffowa. —
Industry. — The Stray Camel. — Town of Wádi. — Good Market and no
Provisions. — Hospitable Treatment. — The Banks of the Wáni. —
Locusts and Hawks. — Ngurútuwa; Grave of Mr. Richardson. — The
Tawárek again. — Aláune. — The Jungles of the Komádugu. — Ruins of
Ghámbarú. — A Forest Encampment. — Nomadic Herdsmen. — Abundance of
Milk. — Ford of the Komádugu. — Native Ferry-boats. — Khér-Álla, the
Border-warfarer. — Changing Guides. — The Runaway Horse. — A Domestic
Quarrel.

                             CHAP. XXVIII.

  Arrival in Kúkawa                                                  240

Peculiar Character of the Alluvial Plains of Bórnu. — The Attentive
Woman. — Entrance into Kúkawa. — Servants of the Mission. — Debts of
the Mission. — Interview with the Vizier. — Sheikh ʿOmár. — Mr.
Richardson’s Property. — Amicable Arrangements.

                              CHAP. XXIX.

  Authenticity and general Character of the History of Bórnu         253

Documents. — Beginning of written History. — Pedigree of the Bórnu
Kings. — Chronology. — Harmony of Facts. — The Séfuwa Dynasty. — Ébn
Khaldún. — Makrízí and Ébn Batúta. — Surprising Accuracy of the
Chronicle of Bórnu. — Statement of Leo Africanus. — Berber Origin of
the Séfuwa. — Form of Government. — The Berber Race. — The Queen
Mother. — Indigenous Tribes. — The Tedá or Tebu. — The Soy. — Epochs of
Bórnu History. — Greatest Power. — Decline of the Bórnu Empire. — The
Kánemíyín.

                               CHAP. XXX.

  The Capital of Bornu                                               283

My Friends. — The Arab Áhmed bel Mejúb. — The Púllo Íbrahím from the
Senegal. — Dangerous Medical Practice. — Áhmed the Traveller. — My
Bórnu Friends. — The Vizier el Háj Beshír; his Career; his Domestic
Establishment; his Leniency. — Debts of the Mission paid. — The English
House. — Plague of Insects. — Preparations for a Journey. — Character
of Kúkawa. — The Two Towns. — The Great Market. — Business and
Concourse. — Defective Currency. — Prices of Provisions. — Fruits. —
Camels. — Horses. — Want of Native Industry. — Bórnu Women. — Promenade.

                              CHAP. XXXI.

  The Tsád                                                           319

Character of the Road to Ngórnu. — Ngórnu. — Searching the Tsád. —
Longer Excursion. — Character of the Shores of the Tsád. — The Búdduma
and their Boats. — Fresh Water. — Swampy Plains. — Boats of the Búdduma
again. — Maduwári. — Dress of the Sugúrti. — Account of the Lake. —
Shores of the Creek. — Sóyorum. — Káwa. — Return to Kúkawa. — Servants
dismissed. — Mohammed Titíwi the Auspicious Messenger. — Slave-caravan.
— Announcement of Rainy Season. — Ride to Gawánge. — Mr. Overweg’s
Arrival. — Meeting. — Property restored. — Mercantile Intrigues. — The
Sheikh’s Relatives. — Messengers from Ádamáwa. — Anticipated Importance
of the Eastern Branch of the Niger — Proposed Journey to Ádamáwa.

                              CHAP. XXXII.

  Setting out on my Journey to Ádamáwa. — The Flat, Swampy
  Grounds of Bórnu                                                   351

Leaving Kúkawa. — The Road Southwards. — Inhospitality near the
Capital. — Buying with a Shirt. — The Winter Corn. — The Shúwa Arabs. —
Múngholo Gezáwa. — Fair Arabs. — Magá District. — The Gámerghú
District. — District of Ujé. — Fine Country. — Mábaní. — Pilgrim
Traders, Banks of the Yáloë. — First View of the Mountains. — Fúgo
Mozári. — Market of Ujé. — Aláwo. — Approach to Mándará.

                             CHAP. XXXIII.

  The Border-country of the Marghí                                   374

Question about Snowy Mountains. — The Blacksmith. — Shámo District. — A
Storm. — Molghoy. — The Southern Molghoy. — Large Kúrna-trees. —
Structure of the Huts. — Deviations from Negro Type. — The Marghí,
their Attire and Language. — Edible Wild Fruits. — The Baobab. —
Beautiful Scenery. — Íssege. — Spirit of the Natives. — Degenerate
Fúlbe. — The Lake. — View of Mount Míndif. — Wándalá Mountains. — Route
to Sugúr. — The Marghí Tribe. — Scientific Dispute. — Unsafe
Wilderness. — Unwholesome Water. — The Return of the Slave Girl. — The
Bábir Tribe. — Laháula. — The Idol. — Alarm. — Abundance of Vegetable
Butter. — Serious March. — The Báza Tribe. — The Dividing Range. — Úba.
— The New Colony.

                              CHAP. XXXIV.

  Ádamáwa. Mohammedan Settlements in the Heart of Central Africa     414

The Conquering Tribe. — The Granite Hills. — Valley and Mountain-chain.
— Isolated Mountain-groups. — Múbi. — The Surrounding Country. — Origin
of the Fúlbe. — Bágma and Peculiar Structures. — Camels a Novelty. —
Compliment paid to the Christian. — Mbutúdi. — Fúlbe Way of Saluting. —
The Déléb-palm (_Borassus flabelliformis?_) and its Fruit. — The
Granite Mount. — Simplicity of Manners. — Mount Hólma. — Legéro. —
Edible Productions. — Ground-nut Diet. — Badaníjo. — Fertile Vale. —
Temporary Scarcity. — Kurúlu. — Red and white Sorghum. — Saráwu
Beréberé. — Comfortable Quarters. — Accurate Description. — Important
Situation of Saráwu. — Tebu Traders. — Fair Negroes. — Market of
Saráwu. — Saráwu Fulfúlde. — The Mansion. — The Blind Governor. —
Principal Men in Yóla. — Mount Konkel. — Bélem. — An Arab Adventurer. —
Rich Vegetation. — The young Púllo. — Old Mʿallem Dalíli. — Arab
Colony. — A Country for Colonies. — Ruined Village (Melágo). —
Gastronomic Discussion. — Máyo Tíyel. — The Bátta Tribe. — Sulléri. —
Inhospitable Reception.

                              CHAP. XXXV.

  The Meeting of the Waters. — The Bénuwé and Fáro                   463

Approach to the River. — Mount Alantíka and the Bénuwé. — The Tépe or
“Junction.” — The great Arm of the Kwára. — The Traveller’s Pursuits. —
Highroad of Commerce. — The Frail Canoes. — Bathing in the Bénuwé. —
The Passage. — The River Fáro; its Current. — Floods and Fall of the
River. — Chabajáure. — Densely inhabited District. — Mount Bágelé. —
The Backwater. — Ribágo. — Cultivation of Rice. — The Bátta Language. —
Inundation. — Yebbórewó. — Mount Bágelé and Island. — Reach Yóla.

                              CHAP. XXXVI.

  My Reception in Yóla. — Short Stay. — Dismissal                    485

Inauspicious Entrance. — Curiosity of Natives. — Quarters. — An Arab
Traveller to Lake Nyassa. — The Governor Mohammed Lowel. — The
Audience. — The Mission repulsed. — The Governor’s Brother Mansúr. —
Ordered to withdraw. — Begin my Return-Journey. — Character of Yóla. —
Slavery. — Extent of Fúmbiná. — Elevation and Climate. — Vegetable and
Animal Kingdom. — Principal Chiefs of the Country. — Tribes; the Bátta,
the Chámba, and other Tribes.

                             CHAP. XXXVII.

  My Journey Home from Ádamáwa                                       515

Start from Ribágo. — Hospitable Treatment in Sulléri. — Demsa-Póha. —
The Memorable Campaign Southward. — View of a Native Settlement. —
Beautiful Country. — Bélem again. — Mʿallem Dalíli and his Family. —
Múglebú. — Múbi. — My Quarters. — Household Furniture. — Úba. — Unsafe
Boundary-district. — Laháula. — Íssege. — Iron Ornaments of the Marghí.
— Funeral Dance. — Ordeal. — Feeling of Love. — A Party going to
Sacrifice. — Arrival at Yerímarí. — Villages of the Gámerghú. — Ujé
Kásukulá. — Difference of Climate. — Plants. — Huts. — Plains of Bórnu
Proper. — Seizing a Hut. — African Schoolboys. — A wandering Tribe. —
Town and Country. — Guineaworm. — Thunder-storm. — People returning
from Market. — Múnghono. — Return to Kúkawa.

                               * * * * *

                               APPENDIX.

                                   I.

  Quarters of the Town of Kátsena                                    555

                                  II.

  Chief Places in the Province of Kátsena                            557

                                  III.

  Chief Places in the Province of Kanó, and Routes diverging from
  Kanó in various Directions, principally towards the South          558

                                  IV.

  Collection of Itineraries passing through the various Districts
  of Ádamáwa                                                         587

                                   V.

                          CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE,

  Containing a List of the Séfuwa, or Kings of Bórnu descended
  from Séf, with the few historical facts and events under
  their respective reigns, that have come to our knowledge           633

                                  VI.

  Fragments of a Meteorological Register                             673




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
                                   IN
                           THE SECOND VOLUME.

                               * * * * *


                                 MAPS.

                                                                  Page

   VII. Routes between Kátsena and Kúkawa                            i

  VIII. Route from Kúkawa to Yóla                                  351

                                PLATES.

  1. Tépe, the confluence of the Bénuwé and Fáro        _Frontispiece_

  2. Kanó from Mount Dalá                              _to face_   111

  3. Dendal in Kúkawa                                      „       243

  4. Kálu-Kemé, the open Water of the Tsád                 „       331

  5. Shores of Lake Tsád                                   „       332

  6. Mbutúdi                                               „       425

  7. Demsa-póha                                            „       521

  8. Múglebu                                               „       525

                               WOODCUTS.

  Corn-stack                                                         5

  Negro Stirrup                                                     46

  Ground-plan of the Town of Kátsena                                79

  Ground-plan of the Town of Kanó                                  107

  Dagger and Scabbard                                              110

  Ground-plan of my House in Kanó                                  124

  Guinea-fowl Shirt                                                129

  Sandals                                                          130

  Leather Pocket                                                   ib.

  Henhouse                                                         207

  Ground-plan of House in Kúkawa                                   299

  Ground-plan of the Town of Kúkawa                                304

  The Seghëum of the Marghí                                        384

  Double Peak of Mount Míndif                                      396

  View of Mountain-chain of Úba                                    416

  Mountain                                                         418

  Another Mountain                                                 419

  Mount Kilba-Gáya                                                 ib.

  Mountain-chain, Fingting                                         421

  Mount Hólma                                                      431

  Mount Kurúlu                                                     437

  Ground-plan of Huts                                              439

  Couch-screen                                                     441

  Picturesque Cone                                                 442

  Mountain-range beyond Saráwu                                     450

  Mount Kónkel                                                     451

  The Governor’s Audience-hall                                     490

  Picturesque Cone                                                 518

  Ground-plan of Hut in Múbi                                       527

  Household Furniture                                              528

  Hand-bill                                                        532

  Shield                                                           537

  Different Shape of Huts                                          549




[Illustration: DR. BARTH’S TRAVELS IN NORTH AND CENTRAL AFRICA Sheet No.
7. MAP OF THE ROUTES between KÁTSENA AND KÚKAWA in the years 1851-1854.

Constructed and drawn by A. Petermann.

Engraved by E. Weller, _Duke Strt. Bloomsbury._

_London, Longman & Co._]


                        TRAVELS AND DISCOVERIES
                                   IN
                                AFRICA.

                               * * * * *

                             CHAPTER XXII.

SEPARATION OF THE TRAVELLERS. — THE BORDER DISTRICTS OF THE INDEPENDENT
                     PAGAN CONFEDERATION. — TASÁWA.


[Sidenote: Friday, Jan. 10th, 1851.]

The important day had arrived when we were to separate not only from
each other, but also from the old chief Ánnur, upon whom our fortunes
had been dependent for so long a period. Having concealed his real
intentions till the very last moment, he at length, with seeming
reluctance, pretended that he was going first to Zínder. He confided
me, therefore, to the care of his brother Elaiji, a most amiable old
man, only a year younger than himself, but of a very different
character, who was to take the lead of the salt-caravan to Kanó; and
he promised me that I should arrive there in safety.

I had been so fortunate as to secure for myself, as far as that place,
the services of Gajére, who was settled in Tágelel, where he was
regarded as Ánnur’s chief slave, or overseer (“babá-n-báwa”). This man I
hired, together with a mare of his, for myself, and a very fine pack-ox
for that part of my luggage which my faithful camel, the Bu-Séfi, was
unable to carry. Ánnur, I must say, behaved excellently towards me in
this matter; for, having called me and Gajére into his presence, he
presented his trusty servant, before all the people, with a red bernús
on my account, enjoining him in the strictest terms to see me safe to
Kanó.

And so I separated from our worthy old friend with deep and sincere
regret. He was a most interesting specimen of an able politician and a
peaceful ruler in the midst of wild, lawless hordes; and I must do him
the justice of declaring that he behaved, on the whole, exceedingly well
towards us. I cannot avoid expressing the sorrow I afterwards felt on
account of the step which Mr. Richardson thought himself justified in
taking as soon as he had passed from the hands of Ánnur into those of
the authorities of Bórnu, viz., to urge the sheikh of that country to
claim restitution from the former, not only for the value of the things
taken from us by the bordering tribes of the desert, but even of part of
the sum which we had paid to Ánnur himself. Such conduct, it appeared to
me, was not only impolitic, but unfair. It was impolitic, because the
claim could be of no avail, and would only serve to alienate from us a
man whom we had succeeded in making our friend; and it was unfair, for,
although the sum which we had given to the chief was rather large in
proportion to our limited means, we were not compelled to pay it, but
were simply given to understand that, if we wanted the chief himself to
accompany us, we must contribute so much. I became fully aware of the
unfavourable effect which Mr. Richardson’s proceedings in this respect
produced, on the occasion of a visit which I paid the old chief in the
beginning of the year 1853, when passing through Zínder on my way to
Timbúktu. He then mentioned the circumstance with much feeling, and
asked me if, judging from his whole behaviour towards us, he had
deserved to be treated as a robber.

But to return to Tágelel, when I shook hands with the “sófo” he was
sitting, like a patriarch of old, in the midst of his slaves and free
men, male and female, and was dividing amongst them presents, such as
shawls and turkedies, but principally painted armrings of clay, imported
from Egypt, and of which the women of these districts are passionately
fond. Mr. Richardson being ready to start, I took a hearty farewell of
him, fixing our next place of meeting in Kúkawa, about the first of
April. He was tolerably well at the time, although he had shown evident
symptoms of being greatly affected by the change from the fine fresh air
of the mountainous district of Aïr to the sultry climate of the fertile
lands of Negroland; and he was quite incapable of bearing the heat of
the sun, for which reason he always carried an umbrella, instead of
accustoming himself to it by degrees. There was some sinister foreboding
in the circumstance that I did not feel sufficient confidence to intrust
to his care a parcel for Europe. I had sealed it expressly that he might
take it with him to Kúkawa, and send it off from that place with his own
despatches immediately after his arrival; but at the moment of parting I
preferred taking it myself to Kanó. All my best friends amongst the Kél-
owí were also going to Zínder, in order, as they said, to accompany
their master, although only a small part of the salt-caravan followed
that route. Overweg and I remained together for two or three days
longer.

[Illustration]

I felt happy in the extreme when I found myself once more on horseback,
however deficient in beauty my little mare might be; for few energetic
Europeans, I think, will relish travelling for any length of time on
camel’s back, as they are far too dependent on the caprice of the
animal. We set out at half-past seven o’clock, and soon passed on our
right a village, and then a second one, which I think was Dákari, where
a noble lady of handsome figure, and well mounted upon a bullock, joined
the caravan. She was seated in a most comfortable large chair, which was
fastened on the bullock’s back. We afterwards passed on our right the
town of Olalówa, situated on a low range of hills. In the lower plain
into which we next descended, I observed the first regular ant-hill.
Small groups of corn-stacks, or rumbús, further on dotted a depression
or hollow, which was encompassed on both sides with gently-sloping
hills. Here I had to leave the path of the caravan with my new companion
Gajére, who was riding the bullock, in order to water our two beasts, a
duty which now demanded our chief attention every day.

At length we reached the watering-place of Gílmirám, consisting of a
group of not less than twenty wells, but all nearly dry. The district of
Damerghú must sometimes suffer greatly from drought. The horses and
cattle of the village were just coming to be watered; what time and
pains it must take to satisfy a whole herd, when we were scarcely able
to water our two animals! Passing along through thick underwood, where
the “kálgo,” with its large dry leaves of olive hue, and its long red
pods similar to those of the kharúb-tree, but much larger, predominated
almost exclusively, and leaving the village Maihánkuba on our right, we
at last overtook the caravan; for the Ásbenáwa pack-oxen are capable of
carrying heavy loads at a very expeditious pace, and in this respect
leave far behind them the pack-oxen of the fertile regions of Negroland.
We now kept along through the woody region, where the tree “góshi,” with
an edible fruit, was most frequent. We encamped in a thickly-wooded
hollow, when my sociable companion Gajére, as well by the care he took
for our evening fire (which he arranged in the most scientific way) as
by the information he gave me with regard to the routes leading from
Zínder to Kanó, contributed greatly to the comfort and cheerfulness of
our bivouac. I first learned from him that there are four different
routes from Zínder to Kanó, one route, the westernmost, passing by
Dáura; the second, passing by Kazáure; the third, by Garú-n-Gedúnia; the
fourth, by Gúmmel (or, as he pronounced it, Gúmiel[1]), gari-n-serki-n-
Da-n-Tanóma, this being the easternmost and longest route. Gajére
himself was only acquainted with the third route, the stations of which
are as follows.

Starting from Zínder you sleep the first night in Gógo, the second in
Mokókia, the third in Zólunzólun, the fourth in Magáriá, the fifth in
Túnfushí, the sixth in Garú-n-Gedúnia, from whence it is three days’
journey to Kanó.

[Sidenote: Saturday, January 11th.]

My people, Gajére, and myself started considerably in advance of the
caravan, in order to water the animals at our leisure, and fill the
waterskins. It was a beautiful morning, and our march a most pleasant
one; a tall sort of grass called “gámba” covered the whole ground. Thus
we went on cheerfully, passing by a well at present dry, situated in a
small hollow and surrounded with fine trees which were enlivened by
numbers of Guinea fowl and wild pigeons. Beyond this spot the country
became more open; and about five miles from the well we reached the pond
or “tébki-n-rúwa Kúdura,” close on the right of our path. It was already
partly dried up, and the water had quite a milky colour from the nature
of the ground, which consists of a whitish clay; but during the rainy
season, and for some time afterwards, when all the trees which surround
it in its dry state stand in the midst of the water, it is of
considerable size. There are a great many kálgo-trees here. We also met
a small troop of men very characteristic of the country we had entered,
being wanton in behaviour and light in dress, having nothing on but
short shirts (the colour of which had once been dark blue) and
diminutive straw hats, while all their luggage consisted of a small
leathern bag with pounded “géro” or millet, some gourd bottles to
contain the fura, besides two or three drinking-vessels. One of them, an
exceedingly tall fellow, rode a horse scarcely able to carry him, though
the cavalier was almost as lean as his Rosinante. Soon afterwards the
pond became enlivened by the arrival of a caravan of pack-oxen,
everything indicating that we had reached a region where intercourse was
easy and continuous.

We remained here nearly two hours, till the “aïri” came up, when we
joined it, and soon discovered the reason of their being so long; for in
the thick underwood the long strings of camels could not proceed fast,
and the stoppages were frequent. We then met another small caravan. At a
quarter past four in the afternoon we encamped in a locality called
Amsúsu, in the midst of the forest. We were busy pitching the tent, when
a body of about sixteen horsemen came up, all dressed in the Tawárek
fashion, but plainly indicating their intermixture with the Háusa people
by their less muscular frame, and by the variety of their dress; and in
fact they all belonged to that curious mulatto tribe called Búzu (_pl._
Búzawe). They were going on a “yáki,” but whether against the
Awelímmiden or the Féllani I could not learn at the time; the latter,
however, proved to be the case.

The earth hereabouts was filled with a peculiar kind of small worms,
which greatly annoyed any person lying on the bare ground, so that I was
very fortunate in having my “gadó” with me. A bedstead of some kind is a
most necessary piece of furniture for an African traveller, as I have
already remarked on a previous occasion; but it should be of a lighter
description than my heavy boards, which, notwithstanding their
thickness, were soon split, and at length smashed to pieces, in the
thick forests through which we often had to pass. Our bivouac in the
evening round our fire was exceedingly agreeable, the staid and grave
demeanour of my burly and energetic companion imposing even upon the
frivolous Mohammed, who at this time behaved much better than usual.
Gajére informed me that the direct western road from here to Tasáwa
passed by the village Gárari, the pond Úrafa, the well Jíga, and by
Birni-n-Tázin, while we were to follow an eastern road. Not far from our
encampment, eastward, was a swamp named Tágelel.

[Sidenote: Sunday, January 12th.]

Several camels were missing in the morning, as was indeed very natural
in a country like this, thickly covered with trees and underwood. Soon,
however, a tremendously shrill cry, passing from troop to troop, and
producing altogether a most startling effect, announced that the animals
had been found; and a most interesting and lively scene ensued, each
party, scattered as the caravan was through the forest, beginning to
load their camels on any narrow open space at hand. The sky was thickly
overcast; and the sun did not break forth till after we had gone some
three or four miles. We passed a beautiful tsámia, or tamarind-tree,
which was, I think, the first full-grown tree of this species we had
seen, those in Tágelel being mere dwarfs. Having descended a little, we
passed at eleven o’clock a small hamlet or farming-village called Kauye-
n-Sálakh; and I afterwards observed the first tulip-tree, splendidly
covered with the beautiful flower just open in all the natural finery of
its colours, while not a single leaf adorned the tree. I think this was
the first tree of the kind we had passed on our road, although Overweg
(whose attention I drew to it) asserted that he had seen specimens of it
the day before; nevertheless I doubt their having escaped my
observation, as I took the greatest interest in noting down accurately
where every new species of plant first appeared. At four o’clock in the
afternoon we saw the first cotton-fields, which alternated with the
corn-fields most agreeably. The former are certainly the greatest and
most permanent ornament of any landscape in these regions, the plant
being in leaf at almost every season of the year, and partly even in a
state of fructification; but a field of full-grown cotton-plants, in
good order, is very rarely met with in these countries, as they are left
generally in a wild state, over-grown with all sorts of rank grass. A
little beyond these fields we pitched our tent.

[Sidenote: Monday, January 13th.]

We started at rather a late hour, our road being crossed by a number of
small paths which led to watering-places; and we were soon surrounded by
a great many women from a neighbouring village called Baíbay, offering
for sale, to the people of the caravan, “godjía,” or ground-nuts, and
“dákkwa,” a sort of dry paste made of pounded Guinea corn
(_Pennisetum_), with dates and an enormous quantity of pepper. This is
the meaning of dákkwa in these districts; it is, however, elsewhere used
as a general term signifying only paste, and is often employed to denote
a very palatable sort of sweatmeat made of pounded rice, butter, and
honey. We then passed on our left the fields of the village, those near
the road being well and carefully fenced, and lying around the well,
where half the inhabitants of the place were assembled to draw water,
which required no small pains, the depth of the well exceeding twenty
fathoms. Attempting to water the horse, I found that the water was
excessively warm; unfortunately, I had not got my thermometer with me,
but resolved to be more careful in future. On passing the village, we
were struck by the neatness with which it was fenced on this side; and I
afterwards learned by experience what a beautiful and comfortable
dwelling may be arranged with no other material than reeds and corn-
stalks. The population of these villages consists of a mixture of
Mohammedans and pagans; but I think the majority of the inhabitants are
Mohammedans.

After a short interval of woody country, we passed a village of the name
of Chirák, with another busy scene round the well. In many districts in
Central Africa the labour of drawing water, for a portion of the year,
is so heavy that it occupies the greater part of the inhabitants half
the day; but fortunately, at this season, with the exception of weaving
a little cotton, they have no other employment, while during the season
when agricultural labours are going on water is to be found everywhere,
and the wells are not used at all. Búzawe are scattered everywhere
hereabouts, and infuse into the population a good deal of Berber blood.
Very pure Háusa is spoken.

It was near Chirák that Overweg, who had determined to go directly to
Tasáwa, in order to commence his intended excursion to Góber and Marádi
separated from me. This was indeed quite a gallant commencement of his
undertaking, as he had none of Ánnur’s people with him, and besides
Ibrahím and the useful snake-like Amánkay (who had recovered from his
guineaworm), his only companion was a Tébu who had long been settled in
Ásben, and whom he had engaged for the length of his intended trip. At
that time he had still the firm intention to go to Kúkawa by way of
Kanó, and begged me to leave his things there. He was in excellent
health, and full of an enthusiastic desire to devote himself to the
study of the new world which opened before us; and we parted with a
hearty wish for each other’s success in our different quarters before we
were to meet again in the capital of Bórnu—for we did not then know that
we should have an interview in Tasáwa.

I now went on alone, but felt not at all depressed by solitude, as I had
been accustomed from my youth to wander about by myself among strange
people. I felt disposed, indeed, to enter into a closer connection with
my black friend Gajére, who was very communicative, but oftentimes
rather rude, and unable to refrain from occasionally mocking the
stranger who wanted to know everything, and would not acknowledge
Mohammed in all his prophetic glory. He called my attention to several
new kinds of trees while we were passing the two villages Bagángaré and
Tangónda. These were the “baushi,” the “karámmia,” and the “gónda,” the
last being identical with the _Carica Papaya_, and rather rare in the
northern parts of Negroland, but very common in the country between
Kátsena and Núpe, and scattered in single specimens over all the country
from Kanó and Gújeba southwards to the river Bénuwé; but at that time I
was ignorant that it bore a splendid fruit, with which I first became
acquainted in Kátsena. The whole country, indeed, had a most interesting
and cheerful appearance, villages and cornfields succeeding each other
with only short intervals of thick underwood, which contributed to give
richer variety to the whole landscape, while the ground was undulating,
and might sometimes even be called hilly. We met a numerous herd of fine
cattle belonging to Gozenákko, returning to their pasture-grounds after
having been watered,—the bulls all with the beautiful hump, and of fine
strong limbs, but of moderate size, and with small horns. Scarcely had
this moving picture passed before our eyes, when another interesting and
characteristic procession succeeded—a long troop of men, all carrying on
their heads large baskets filled with the fruit of the góreba
(_Cucifera_, or _Hyphaene Thebaïca_), commonly called the gingerbread-
tree, which, in many of the northern districts of Negroland, furnishes a
most important article of food, and certainly seasons many dishes very
pleasantly, as I shall have occasion to mention in the course of my
narrative. Further on, the fields were enlivened with cattle grazing in
the stubble, while a new species of tree, the “kírria,” attracted my
attention.

Thus we reached Gozenákko; and while my servants Mohammed and the
Gatróni went with the camel to the camping-ground, I followed my sturdy
overseer to the village in order to water the horse; for though I might
have sent one of my men afterwards, I preferred taking this opportunity
of seeing the interior of the village. It is of considerable size, and
consists of a town and its suburbs, the former being surrounded with a
“kéffi,” or close stockade of thick stems of trees, while the suburbs
are ranged around without any inclosure or defence. All the houses
consist of conical huts made entirely of stalks and reeds; and great
numbers of little granaries were scattered among them. As it was about
half-past two in the afternoon, the people were sunk in slumber or
repose, and the well was left to our disposal; afterwards, however, we
were obliged to pay for the water. We then joined the caravan, which had
encamped at no great distance eastward of the village, in the stubble-
fields. These, enlivened as they were by a number of tall fan-palms
besides a variety of other trees, formed a very cheerful open ground for
our little trading-party, which, preparing for a longer stay of two or
three days, had chosen its ground in a more systematic way, each person
arranging his “tákrufa,” or the straw sacks containing the salt, so as
to form a barrier open only on one side, in the shape of an elongated
horseshoe, in the recess of which they might stow away their slender
stock of less bulky property, and sleep themselves, while in order to
protect the salt from behind, a light stockade of the stalks of Guinea
corn was constructed on that side; for having now exchanged the regions
of highway robbers and marauders for those of thieves, we had nothing
more to fear from open attacks, but a great deal from furtive attempts
by night.

Scarcely had our people made themselves comfortable, when their appetite
was excited by a various assortment of the delicacies of the country,
clamourously offered for sale by crowds of women from the village. The
whole evening a discordant chime was rung upon the words “nóno” (sour
milk), “may” (butter), “dodówa” (the vegetable-paste above mentioned),
“kúka” (the young leaves of the _Adansonia_, which are used for making
an infusion with which meat or the “túwo” is eaten), and “yáru da
dária.” The last of these names, indeed, is one which characterizes and
illustrates the cheerful disposition of the Háusa people; for the
literal meaning of it is, “the laughing boy,” or “the boy to laugh,”
while it signifies the sweet ground-nut, which if roasted is indeed one
of the greatest delicacies of the country. Reasoning from subsequent
experience, I thought it remarkable that no “túwo” (the common paste or
hasty pudding made of millet, called “fufu” on the western coast), which
forms the ordinary food of the natives, was offered for sale; but it
must be borne in mind that the people of Ásben care very little about a
warm supper, and like nothing better than the fura or ghussub-water, and
the corn in its crude state, only a little pounded. To this circumstance
the Arabs generally attribute the enormous and disgusting quantity of
lice with which the Kél-owí, even the very first men of the country, are
covered.

I was greatly disappointed in not being able to procure a fowl for my
supper. The breeding of fowls seems to be carried on to a very small
extent in this village, although they are in such immense numbers in
Damerghú, that a few years ago travellers could buy “a fowl for a
needle.”

[Sidenote: Tuesday, January 14th.]

Seeing that we should make some stay here, I had decided upon visiting
the town of Tasáwa, which was only a few miles distant to the west, but
deferred my visit till the morrow, in order to see the town in the more
interesting phase of the “káswa-n-Láraba,” or the Wednesday market.
However, our encampment, where I quietly spent the day, was itself
changed into a lively and bustling market; and even during the heat of
the day the discordant cries of the sellers did not cease.

My intelligent and jovial companion meanwhile gave me some valuable
information with regard to the revenue of the wealthy governor of
Tasáwa, who in certain respects is an independent prince, though he may
be called a powerful vassal of the king or chief of Marádi. Every head
of a family in his territory pays him three thousand kurdí, as “kurdí-n-
kay” (head-money or poll-tax); besides, there is an ample list of
penalties (“kurdí-n-laefi”), some of them very heavy: thus, for example,
the fine for having flogged another man, or most probably for having
given him a sound cudgelling, is as much as ten thousand kurdí; for
illicit paternity, one hundred thousand kurdí—an enormous sum
considering the economic condition of the population, and which, I
think, plainly proves how rarely such a thing happens in this region;
but of course where every man may lawfully take as many wives as he is
able to feed, there is little excuse for illicit intercourse. In case of
wilful murder, the whole property of the murderer is forfeited, and is
of right seized by the governor.

Each village has its own mayor, who decides petty matters, and is
responsible for the tax payable within his jurisdiction. The king, or
paramount chief, has the power of life and death; and there is no appeal
from his sentence to the ruler of Marádi. However, he cannot venture to
carry into effect any measure of consequence without asking the opinion
of his privy council, or at least that of the ghaladíma or prime
minister, some account of whose office I shall have an opportunity of
giving in the course of my narrative. The little territory of Tasáwa
might constitute a very happy state, if the inhabitants were left in
quiet; but they are continually harassed by predatory expeditions, and
even last evening, while we were encamped here, the Féllani drove away a
small herd of ten calves from the neighbouring village of Kálgo.

About noon the “salt” of the serkí-n-Kél-owí arrived with the people of
Olalówa, as well as that of Sálah Lúsu’s head man, who before had always
been in advance of us. In the evening I might have fancied myself a
prince; for I had a splendid supper, consisting of a fowl or two, while
a solitary maimólo cheered me with a performance on his simple three-
stringed instrument, which, however monotonous, was still expressive of
much feeling, and accompanied with a song in my praise.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, January 15th.]

At the very dawn of day, to my great astonishment, I was called out of
the tent by Mohammed, who told me that Fárraji, Lúsu’s man, our
companion from Ghát, had suddenly arrived from Zínder with three or four
Bórnu horsemen, and had express orders with regard to me. However, when
I went out to salute him, he said nothing of his errand, but simply told
me that he wanted first to speak to Elaíji, the chief of the caravan. I
therefore went to the latter myself to know what was the matter, and
learnt from the old man, that though he was not able to make out all the
terms of the letters of which Fárraji was the bearer, one of which was
written by the sheríf and the other by Lúsu, he yet understood that the
horsemen had come with no other purpose but to take me and Overweg to
Zínder, without consulting our wishes, and that the sheríf as well as
Lúsu had instructed him to send us off in company with these fellows,
but that they had also a letter for Ánnur, who ought to be consulted. As
for himself, the old man (well aware of the real state of affairs, and
that the averment of a letter having arrived from the consul at Tripoli,
to the effect that till further measures were taken with regard to our
recent losses we ought to stay in Bórnu, was a mere sham and
fabrication) declared that he would not force us to do anything against
our inclination, but that we ought to decide ourselves what was best to
be done.

Having, therefore, a double reason for going to Tasáwa, I set out as
early as possible, accompanied by my faithless, wanton Tunisian shushán,
and by my faithful, sedate Tageláli overseer. The path leading through
the suburbs of Gozenákko was well fenced, in order to prevent any
violation of property; but on the western side of the village there was
scarcely any cultivated ground, and we soon entered upon a wilderness
where the “dúmmia” and the “karása” were the principal plants, when,
after a march of a little more than three miles, the wild thicket again
gave way to cultivated fields, and the town of Tasáwa appeared in the
distance—or rather (as is generally the case in these countries, where
the dwellings are so low, and where almost all the trees round the towns
are cut down, for stratagetical as well as economical reasons) the fine
shady trees in the interior of the town were seen, which make it a very
cheerful place. After two miles more we reached the suburbs, and,
crossing them, kept along the outer ditch which runs round the stockade
of the town, in order to reach Al Wáli’s house, under whose special
protection I knew that Mr. Overweg had placed himself.

My friend’s quarters, into which we were shown, were very comfortable,
although rather narrow. They consisted of a courtyard, fenced with mats
made of reeds, and containing a large shed or “runfá,” likewise built of
mats and stalks, and a tolerably spacious hut, the walls built of clay
(“bángo”), but with a thatched roof (“shíbki”). The inner part of it was
guarded by a cross-wall from the prying of indiscreet eyes.

Overweg was not a little surprised on hearing the recent news; and we
sent for El Wákhshi, our Ghadámsi friend from Tin-téggana, in order to
consult him, as one who had long resided in these countries, and who, we
had reason to hope, would be uninfluenced by personal considerations. He
firmly pronounced his opinion that we ought not to go, and afterwards,
when Fárráji called Mánzo and Al Wáli to his aid, entered into a violent
dispute with these men, who advised us to go; but he went too far in
supposing that the letter had been written with a malicious intention.
For my part, I could well imagine that the step was authorized by the
sheikh of Bórnu, or at least by his vizier, who might have heard long
ago of our intention to go to Kanó, as it had been even Mr. Richardson’s
intention to go there, which indeed he ought to have done in conformity
with his written obligations to Mohammed e’ Sfáksi; they might therefore
have instructed the sheríf to do what he might think fit to prevent us
from carrying out our purpose. However, it seemed not improbable that
Lúsu had something to do with the affair. But it was absolutely
necessary for Mr. Overweg and myself, or for one of us at least, to go
to Kanó, as we had several debts to pay, and were obliged to sell the
little merchandise we had with us, in order to settle our affairs.

We were still considering the question, when we were informed that our
old protector the chief Ánnur had just arrived from Zínder; and I
immediately determined to go to see him in his own domain at Náchira,
situated at a little more than a mile N.E. from Tasáwa. In passing
through the town I crossed the market-place, which at that time, during
the hot hours of the day, was very well frequented, and presented a busy
scene of the highest interest to a traveller emerging from the desert,
and to which the faint sparks of life still to be observed in Ágades
cannot be compared. A considerable number of cattle were offered for
sale, as well as six camels, and the whole market was surrounded by
continuous rows of runfás or sheds; but provisions and ready-dressed
food formed the staple commodity, and scarcely anything of value was to
be seen. On leaving the town I entered an open country covered with
stubble-fields, and soon reached that group of Náchira where the chief
had fixed his quarters. In front of the yard was a most splendid
tamarind-tree, such as I had not yet seen. Leaving my horse in its
shade, I entered the yard, accompanied by Gajére, and looked about for
some time for the great man, when at length we discovered him under a
small shed or runfá of a conical form, so low that we had passed it
without noticing the people collected in its shade. There he lay
surrounded by his attendants, as was his custom in general when reposing
in the day-time, with no clothing but his trowsers, while his shirt,
rolled up, formed a pillow to rest his left arm upon. He did not seem to
be in the best humour—at least he did not say a single cheerful word to
me; and though it was the very hottest time of the day, he did not offer
me as much as a draught of water. I had expected to be treated to a bowl
of well-soaked “fura” seasoned with cheese. But what astonished me more
than his miserly conduct (which was rather familiar to me) was, that I
learned from his own mouth that he had not been to Zínder at all,
whither we had been assured he had accompanied Mr. Richardson, but that
he had spent all the time in Tágelel, from which place he had now come
direct. I was therefore the more certain that Lúsu had some part in the
intrigues. Ánnur, who had not yet received the letter addressed to him
from Zínder, knew nothing about it, and merely expressed his surprise
that such a letter had been written, without adding another word.

Seeing the old chief in a very cheerless humour, I soon left him, and
took a ramble with Gajére over the place. The estate is very extensive,
and consists of a great many clusters of huts scattered over the fields,
while isolated dúm-palms give to the whole a peculiar feature. The
people, all followers and mostly domestic slaves of Ánnur, seemed to
live in tolerable ease and comfort, as far as I was able to see, my
companion introducing me into several huts. Indeed every candid person,
however opposed to slavery he may be, must acknowledge that the Tawárek
in general, and particularly the Kél-owí, treat their slaves not only
humanely, but even with the utmost indulgence and affability, and
scarcely let them feel their bondage at all. Of course there are
exceptions, as the cruelty of yoking slaves to a plough, and driving
them on with a whip (which I had witnessed in Aúderas), is scarcely
surpassed in any of the Christian slave-states; but these exceptions are
extremely rare.

When I returned from my ramble, Mr. Overweg had also arrived, and the
old chief had received the letter; and though neither he nor any of his
people could read it, he was fully aware of its contents, and
disapproved of it entirely, saying that we should act freely, and
according to the best of our knowledge. I then returned with my
countryman into the town, and remained some time with him. In front of
his dwelling was encamped the natron-caravan of Al Wáli, which in a few
days was to leave for Núpe or (as the Háusa people say) Nýffi. We shall
have to notice very frequently this important commerce, which is carried
on between the shores of the Tsád and Nýffi.

I left the town at about five o’clock, and feeling rather hungry on
reaching the encampment in Gozenákko, to the great amusement of our
neighbours, parodying the usual salute of “iná labári” (what is the
news)? I asked my people immediately the news of our cooking-pot, “iná
labári-n-tokónia” (what news of the pot)? I was greatly pleased with my
day’s excursion; for Tasáwa was the first large place of Negroland
proper which I had seen, and it made the most cheerful impression upon
me, as manifesting everywhere the unmistakable marks of the comfortable,
pleasant sort of life led by the natives:—the courtyard fenced with a
“dérne” of tall reeds, excluding to a certain degree the eyes of the
passer-by, without securing to the interior absolute secrecy; then near
the entrance the cool shady place of the “runfá” for ordinary business
and for the reception of strangers, and the “gída,” partly consisting
entirely of reed (“dáki-n-kára”) of the best wickerwork, partly built of
clay in its lower parts (“bóngo”), while the roof consists of reeds only
(“shíbki”)—but of whatever material it may consist, it is warm and well
adapted for domestic privacy,—the whole dwelling shaded with spreading
trees, and enlivened with groups of children, goats, fowls, pigeons,
and, where a little wealth had been accumulated, a horse or a pack-ox.

With this character of the dwellings, that of the inhabitants themselves
is in entire harmony, its most constant element being a cheerful
temperament, bent upon enjoying life, rather given to women, dance, and
song, but without any disgusting excess. Everybody here finds his
greatest happiness in a comely lass; and as soon as he makes a little
profit, he adds a young wife to his elder companion in life: yet a man
has rarely more than two wives at a time. Drinking fermented liquor
cannot be strictly reckoned a sin in a place where a great many of the
inhabitants are pagans; but a drunken person, nevertheless, is scarcely
ever seen: those who are not Mohammedans only indulge in their “gíya,”
made of sorghum, just enough to make them merry and enjoy life with more
light-heartedness. There was at that time a renegade Jew in the place,
called Músa, who made spirits of dates and tamarinds for his own use.
Their dress is very simple, consisting, for the man, of a wide shirt and
trowsers, mostly of a dark colour, while the head is generally covered
with a light cap of cotton cloth, which is negligently worn, in all
sorts of fashions. Others wear a rather closely fitting cap of green
cloth, called báki-n-záki. Only the wealthier amongst them can afford
the “zénne” or shawl, thrown over the shoulder like the plaid of the
Highlanders. On their feet the richer class wear very neat sandals, such
as we shall describe among the manufactures of Kanó.

As for the women, their dress consists almost entirely of a large cotton
cloth, also of dark colour—“the túrkedi,” fastened under or above the
breast—the only ornament of the latter in general consisting of some
strings of glass beads worn round the neck. The women are tolerably
handsome, and have pleasant features; but they are worn out by excessive
domestic labour, and their growth never attains full and vigorous
proportions. They do not bestow so much care upon their hair as the
Féllani, or some of the Bagírmi people.

There are in the town a good many “Búzawe,” or Tawárek half-castes, who
distinguish themselves in their dress principally by the “ráwani” or
tesílgemíst (the lithám) of white or black colour, which they wind round
their head in the same way as the Kél-owí; but their mode of managing
the tuft of hair left on the top of the head is not always the same,
some wearing their curled hair all over the crown of the head, while
others leave only a long tuft, which was the old fashion of the Zenágha.
The pagan inhabitants of this district wear, in general, only a leathern
apron (“wuélki”); but with the exception of young children, none are
seen here quite naked. The town was so busy, and seemed so well
inhabited, that on the spot I estimated its population at fifteen
thousand; but this estimate is probably too high.

[Sidenote: Thursday, January 16th.]

We still remained near Gozenákko, and I was busy studying Temáshight,
after which I once more went over the letter of the sheríf El Fási, Háj
Beshír’s agent in Zínder; and having become fully aware of the
dictatorial manner in which he had requested Elaíji to forward me and
Mr. Overweg to him (just as a piece of merchandise) without asking our
consent, I sat down to write him a suitable answer, assuring him that,
as I was desirous of paying my respects to the son of Mohammed el Kánemi
and his enlightened vizier, I would set out for their residence as soon
as I had settled my affairs in Kanó, and that I was sure of attaining my
ends without his intervention, as I had not the least desire to visit
him.

This letter, as subsequent events proved, grew into importance, for the
sheríf being perplexed by its tone, sent it straight on to Kúkawa, where
it served to introduce me at once to the sheikh and his vizier. But the
difficulty was to send it off with the warlike messengers who had
brought the sheríf’s letters, as they would not go without us, and swore
that their orders, from the sheríf as well as from Serk’ Ibrám, were so
peremptory that they should be utterly disgraced if they returned empty-
handed. At length, after a violent dispute with Fárráji and these
warlike-looking horsemen, the old chief, who took my part very fairly,
finished the matter by plainly stating that if we ourselves, of our own
free will, wanted to go, we might do so, but if we did not wish to go,
instead of forcing us, he would defend us against anybody who should
dare to offer us violence. Nevertheless the messengers would not depart;
and it seemed impossible to get rid of them till I made each of them a
present of two mithkáls, when they mounted their horses with a very bad
grace, and went off with my letter. The energetic and straightforward
but penurious old chief left us in the afternoon, and rode to Kálgo, a
village at no great distance.

[Sidenote: Friday, January 17th.]

Still another day of halt, in order, as I was told, to allow Háj
ʿAbdúwa’s salt-caravan to come up and join us. Being tired of the camp,
I once more went into the town to spend my day usefully and pleasantly;
leaving all my people behind, I was accompanied by some of my fellow-
travellers of the caravan. Arriving at Overweg’s quarters, what was my
surprise to find Fárráji not yet gone, but endeavouring to persuade my
companion, with all the arts of his barbarous eloquence, that though I
should not go, he at least might, in which case he would be amply
rewarded with the many fine things which had been prepared in Zínder for
our reception. The poor fellow was greatly cast down when he saw me, and
soon made off in very bad humour, while I went with Overweg to El
Wákhshi, who was just occupied in that most tedious of all commercial
transactions in these countries, namely, the counting of shells; for in
all these inland countries of Central Africa the cowries or kurdí
(_Cypræa moneta_) are not, as is customary in some regions near the
coast, fastened together in strings of one hundred each, but are
separate, and must be counted one by one. Even those “tákrufa” (or sacks
made of rushes) containing 20,000 kurdí each, as the governors of the
towns are in the habit of packing them up, no private individual will
receive without counting them out. The general custom in so doing is to
count them by fives, in which operation some are very expert, and then,
according to the amount of the sum, to form heaps of two hundred (or ten
háwiyas[2]) or a thousand each. Having at length succeeded, with the
help of some five or six other people, in the really heroic work of
counting 500,000 shells, our friend went with us to the sick sultan
Mazáwaji: I say sultan, as it is well for a traveller to employ these
sounding titles of petty chiefs, which have become naturalized in the
country from very ancient times, although it is very likely that foreign
governments would be unwilling to acknowledge them. The poor fellow, who
was living in a hut built half of mud, half of reeds, was suffering
under a dreadful attack of dysentery, and looked like a spectre;
fortunately my friend succeeded in bringing on perspiration with some
hot tea and a good dose of peppermint, in the absence of stronger
medicines. We then went to the house of Amánkay, that useful fellow so
often mentioned in the Journal of the late Mr. Richardson, and by
myself. He was a “búzu” of this place, and had many relatives here, all
living near him. His house was built in the general style; but the
interior of the courtyard was screened from profane eyes. Fortunately I
had taken with me some small things, such as mirrors, English darning-
needles, and some knives, so that I was able to give a small present to
each of his kinsmen and relatives, while he treated us with a calabash
of fura.

In the afternoon we strolled a long time about the market, which not
being so crowded as the day before yesterday, was on that account far
more favourable for observation. Here I first saw and tasted the bread
made of the fruit of the magariá-tree, and called “túwo-n-magariá,”
which I have mentioned before, and was not a little astonished to see
whole calabashes filled with roasted locusts (“fará”), which
occasionally form a considerable part of the food of the natives,
particularly if their grain has been destroyed by this plague, as they
can then enjoy not only the agreeable flavour of the dish, but also take
a pleasant revenge on the ravagers of their fields. Every open space in
the midst of the market-place was occupied by a fire-place (“maidéffa”)
on a raised platform, on which diminutive morsels of meat, attached to a
small stick, were roasting, or rather stewing, in such a way that the
fat, trickling down from the richer pieces attached to the top of the
stick, basted the lower ones. These dainty bits were sold for a single
shell or “urí”[3] each. I was much pleased at recognizing the red cloth
which had been stolen from my bales in the valley of Afís, and which was
exposed here for sale. But the most interesting thing in the town was
the “máriná” (the dyeing-place) near the wall, consisting of a raised
platform of clay with fourteen holes or pits, in which the mixture of
indigo is prepared, and the cloths remain for a certain length of time,
from one to seven days, according to the colour which they are to
attain. It is principally this dyeing, I think, which gives to many
parts of Negroland a certain tincture of civilization, a civilization
which it would be highly interesting to trace, if it were possible,
through all the stages of its development.

While rambling about, Overweg and I for a while were greatly annoyed by
a tall fellow, very respectably and most picturesquely dressed, who
professed himself to be a messenger from the governor of Kátsena, sent
to offer us his compliments and to invite us to go to him. Though the
thing was not altogether impossible, it looked rather improbable; and
having thanked him profusely for his civility, we at length succeeded in
getting rid of him. In the evening I returned to our camping-ground with
Ídder the Emgédesi man mentioned in a preceding part of my narrative,
and was very glad to receive reliable information that we were to start
the following day.


[Footnote 1: This same variation is to be observed in the name Marádi,
which many people pronounce Mariyádi.]

[Footnote 2: “Háwiya” means twenty, and seems originally to have been
the highest sum reached by the indigenous arithmetic. I shall say more
about this point in my vocabulary of the Háusa language.]

[Footnote 3: “Kurdí” (shells) is the irregular plural of “urí” (a single
shell).]




                              CHAP. XXIII.

                    GAZÁWA. — RESIDENCE IN KÁTSENA.


[Sidenote: Saturday, January 18th.]

We made a good start with our camels, which having been treated to
a considerable allowance of salt on the first day of our halt, had
made the best possible use of these four days’ rest to recruit their
strength. At the considerable village of Kálgo, which we passed at a
little less than five miles beyond our encampment, the country became
rather hilly, but only for a short distance. Tamarinds constituted the
greatest ornament of the landscape. A solitary traveller attracted our
notice on account of his odd attire, mounted as he was on a bullock
with three large pitchers on each side. Four miles beyond Kálgo the
character of the country became suddenly changed, and dense groups of
dúm-palms covered the ground. But what pleased me more than the sight
of these slender forked trees was when, half an hour after mid-day,
I recognized my splendid old friend the bóre-tree, of the valley
Bóghel[4], which had excited my surprise in so high a degree, and
the magnificence of which at its first appearance was not at all
eclipsed by this second specimen in the fertile regions of Negroland.
Soon afterwards we reached the fáddama of Gazáwa; and leaving the town
on our right hidden in the thick forest, we encamped a little further on
in an open place, which was soon crowded with hucksters and retailers. I
was also pestered with a visit from some half-caste Arabs settled in the
town; but fortunately, seeing that they were likely to wait in vain for
a present, they went off, and were soon succeeded by a native mʿallem
from the town, whose visit was most agreeable to me.

About sunset the “serkí-n-turáwa,” or consul of the Arabs, came to pay
his regards to Elaíji, and introduced the subject of a present, which,
as he conceived, I ought to make to the governor of the town as a sort
of passage-money; my protector, however, would not listen to the
proposal, but merely satisfied his visitor’s curiosity by calling me
into his presence and introducing him to me. The serkí was very showily
and picturesquely dressed—in a green and white striped tobe, wide
trowsers of a speckled pattern and colour, like the plumage of the
Guinea fowl, with an embroidery of green silk in front of the legs. Over
this he wore a gaudy red bernús, while round his red cap a red and white
turban was wound crosswise in a very neat and careful manner. His sword
was slung over his right shoulder by means of thick hangers of red silk
ornamented with enormous tassels. He was mounted on a splendid charger,
the head and neck of which was most fancifully ornamented with a
profusion of tassels, bells, and little leather pockets containing
charms, while from under the saddle a shabrack peeped out, consisting of
little triangular patches in all the colours of the rainbow.

This little African dandy received me with a profusion of the finest
compliments, pronounced with the most refined and sweet accent of which
the Háusa language is capable. When he was gone, my old friend Elaíji
informed me that he had prevented the “consul of the Arabs” from
exacting a present from me, and begged me to acknowledge his service by
a cup of coffee, which of course I granted him with all my heart. Poor
old Elaíji! He died in the year 1854, in the forest between Gazáwa and
Kátsena, where from the weakness of age he lost his way when left alone.
He has left on my memory an image which I shall always recall with
pleasure. He was certainly the most honourable and religious man among
the Kél-owí.

The market in our encampment, which continued till nightfall, reached
its highest pitch at sunset, when the people of the town brought ready-
made “túwo,” each dish, with rather a small allowance, selling for three
kurdí, or not quite the fourth part of a farthing. I, however, was happy
in not being thrown upon this three-kurdí supper; and while I indulged
in my own home-made dish, Gajére entertained me with the narrative of a
nine days’ siege, which the warlike inhabitants of Gazáwa had sustained,
ten years previously, against the whole army of the famous Bello.

[Sidenote: Sunday, January 19th.]

We remained encamped; and my day was most agreeably and usefully spent
in gathering information with regard to the regions which I had just
entered. There was first Maʿadi, the slave of Ánnur, a native of Bórnu,
who when young had been made prisoner by the Búdduma of the lake, and
had resided three years among these interesting people, till having
fallen into the hands of the Welád Slimán, then in Kánem, he at length,
on the occasion of the great expedition of the preceding year, had
fallen into the power of the Kél-owí. Although he owed the loss of his
liberty to the freebooting islanders, he was nevertheless a great
admirer of theirs, and a sincere vindicator of their character. He
represented them as a brave and high-spirited people, who made glorious
and successful inroads upon the inhabitants of the shores of the lake
with surprising celerity, while at home they were a pious and God-
fearing race, and knew neither theft nor fraud among themselves. He
concluded his eloquent eulogy of this valorous nation of pirates by
expressing his fervent hope that they might for ever preserve their
independence against the ruler of Bórnu.

I then wrote, from the mouth of Gajére and Yáhia (another of my
friends), a list of the places lying round about Gazáwa, as follows:—On
the east side, Mádobí, Maíjirgí[5], Kógena na kay-debú, Kórmasa, Kórgom,
Kánche (a little independent principality); Gumdá, half a day east of
Gazáwa, with numbers of Ásbenáwa; Démbeda, or Dúmbida, at less distance;
Shabáli, Babíl, Túrmeni, Gínga, Kandémka, Sabó-n-kefí, Zángoni-n-ákwa,
Kúrni, Kurnáwa, Dángudaw. On the west side, where the country is more
exposed to the inroads of the Fúlbe or Féllani, there is only one place
of importance, called Tindúkku, which name seems to imply a close
relation to the Tawárek. All these towns and villages are said to be in
a certain degree dependent on Raffa, the “babá” (i.e. great man or
chief) of Gazáwa, who, however, himself owes allegiance to the supreme
ruler of Marádi.

There was an exciting stir in the encampment at about ten o’clock in the
morning, illustrative of the restless struggle going on in these
regions. A troop of about forty horsemen, mostly well mounted, led on by
the serkí-n-Gumdá, and followed by a body of tall slender archers, quite
naked but for their leathern aprons, passed through the different rows
of the aïri, on their way to join the expedition which the prince of
Marádi was preparing against the Féllani.

About noon the natron-caravan of Háj Al Wáli, which I had seen in
Tasáwa, came marching up in solemn order, led on by two drums, and
affording a pleasant specimen of the character of the Háusa people.
Afterwards I went into the town, which was distant from my tent about
half a mile. Being much exposed to attacks from the Mohammedans, as the
southernmost pagan place belonging to the Marádi-Góber union, Gazáwa has
no open suburbs outside its strong stockade, which is surrounded by a
deep ditch. It forms almost a regular quadrangle, having a gate on each
side built of clay, which gives to the whole fortification a more
regular character, besides the greater strength which the place derives
from this precaution. Each gateway is twelve feet deep, and furnished on
its top with a rampart sufficiently capacious for about a dozen archers.
The interior of the town is almost of the same character as Tasáwa; but
Gazáwa is rather more closely built, though I doubt whether its
circumference exceeds that of the former place. The market is held every
day, but, as might be supposed, is far inferior to that of Tasáwa, which
is a sort of little entrepôt for the merchants coming from the north,
and affords much more security than Gazáwa, which, though an important
place with regard to the struggle carried on between Paganism and
Islamism in these quarters, is not so with respect to commerce. The
principal things offered for sale were cattle, meat, vegetables of
different kinds, and earthenware pots. Gazáwa has also a máriná or
dyeing-place, but of less extent than that of Tasáwa, as most of its
inhabitants are pagans, and wear no clothing but the leathern apron.
Their character appeared to me to be far more grave than that of the
inhabitants of Tasáwa; and this is a natural consequence of the
precarious position in which they are placed, as well as of their more
warlike disposition. The whole population is certainly not less than ten
thousand.

Having visited the market, I went to the house of the mʿallem, where I
found several Ásbenáwa belonging to our caravan enjoying themselves in a
very simple manner, eating the fruits of the kaña, which are a little
larger than cherries, but not so soft and succulent. The mʿallem, as I
had an opportunity of learning on this occasion, is a _protégé_ of
Elaíji, to whom the house belongs. Returning with my companions to our
encampment, I witnessed a very interesting sort of dance, or rather
gymnastic play, performed on a large scale by the Kél-owí, who being
arranged in long rows, in pairs, and keeping up a regular motion, pushed
along several of their number under their arms—not very unlike some of
our old dances.

[Sidenote: Monday, January 20th.]

Starting early in the morning, we felt the cold very sensibly, the
thermometer standing at 48° Fahr. a little before sunset. Cultivated
fields interrupted from time to time the underwood for the first three
miles, while the “ngílle,” or “kába,” formed the most characteristic
feature of the landscape; but dúm-palms, at first very rarely seen, soon
became prevalent, and continued for the next two miles. Then the country
became more open, while in the distance to the left extended a low range
of hills. New species of trees appeared, which I had not seen before, as
the “kókia,” a tree with large leaves of a dark-green colour, with a
green fruit of the size of an apple, but not eatable. The first solitary
specimens of the gigiña or deléb-palm, which is one of the most
characteristic trees of the more southern regions, were also met with.

Moving silently along, about noon we met a considerable caravan, with a
great number of oxen and asses led by two horsemen, and protected in the
rear by a strong guard of archers; for this is one of the most dangerous
routes in all Central Africa, where every year a great many parties are
plundered by marauders, no one being responsible for the security of
this disputed territory. We had here a thick forest on our left
enlivened by numbers of birds; then about two o’clock in the afternoon
we entered a fine undulating country covered with a profusion of
herbage, while the large gámshi-tree, with its broad fleshy leaves of
the finest green, formed the most remarkable object of the vegetable
kingdom. All this country was once a bustling scene of life, with
numbers of towns and villages, till, at the very commencement of this
century, the “Jihádi,” or Reformer, rose among the Fúlbe of Góber, and,
inflaming them with fanatic zeal, urged them on to merciless warfare
against pagans as well as Mohammedans.

It was here that my companions drew my attention to the tracks of the
elephant, of whose existence in the more northern regions we had not
hitherto seen the slightest trace—so that this seems to be the limit of
its haunts on this side; and it was shortly afterwards that Gajére
descried in the distance a living specimen making slowly off to the
east; but my sight was not strong enough to distinguish it. Thus we
entered the thicker part of the forest, and about half-past four in the
afternoon reached the site of the large town of Dánkama, whither Mágajin
Háddedu, the king of Kátsena, had retired after his residence had been
taken by the Fúlbe, and from whence he waged unrelenting but
unsuccessful war against the bloody-minded enemies of the religious as
well as political independence of his country. Once, indeed, the Fúlbe
were driven out of Kátsena; but they soon returned with renewed zeal and
with a fresh army, and the Háusa prince was expelled from his ancient
capital for ever. After several battles Dánkama, whither all the
nobility and wealth of Kátsena had retired, was taken, ransacked, and
burnt.

A solitary colossal kúka[6] (baobab), representing in its huge,
leafless, and gloomy frame the sad recollections connected with the
spot, shoots out from the prickly underwood which thickly overgrows the
locality[7], and points out the market-place once teeming with life. It
was a most affecting moment; for, as if afraid of the evil spirits
dwelling in this wild and deserted spot, all the people of the caravan,
while we were thronging along the narrow paths opening between the thick
prickly underwood, shouted with wild cries, cursing and execrating the
Féllani, the authors of so much mischief, all the drums were beating,
and every one pushed on in order to get out of this melancholy
neighbourhood as soon as possible.

Having passed a little after sunset a large granitic mass projecting
from the ground, called Korremátse, and once a place of worship, we saw
in the distance in front the fires of those parties of the aïri which
had preceded us; and greeting them with a wild cry, we encamped on the
uneven ground in great disorder, as it had become quite dark. After a
long march I felt very glad when the tent was at length pitched. While
the fire was lighted, and the supper preparing, Gajére informed me that,
besides Dánkama, Bello destroyed also the towns of Jankúki and Madáwa in
this district, which now presents such a frightful wilderness.[8]

In the course of the night, the roar of a lion was heard close by our
encampment.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, January 21st.]

We started, with general enthusiasm, at an early hour; and the people of
our troop seeing the fires of the other divisions of the salt-caravan in
front of us still burning, jeered at their laziness, till at length, on
approaching within a short distance of the fires, we found that the
other people had set out long before, leaving their fires burning. A
poor woman, carrying a load on her head, and leading a pair of goats,
had attached herself to our party in Gazáwa; and though she had lost her
goats in the bustle of the previous afternoon, she continued her journey
cheerfully and with resignation.

After five hours’ march the whole caravan was suddenly brought to a
stand for some time, the cause of which was a ditch of considerable
magnitude, dug right across the path, and leaving only a narrow passage,
the beginning of a small path which wound along through thick thorny
underwood. This, together with the ditch, formed a sort of outer defence
for the cultivated fields and the pasture-grounds of Kátsena, against
any sudden inroad. Having passed another projecting mass of granite
rock, we passed two small villages on our left, called Túlla and
Takumáku, from whence the inhabitants came out to salute us. We encamped
at length in a large stubble-field, beyond some kitchen-gardens, where
pumpkins (dúmma) were planted, two miles N.E. from the town of Kátsena.
While we were pitching my tent, which was the only one in the whole
encampment, the sultan or governor of Kátsena came out with a numerous
retinue of horsemen, all well-dressed and mounted; and having learnt
from Elaíji that I was a Christian traveller belonging to a mission (a
fact, however, which he knew long before), he sent me soon afterwards a
ram and two large calabashes or dúmmas filled with honey—an honour which
was rather disagreeable to me than otherwise, as it placed me under the
necessity of making the governor a considerable present in return. I had
no article of value with me; and I began to feel some unpleasant
foreboding of future difficulties.

An approximative estimate of the entire number of the salt-caravan, as
affording the means of accurately determining the amount of a great
national commerce carried on between widely-separated countries, had
much occupied my attention, and having in vain tried on the road to
arrive at such an estimate, I did all I could to-day to obtain a list of
the different divisions composing it; but although Yáhia, one of the
principal of Ánnur’s people, assured me that there were more than thirty
troops, I was not able to obtain particulars of more than the following:
viz., encamped on this same ground with us was the salt-caravan of
Ánnur, of Elaíji, of Hámma with the Kél-táfidet, of Sálah, of Háj
Makhmúd with the Kél-tagrímmat, of Ámaki with the Amákita, of the
Imasághlar (led by Mohammed dan Ággeg), of the Kél-azanéres, of the Kél-
ínger (the people of Zingína), of the Kél-ágwau, and finally that of the
Kél-chémia. No doubt none of these divisions had more than two hundred
camels laden with salt, exclusive of the young and the spare camels; the
whole of the salt, therefore, collected here at the time was at the
utmost worth one hundred millions of kurdí, or about eight thousand
pounds sterling. Beside the divisions of the aïri which I have just
enumerated as encamped on this spot, the Erázar were still behind, while
the following divisions had gone on in advance: the Kél-n-Néggaru; the
Iseráraran, with the chief Bárka and the támberi (war chieftain) Nasóma;
and the Ikázkezan, with the chiefs Mohammed Irólagh and Wuentúsa.

We may therefore not be far from the truth if we estimate the whole
number of the salt-caravan of the Kél-owí, of this year, at two thousand
five hundred camels. To this must be added the salt which had gone to
Zínder, and which I estimate at about a thousand camel-loads, and that
which had been left in Tasáwa for the supply of the markets of the
country as far as Góber, which I estimate at from two hundred to three
hundred camel-loads. But it must be borne in mind that the country of
Ásben had been for some time in a more than ordinarily turbulent state,
and that consequently the caravan was at this juncture probably less
numerous than it would be in quiet times.

Being rather uneasy with regard to the intention of the governor of the
province, I went early the next morning to Elaíji, and assured him that,
besides some small things, such as razors, cloves, and frankincense, I
possessed only two red caps to give to the governor, and that I could
not afford to contract more debts by buying a bernús. The good old man
was himself aware of the governor’s intention, who, he told me, had made
up his mind to get a large present from me, otherwise he would not allow
me to continue my journey. I wanted to visit the town, but was prevented
from doing so under these circumstances, and therefore remained in the
encampment.

The governor, who spends a great deal of his time in a country-house
which he has recently built outside the town, about noon held a sort of
review of several hundred horsemen, whose horses, in general, were in
excellent condition. They were armed with a straight sword hanging on
the left, a long heavy spear for thrusting, and a shield, either of the
same description as that of the Tawárek, of oblong shape, made of the
hide of the large antelope (_Leucoryx_), or else of bullock’s or
elephant’s hide, and forming an immense circular disk of about five feet
in diameter; some of them wore also the dagger at the left arm, while I
counted not more than four or five muskets. Their dress was picturesque,
and not too flowing for warlike purposes, the large shirt, or shirts
(for they generally wear two), being fastened round the breast with an
Egyptian shawl with a red border; and even those who were dressed in a
bernús had it wound round their breast. Most of them wore black
“ráwani,” or shawls, round their faces, a custom which the Féllani of
Háusa have adopted from the Tawárek merely on account of its looking
warlike; for they have no superstitious reason for covering the mouth.
The harness of the horses was all of Háusa manufacture, the saddles very
different from those of the Tawárek (which seem to be identical with the
old Arab saddles). The stirrups formed a very peculiar kind of medium
between the large unwieldy stirrups of the modern Arab and the small
ones of the Tawárek and Europeans, the sole of the stirrup being long,
but turned down at both ends, while it is so narrow that the rider can
only thrust the naked foot into it. I could not understand the principle
upon which this kind of stirrup is made. It appeared to me a most absurd
specimen of workmanship.

[Illustration]

The Féllani in Kátsena have good reason to be on their guard against the
Kél-owí, who, in an underhand way, are always assisting the independent
Háusa states of Góber and Marádi in their struggle, and might some day
easily make common cause with them to drive out these arrogant intruders
from the conquered provinces. In fact they have done all in their power
to attain this object; and Ánnur’s policy is so well known to the
Féllani, that once when he came to Kátsena he received most shameful
treatment at their hands. Afterwards I was visited by El Wákhshi, and
paid him in return a visit at that part of the encampment where some of
his merchandise was deposited, for he himself was living in the town.
Here he introduced to me a person who was very soon to become one of my
direst tormentors, the bare remembrance of whom is even now unpleasant;
it was the háj Bel-Ghét, a man born in Tawát, but who had long been
settled in Kátsena, and though not with the title, yet in reality
holding the office of “a serkí-n-turáwa.”

A troop of eight mounted royal musicians (“masukídda-n-serkí”), who had
been playing the whole day before the several divisions of the “aïri,”
came likewise to my tent in the course of the afternoon, and gratified
my ears with a performance on their various instruments. There was the
drum, or “ganga”, very much like our own instrument of that kind, and of
about the same size as the common regimental drum; the long wind
instrument, or “pampámme;” a shorter one, a sort of flute, or
“elgaita[9];” a sort of double tambourine, or “kalángo;” a simple
tympanum, or “kóso;” a sort of double Egyptian darabúka, called “jójo,”
and a small horn, or “kafó.” The most common among them is the “jójo,”
which in Háusa is the chief instrument made use of in an expedition,
and, if accompanied by the voice, is not disagreeable. With these
various instruments the well-mounted horsemen made a pretty good noise;
but it was neither harmonious nor characteristic—to all this pompous
imitative music I prefer a few strains with natural feeling by a
solitary maimólo. I was obliged to reward my entertainers with a large
quantity of cloves, as I had scarcely anything else left.

I was rather astonished to hear that the Ásbenáwa do not pay passage-
money to the governor according to the number of their camels, but that
every freeman among them makes him a present of one kántu of salt. For
every beast of burden, be it pack-ox or donkey, five hundred kurdí are
generally paid.

[Sidenote: Thursday, January 23rd.]

Having assorted such a present as I could afford, I protested once more
to Elaíji that, my other luggage having gone on in advance to Kanó, I
had but very little to offer the governor.

I went about noon with my protector and a great number of Ásbenáwa to
offer the governor my compliments and my present. Sitting down under a
tree at a considerable distance from the spot where he himself was
seated, we waited a little, till we should be called into his presence,
when his brother, who held the office of ghaladíma, came to us—a man of
immense corpulency, resembling a eunuch. Indeed nothing but the cut of
his face, his aquiline nose, and rather light colour, and the little
goatlike beard which ornamented his chin, could expose him to the
suspicion of being a Púllo or Ba-Féllanchi.[10] He wanted to treat my
business apart from that of Elaíji, who, however, declared that he had
come only for my sake. While the fat ghaladíma was returning to inform
his brother of what he had heard, a troop of well-mounted Kél-esárar[11]
(who, as I was told, are settled at present in the province of Kátsena)
came up at full speed. It was not long before a servant came from the
serkí, inviting me alone into his presence.

Mohammed Béllo Yeríma, the eldest son of the former well-known governor
Mʿallem Ghomáro[12] was seated under a wide-spreading and luxuriant
tamarind-tree, dressed simply in a large white shirt with a black ráwani
round his face. The Ásbenáwa, who formed a large semicircle around him,
were dressed most gaudily. Stepping into the opening of the semicircle,
I saluted the governor, telling him that as I and my companions had
lost, on the border of Ásben, almost all the valuable property we had
brought with us, and as the few things left to me had gone on to Kanó,
he ought to excuse me for being unable at the present moment to offer
him a present worthy of his high position, that it was my desire to go
on without delay to Kanó, in order to settle my affairs, and to proceed
to Bórnu, where we expected to receive fresh supplies, after which one
of our party certainly would go to Sókoto, in order to pay our respects
to the Emír el Múmenín. The governor answered my address with much
apparent kindness, telling me that I was now in his “imána,” or under
his protection, and that he had no other purpose but to do what would be
conducive to my advantage. He then asked the news of my companions,
though he knew all about them, and did not appear to take the least
offence at Mr. Overweg’s going to Marádi, although the people and the
ruler of that place were his most inveterate enemies. But things must
not be looked upon here as they would be in Europe; for here people are
accustomed to see strangers from the north pay visits to all sorts of
princes, whatever may be their policy. However, while he spoke in rather
friendly terms to me, and while my presents were received thankfully by
the servants, he declared to the people who were sitting near him, that
as the ruler of Bórnu had laid hold of one of my companions, and that of
Marádi of the other, he should be a fool if he were to let me pass out
of his hands. I therefore took leave of him with no very light heart.

My present consisted of two fine red caps, a piece of printed calico
which I had bought in Múrzuk for four Spanish dollars, but which was of
a pattern not much liked in Sudán, an English razor and scissors, one
pound of cloves, another of frankincense, a piece of fine soap, and a
packet of English needles. Though it certainly was not a very brilliant
present, yet, considering that I did not want anything from him, it was
quite enough; but the fact was, that he wanted something more from me,
and therefore it was not sufficient.

Early the following morning, while it was still dark, a servant of the
governor came with Elaíji to my tent, requesting me to stay voluntarily
behind the caravan. Though this would have been the best plan, had I
known that the governor had set his heart upon keeping me back, yet I
could not well assent to it, as I had nothing at all with me, not even
sufficient to keep me and my people for a short time from starving. I
therefore told them that it was impossible for me to stay behind, and
prepared to go on with the caravan which was setting out. This, however,
Elaíji would not allow me to do, but while all the divisions of the aïri
started one after the other, he himself remained behind with several of
the principal men of the caravan, till Háj Bel-Ghét came and announced
that it was necessary for me to go to the town, there to await the
decision of the governor. Seeing that nothing was to be done but to
obey, and having in vain shown my letter of recommendation from the
sultan of Ágades, from which, as I had feared from the beginning,
nothing was inferred but that I had been directly forwarded by him to
the governor of Kátsena in order to see me safe to Sókoto, I took leave
of Elaíji, thanking him and his friends for their trouble, and followed
Bel-Ghét and his companion Músa into the town.

The immense mass of the wall, measuring in its lower part not less than
thirty feet, and its wide circumference, made a deep impression upon me.
The town (if town it may be called) presented a most cheerful rural
scene, with its detached light cottages, and its stubble-fields shaded
with a variety of fine trees; but I suspect that this ground was not
entirely covered with dwellings even during the most glorious period of
Kátsena. We travelled a mile and a half before we reached the “zínsere,”
a small dwelling used by the governor as a place of audience—on account,
as it seems, of a splendid wide-spreading fig-tree growing close to it,
and forming a thick shady canopy sufficient for a large number of
people.

I, however, was conducted to the other side of the building, where a
quadrangular chamber projects from the half-decayed wall, and had there
to wait a long time, till the governor came into town from his new
country-seat. Having at last arrived, he called me, and, thanking me for
remaining with him, he promised that I should be well treated as his
guest, and that without delay a house should be placed at my disposal.
He was a man of middle age, and had much in his manners and features
which made him resemble an actor; and such he really is, and was still
more so in his younger days.

Taking leave of him for the present, I followed Bel-Ghét to my quarters;
but we had still a good march to make, first through detached dwellings
of clay, then leaving the immense palace of the governor on our left,
and entering what may be strictly called the town, with connected
dwellings. Here I was lodged in a small house opposite the spacious
dwelling of Bel-Ghét; and though on first entering I found it almost
insupportable, I soon succeeded in making myself tolerably comfortable
in a clean room neatly arranged. It seemed to have once formed the snug
seat for a well-furnished harím; at least the dark passages leading to
the interior could not be penetrated by a stranger’s eye. We had
scarcely taken possession of our quarters, when the governor sent me a
ram and two ox-loads of corn—one of “dáwa” and the other of “géro.” But
instead of feeling satisfied with this abundant provision, we were quite
horrified at it, as I with my three people might have subsisted a whole
year on the corn sent us; and we began to have uneasy forebodings of a
long detention. Indeed we suspected, and were confirmed in our suspicion
by the statements of several people, that it was the governor’s real
intention to forward me directly to Sókoto, a circumstance which
alienated from me my servants—even the faithful Mohammed el Gatróni, who
was much afraid of going there.

However, my new protector, Bel-Ghét, did not leave me much time for
reflection, but soon came back to take me again to the governor. Having
sat awhile in the cool shade of the tree, we were called into his
audience-room, which was nothing more than the round hut or dérne
(“zaure” in Kanúri) which generally forms the entrance and passage-room
in every Púllo establishment. Besides myself, the háj Bel-Ghét, and his
constant companion Músa, there was also the wealthy merchant Háj Wáli,
whom I had seen in Tasáwa, when he tried to persuade me to follow the
men sent to take me to Zínder, while he now sought to represent the
governor of Kátsena as the greatest man in all Negroland, and the best
friend I could have. The governor soon began to display his talent as an
actor, and had the unfortunate letter from the sultan of Ágades read,
interpreted, and commented upon. According to the sagacious
interpretation of these men, the purport of the letter was to recommend
me expressly to this governor as a fit person to be detained in his
company. All my representations to the effect that my friend ʿAbd el
Káder had recommended me in exactly the same terms to the governors of
Dáura and Kanó, and that I had forwarded a letter from Ágades to the
Emír el Múmenín in Sókoto, informing him that as soon as we had received
new supplies from the coast, one of us at least would certainly pay him
a visit, which under present circumstances, robbed and destitute as we
were, we could not well do, were all in vain; he had an answer for every
objection, and was impudent enough to tell me that a message had been
received from Marádi, soliciting me to go thither; that as Bórnu had
laid hold of one of my companions, and Marádi of the other, so he would
lay hold of me, but of course only in order to become my benefactor (“se
al khére”). Seeing that reply was useless, and that it was much better
to let this lively humourist go through his performance, and to wait
patiently for the end of the comedy, I took leave of him, and returned
to my quarters.

Late in the evening the governor sent for Mohammed, who could scarcely
be expected, with his fiery and inconsiderate behaviour, to improve the
state of things; and as the governor’s dwelling was a good way off, and
the town ill-frequented, I was obliged to allow him to go armed with a
pair of pistols, which soon attracted the attention of our host, who
complained bitterly that while all the petty chiefs had received from us
such splendid presents, he, the greatest man in Negroland, had got
nothing. Mohammed having told him that the pistols belonged to me, he
wanted me to present them to him; but this I obstinately refused, as I
was convinced that the whole success of our further proceedings depended
on our fire-arms.

I was rather glad when El Wákhshi called upon me the following morning,
as I trusted he might help me out of the scrape. After conversing with
him about my situation, I went out with him to stroll about the town. We
had gone, however, but a little way when Bel-Ghét saw us, and
reprimanded me severely for going out without asking his permission.
Growing rather warm at such humiliating treatment, I told him, in very
plain terms, that as long as the governor refrained from posting
soldiers before my door, I would regard myself as a free man, and at
liberty to go where I chose. Seeing that he could not wreak his anger
directly upon me, he tried to do it indirectly, by reprimanding my
companion for going about with this “káfer,” and confirming the “káfer”
in his refractoriness against the will of the sultan. Not feeling much
honoured with the title thus bestowed on me, I told him that as yet
nobody in the whole town had insulted me with that epithet, but that he
alone had the insolence to apply it. When the miserable fellow saw me
irritated, he did not hesitate to declare that though well versed in the
Kurán, he had been entirely unaware of the meaning of “káfer,” and
begged me to give him full information about the relations of the
English to the various Mohammedan states. When I came to speak about
Morocco, he interrupted me, as, being a native of Gurára, he might be
presumed to know the relations of those countries better than I did; and
he insisted that the English were not on good terms with the emperor of
Morocco, and were not allowed to visit Fás (Fez). I then declared to him
that there could scarcely be a more unmistakeable proof of the friendly
relations existing between the English and Mulʿa ʿAbd e’ Rahmán than the
present of four magnificent horses, which the latter had lately sent to
the Queen of England. He then confessed that he was more of an
antiquarian, and ignorant of the present state of matters; but he was
quite sure that during the time of Mulʿa Ismʿaíl it certainly was as he
had stated. To this I replied, that while all the Mohammedan states,
including Morocco, had since that time declined in power, the
Christians, and the English in particular, had made immense steps in
advance. We then shook hands, and I left the poor Moslim to his own
reflections.

Proceeding with El Wákhshi on our intended promenade, and laughing at
the scrape into which he had almost got by changing (in the dispute with
Bel-Ghét) the honorary title of the latter, “Sultán ben e’ Sultán”
(Sultan son of Sultan), into that of “Shitán ben e’ Shitán” (Satan son
of Satan), we went to the house of a Ghadámsi, where we found several
Arab and native merchants collected together, and among them a Ghadámsi
who bore the same name as that which, for more friendly intercourse with
the natives, I had adopted on these journeys, namely, that of ʿAbd el
Kerím. This man had accompanied ʿAbd Allah (Clapperton) on his second
journey from Kanó to Sókoto, and was well acquainted with all the
circumstances attending his death. He was greatly surprised to hear that
“Ríshar” (Richard Lander), whom he had believed to be a younger brother
of Clapperton, had not only successfully reached the coast, after his
circuitous journey to Danróro, and after having been dragged back by
force from his enterprising march upon Fanda, but had twice returned
from England to those quarters before he fell a victim to his arduous
exertions.

I then returned with my old Ghadámsi friend to my lodgings, when Bel-
Ghét came soon after us, and once more begged my pardon for having
called me “káfer.”

Afterwards El Wákhshi brought me a loaf of sugar, that I might make a
present of it to Bel-Ghét. On this occasion he cast his eyes on a small
telescope which I had bought in Paris for six francs, and begged me to
give it to him for the loaf of sugar which he had just lent me. I
complied with his wish. Taking the loaf of sugar with me, and the two
other letters of the sultan of Ágades, as well that addressed to the
governor of Dáura, as that to the governor of Kanó, I went to Bel-Ghét,
and presenting him with the sugar as a small token of my acknowledgment
for the trouble he was taking in my behalf; I showed him the letters as
a proof that the sultan of Ágades never intended to forward me to his
friend the governor of Kátsena as a sort of “abenchí,” or a _titbit_ for
himself, but that he acknowledged entirely my liberty of action, and
really wished to obtain protection for me wherever I might choose to go.
Bel-Ghét being touched by the compliments I paid him, affected to
understand now for the first time the real circumstances of my case, and
promised to lend me his assistance if I would bind myself to return to
Kátsena from Bórnu, after having received sufficient supplies from the
coast. This I did to a certain degree, under the condition that
circumstances should not prove unfavourable to such a proceeding; indeed
I doubted at that time very much whether I should be able to return this
way again. But when I did re-visit Kátsena in the beginning of 1853,
with a considerable supply of presents, and met before the gates of the
town this same man, who had been sent to compliment me on the part of
the same governor, it was a triumph which I could scarcely have
expected. The old man was on the latter occasion almost beside himself
with joy, and fell upon my neck exclaiming, over and over again, “ʿAbd
el Kerím! ʿAbd el Kerím!” while I told him, “Here I am, although both my
companions have died; I am come to fulfil my promise. I am on my way to
Sókoto, with valuable presents for the Emír el Múmenín.”

Leaving Bel-Ghét in better humour, I went with El Wákhshi to his house,
where he treated me and two Ásbenáwa with a dish of roasted fowl and
dates, after which I proceeded with him through the decayed and deserted
quarter where the rich Ghadámsíye merchants once lived, and through some
other streets in a rather better state, to the market-place, which forms
a large regular quadrangle, with several rows of sheds, or runfá, of the
same style as those in Tasáwa, but much better and more regularly built.
Of course there was here a better supply of native cotton-cloth, and of
small Nuremberg wares, in the market than in the former place; but
otherwise there was nothing particular, and altogether it was dull,
showing the state of decay into which this once splendid and busy
emporium of Negroland has fallen.

The most interesting thing I observed in the market were limes, of
tolerably large size, and extremely cheap, and the beautiful large fruit
of the gonda (_Carica Papaya_), which had just begun to ripen; however,
the latter was rather dear, considering the low price of provisions in
general, a fine papaw being sold for from twenty-five to thirty kurdí, a
sum which may keep a poor man from starvation for five days. In Kanó I
afterwards saw this fruit cut into thin slices, which were sold for one
“urí” (shell) each. Having sat for a long time with El Wákhshi in a
runfá, without being exposed to any insult whatever, though I was
necessarily an object of some curiosity, I returned home and passed the
evening quietly with my people, Gajére giving me reason all the time for
the utmost satisfaction with his faithful and steadfast behaviour.
Besides being sincerely attached to me, he was persuaded that he
possessed influence enough to get me out of my scrape; and thus he
informed me, as a great secret, that he had forwarded a message to
Ánnur, giving him full information of my case, and that in consequence I
might give myself no further trouble, but rely entirely upon that
chief’s assistance. While he was thus cheering my spirits in the
evening, as we lay round the fire in our courtyard, he frequently
repeated the words, “Kasó mutúm dondádi uyátaso, kádda kakíshi da
kúmmia,” contrasting his own faithfulness with the faithless, frivolous
behaviour of Mohammed el Túnsi, whom he called “mógo mutúm” (a bad sort
of fellow). But Gajére also had his own reasons for not being so very
angry at our delay, as the lean mare which I had hired of him had a sore
back, and was in a rather weak state, so that a little rest and a full
measure of corn every day was not so much amiss for her.

El Wákhshi returned the same evening, giving me hope that I might get
off the next day. However, this proved to be empty talk; for the
following day my business with the pompous Béllo made no progress, he
demanding nothing less from me than one hundred thousand kurdí or
cowries—a sum certainly small according to European modes of thinking,
barely exceeding 8_l._, but which I was quite unable to raise at the
time. Béllo was mean enough to found his claims upon his noble but quite
uncalled-for hospitality, having given me, as he said, two rams, two
vessels of honey, and two loads of corn, altogether worth from eleven to
twelve thousand cowries; and I now felt myself fully justified in
changing his noble title “Sultán ben Sultán” into that of “dellál ben
dellál” (broker, son of a broker). Even my old friend El Wákhshi took
the occasion of this new difficulty of mine to give vent to his feelings
as a merchant, saying that this was the “dʿawa” (the curse) attending
our (the English) proceedings against the slave-trade. And it must be
confessed that the merchants of Ghadámes have suffered a great deal from
the abolition of the slave-trade in Tunis[13], without being compensated
for this loss by the extension or increased security of legitimate
commerce. Seeing that the slave-trade is still carried on in Núpe or
Nýffi, where, they are persuaded, the English could prevent it if they
would, and that it is there carried on not by Mohammedans but by
Christians, they have plausible grounds for being angry with the English
nation.

I had a highly interesting discussion with my old fanatical friend Bel-
Ghét. It seems that after I had protested against his calling me “káfer”
the other day, he had held a consultation on the subject with some
people of his own faith; and his zeal being thus revived, he returned to
day to urge the point. He began with questioning me about the different
nations that professed Christianity, and which among them were the
“kofár;” for some of them, he was quite sure, were, and deserved to be,
so called. I replied that the application of the word depended on the
meaning attached to it, and that if he understood by the word káfer
anybody who doubted of the mission of Mohammed, of course a great many
Christians were kofár, but if, with more reason, he called by this name
only those who had no idea of the unity of God, and venerated other
objects besides the Almighty God, that it could then be applied only to
a few Christians particularly to those of the Greek, and to the less
enlightened of the Catholic Church, though even these venerated the
crucifix and the images rather as symbols than as idols. But I confessed
to him that, with regard to the unity of the Divine Being, Islám
certainly was somewhat purer than the creeds of most of the Christian
sects; and I acknowledged that, just at the time when Mohammed appeared,
Christianity had sunk considerably below the level of its pristine
purity. The old man went away pleased with what I had told him, and
swore that he would not again call the English kofár, but that with my
permission he would still apply that name to the “Mósko” (the Russians).

In the afternoon his son, a man of about five and thirty, came to visit
me, accompanied by a sheríf from Yeman, who had been to Bombay, and was
well acquainted with the English; he was now on his way to Timbúktu, in
order to vindicate his right of inheritance to the property of a wealthy
merchant who had died there. In this, however, he was unsuccessful; and
when I reached Timbúktu in September, 1853, he had left it some time
previously with broken spirits and in great distress. He perished on his
way home. He was an amiable and intelligent man, and visited me several
times. From him and his companion I received intimation of a large
“Christian book,” bound in leather, with edges and lock made of metal,
in the possession of a Púllo or Ba-Féllanchi in the town; but no one
could tell me whether it was manuscript or print, and although I offered
to pay for a sight of it, I never succeeded in my object. It might be
one of those heavy books which Clapperton, when dying, told Lander
rather to leave behind than take with him to England.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, January 28th.]

I at length succeeded in arranging matters with the governor. Early in
the morning I sent Mohammed to El Wákhshi in order to try and settle the
business, telling him that I was ready to make any possible sacrifice;
and he sent me a bernús for fifty-two thousand kurdí. While I was
hesitating about contracting a new debt of such magnitude (in my poor
circumstances), Bel-Ghét, who evidently feared that if I gave one large
present to the governor, he himself would get nothing, intimated to me
that it would be better to choose several small articles. El Wákhshi
therefore procured a caftan of very common velvet, a carpet, a sedríye
or close waistcoat, and a shawl, which altogether did not exceed the
price of thirty-one thousand kurdí, so that I saved more than twenty
thousand. In order, however, to give to the whole a more unpremeditated,
honorary, and professional appearance, I added to it a pencil, a little
frankincense, and two strong doses of Epsom salts.

While Bel-Ghét was engaged in negotiating peace for me with the
eccentric governor, I went with El Wákhshi and Gajére to the market, and
thence proceeded with the latter, who, stout and portly, strode before
me with his heavy spear, like a stately bodyguard or “kavás,” to the
house of Mánzo, an agent of Masáwaji, who always lives here, and paid
him our compliments. Passing then by the house of the sultan of Ágades
(“gída-n-serkí-n-Ágades”), who occasionally resides here, we went to the
“kófan Gúga” (the north-western gate of the town), which my companion
represented to me as belonging entirely to the Ásbenáwa; for as long as
Kátsena formed the great emporium of this part of Africa, the Aïri used
to encamp in the plain outside this gate. The wall is here very strong
and high, at least from without, where the height is certainly not less
than from five and thirty to forty feet, while in the interior the
rubbish and earth has accumulated against it to such a degree that a man
may very easily look over it; the consequence is, that during the rains
a strong torrent formed here rushes out of the gate. On the outside
there is also a deep broad ditch. We returned to our lodging by way of
the “máriná” and the market, both of which places were already sunk in
the repose and silence of night.

I had scarcely re-entered my dark quarters, when Bel-Ghét arrived,
telling me that the governor did not want my property at all; however,
to do honour to my present, he would condescend to keep the caftan and
the carpet, but he sent me back the sedríye and the shawl—of course to
be given as a present to his agent and commissioner, my noble friend
from Gurára. The governor, however, was anxious to obtain some more
medicines from me. He at the same time promised to make me a present of
a horse. Although I had but a small store of medicines with me, I chose
a few powders of quinine, of tartar-emetic, and of acetate of lead, and
gave him a small bottle with a few drops of laudanum, while it was
arranged that the following morning I should explain to the governor
himself the proper use of these medicines.

The next morning, therefore, I proceeded with Bel-Ghét, to whose swollen
eye I had successfully applied a lotion, and whose greediness I had
satisfied with another small present, on the way to the “zínsere.” He
wished to show me the interior of the immense palace or the “fáda;” but
he could not obtain access to it, and I did not see it till on my second
visit to Kátsena.

Béllo received me in his private apartment, and detained me for full two
hours while I gave him complete information about the use of the
medicines. He wanted, besides, two things from me, which I could not
favour him with,—things of very different character, and the most
desired by all the princes of Negroland. One of these was a “mágani-n-
algúwa” (a medicine to increase his conjugal vigour); the other, some
rockets, as a “mágani-n-yáki” (a medicine of war), in order to frighten
his enemies.

Not being able to comply with these two modest wishes of his, I had
great difficulty in convincing him of my good will; and he remained
incredulous to my protestations that we had intentionally not taken such
things as rockets with us, as we were afraid that if we gave such a
thing to one prince, his neighbour might become fiercely hostile to us.
But he remarked that he would keep such a gift a secret. I was very glad
he did not say a word more about the pistols; but in order to give me a
proof that he knew how to value fine things, he showed me the scissors
and razor which I had given him the other day, for which he had got a
sheath made, and wore them constantly at his left side. He then told me
he would make me a present of an “abi-n-háwa” (something to mount upon),
intimating already by this expression that it would not be a first-rate
horse, as I had not complied with his heart’s desire, but that it would
be furnished with saddle and harness, and that besides he would send me
a large “hákkori-n-gíwa” (an elephant’s tooth) to Kanó. This latter
offer I declined, saying that, though my means were very small at
present, I did not like to turn merchant. He reminded me then of my
promise to return; and we parted the best of friends. Notwithstanding
the injustice of every kind which he daily commits, he has some
sentiment of honour; and feeling rather ashamed for having given me so
much trouble for nothing, as he was aware that it would become known to
all his fellow-governors, and probably even to his liege lord, the Emír
el Mumenín, he was anxious to vindicate his reputation. It was from the
same motive that he begged me most urgently not to tell anybody that I
had made him the presents here, adding, that he would afterwards say
that he had received them from me from Kanó.

Having returned home, I thankfully received the compliments which were
made me from different quarters on account of the fortunate issue of my
affair with this “munáfekí,” or evil-doer; and although the horse, which
was not brought till next morning after we had been waiting for it a
long while, proved rather ill-looking and poor, being scarcely worth
more than ten thousand kurdí, or four dollars, and though the saddle was
broken and harness wanting altogether, I was quite content, and exulted
in my good fortune. But before leaving this once most important place, I
shall try to give a short historical sketch of its past, and an outline
of its present state. I only hope that the description of my personal
relations in this town may not be thought too diffuse; but while it
affords a glance into the actual state of things, it may also serve to
instruct those who may hereafter travel in these regions.


[Footnote 4: It might seem to some readers that there is some connection
between the name of the valley and the tree; but I think it is merely
accidental. The Háusa language is not a written language; but if the
natives were to write the name “bóre” or “báure,” they would certainly
write it with an _r_, and not with a _gh_.]

[Footnote 5: This village I touched at on my journey from Zínder to
Kátsena in 1853—a journey which is of great importance for the
construction of my routes collectively, as it forms the link between my
first route and Zínder.]

[Footnote 6: It has been remarked by travellers that this tree is only
found near some dwelling-place of man; but I doubt whether we are
authorized to regard all those specimens of it which are scattered over
the wilds of Central Africa, as marking the site of former towns.]

[Footnote 7: The Háusa people call the site of a former town “kufai,” in
the plural form “kufaife.”]

[Footnote 8: Gajére enumerated to me also the following places as lying
towards the north-west of our road in the direction of Marádi: viz.,
Wála, Golkúka, Harumáwa, Gindáwa, Majéne, Kóre, Dándabu, Kúbdu (a large
place belonging to Astáfidet), Sámia maigíjje, Rubákia, Furagírke, Agé,
Kukúta, Kafí mayáki (which approaches within a little distance of
Tindúkku, the place I mentioned above). Further southward, on the west
side of our route, were mentioned Súruru and Kofí; to the east, Sámia
maidánkay. On inquiring after Sámia Enkóra, a place mentioned in an
itinerary sent home by Mr. Richardson during his first journey, I learnt
that it lies on an eastern road leading from Damerghú to Tasáwa by the
following stations (the march being slow from Tágelel):—Baíbay, Kamé,
Sámia E_l_kóra (this is said to be the right form of the name), Dándu,
Gomariyúma, Tasáwa.]

[Footnote 9: All sorts of wind instruments, the flute included, are
called by the Háusa people “bushé-bushé,” from which word the Féllani-n-
Háusa have formed “fufefuféji.”]

[Footnote 10: This is the only correct Háusa form for the singular of
Féllani.]

[Footnote 11: I afterwards heard that these people belonged to the Kél-
tídik, and possessed large establishments of slaves and farms in Dwán
and Shirgíngim.]

[Footnote 12: The Fúlbe generally change the ʿain into ghain, and
therefore say Ghomáro instead of ʿOmáro.]

[Footnote 13: The recent abolition of the slave-trade in Tripoli and
Fezzán will certainly not soothe their wrath.]




                              CHAP. XXIV.

    HÁUSA. — HISTORY AND DESCRIPTION OF KÁTSENA. — ENTRY INTO KANÓ.


In order to render intelligible the anterior history of Kátsena, it will
be necessary to enter into some preliminary explanation respecting the
whole country of Háusa. The name Háusa was unknown, as it seems, to Leo
Africanus; else instead of saying that the inhabitants of Zária,
Kátsena, and Kanó spoke the language of Góber[14], he would have said
that they spoke the Háusa language. But we have no right to conclude
from this circumstance that the practice of giving the name Háusa, not
only to the widely-diffused language, but also to the countries
collectively in which it prevails, is later than Leo’s time; on the
contrary, I must acknowledge the improbability of such an assumption. It
is true that, with the faint light available, we are unable to discern
quite distinctly how the Háusa nation originated; but we may positively
assert that it was not an indigenous nation, or at least that it did not
occupy its present seat from very ancient times, but that it settled in
the country at a comparatively recent date. As to one of the associated
states, and the most prominent and noble amongst them (I mean Góber), we
know positively that in ancient times it occupied tracts situated much
further north[15]; and I have been assured that the name Háusa also
proceeded from the same quarter—an opinion which seems to be confirmed
by the affinity of that language with the Temáshight.[16] Whether the
name was originally identical with the word “Áusa,” which, as we shall
see, is used by the Western Tawárek and the people of Timbúktu to denote
the country on this the northern side of the Great River, in opposition
to “Gúrma,” the country on its southern side, I am unable to say.

Sultan Béllo’s statement, that the Háusa people originated from a Bórnu
slave, deserves very little credit. It is to be considered as merely
expressive of his contempt for the effeminate manners of the Háusa
people in his time. But their language, though it has a few words in
common with the Kanúri, is evidently quite distinct from it, as well in
its vocabulary as in its grammar. What Béllo says may be correct in a
certain sense with regard to the population of Kanó, which indeed seems
to consist, for the greater part, of Bórnu elements, though in course of
time the people have adopted the Háusa language; and this may be the
case also with other provinces, the original population having been more
nearly related to the Manga-Bórnu stock. The name “Báwu,” which occurs
in the mythical genealogy of the Háusa people as that of the ancestor of
most of the Háusa states, can hardly be supposed to be a mere
personification representing the state of slavery in which the nation
formerly existed; the name for slave in the Háusa language is báwa, not
báwu. It is, however, remarkable that this personage is said to be the
son of Karbágarí, whose name evidently implies “the taking of a town,”
and might be derived from the capture of the town of Bíram, which is
universally represented as the oldest seat of the Háusa people, a
tradition which is attested by a peculiar usage even at the present day.
This town of Bíram is situated between Kanó and Khadéja, and is often
called “Bíram-ta-ghabbes,” in order to distinguish it from a more
westerly town of the same name. Bíram, the personification of this town,
is said to have been, by his grandson, Báwu, (the son of Karbágarí), the
progenitor of the six other Háusa states (likewise personified): viz.
Kátsena and Zégzeg, who are represented as twins; Kanó and Ranó, another
pair of twins; Góber and Dáura. However, it seems almost universally
acknowledged that of all these children Dáura was the eldest.[17]

More important in a historical point of view, and confirming what has
been said above, appears to be the statement that the mother of these
children belonged to the Déggara or Díggera, a Berber tribe at present
established to the north of Múniyo, and once very powerful. Bíram,
Dáura, Góber, Kanó, Ranó, Kátsena, and Zégzeg, are the well-known
original seven Háusa states, the “Háusa bókoy” (the seven Háusa), while
seven other provinces or countries, in which the Háusa language has
spread to a great extent, although it is not the language of the
aboriginal inhabitants, are called jocosely “bánza bokoy” (the upstart,
or illegitimate); these are Zánfara, Kébbi, Núpe or Nýffi, Gwári, Yáuri,
Yóruba or Yáriba, and Korórofa.

As for the six children of Báwu, they are said to have had each his
share assigned to him by his father in the following way: Góber was
appointed the “serkí-n-yáki” (the war-chief), in order to defend his
brethren, Kanó and Ranó being made “sáraki-n-bába” (the ministers of the
“máriná,” that peculiar emblem of the industry of Háusa), and Kátsena
and Dáura “sáraki-n-káswa” (the ministers of intercourse and commerce),
while Zégzeg is said to have been obliged to provide his brethren with
those necessary instruments of social life in these regions, namely,
slaves, becoming the “serkí-n-baÿ.” Ranó, which at present has been
greatly reduced, though it is still a considerable place, situated
south-west from Kanó, was originally, like each of the other towns, the
capital of an independent territory, though not mentioned hitherto by
any traveller who has spoken of Háusa.

If we credit Leo’s description, we must conclude that when he visited
these regions, towards the end of the 15th century of our era, there was
no capital in the province of Kátsena, the whole country being inhabited
in “piccoli casali fatti a guisa di capanne.” For with respect to later
events, which happened after he had left the country, and while he was
writing his description, very imperfect information appears to have
reached him. Now, the list of the kings of Kátsena, from a remote
period, is still tolerably well preserved, together with the length of
their respective reigns; and there is no reason whatever to doubt their
general accuracy, as the history of the state has been in writing at
least since the middle of the 16th century of our era, and we have
something to control this list, and to connect it with facts gleaned
from other quarters. This regards the period of the reign of the king
Ibrahím Máji, who, as we know, lived in the time of the famous Tawáti
Mohammed ben ʿAbd el Kerím ben Maghíli, the friend and contemporary, as
I have said above[18], of the great encyclopædist Abu ’l Fadhl Jelál e’
dín ʿAbd e’ Rahmán el Khodairi e’ Soyúti, commonly known under the name
of E’ Sheikh e’ Soyúti; and his connection with the king of Kátsena we
are able to fix with tolerable certainty by his relation to the Sónghay
king Is-hák, who is said to have excited his severest indignation by
refusing to punish the people who had murdered his son in Gógó.[19] And
although we can scarcely believe that the ruin of the Sónghay empire,
and the rise of that of Kátsena, was the consequence of this holy man’s
curse, nevertheless we are justified in presuming that after he had
received offence from the king Is-hák, by being refused satisfaction, he
began to cultivate friendly relations with the king of Kátsena, a
country then rising into importance.

We are therefore justified in placing Ibrahím Máji (the king of Kátsena,
whom the fanatic Moslim converted to Islám) about the middle of the 10th
century of the Hejra. Now, if we count backwards from this period,
adding together the years attributed to each reign, to Komáyo, the man
who is universally stated to have founded Kátsena, we obtain at least
three hundred and fifty years, which would carry back the political
existence of the state of Kátsena to the beginning of the 7th century of
the Hejra. In this computation we reduce the reign of the first two
kings, or chiefs (of whom Komáyo is said to have reigned a hundred
years, and his successor ninety), to about twenty years each. Excepting
this little exaggeration, which is such as we find recurring in the
early history of almost every nation, I do not see any reason for
rejecting the list of the kings of this country, as it is preserved not
only in the memory of the people, but even in written documents, though,
indeed, it is to be lamented that the books containing a comprehensive
history of this nation have been destroyed intentionally by the Fúlbe,
or Féllani, since the conquest of the country, in order to annihilate,
as far as possible, the national records.

The dynasty founded by Komáyo comprised four kings in succession,
besides its founder, namely, Rámba, Téryau, Jerinnáta and Sanáwu.
Sanáwu, after a reign of thirty years, is said to have been killed by
Koráwu, who came from a place named Yendútu, and founded a new dynasty
(if we count backwards from the time of Ibrahím Máji) about the year 722
of the Hejra; but, of course, I do not pretend to any exactness in these
dates. Whether Ibrahím Máji belonged to the same dynasty which Koráwu
had founded, I am not able to say. About thirty years before the time of
Ibrahím Máji, in the year 919 A.H., or 1513 A.D., occurred that eventful
expedition of the great Sónghay king Háj Mohammed Áskiá which threw all
these countries into the greatest confusion. According to Leo, at that
time Kátsena acknowledged the supremacy of Kanó, having been subjected
for only a short time to the sway of the king of Sónghay, and afterwards
most probably to that of the energetic and successful king of Kébbi, who
repulsed the great Áskiá. Kátsena must have fallen very soon under the
supremacy of the empire of Bórnu. About fifty years after the beginning
of the reign of the first Moslim king, a new dynasty commenced, that of
the Hábe[20], which, as it is unanimously stated to have ruled for a
hundred and sixty-nine years, and as it was driven out by the Fúlbe in
the year of the Hejra 1222, must have commenced about the year 1053
(A.D. 1643). In this latter dynasty, however, there seem to have been
two factions (or families), which are noticed already in the preceding
dynasty, one of which was called Chagarána, and the other
Káryaghíwá.[21] But before speaking of the struggle between the Fúlbe
and the Hábe, I shall say a few words about the town of Kátsena.

The town, probably, did not receive the name of the province till it had
become large and predominant; which event, if Leo be correct, we must
conclude did not happen much before the middle of the 16th century of
our era, while in early times some separate villages probably occupied
the site where, at a later period, the immense town spread out. The
oldest of these villages is said to have been Ambutéy or Mbutéy, where
we must presume Komáyo and his successors to have resided. After Gógó
had been conquered by Muláy Hámed, the emperor of Morocco, and, from a
large and industrious capital, had become a provincial town, great part
of the commerce which formerly centred there must have been transferred
to Kátsena, although this latter place seems never to have had any
considerable trade in gold, which formed the staple of the market of
Gógó. Thus the town went on increasing to that enormous size, the
vestiges of which still exist at the present time, although the quarter
actually inhabited comprises but a small part of its extent.[22]

The town, if only half of its immense area were ever tolerably well
inhabited, must certainly have had a population of at least a hundred
thousand souls; for its circuit is between thirteen and fourteen English
miles. At present, when the inhabited quarter is reduced to the north-
western part, and when even this is mostly deserted, there are scarcely
seven or eight thousand people living in it. In former times it was the
residence of a prince, who, though he seems never to have attained to
any remarkable degree of power, and was indeed almost always in some
degree dependent on, or a vassal of, the king of Bórnu, nevertheless was
one of the most wealthy and conspicuous rulers of Negroland.[23] Every
prince at his accession to the throne had to forward a sort of tribute
or present to Birni Ghasréggomo, the capital of the Bórnu empire,
consisting of one hundred slaves, as a token of his obedience; but this
being done, it does not appear that his sovereign rights were in any way
interfered with. In fact, Kátsena, during the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries of our era, seems to have been the chief city of this part of
Negroland, as well in commercial and political importance as in other
respects; for here that state of civilization which had been called
forth by contact with the Arabs seems to have reached its highest
degree, and as the Háusa language here attained the greatest richness of
form and the most refined pronunciation, so also the manners of Kátsena
were distinguished by superior politeness from those of the other towns
of Háusa.

[Illustration:

1. House where I was lodged during my first stay in Kátsena in 1851.

2. House belonging to the quarter Dóka where I was lodged in 1853.

3. The Zénsere.

4. Palace of the governor.

5. Market-place.

6. Old mosque.

7. Kofa-n-Gúga.

8. Kofa-n-Yendúkki.

9. Kofa-n-Koya.

10. Kofa-n-Gazúbi.

11. Kofa-n-Káura.

12. Kofa-n-Marúsa.

13. Kofa-n-Dúrdu.

14. Kofa-n-Samrí.

15. A brook formed by a spring.

16. Former place of encampment of salt caravan.]

But this state of things was wholly changed, when, in the very beginning
of the present century, in the year 1222 of the Hejra, or 1807 of our
era, the Fúlbe, called Féllani by the Háusa, and Felláta by the Bórnu
people, raised to the highest pitch of fanaticism by the preaching of
the Reformer or Jihádi ʿOthmán dan Fódiye, and formed into the religious
and political association of the Jemmáʿa, or, as they pronounce it,
Jemmára, succeeded in possessing themselves of this town. However, while
Kanó fell ingloriously, and almost without resistance, into the hands of
Slimán (the Háusa king El Wáli having escaped to Zária), the struggle
for Kátsena was protracted and sanguinary. Indeed Mʿallem Ghomáro had
carried on unrelenting war against the town for seven years, before he
at length reduced it by famine; and the distress in the town is said to
have been so great that a dead “ángulú” or vulture (impure food which
nobody would touch in time of peace) sold for five hundred kurdí, and a
kadángeré or lizard for fifty. But the struggle did not cease here; for
the “Hábe” succeeded once more in expelling the conquerors from the
town, without, however, being able to maintain their position, when
Mʿallem Ghomáro returned with a fresh army. Five princes of Kátsena, one
after the other, fell in this struggle for religious and national
independence; and the Púllo general was not quite secure of his conquest
till after the total destruction of the town of Dánkama, when Mágajin
Háddedu was slain only four months after his predecessor Mahamúdu had
succumbed in Sabóngarí. Even then the new Háusa prince Benóni, who still
bore the title of “serkí-n-Kátsena,” did not lay down his arms, but
maintained the contest till he likewise was conquered and slain in
Túntuma.

From this time the town declined rapidly, and all the principal foreign
merchants migrated to Kanó, where they were beyond the reach of this
constant struggle; and even the Asbenáwa transferred their salt-market
to the latter place, which now became the emporium of this part of
Negroland, while Kátsena retained but secondary importance as the seat
of a governor. This is indeed to be lamented, as the situation of the
town is excellent, and, both on account of its position to the various
routes and of its greater salubrity, is far preferable to Kanó. However,
as matters stand, unless either the Fúlbe succeed in crushing entirely
the independent provinces to the north and north-west (which, in the
present weak state of the empire of Sókoto, is far from probable), or
till the Goberáwa and Mariadáwa, whose king still bears the title of
serkí-n-Kátsena, reconquer this town, it will continue to decline and
become more desolate every year. In fact, Mohammed Béllo, the present
governor, had conceived the design of giving up this immense town
altogether, and of founding a new residence of smaller compass in its
neighbourhood; but his liege-lord, Alíyu, the Emír el Múmenín, would not
allow him to do so.

I shall say nothing here about the empire of the Fúlbe, or about their
character, of which I received a very bad impression during my first
dealings with them, but shall treat of both these subjects hereafter.
The only inhabited part of the town at present is the north-west
quarter, although any one who should omit to take into account the
population scattered over the other parts, principally round about the
residence of the governor, and the people settled in the hamlets near
the gates, would make a great mistake. Here it may be added, that most
of the importance which Kátsena has still preserved, in a commercial
aspect, is due to its position with respect to Núpe, with which it keeps
up a tolerably-lively intercourse, the route from it to that industrious
but most unfortunate country being practicable even for camels, while
the road from Kanó can only be travelled with horses and asses. Almost
all the more considerable native merchants in Kátsena are Wangaráwa
(Eastern Mandingoes).

The province of Kátsena was formerly far more extensive than it is at
present, but it has been curtailed, in order not to leave its governor
too much inducement to make himself independent. Besides, many parts of
it, being much exposed to the continual incursions of the independent
Háusáwa, have greatly suffered, so that probably the population of the
whole province does not now exceed three hundred thousand souls[24], of
whom only about one half seem to pay tribute. Every head of a family has
to pay here two thousand five hundred kurdí-n-kassa, or ground-rent, and
the whole of the kurdí-n-kassa of the province is estimated by those
best acquainted with the affairs of the country at from twenty to thirty
millions; a tax of five hundred kurdí is levied also on every slave. The
military force of the province consists of two thousand horsemen, and
about eight thousand men on foot, most of them archers.[25] Altogether
the province of Kátsena is one of the finest parts of Negroland, and
being situated just at the water-parting between the basin of the Tsád
and that of the Kwára, at a general elevation of from 1200 to 1500 feet,
it enjoys the advantage of being at once well watered and well drained,
the chains of hills which diversify its surface sending down numerous
rapid streams, so that it is less insalubrious than other regions of
this continent. Its productions are varied and rich, though its elevated
situation seems unfavourable to the growth of cotton. But, on the other
side, useful trees seem to be more numerous in this district than in any
other under the same latitude; and the áyaba or banana, and the gónda or
papaya, are found in many favoured spots, while the dorówa or _Parkia_,
the tsámia or tamarind, and the kadeña, or the Shea butter-tree (_Bassia
Parkii_), are the most common trees everywhere, and very often form
thick clusters. As I shall have to describe the western districts in the
narrative of my journey to Sókoto, in 1853, I now proceed with my route
to Kanó.

[Sidenote: Thursday, January 30th.]

I was extremely glad when, after a long delay—for we had been obliged to
wait more than an hour for the poor nag presented to me by the
governor,—we reached the south-eastern gate of the town, the “kófa-n-
Káura.” It was as if I had just escaped from a prison, and I drew my
breath deeply as I inhaled the fresh air outside the wall. I should have
carried with me a very unfavourable impression of Kátsena, if it had not
been my destiny to visit this place again under more favourable
circumstances; and I should have obtained a very false idea of the
character of the Fúlbe, if, from the little experience which I had
acquired in this place, I had formed a definitive judgment of them.

On the southern side of the town there is at present no cultivated
ground; but the whole country is in a wild state, covered with
brushwood. What we saw also of the traffic on the path seemed to be not
of a very peaceable kind; for we met nothing but armed foot and horsemen
hastening to Kátsena on the news of the expedition in course of
preparation by the people of Marádi. But further on, the aspect of the
country became a little more peaceful; and after a march of three miles
we passed a well, where the women from a neighbouring village were
offering for sale the common vegetables of the country, such as gowáza
or yams, dánkali or sweet potatoes, kúka, the leaves of the monkey
bread-tree, dodówa or the vegetable cakes mentioned above, ground nuts,
beans, and sour milk. Nevertheless the whole country, with its few
fortified villages, its little cultivation, and the thick forests which
separated the villages one from another, left the impression of a very
unsettled and precarious existence. I observed that brushwood, where it
is not interrupted by larger trees, is always a proof of cultivation
having been carried on at no distant period. In the midst of a wild
thicket, which deranged all my things, we met a long warlike-train of
several hundred horsemen, who perhaps might have incommoded us on the
narrow path, if the strange appearance of my luggage had not so
frightened the horses, that they rather chose to carry their riders
through the very thickest of the covert than to fall in with us. Dúm-
palms now began to appear; and beyond the considerable village Bay,
cultivation became more extensive. Besides the fan-palm, the dumma and
kaña, and the immense monkey bread-tree, with its colossal (now
leafless) branches, from which the long heavy “kauchi” were hanging down
on slender mouse-tail stalks, were the prevalent trees.

By degrees the country became more beautiful and cheerful, exhibiting a
character of repose and ease which is entirely wanting in the northern
parts of the province; separate comfortable dwellings of cattle-breeding
Féllani were spread about, and the corn-fields were carefully fenced and
well kept. I was greatly astonished when Gajére, with a certain feeling
of national pride, pointed out to me here the extensive property of Sídi
Ghálli el Háj Ánnur, the man whom I had occasion, in my description of
Ágades, to mention amongst the most respectable people of that town. It
is astonishing how much property is held in these fertile regions by the
Tawárek of Ásben; and to what consequences this may eventually lead,
everybody will easily conjecture.

A little before four o’clock in the afternoon we encamped close to a
village called Shibdáwa, the celebrated town of Dáura being distant two
days’ march.

[Sidenote: Friday, January 31st.]

It was a most beautiful morning; and I indulged in the feeling of
unbounded liberty, and in the tranquil enjoyment of the beautiful aspect
of God’s creation. The country through which we passed on leaving
Shibdáwa, formed one of the finest landscapes I ever saw in my life. The
ground was pleasantly undulating, covered with a profusion of herbage
not yet entirely dried up by the sun’s power; the trees, belonging to a
great variety of species, were not thrown together into an impenetrable
thicket of the forest, but formed into beautiful groups, exhibiting all
the advantage of light and shade. There was the kaña, with its rich
dark-tinged foliage, the kadeña, or butter-tree, which I here saw for
the first time, exhibiting the freshest and most beautiful green; then
the marké, more airy, and sending out its branches in more irregular
shape, with light groups of foliage; young tamarind-trees rounding off
their thick crown of foliage till it resembled an artificial canopy
spread out for the traveller to repose in its shade, besides the gámji,
the shéria, the sokútso, the turáwa, and many other species of trees
unknown to me; while above them all, tall and slender górebas unfolded
their fan-crowns, just as if to protect the eye of the delighted
wanderer from the rays of the morning sun, and to allow him to gaze
undisturbed on the enchanting scenery around. Near the village Káshi
even the gónda-tree or _Carica Papaya_, which is so rarely seen in these
quarters, enlivened the scenery. The densely-luxuriant groves seemed to
be the abode only of the feathered tribe, birds of numberless variety
playing and warbling about in the full enjoyment of their liberty, while
the “serdi,” a large bird with beautiful plumage of a light-blue colour,
especially attracted my attention. Now and then a herd of cattle was
seen dispersed over the rich pasturage-grounds, all of white colour, and
the bulls provided with a large fat hump or “tózo” hanging down on one
side. But in this delightful spectacle objects of destruction also were
not wanting, the poisonous plant “túmnia” starting forth everywhere.

Cotton and karásia fields interrupted the parklike scenery; and near
Kámri, a small place surrounded with a low clay wall, we were delighted
with the view of a green patch of low ground laid out into beds, and,
with the help of a number of drawbeams, “khattatír,” or “lámbuna,”
producing wheat and onions. This ground too is only worked with the
gélma and the fertáña or small hoe.

Granite rock was protruding in several places; and a little after mid-
day we had a detached range of hills on our right stretching E. and W.
Soon afterwards, near the village Temma, we passed a small market-place,
consisting of about eight sheds, and shaded by a number of wide-
spreading tamarind-trees, where I was astonished at the number of cattle
and horses assembled, but heard on inquiry that they were not intended
for sale. Further on, after we had passed the fields of Gógó, plenty of
cattle and goats were seen browsing everywhere about. All the cattle
were of a white, and all the goats of a coffee-brown colour. Having
passed the encampment of the Tin-néggaru or Kél-néggaru, and crossed a
dale fringed with small fresh patches of wheat, which were watered by
way of the said “lámbuna” from wells in the hollow, we encamped a
quarter before four o’clock close to the fence of the village Bógo; for
the whole country swarms with thieves, and great caution is necessary at
night: the Tin-néggaru last night killed a thief, who was attempting to
carry off a loaf of salt.

[Sidenote: Saturday, February 1st.]

After a march of about two miles and a half, over clayey ground greatly
broken up by the rains, we reached the N.W. corner of the considerable
town Kusáda, and continued along its western wall, where a group of very
tall and majestic rimis (_Bombax_ or _Eriodendron Guineense_), though at
present leafless, formed a most conspicuous object. It is very singular
and highly characteristic, that this tree (the bentang-tree of Mungo
Park) generally grows near the principal gate of the large towns in
Háusa, while otherwise it is not frequent, at least not the large full-
grown specimens; and it is not improbable that the natives purposely
planted them in those places as a kind of waymark—or perhaps it may be a
remnant of their pagan customs, this tree being deemed holy by several
pagan tribes. It is almost incredible at what an immense distance these
stupendous trees, the tallest of the vegetable kingdom, may be seen.

Kusáda is a town of importance, and is very little less than Gazáwa,
though not so thickly inhabited; the wall of the town is in tolerably
good repair, and the interior is rich in trees, making it look very
cheerful and comfortable. Most of the huts consist of clay walls, with a
thatched roof, which is certainly the mode of architecture best adapted
to the climate and the whole nature of the country.

When leaving the south side of this town we were joined by a troop of
women very heavily-laden, each carrying upon the head from six to ten
enormous calabashes filled with various articles: but they did not prove
to be agreeable company; for not being able to walk steadily for any
length of time with their loads, they stopped every few minutes, and
then went on at a running pace, till they were obliged again to halt, so
that they came frequently into collision either with my camel or with
the bullock. It is really incredible what loads the native women of
Negroland can carry on their heads, but I think no other tribe is equal
in this respect to the Tápua or Nyffáwa. The country through which we
had to pass along for the first two miles was overgrown with underwood,
and much broken up by the rains, till we reached the stubble-fields of
Kaférda, where my attention was attracted again by a few scattered
specimens of the gigiña, or deléb-palm, which, in these districts, seems
to be extremely rare. Descending then a little, the country assumed once
more that delightful park-like appearance which had so charmed me the
previous day; and the variety of the vegetation was
extraordinary,—góreba, jéja, gámji, rími, and dóka being the principal
trees.

The industry of the natives was also well represented; for soon after we
had met a troop of men carrying home loads of indigo-plants, in order to
prepare them in their simple way, we passed over extensive tobacco-
fields, which had very nearly reached maturity. Rich aromatic bushes
were growing everywhere in the fields, affording most nourishing food
for bees, for which purpose hives, formed of thick hollow logs, were
fastened to the branches of the colossal kúka-trees. We here passed a
most curious specimen of vegetable intercourse in the thorough
intermixture of a gigiña with another tree. In the course of my travels
my attention was drawn to the interesting attraction which exists
between the tamarind-tree and the kúka, both of which trees I very often
found linked together in the closest embraces. This district was greatly
enlivened also by a rich variety of the feathered tribe, but the
beautiful serdi was not seen; the káló and the tsírna now taking its
place.

A quarter of an hour after noon we passed the considerable place Dan-
Sábua, defended only by a stockade, and, with the exception of a small
market-place, giving very little proof of any kind of industry existing
among its inhabitants. When I passed the place three years later, it
even seemed almost deserted. About two miles further on we passed a
small round hill covered with underwood up to its very summit, and
remarkable enough for being taken as a boundary-mark between the
provinces of Kátsena and Kanó; in 1854, however, the frontier was
carried further N.W., near Kaférda. We encamped early in the afternoon
near the village Gúrzo, separated from it only by a dell laid out in
small garden-fields with wheat and onions, and obtained a good supply of
the latter, but nothing else. In the night a thief almost succeeded in
carrying off some of our luggage, but had to run very hard for his life.

Early the next morning we started with an enthusiastic impulse, in order
to reach before night the celebrated emporium of Central Negroland.
Kanó, indeed, is a name which excites enthusiasm in every traveller in
these regions, from whatever quarter he may come, but principally if he
arrives from the north. We thus started in the twilight, passing in the
bush some herds of cattle remaining out in the pasture-grounds, and
meeting several troops of travellers, which made us fancy the capital to
be nearer than it really was. We listened to the tales of our comely and
cheerful companion, the “babá-n-báwa” of Tágelel, who detailed to us the
wonders of this African London, Birmingham, and Manchester—the vastness
of the town, the palace and retinue of the governor, the immense
multitudes assembled every day in its market-place, the splendour and
richness of the merchandise exposed there for sale, the various
delicacies of the table, the beauty and gracefulness of its ladies. At
times my fiery Tunisian mulatto shouted out from mere anticipation of
the pleasures which awaited him.

Keeping steadily along, we reached, after about five miles, the very
considerable town of Béchi, the well-kept high clay walls of which
started forth suddenly from a most luxuriant mass of vegetation, where
we saw again the beautifully-feathered serdi fluttering about from
branch to branch.

The town is very remarkable, as exhibiting the peculiar circumstances of
the social state in this country; for it belongs partly to the Tawárek
tribe of the Itísan, whose búgaje or serfs—properly half-castes, born of
free mothers, but slaves from the father’s side—live here, cultivating
for their lords the fields around the town. Thus we see Tawárek
everywhere, not only as occasional merchants, but even as settlers and
proprietors. The town has but one gate; and a great many of the houses
are of the kind described above. Beyond the town the country becomes
less cultivated, and is mostly covered with the wild gónda-bush, which
bears a most delicious fruit, richly deserving to be called the cream-
apple. I suspected it for some time to be identical with the custard-
apple; but I afterwards assured myself that it is not. I call the
attention of every African traveller to this fruit, which affords the
greatest relief after a long day’s journey; but it does not grow on the
flat clayey plains of Bórnu Proper.

Beyond the little market-place of Budúmme we met the first strings of
empty camels belonging to the aïri with which we had been travelling.
They were returning from Kanó, where they had carried the salt, in order
to retrace their steps to good pasture-grounds, while their masters
remained in the capital to sell their merchandise. The drivers confirmed
the information we had already received, that our protector Elaíji had
not as yet arrived in the town. For he likewise possesses a large
property near Kazáure, whither he had gone after parting from me at
Kátsena. The country again assumed a more cheerful character; we passed
several villages, and even a máriná, or dyeing-place, and the path was
well frequented. Almost all the people who met us saluted us most kindly
and cheerfully; and I was particularly amused by the following form of
salutation: “Bárka, sanú sanú: hm! hm!” “God bless you, gently, gently;
how strange!” Only a few proud Féllani, very unlike their brethren in
the west, passed us without a salute. The villages are here scattered
about in the most agreeable and convenient way, as farming villages
ought always to be, but which is practicable only in a country in a
state of considerable security and tranquillity. All their names,
therefore, are in the plural form, as Tarauráwa, Jimbedáwa, Bagadáwa.
The idea of a great degree of industry was inspired by the sight of a
máriná near Jimbedáwa, comprising as many as twenty dyeing-pots; and
here also a little market was held by the women of the district. About
half-past one in the afternoon we entered the rich district of Dáwano,
which almost exclusively belongs to the wealthy Dan Mália, and is
chiefly inhabited by Féllani. There was here a large market-place,
consisting of several rows of well-built sheds, and frequented by
numbers of people. A few market-women attached themselves to our little
troop, giving us assurance that we should be able to reach the “bírni”
to-day, but then added that we ought to arrive at the outer gate before
sunset, as it is shut at that time.

We accordingly pressed on with our varied little caravan, consisting of
a very lean black horse, covered with coarse wool-like hair, worth four
dollars, or perhaps less; a mare, scarcely worth more in its present
condition; a camel, my faithful Bú-Séfi, evidently the most respectable
four-footed member of the troop, carrying a very awkward load,
representing my whole travelling household, with writing-table and
bedding-boards; a sumpter-ox, heavily laden; then the four human bipeds
to match, viz. one half-barbarized European, one half-civilized Góberáwi
Tunisian mulatto, a young lean Tébu lad, and my stout, sturdy, and grave
overseer from Tágelel. As we then entered some fields of sesamum, or
“nóme” (quite a new sight for me in this country, but which was soon to
become of very common occurrence), Gajére descried in the distance
between the trees the top of the hill Dalá, and we all strained our eyes
to get a first glimpse of this hill, which is the real landmark of Kanó.

The country hereabouts exhibited a new feature, some of the fields being
enclosed with a bush which I had not seen before, and which was called
by my intelligent guide “fidde serewukka.” In Múniyo, where I afterwards
saw it used for the same purpose, it is called “mágara.” It is a kind of
broom, growing to the height of ten or twelve feet, and has a milky
juice, which is slightly poisonous, but by some people is employed as a
cure for wounds caused by thorns. A little while afterwards we saw the
first single date-palm, a tree also most characteristic of Kanó; and
now, the country becoming clear, we obtained a full sight of both the
hills, Dalá and Kógo-n-dútsi, which rise from the flat level of the
plain; but nothing was as yet visible of the town, and we had but faint
hopes of reaching it before sunset. However, we went on, though a little
disheartened, as we had some foreboding that we should incur the
displeasure of the governor; and passing through the gate, in front of
which part of the aïri were encamped, without stopping, as if we were
natives of the country, went on across open fields. It took us forty
minutes to reach the house of Báwu from the gate, though this lies near
the very outskirts of Dalá, the northernmost quarter of the town.

It was quite dark, and we had some trouble in taking possession of the
quarters assigned to us by our host.

Kanó had been sounding in my ears now for more than a year; it had been
one of the great objects of our journey as the central point of
commerce, as a great storehouse of information, and as the point whence
more distant regions might be most successfully attempted. At length,
after nearly a year’s exertions, I had reached it.


[Footnote 14: Leo, l. i. s. 12. When he says that the inhabitants of
Wángara (Guangara) likewise spoke Háusa, he falls into the same sort of
error as when he says that the people of Mélle spoke the Sónghay
language.]

[Footnote 15: See above, Vol. I. Ch. XV.]

[Footnote 16: There is evidently some relation between the Háusa, the
Berber, and the Coptic languages, not in the general vocabularies, but
chiefly in the demonstratives, such as “me,” “hakka,” and the
prepositions, such as “ná,” “dá,” “gá,” “dága,” “garé.” See the
excellent analysis of the Berber language by Newman, in Zeitschrift für
Kunde des Morgenlandes, vol. vii. a. 1845, pp. 268, 277, 278; (on the
feminine forms “ita,” “ta,”) pp. 282, 291, 296. Many more specimens,
however, may now be added.]

[Footnote 17: It is also a very remarkable fact, that Dáura claims the
glory of having had an apostle of its own, Mohammed ʿAli el Baghdádi;
and with this fact the circumstance, that the holy place which I noticed
on my tour from Tin-téllust to Ágades is called by some “msíd Sídi
Baghdádi,” may probably be connected. Whether Dáura be identical with El
Bekri’s Daur, or Daw, is a question of some importance, since, if it
really be so, it would appear to have been a considerable place at a
very early period; but I prefer not to enter here upon the slippery
ground of comparative geography.]

[Footnote 18: Vol. I. p. 386.]

[Footnote 19: In Timbúktu I was enabled to peruse a long letter from
Maghíli to Is-hák about points of religion. This is the only work of
Maghíli, which I was able to discover in Negroland. There were two
Sónghay kings of the name of Is-hák—the first, who ruled from A.H.
946-956, and the second, who was the last king of the dynasty, when
Gógho or Gógó was conquered by the Basha Jodár the 17th Jumad e’ tháni,
999; but there is no doubt that the first is meant. What I have said
about the grandson of Maghíli’s dispute with Is-hák is the common
tradition in Negroland, and, I think, deserves more confidence than what
M. Cherbonneau has made out in Constantine. See Journal Asiatique, 1855.
He says, “Après cet horrible massacre, El Mʿrili quitta Touat pour
s’enfoncer dans le cœur du Soudan. Il parcourut successivement Tekra (?
Tirka), Kachène et Kanou. Dans les deux premières villes il enseigna
publiquement la science du Koran; dans l’autre il fit un cours de
jurisprudence. De là il passa à Karou (ou Tchiarou, suivant la
prononciation locale), et fut invité par el Hadj Mohammed, qui en était
le gouverneur, à rédiger une note sur différentes questions de droit. Il
était depuis peu dans cette ville, lorsqu’on vint lui apprendre que son
fils avait été assassiné par les juifs de Touat. Il repartit et mourut
presque au moment de son arrivée.”]

[Footnote 20: “Hábe,” plural of the singular “Kádo” is a general term
now applied by the Fúlbe to the conquered race; but in this instance the
application is different. It is not improbable that the conquerors
extended the meaning of this term, which originally applied only to one
dynasty, to the whole conquered nation.]

[Footnote 21: This name, in the corrupted form “Kilinghiwa,” Mr. Cooley
has connected with the Berbers, in his excellent little work on the
Negroland of the Arabs.]

[Footnote 22: For the names of the quarters of the town, which are not
destitute of interest, see Appendix I.]

[Footnote 23: It was most probably a king of Kátsena, whom Makrízi
entitled king of Áfunú. (Hamaker, Spec. Cat. p. 206.), remarking the
great jealousy with which he watched his wives, although the name Mastúd
which he gives to him, does not occur in the lists of the kings of
Kátsena which have come to my knowledge, and does not even seem to be a
true native name. The power of the prince of Kátsena towards the end of
the last century (Lucas, Horneman) seems to have been rather transient,
being based on the then weakness of Bórnu.]

[Footnote 24: Among the places of which a list is subjoined, certainly
not less than fifty have about 4000 inhabitants, while about 100,000
people are distributed amongst the rest and those smaller hamlets which
have not been named.]

[Footnote 25: For the names of the chief places in the province, see
Appendix II.]




                               CHAP. XXV.

  RESIDENCE IN KANÓ. — VIEW OF ITS INTERIOR. — ITS HISTORY AND PRESENT
                           STATE. — COMMERCE.


Kanó for us was a station of importance not only from a scientific but
also from an economical point of view. Instead of being provided with
ready cash, we had received in Múrzuk, on account of the British
government, merchandise which, we had been assured, would not only be
safer than money, but would also prove more advantageous for us. In
consequence of the heavy extortions to which we were subjected on the
road to Aïr, and of our long delay in that country, we had been deprived
of the small articles which we carried for barter, so that we were
entirely thrown upon the merchandise which we had forwarded in advance
from Tintéggana; and I for my part, on my arrival in Kanó, had to
liquidate a debt of not less than 112,300 kurdí: viz. 55,000 for the
carriage of this very merchandise from Tintéggana to Kanó; 8300 as my
share of the presents or passage-money given on the road; 18,000 to
Gajére, as hire for the mare and bullock; and 31,000 to a man of the
name of Háj el Dáwaki, on account of Abú-Bakr el Wákhshi, for the
articles bought from him in Kátsena, in order to satisfy the governor of
that place. Besides, I was aware that I had to make a considerable
present to the governor of Kanó; and I was most desirous to discharge
Mohammed e’ Túnsi, whom I had discovered to be utterly useless in these
countries, and who, besides his insupportable insolence, might bring me
into trouble by his inconsiderate and frivolous conduct.

These were material calls upon my encumbered property. On my mind, too,
there were claims of a not less serious character; for, from my very
outset from Europe, I had steadily fixed my eyes upon that Eastern
branch of the Kwára, or so called Niger, which Laird, Allen, and
Oldfield had navigated for the distance of some eighty miles, and which
the former (although he himself did not penetrate further than Fánda)
had, with reasons decisive in my eyes, and which could not be overthrown
in my opinion by Captain William Allen’s ingenious but fanciful
hypothesis, concluded to have no communication whatever with Lake Tsád,
but to proceed from another and very different quarter.[26]

I had therefore cherished the hope, that I should be capable of
penetrating from Kanó in the direction of ʿAdamáwa, a country wherein I
was sure that the question respecting the course of the river would be
decided; but obviously such an undertaking could not be engaged in
without pecuniary means, and all therefore depended on my success in
selling advantageously the merchandise with which I was provided.

For all these reasons, nothing could be more disagreeable and
disheartening to me, though I was not quite unprepared for it, than the
information which I received the very evening of my arrival in Kanó,
that the price of merchandise such as I had was very low. In the next
place, I soon found that Báwu, Mr. Gagliuffi’s agent, whom in compliance
with his recommendation we had made also our commissioner, was not to be
implicitly relied on. He was the second son of Háj Hát Sáleh, the man so
well known from the narrative of Captain Clapperton, towards whom he
seems to have behaved with honesty and fairness, and by this means
perhaps he had recommended himself to Mr. Gagliuffi; but Báwu was not
the right man to be entrusted with discretionary power over the property
of a foreign merchant residing at a great distance, and belonging even
to another religion, or to be the commissioner for European travellers.
Young and ambitious as he was, he had no other object but to insinuate
himself into the good graces of the governor at the expense of those who
had been foolish enough to trust themselves into his hands. Besides, he
had upon his hand a host of younger brothers, who all wanted to “eat.”
Though Háj Hát Sáleh seems to have been a respectable man, he must have
paid very little attention to the education of his children.

It will scarcely be believed that this man, although he had two camel-
loads of goods of mine in his hands, yet left me without a single shell,
“ko urí gudá,” for a whole fortnight, so that I was glad to borrow two
thousand kurdí—less than an Austrian dollar, from Mohammed e’ Sfáksi, in
order to defray the most necessary expenses of my household.

Besides, this agent urged the absolute necessity of making a
considerable present not only to the governor, which I was quite
prepared to do, but another of nearly the same value to the ghaladíma or
first minister, who happened to be the governor’s brother, and enjoyed
quite as much authority and influence. The consequence was that I was
obliged to give away the few articles of value in my possession merely
for being tolerated and protected. The second day after my arrival, the
governor received a message from Mr. Richardson, forwarded from Zínder,
intimating that, after he should have received new supplies from the
coast, he would not fail to come to Kanó; whereupon he sent me word that
I had done very wrong to enter his town without giving him previous
information, whereas my countryman had already forwarded a notice that
at some future period he was likely to pay him a visit. Besides
concluding from the fact that I was not mentioned at all in that letter
that I was travelling on my own account, he made also greater
pretensions with regard to a present.

Being lodged in dark, uncomfortable, and cheerless quarters, which I was
forbidden to leave before the governor had seen me, destitute of a
single farthing in cash, while I was daily called upon and pestered by
my numerous creditors, and laughed at on account of my poverty by an
insolent servant, my readers may fancy that my situation in the great
far-famed entrepôt of Central Africa, the name of which had excited my
imagination for so long a time, was far from agreeable. Partly from
anxiety, partly from want of exercise, in the course of a few days I had
a very severe attack of fever, which reduced me to a state of great
weakness. Fortunately, however, I mustered sufficient strength to avail
myself of a summons which called me at length into the presence of the
governor, on the 18th of February; and by sacrificing what few things
remained to me, I paved the road for my further proceedings, while the
degree of exertion which was necessary to undergo the fatigue of the
visit carried me over my weakness, and restored me gradually to health.
The distances in Kanó, though less than those of London, are very great;
and the ceremonies to be gone through are scarcely less tedious than
those at any European court.

Clothing myself as warmly as possible in my Tunisian dress, and wearing
over it a white tobe and a white bernús, I mounted my poor black nag,
and followed my three mediators and advocates. These were Báwu, Elaíji
and Sídi ʿAli. Elaíji had arrived three days after me from his estate,
and had continued to show me the same disinterested friendship which I
had experienced from him before. Sídi ʿAli was the son of Mohammed, the
former sultan of Fezzán, and last of the Welád Mohammed, who was killed
by Mukni, the father of Yusuf, Mr. Richardson’s interpreter.

This man, whom it would have been far better for us to have employed as
our agent from the beginning, had testified his interest in my welfare
by sending me a fat ram as a present, and now accompanied me most
kindly, in order to exert his influence in my behalf with the governor.
On my second visit to Kanó on my return from Timbúktu, in the latter
part of 1854, when I was still more destitute than in 1851, I placed
myself directly under his protection, and made him my agent at the
moment when the state of my affairs rendered considerable credit
desirable.

It was a very fine morning; and the whole scenery of the town in its
great variety of clay houses, huts, sheds, green open places affording
pasture for oxen, horses, camels, donkeys, and goats, in motley
confusion, deep hollows containing ponds overgrown with the water-plant
the _Pistia stratiotes_, or pits freshly dug up in order to form the
material for some new buildings, various and most beautiful specimens of
the vegetable kingdom, particularly the fine symmetric gónda or papaya,
the slender date-palm, the spreading alléluba, and the majestic rími or
silk cotton-tree (_Bombax_)—the people in all varieties of costume, from
the naked slave up to the most gaudily dressed Arab,—all formed a most
animated and exciting scene. As far as the market-place I had already
proceeded on foot; but Báwu, as soon as he saw me, had hurried me back
to my lodgings, as having not yet been formally received by the
governor. But no one on foot can get a correct idea of an African town,
confined as he is on every side by the fences and walls, while on
horseback he obtains an insight into all the courtyards, becomes an eye-
witness of scenes of private life, and often with one glance surveys a
whole town.

Passing through the market-place, which had only begun to collect its
crowds, and crossing the narrow neck of land which divides the
characteristic pool “Jákara,” we entered the quarters of the ruling
race, the Fúlbe or Féllani, where conical huts of thatchwork, and the
gónda-tree, are prevalent, and where most beautiful and lively pictures
of nature meet the eye on all sides. Thus we proceeded, first to the
house of the gadó (the Lord of the Treasury), who had already called
several times at my house, and acted as the mediator between me and the
governor.

His house was a most interesting specimen of the domestic arrangements
of the Fúlbe, who, however civilized they may have become, do not disown
their original character as “berroróji,” or nomadic cattle-breeders. His
courtyard, though in the middle of the town, looked like a farm-yard,
and could not be conscientiously commended for its cleanliness. Having
with difficulty found a small spot to sit down upon without much danger
of soiling our clothes, we had to wait patiently till his Excellency had
examined and approved of the presents. Having manifested his
satisfaction with them by appropriating to himself a very handsome large
gilt cup, which with great risk I had carried safely through the desert,
he accompanied us on horseback to the “fáda,” “lamórde,” or palace,
which forms a real labyrinth of courtyards, provided with spacious round
huts of audience, built of clay, with a door on each side, and connected
together by narrow intricate passages. Hundreds of lazy, arrogant
courtiers, freemen and slaves, were lounging and idling here, killing
time with trivial and saucy jokes.

We were first conducted to the audience-hall of the ghaladíma, who,
while living in a separate palace, visits the “fáda” almost every day,
in order to act in his important and influential office as vizier; for
he is far more intelligent, and also somewhat more energetic, than his
lazy and indolent brother ʿOthmán[27], who allows this excessively
wealthy and most beautiful province, “the garden of Central Africa,” to
be ransacked with impunity by the predatory incursions of the serkí
Ibrám of Zínder, and other petty chiefs. Both are sons of Dábo and
Shékara—the latter one of the celebrated ladies of Háusa, a native of
Dáura, who is still living, and has three other children, viz. a son
(Makhmúd) and two daughters, one of them named Fátima Záhar, and the
other Sáretu. The governor was then eight and thirty, the ghaladíma
seven and thirty years of age. They were both stout and handsome men,
the governor rather too stout and clumsy. Their apartments were so
excessively dark that, coming from a sunny place, it was some time
before I could distinguish anybody. The governor’s hall was very
handsome, and even stately for this country, and was the more imposing
as the rafters supporting the very elevated ceiling were concealed, two
lofty arches of clay, very neatly polished and ornamented, appearing to
support the whole. At the bottom of the apartment were two spacious and
highly decorated niches, in one of which the governor was reposing on a
“gadó,” spread with a carpet. His dress was not that of a simple Púllo,
but consisted of all the mixed finery of Háusa and Barbary; he allowed
his face to be seen, the white shawl hanging down far below his mouth
over his breast.

In both audiences (as well that with the “ghaladíma” as with the
governor) old Elaíji was the speaker, beginning his speech with a
_captatio benevolentiæ_, founded on the heavy and numerous losses
sustained on the road by me and my companions. Altogether he performed
his office very well, with the exception that he dwelt longer than was
necessary on Overweg’s journey to Marádi, which certainly could not be a
very agreeable topic to a Ba-Féllanchi. Sídi ʿAli also displayed his
eloquence in a very fair way. The ghaladíma made some intelligent
observations, while the governor only observed that, though I had
suffered so severely from extortion, yet I seemed to have still ample
presents for him. Nor was he far wrong; for the black “kabá” (a sort of
bernús, with silk and gold lace, which I gave him) was a very handsome
garment, and here worth sixty thousand kurdí: besides, he got a red cap,
a white shawl with red border, a piece of white muslin, rose oil, one
pound of cloves, and another of jáwi or benzoin, razor, scissors, an
English clasp-knife, and a large mirror of German silver. The ghaladíma
got the same presents, except that, instead of the kabá, I gave him a
piece of French striped silk worth fifty thousand kurdí.

However, our audience did not go off so fast as I relate it; for, after
being dismissed by the ghaladíma, we were obliged to wait full two hours
before we could see the governor; yet although we returned to our
quarters during the very hottest hour of the day, I felt much better,
and in the evening was able to finish a whole chicken, and to enjoy a
cup of Cyprian wine, for which I felt very grateful to Mr. and Mrs.
Crowe, who had supplied me with this cheering luxury.

Having now at length made my peace with the governor, and seeing that
exercise of body and recreation of mind were the best medicines I could
resort to, I mounted on horseback the next day again, and, guided by a
lad well acquainted with the topography of the town, rode for several
hours round all the inhabited quarters, enjoying at my leisure, from the
saddle, the manifold scenes of public and private life, of comfort and
happiness, of luxury and misery, of activity and laziness, of industry
and indolence, which were exhibited in the streets, the market-places,
and in the interior of the courtyards. It was the most animated picture
of a little world in itself, so different in external form from all that
is seen in European towns, yet so similar in its internal principles.

[Illustration:

1. My own quarters in Dalá. During my second stay in Kanó, I also
resided in Dalá, at a short distance from my old quarters.

2. Great market-place.

3. Small market-place.

4. Palace of Governor.

5. Palace of Ghaladíma.

6. Kofa Mazúger.

7. Kofa-n-ʿAdama.

8. Kofa-n-Gúdan.

9. Kofa-n-Kansákkali.

10. Kofa-n-Limún, or Káboga.

11. Kofa-n-Dakanye, or Dukánie.

12. Kofa-n-Dakaina.

13. Kofa-n-Naïsa.

14. Kofa-n-Kúra.

15. Kofa-n-Nasaráwa.

16. Kofa-n-Máta.

17. Kofa-n-Wambay.

18. Kofa-n-Magardi.

19. Kofa-n-Rúa (at present shut.)

20. Mount Dalá.

21. Mount Kógo-n-dútsi.]

Here a row of shops filled with articles of native and foreign produce,
with buyers and sellers in every variety of figure, complexion, and
dress, yet all intent upon their little gain, endeavouring to cheat each
other; there a large shed, like a hurdle, full of half-naked, half-
starved slaves torn from their native homes, from their wives or
husbands, from their children or parents, arranged in rows like cattle,
and staring desperately upon the buyers, anxiously watching into whose
hands it should be their destiny to fall. In another part were to be
seen all the necessaries of life; the wealthy buying the most palatable
things for his table; the poor stopping and looking greedily upon a
handful of grain: here a rich governor dressed in silk and gaudy
clothes, mounted upon a spirited and richly caparisoned horse, and
followed by a host of idle, insolent slaves; there a poor blind man
groping his way through the multitude, and fearing at every step to be
trodden down; here a yard neatly fenced with mats of reed, and provided
with all the comforts which the country affords—a clean, snug-looking
cottage, the clay walls nicely polished, a shutter of reeds placed
against the low, well-rounded door, and forbidding intrusion on the
privacy of life, a cool shed for the daily household work,—a fine
spreading alléluba-tree, affording a pleasant shade during the hottest
hours of the day, or a beautiful gónda or papaya unfolding its large
feather-like leaves above a slender, smooth, and undivided stem, or the
tall date-tree, waving over the whole scene; the matron in a clean black
cotton gown wound round her waist, her hair neatly dressed in “chókoli”
or bejáji, busy preparing the meal for her absent husband, or spinning
cotton, and at the same time urging the female slaves to pound the corn;
the children naked and merry, playing about in the sand at the “urgi-n-
dáwaki” or the “da-n-chácha,” or chasing a straggling stubborn goat;
earthenware pots and wooden bowls, all cleanly washed, standing in
order. Further on a dashing Cyprian, homeless, comfortless, and
childless, but affecting merriment or forcing a wanton laugh, gaudily
ornamented with numerous strings of beads round her neck, her hair
fancifully dressed and bound with a diadem, her gown of various colours
loosely fastened under her luxuriant breast, and trailing behind in the
sand; near her a diseased wretch covered with ulcers, or with
elephantiasis.

[Illustration]

Now a busy “máriná,” an open terrace of clay, with a number of dyeing-
pots, and people busily employed in various processes of their
handicraft: here a man stirring the juice, and mixing with the indigo
some colouring wood in order to give it the desired tint; there another,
drawing a shirt from the dye-pot, or hanging it up on a rope fastened to
the trees; there two men beating a well-dyed shirt, singing the while,
and keeping good time; further on, a blacksmith busy with his rude tools
in making a dagger which will surprise, by the sharpness of its blade,
those who feel disposed to laugh at the workman’s instruments, a
formidable barbed spear, or the more estimable and useful instruments of
husbandry; in another place, men and women making use of an ill-
frequented thoroughfare, as a “kaudi tseggenábe,” to hang up, along the
fences, their cotton thread for weaving; close by, a group of indolent
loiterers lying in the sun and idling away their hours.

Here a caravan from Gónja arriving with the desired kola-nut, chewed by
all who have “ten kurdí” to spare from their necessary wants, or a
caravan laden with natron, starting for Núpe, or a troop of Ásbenáwa
going off with their salt for the neighbouring towns, or some Arabs
leading their camels, heavily laden with the luxuries of the north and
east (the “káya-n-ghábbes”) to the quarter of the Ghadamsíye; there, a
troop of gaudy, warlike-looking horsemen galloping towards the palace of
the governor to bring him the news of a new inroad of Serkí Ibrám.
Everywhere human life in its varied forms, the most cheerful and the
most gloomy, seemed closely mixed together; every variety of national
form and complexion—the olive-coloured Arab, the dark Kanúri, with his
wide nostrils, the small-featured, light, and slender Ba-Féllanchi, the
broad-faced Ba-Wángara (Mandingo), the stout, large-boned, and
masculine-looking Núpe female, the well-proportioned and comely Ba-
Háushe woman.

Delighted with my trip, and deeply impressed by the many curious and
interesting scenes which had presented themselves to my eyes, I returned
by way of the “úngwa-n-makáfi,” or “belád el amiyán” (the village of the
blind), to my quarters, the gloominess and cheerlessness of which made
the more painful impression upon me from its contrast with the brightly
animated picture which I had just before enjoyed.

The next day I made another long ride through the town; and being
tolerably well acquainted with the topography of the place and its
different quarters, I enjoyed still more the charming view obtained from
the top of the Dalá, and of which the accompanying sketch is but a
feeble representation.[28]

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

KANÓ FROM MOUNT DALÁ.

Feby. 10th. 1851.]

I had just descended from the eminence beneath which spread this
glorious panorama, when I heard a well-known voice calling me by my
name; it was ʿAbdalla the Tawáti, my friend and teacher in Ágades, who
after residing some time in Tasáwa, had come to try his fortune in this
larger sphere of action. I had besides him some other acquaintances, who
gave me much interesting information, particularly a young Ba-Háushe lad
of the name of Ibrahíma, who gave me the first tolerably correct idea of
the road to Yóla, the capital of Adamáwa, although he was puzzled about
the direction of the Great River, which he had crossed, supposing that
it flowed eastward instead of westward. I derived also a great deal of
information from a less agreeable man named Mohammed, with the surname
“el Merábet” (reclaimed), rather antithetically, as “lucus a non
lucendo,” for he was the most profligate drunkard imaginable, and
eventually remained indebted to me for several thousand cowries.

I was much worried during my stay in Kanó by a son of the governor of
Zária, who, suffering dreadfully from stricture or some other
obstruction, had come expressly to Kanó in the hope of being relieved by
me; and it was impossible for me to convince him that I had neither the
knowledge nor the instruments necessary for effecting the cure of his
disease. It would, no doubt, have been of great service if I had been
able to cure him, as he was the son of one of the most powerful princes
of Negroland; but as it was, I could only afford him a little temporary
relief. My intercourse with this man was indeed most painful to me, as I
felt conscious of entire inability to help him, while he conjured me by
all that was dear to me not to give him up and abandon him. He died
shortly afterwards. More agreeable to me was a visit from the eldest son
of the governor of Kanó, who, accompanied by two horsemen, came to call
upon me one day, and not finding me at home, traced me whither I had
gone, and having met me, followed silently till I had re-entered my
quarters. He was a handsome, modest, and intelligent youth of about
eighteen years of age, and was delighted with the performance of my
musical-box. I gave him an English clasp-knife, and we parted the best
of friends, greatly pleased with each other.

I had considerable difficulty in arranging my pecuniary affairs, and
felt really ashamed at being unable to pay my debt to the Háj el Dáwaki
till after El Wákhshi himself had arrived from Kátsena. After having
sold, with difficulty, all that I possessed, having suffered a very
heavy loss by Báwu’s dishonesty, paid my debts, and arranged my business
with Mohammed el Túnsi, who, suffering under a very severe attack of
fever, wanted most eagerly to return home, I should scarcely have been
able to make the necessary preparations for my journey to Bórnu if the
governor had not assisted me a little. He had hitherto behaved very
shabbily towards me, not a single dish, not a sheep or other token of
his hospitality having been sent me during my stay in the town. I was
therefore most agreeably surprised when, on the morning of the 2nd of
March, old Elaíji came and announced to me that, in consequence of his
urgent remonstrances, the governor had sent me a present of sixty
thousand kurdí. He told me, with a sort of pride, that he had severely
reprimanded him, assuring him that he was the only prince who had not
honoured me. I should have been better pleased if the governor had sent
me a pair of camels or a horse; but I was thankful for this unexpected
supply; and giving six thousand to the officer who had brought the
money, and as much to Elaíji, and dividing eight thousand between Báwu
and Sídi ʿAli, I kept forty thousand for myself.

With this present I was fortunately enabled to buy two camels instead of
sumpter oxen, which give great trouble on the road during the dry
season, especially if not properly attended to, and prepared everything
for my journey; but the people in these countries are all cowards, and
as I was to go alone without a caravan, I was unable to find a good
servant. Thus I had only my faithful Tébu lad Mohammed whom I could rely
upon, having besides him none but a debauched young Fezzáni, Makhmúd,
who had long lived in this town, and a youth named ʿAbd-Alla.
Nevertheless I felt not a moment’s hesitation, but, on the contrary,
impatiently awaited the moment when I should leave my dingy and
melancholy quarters, full of mice and vermin.

I had hoped to get off on the 6th; but nothing was heard from the
governor, and it would have been imprudent to start without his
permission. With envious feelings I witnessed the departure of the
natron-caravan for Núpe or Nýffi, consisting of from two to three
hundred asses. With it went Mohammed Ánnur, a very intelligent man, whom
I had endeavoured by all possible means to hire as a servant, but could
not muster shells enough. However, the exploration of all those more
distant regions I was obliged in my present circumstances to give up,
and to concentrate my whole energies on the effort to reach Kúkawa,
where I had concerted with Mr. Richardson to arrive in the beginning of
April. I had had the satisfaction of sending off a long report and
several letters to Europe on the 1st of March (when the Ghadámsíye
merchants dispatched a courier to their native town), and felt therefore
much easier with regard to my communication with Europe. My delay also
had given me the great advantage of making the acquaintance of a man
named Mohammed el ʿAnáya, from the Dʿara el Takhtaníye, to the south of
Morocco, who first gave me some general information about the route from
Timbúktu to Sókoto, which in the sequel was to become a new field for my
researches and adventures.

I became so seriously ill on the 8th, that I looked forward with
apprehension to my departure, which was fixed for the following day. But
before leaving this important place, I will make a few general
observations with regard to its history and its present state.

The town of Kanó, considered as the capital of a province, must be of
somewhat older date than Kátsena, if we are to rely on Leo’s accuracy,
though from other more reliable sources (which I shall bring to light in
the chapter on the history of Bórnu) it is evident that even in the
second half of the 16th century there could have been here only the
fortress of Dalá, which, at that period, withstood the attacks of the
Bórnu king. I think we are justified in supposing that, in this respect,
Leo (when, after an interval of many years, he wrote the account of the
countries of Negroland which he had visited) confounded Kanó with
Kátsena. The strength of the Kanáwa, that is to say, the inhabitants of
the province of Kanó, at the time of the Bórnu king Edrís Alawóma, is
quite apparent from the report of his imám; but from that time forth the
country seems to have been tributary to Bórnu; and the population of the
town of Kanó is said, with good reason, to have consisted from the
beginning mostly of Kanúri or Bórnu elements. However, the established
allegiance or subjection of this province to Bórnu was evidently rather
precarious, and could be maintained only with a strong hand; for there
was a powerful neighbour, the king of Korórofa or Júku, ready to avail
himself of every opportunity of extending his own power and dominion
over that territory. We know also that one king of that country, whose
name, however, I could not obtain, on the entry of a new governor into
office in Kanó, made an expedition into that country, and installed his
own representative in the place of that of Bórnu, and though the eastern
provinces of Korórofa itself (I mean the district inhabited by the Koána
or Kwána) became afterwards tributary to Bórnu, yet the main province
(or Júku Proper) with the capital Wukári, seems to have always remained
strong and independent, till now, at length, it seems destined to be
gradually swallowed up by the Fúlbe, if the English do not interfere.
But to return to our subject. As long as Kátsena continued independent
and flourishing, the town of Kanó appears never to have been an
important commercial place; and it was not till after Kátsena had been
occupied by the Fúlbe, and, owing to its exposed position on the
northern frontier of Háusa, had become a very unsafe central point for
commercial transactions, that Kanó became the great commercial entrepôt
of Central Negroland. Before this time, that is to say, before the year
1807, I have strong reason to suppose that scarcely any great Arab
merchant ever visited Kanó, a place which nevertheless continues till
this very day to be identified with Ghána or Ghánata, a state or town
expressly stated by Arab writers of the 11th century to have been the
rendezvous for Arab merchants from the very first rise of commercial
connections with Negroland. And all regard to historical or geographical
facts is put aside merely from an absurd identification of two entirely
distinct names such as Kanó and Ghána or Ghánata.

As to the period when the Kanáwa in general became Mohammedans, we may
fairly assume it to have been several years later than the time when
Máji, the prince of Kátsena, embraced Islám, or about the 17th century,
though it is evident that the larger portion of the population all over
Háusa, especially that of the country towns and villages, remained
addicted to paganism till the fanatic zeal of their conquerors the Fúlbe
forced them to profess Islám, at least publicly. Nevertheless even at
the present day there is a great deal of paganism cherished, and rites
really pagan performed, in the province of Kanó as well as in that of
Kátsena,—a subject on which I shall say something more on another
occasion.

With regard to the growth of the town, we have express testimony that
Dalá was the most ancient quarter. The steep rocky hill, about 120 feet
high, naturally afforded a secure retreat to the ancient inhabitants in
case of sudden attack; but it is most probable that there was another or
several separate villages within the wide expanse now encompassed by the
wall, which rather exceeds than falls short of fifteen English miles,
and it seems inconceivable why the other hill, “Kógo-n-dútsi” (which is
inclosed within the circumference of the walls) though it is not quite
so well fortified by nature, should not have afforded a strong site for
another hamlet. We have, indeed, no means of describing the way in which
the town gradually increased to its present size; this much, however, is
evident, that the inhabited quarters never filled up the immense space
comprised within the walls, though it is curious to observe that there
are evident traces of a more ancient wall on the south side, which, as
will be seen from the plan, did not describe so wide a circumference,
particularly towards the south-west, where the great projecting angle
seems to have been added in later times, for merely strategical
purposes. The reason why the fortifications were carried to so much
greater extent than the population of the town rendered necessary, was
evidently to make the place capable of sustaining a long siege
(sufficient ground being inclosed within the walls to produce the
necessary supply of corn for the inhabitants), and also to receive the
population of the open and unprotected villages in the neighbourhood.
The inhabited quarter occupies at present only the south-eastern part of
the town between Mount Dalá and the wall, which on this side is closely
approached by the dwellings.

On the northern margin of the Jákara is the market-place, forming a
large quadrangle, mostly consisting of sheds built in regular rows like
streets; but the westernmost part of it forms the slaughtering-place,
where numbers of cattle are daily butchered, causing an immense quantity
of offal and filth to accumulate, for which there is no other outlet
than the all-swallowing Jákara. It is the accumulation of this filth in
the most frequented quarters of the town which makes it so unhealthy. On
the north-east side of the sheds is the camel-market, where also pack-
oxen are sold. The shed where the slaves are sold is at the north-west
corner; and thence, along the principal street, which traverses the
market, is the station of the people who sell firewood. The market is
generally immensely crowded during the heat of the day, and offers a
most interesting scene.

The wall, just as it has been described by Captain Clapperton[29], is
still kept in the best repair, and is an imposing piece of workmanship
in this quarter of the world. This wall, with its gates, I have not been
able to lay down with much exactness; but, from my observations on my
later visit in 1854, being aware of the great inaccuracy of the little
sketch of the town given by Clapperton, who himself pretends only to
give an eye-sketch, I thought it worth while, with regard to a place
like Kanó (which certainly will at some future period become important
even for the commercial world of Europe), to survey and sketch it more
minutely; and I hope my plan, together with the view taken from Mount
Dalá of the southern and really-inhabited quarter of the town, will give
a tolerably correct idea of its character.

The market-place is necessarily much less frequented during the rainy
season, when most of the people are busy with the labours of the field.
A great part of the market-place during that time is even inundated by
the waters of the pond Jákara.

I now proceed to enumerate the quarters, the names of which are not
without their interest. I must first observe, that the quarters to the
north of the great and characteristic pond Jákara, which intersects the
town from east to west, are chiefly inhabited by Háusa people, or, as
they are called by their conquerors, “Hábe,” from the singular “Kádo,”
while the southern quarters are chiefly, but not at all exclusively,
inhabited by the Fúlbe (_sing._ Púllo), called Féllani (_sing._
Baféllanchi), by the conquered race.

Beginning with Dalá, the oldest quarter of the town, and which in
commercial respects is the most important one, as it is the residence of
almost all the wealthy Arab and Berber (principally Ghadámsíye)
merchants, I shall first proceed eastwards, then return by south to
west, and so on. East-south-east, the quarter called Déndalin (the
esplanade) borders on Dalá, then Kutumbáwa, Gérke, Mádabó, Ya-n-tándu,
Adakáwa, Kóki, Zéta, Límanchí (or the quarter of the people of Tóto, a
considerable town not far from Fánda); south from the latter, Yandówea,
and thence, returning westward, Jibdji-n-Yél-labu, another Límanchí
(with a large mosque), Masu-kiyáni (the quarter near the “kaswa” or
market-place), Túddu-n-mákera (the quarter of the blacksmiths) on the
west side of the market, Yámroché, “Marárraba bókoy” (the seven
crossways), “Báki-n-rúa” (the waterside—that is, the quay along the
Jákara), not very neat nor fragrant, and in this respect deserving to be
compared with the quays of the Thames, which may be called, just with
the same reason, the great sink of London, as the Jákara is that of
Kanó, the difference being only that the Thames is a running stream,
while the Jákara is stagnant), “Runfáwa” (the quarter of the sheds),
Yéllwá. Here, turning again eastwards, we come first to the quarter
Ríma-n-jirájiré, then enter Mággoga, then Maggógi, Ungwa-n-kári,
Déndali-n-Wáre, Límanchí (a third quarter of this name), Dukkuráwa,
Rúffogí, Dérma. All these are quarters of the Hábe, where no Púllo, as
far as I am aware, would deign to live. Beyond the Jákara we now come to
the quarters of the ruling race, proceeding from west to east.

Yaálewa, Mármara, Ágadesáwa (a quarter belonging originally to the
natives of Ágades), Yóla—the princely quarter of the town, and called on
this account “mádaki-n-Kanó.” It is interesting also as having given its
name to the new capital of Adamáwa, (the natives of Negroland being not
less anxious than Europeans to familiarize the new regions which they
colonize by names taken from their ancient homes); el Kántara (so called
from a rough kind of bridge, or kadárko, thrown over one of those
numerous pools which intersect the town), Wuaitákka, Go-shérifé-dodó (a
quarter, the name of which is taken from the ancient pagan worship of
the “dodó),” Tókobá, Dukkáwa, Zaghidámse, Sháfushí. Returning from east
to west we have the quarters Shérbalé, Mádaté, Kúrna, Sheshé, “Dirmí (or
dírremi)-kay okú” (called from a tree of the dírremi species, with three
separate crowns), Lelóki-n-lemú, Kóllwá al héndeki, Sóra-n-dínki, Rími-
n-kóro, Tojí, Yárkasá, Mándáwari, Mármara (different from the quarter
mentioned above), Dantúrku, Sabansára, Kudedefáwa, Jingo, Doséyi,
Warúre, Gʿao (an interesting name, identical with that of the capital of
the Sónghay empire), Kurmáwa, Háusáwa, Ungwa Mákama, Ghaladánchi (the
quarter wherein resides the ghaladíma), Shúramchí (the quarter where
lives the eldest son of the governor, whose title chiróma—a Kanúri
name—in the corrupted form of “shúromo” has furnished the name of the
quarter), Ye-serkí, Kurmáwa (not identical with the above), “Kusseráwa”
(the corner), Udeláwa. South from the palace of the governor, Rími-n-
kerá, Káraká, Dugeráwa, Yákase, Naseráwa (most probably destined to be
hereafter the quarter of the Nasára or Christians), and ʿAbdeláwa.

All over the town, clay houses and huts, with thatched conical roofs,
are mixed together; but generally in the southern quarter the latter
prevail. The clay houses, as far as I have seen them in Dalá, where of
course Arab influence predominates, are built in a most uncomfortable
style, with no other purpose than that of obtaining the greatest
possible privacy for domestic life, without any attempt to provide for
the influx of fresh air and light, although I must admit that a few
houses are built in somewhat better taste; but invariably the courtyard
is extremely small, and in this respect the houses of Kanó are very
inferior to those of Ágades and Timbúktu, which are built almost on the
same principle as the dwellings of the ancient Greeks and Romans. I here
give the ground-plan of the house in which I lodged in 1851.

[Illustration:

1. Large public yard common to the two houses, with two huts.

2. Irregular apartment where I was to reside, as it was least wanting in
light and air.

3. Dark room without any current of air, but to which I was obliged to
withdraw when suffering from fever.

4. Storeroom.

5. Inner private yard.

6. Closet.]

Almost all these houses have also a very irregular upper story on a
different level, and very badly aired. Many of the Arabs sleep on their
terraces.

In estimating the population of the town at 30,000, I am certainly not
above the truth. Captain Clapperton estimated it at from 30,000 to
40,000. The population, as might be expected in a place of great
commercial resort, is of a rather mixed nature; but the chief elements
in it are Kanúri or Bórnu people, Háusáwa, Fúlbe or Féllani, and Nyffáwa
or Núpe; a good many Arabs also reside there, who by their commerce and
their handicraft contribute a great deal to the importance of the place.
The influx of foreigners and temporary residents is occasionally very
great, so that the whole number of residents during the most busy time
of the year (that is to say from January to April) may often amount to
60,000. The number of domestic slaves, of course, is very considerable;
but I think it hardly equals, certainly does not exceed, that of the
free men, for, while the wealthy have many slaves, the poorer class,
which is far more numerous, have few or none. It would be very
interesting to arrive at an exact estimate of the numbers of the
conquering nation, in order to see the proportion in which they stand to
the conquered. As for the town itself, their whole number, of every sex
and age, does not, in my opinion, exceed 4000; but with regard to the
whole country I can give no opinion.

The principal commerce of Kanó consists in native produce, namely, the
cotton cloth woven and dyed here or in the neighbouring towns, in the
form of tobes or rígona (_sing._ ríga); túrkedí, or the oblong piece of
dress of dark-blue colour worn by the women; the zénne[30] or plaid, of
various colours; and the ráwani bakí, or black lithám.

The great advantage of Kanó is, that commerce and manufactures go hand
in hand, and that almost every family has its share in them. There is
really something grand in this kind of industry, which spreads to the
north as far as Múrzuk, Ghát, and even Tripoli; to the west, not only to
Timbúktu, but in some degree even as far as the shores of the Atlantic,
the very inhabitants of Arguin dressing in the cloth woven and dyed in
Kanó; to the east, all over Bórnu, although there it comes into contact
with the native industry of the country; and to the south it maintains a
rivalry with the native industry of the Ígbira and Ígbo, while towards
the south-east it invades the whole of ʿAdamáwa, and is only limited by
the nakedness of the pagan _sans-culottes_, who do not wear clothing.

As for the supply sent to Timbúktu, this is a fact entirely overlooked
in Europe, where people speak continually of the fine cotton cloth
produced in that town, while in truth all the apparel of a decent
character in Timbúktu is brought either from Kanó or from Sansándi; and
how urgently this article is there demanded is amply shown by the
immense circuit which the merchandise makes to avoid the great dangers
of the direct road from Kanó to Timbúktu travelled by me, the
merchandise of Kanó being first carried up to Ghát and even Ghadámes,
and thence taking its way to Timbúktu by Tawát.

I make the lowest estimate in rating this export to Timbúktu alone at
three hundred camel-loads annually, worth 60,000,000 kurdí in Kanó—an
amount which entirely remains in the country, and redounds to the
benefit of the whole population, both cotton and indigo being produced
and prepared in the country. In taking a general view of the subject, I
think myself justified in estimating the whole produce of this
manufacture, as far as it is sold abroad, at the very least at about
300,000,000; and how great this national wealth is, will be understood
by my readers when they know that, with from fifty to sixty thousand
kurdí, or from four to five pounds sterling a year, a whole family may
live in that country with ease, including every expense, even that of
their clothing: and we must remember that the province is one of the
most fertile spots on the earth, and is able to produce not only the
supply of corn necessary for its population, but can also export, and
that it possesses, besides, the finest pasture-grounds. In fact, if we
consider that this industry is not carried on here as in Europe, in
immense establishments, degrading man to the meanest condition of life,
but that it gives employment and support to families without compelling
them to sacrifice their domestic habits, we must presume that Kanó ought
to be one of the happiest countries in the world; and so it is as long
as its governor, too often lazy and indolent, is able to defend its
inhabitants from the cupidity of their neighbours, which of course is
constantly stimulated by the very wealth of this country.

Besides the cloth produced and dyed in Kanó and in the neighbouring
villages, there is a considerable commerce carried on here with the
cloth manufactured in Nýffi or Núpe, which, however, extends only to the
first and the third of the articles above mentioned, viz., the “ríga,”
or shirt worn by men, and the “zénne,” or plaid; for the Nyffáwa are
unable to produce either túrkedí or ráwaní—at least for export, while
they seem, with the exception of the wealthier classes, to supply their
own wants themselves. The tobes brought from Nýffi are either large
black ones, or of mixed silk and cotton.

With regard to the former, which are called “gíwa” (the elephant’s
shirt), I am unable to say why the Kanáwa are not capable of
manufacturing them themselves; but it seems that, while they thoroughly
understand how to impart the most beautiful dye to the túrkedí, they are
unable to apply the same to the ríga—I do not know why.

Of the latter kind there are several varieties:—the ríga sáki, with
small squares blue and white, as if speckled, and therefore called by
the Arabs “fílfil” (pepper), and by the Tawárek, who, as I have
mentioned, esteem it more than any other kind, the “Guinea-fowl shirt”
(tekátkat taílelt), as shown in the accompanying woodcut, is very
becoming, and was my ordinary dress from the moment I was rich enough to
purchase it, as a good one fetches as much as from eighteen to twenty
thousand kurdí; then the tob-harír, with stripes of speckled cast like
the taílelt, but intermixed with red; the jellába, red and white, with
embroidery of green silk, and several others. Specimens of all these I
have brought home and delivered to the Foreign Office.[31]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

The chief articles of native industry, besides cloth, which have a wide
market, are principally sandals. The sandals are made with great
neatness, and, like the cloth, are exported to an immense distance; but
being a cheap article (the very best, which are called “táka-sárakí,”
fetching only 200 kurdí), they bear of course no comparison in
importance with the former. I estimate this branch at ten millions. It
is very curious that the shoes made here by Arab shoemakers, of Sudán
leather, and called “bélghʿa,” are exported in great quantities to North
Africa. The “nesísa,” or twisted leather strap, is a celebrated article
of Kanó manufacture, and “jebíras,” richly ornamented, as the
accompanying woodcut shows, are made by Arab workmen.

[Illustration]

The other leather-work I will not mention here, as it does not form a
great article of commerce; but tanned hides (“kulábu”) and red
sheepskins, dyed with a juice extracted from the stalks of the holcus,
are not unimportant, being sent in great quantities even as far as
Tripoli. I value the amount of export at about five millions.[32]

Besides these manufactures, the chief article of African produce in the
Kanó market is the “gúro,” or kola-nut; but while on the one hand it
forms an important article of transit, and brings considerable profit,
on the other large sums are expended by the natives upon this luxury,
which has become to them as necessary as coffee or tea to us. On another
occasion I shall enumerate the different kinds of this nut, and the
seasons when it is collected. The import of this nut into Kanó,
comprising certainly more than five hundred ass-loads every year, the
load of each, if safely brought to the market—for it is a very delicate
article, and very liable to spoil—being sold for about 200,000 kurdí,
will amount to an average of from eighty to one hundred millions. Of
this sum, I think we shall be correct in asserting about half to be paid
for by the natives of the province, while the other half will be profit.

But we must bear in mind that the greater part of the persons employed
in this trade are Kanáwa, and that therefore they and their families
subsist upon this branch of trade.

A very important branch of the native commerce in Kanó is certainly the
slave-trade; but it is extremely difficult to say how many of these
unfortunate creatures are exported, as a greater number are carried away
by small caravans to Bórnu and Núpe than on the direct road to Ghát and
Fezzán. Altogether, I do not think that the number of slaves annually
exported from Kanó exceeds[33] 5,000; but of course a considerable
number are sold into domestic slavery either to the inhabitants of the
province itself, or to those of the adjoining districts. The value of
this trade, of which only a small percentage falls to the profit of the
Kanáwa, besides the tax which is levied in the market, may altogether
amount to from a hundred and fifty to two hundred millions of kurdí per
annum.

Another important branch of the commerce of Kanó is the transit of
natron from Bórnu to Núpe or Nýffi, which here always passes into other
hands, and in so doing leaves a considerable profit in the place. The
merchandise is very cheap; but the quantity is great, and it employs a
great many persons, as I shall have ample occasion to illustrate in the
course of my proceedings. Twenty thousand loads, at the very least,
between pack-oxen, sumpter-horses, and asses, of natron must annually
pass through the market of Kanó; which, at 500 kurdí per load, merely
for passage-money, would give 10,000,000 kurdí.

I here also mention the salt-trade, which is entirely an import one, the
salt being almost all consumed in the province. Of the three thousand
camel-loads of salt which I have above computed as comprising the aïri
with which I reached Kátsena, we may suppose one-third to be sold in the
province of Kanó; and therefore that hereby a value of from fifty to
eighty millions annually is drained from the country. But we must not
forget that the money which is paid for this requisite (and not only for
that consumed in Kanó, but also in other provinces) is entirely laid out
by the sellers in buying the produce of Kanó; viz., cloth and corn.
Here, therefore, is an absolute balance—a real exchange of necessaries
and wants.

As for ivory, at present it does not form a very important branch of the
commerce of Kanó; and I scarcely believe that more than one hundred
kantárs pass through this place. The lowest price of the kantár is in
general thirty dollars, or 75,000 kurdí; but it often rises to forty
dollars, or 100,000 kurdí, and even more, though I have seen it bought
with ready money for twenty-five dollars.

Of European goods the greatest proportion is still imported by the
northern road, while the natural road, by way of the great eastern
branch of the so-called Niger, will and must, in the course of events,
be soon opened.

But I must here speak about a point of very great importance for the
English, both as regards their honour and their commercial activity. The
final opening of the lower course of the Kwára has been one of the most
glorious achievements of English discovery, bought with the lives of so
many enterprising men. But it seems that the English are more apt to
perform a great deed than to follow up its consequences. After they have
opened this noble river to the knowledge of Europe, frightened by the
sacrifice of a few lives, instead of using it themselves for the benefit
of the nations of the interior, they have allowed it to fall into the
hands of the American slave-dealers, who have opened a regular annual
slave-trade with those very regions, while the English seem not to have
even the slightest idea of such a traffic going on. Thus American
produce, brought in large quantities to the market of Núpe, has begun to
inundate Central Africa, to the great damage of the commerce and the
most unqualified scandal of the Arabs, who think that the English, if
they would, could easily prevent it. For this is not a legitimate
commerce; it is nothing but slave-traffic on a large scale, the
Americans taking nothing in return for their merchandise and their
dollars but slaves, besides a small quantity of natron. On this painful
subject I have written repeatedly to H.M.’s consul in Tripoli, and to
H.M.’s government, and I have spoken energetically about it to Lord
Palmerston since my return. I principally regret in this respect the
death of Mr. Richardson, who, in his eloquent language, would have dealt
worthily with this question. But even from his unfinished journals as
they have been published, it is clear that, during his short stay in the
country before he was doomed to succumb, he became well aware of what
was going on.[34]

The principal European goods brought to the market of Kanó are bleached
and unbleached calicoes, and cotton prints from Manchester; French silks
and sugar; red cloth from Saxony and other parts of Europe; beads from
Venice and Trieste; a very coarse kind of silk from Trieste; common
paper with the sign of three moons, looking-glasses, needles, and small
ware, from Nuremberg; sword blades from Solingen; razors from Styria. It
is very remarkable that so little English merchandise is seen in this
great emporium of Negroland, which lies so near to the two branches of
“the Great River” of Western Africa, calico and muslins (or tanjips, as
they are called by the merchants) being almost the only English
articles. Calico certainly is not the thing most wanted in a country
where home-made cloth is produced at so cheap a rate, and of so
excellent a quality; indeed the unbleached calico has a very poor chance
in Kanó, while the bleached calico and the cambric attract the wealthier
people on account of their nobler appearance. In Timbúktu on the
contrary, where the native cloth is dearer, unbleached calico is in
request; and it would be so in an extraordinary degree, if it were dyed
dark blue. It is very interesting to observe that a small proportion of
the calico imported into Kanó is again exported, after having been dyed,
returning even the long way to Ghadámes. I estimate the whole amount of
Manchester goods imported into Kanó at about forty millions; but it may
be somewhat more. The sale of tanjips is very considerable; and the
import of this article into Kanó certainly equals in value that of the
former.

The very coarse silk, or rather refuse, which is dyed in Tripoli, is
imported to a very considerable amount, this forming the principal
merchandise of most of the caravans of the Ghadámsíye merchants, and
about one third of their whole commerce, amounting certainly to not less
than from three to four hundred camel-loads annually, worth in Kanó each
about 200,000 kurdí; this would give a value of about seventy millions
imported. But according to some well-informed people, even as many as
one thousand loads of this article pass annually through Ghadámes; so
that, if we take into consideration that the supply of the northerly
markets (as Tasáwa, Zínder) may well be compensated by what is brought
by way of Múrzuk, the value of the import of this article into Kanó may
be much more. A great deal of this silk, I have no doubt by far the
greatest part, remains in the country, being used for ornamenting the
tobes, sandals, shoes, and other things.

Woollen cloth of the most ordinary quality, chiefly red, but about one
third of the whole amount of green colour, was formerly imported to a
great extent; but it has gone out of fashion, and I think a better
quality, like that with which the market of Timbúktu is supplied by way
of Mogador or Swaira, would succeed. I estimate this branch at present
at only fifteen millions.

Beads, in very great variety[35], form an important article of import;
but the price has become so low of late years that there has been very
little profit, and the supply has been kept back to raise the prices.
The import of this article certainly amounts to more than fifty millions
of kurdí, of which sum the value of twenty may remain in the country.

Of sugar, I think about one hundred camel-loads are imported every year,
each containing eighty small loaves, of two and a half pounds each,
which are sold in general at 1500 kurdí; so that the import of this
article would amount to about twelve millions. It is very remarkable
that in all Central Negroland the large English sugarloaf is scarcely
ever seen, while it is the only one seen in Timbúktu. However, I was
greatly surprised when, on my return from that place in 1854, ʿAlíyu,
the Emír el Mumenín of Sókoto, presented to me an English loaf of sugar;
and I heard that he had received several of them as presents from a
merchant of Tawát. The small loaf has certainly a great advantage in
such a country, where money is scarce; and I found in 1854 that its
weight had even been reduced to two pounds.

Common paper, called on the coast “tre lune,” from the mark of three
moons which it bears, is imported in great quantity, being used for
wrapping up the country cloth; but it is a bulky, heavy article, and in
larger quantities is sold at a very cheap rate. The whole amount of this
import may be about five millions of kurdí.

Needles, with the emblem of the pig[36], and small looking-glasses
called “lemmʿa,” in boxes, form important but very cheap articles, and I
think their amount together will not much exceed the value of eight
millions. Generally, the needles in large quantities are sold for one
“urí” or shell each, but often even cheaper; and I was obliged to sell a
thousand for six hundred kurdí. Also, fine needles for silk-work are in
request, but only in small quantity, while large darning-needles are not
at all wanted here, where the cotton cloth is fine, but are the most
profitable thing in Eastern Negroland, from Bagírmi inclusive to
Abyssinia.

Sword-blades, which are set here, are imported in considerable quantity;
as not only the Kél-owí and the neighbouring Tárki tribes, but also the
Háusáwa, Fúlbe, Nyffáwa, and Kanúri or Bórnu people, are supplied from
this market. Fifty thousand may be the general annual amount of this
article, which produces (the blade being reckoned at one thousand kurdí)
fifty millions. Almost all of them that I saw, not only here, but even
among the Tawárek near Timbúktu, were from Solingen. Only a small
proportion of the import remains in the country; but the setting of the
blades, which are again exported, secures a great profit to the natives.

Very few fire-arms, as far as I became aware, are imported into this
market, although common muskets have begun to be imported by way of
Nýffi at extraordinarily cheap prices by the Americans. Pistols and
blunderbusses are privately sold by the merchants to princes or great
men.

The common razors, made in Styria, with black wooden handles, bad as
they are, are very much liked by the inhabitants, who know how to
sharpen them most beautifully, and strengthen the wretched handle with a
guard of copper. I had a tolerable supply of English razors, and found
that those bought for sixpence at home would sell profitably, but that
nobody would give, for a good razor, though ever so excellent, more than
one thousand kurdí; however, the better sort are very fit for presents
to men of importance, who know well their value. In any case the handles
ought to be strong, and not likely to break. This commodity does
certainly not much exceed two or three millions.

French silks, called “hattáya,” were formerly in great request, but at
present seem to be a little out of vogue; and most of what is imported
here is exported again by second-hand buyers to Yóruba and Gónja. The
amount of this import into the Kanó market, I think, does not exceed
twenty millions.

An important branch of import is formed by articles of Arab dress,
chiefly bernúses, caftans, sedríyas, trowsers, red caps, red sashes,
shawls. It is difficult to state, even approximately, the value of these
articles; but it cannot certainly be much less than fifty millions
altogether. The sort of dress most in request comes from Tunis, but a
good deal also from Egypt; and from the latter country come all the
white shawls with red borders, called “subéta” in Arabic, “aliyáfu” in
Háusa, and very much liked by the negroes as well as by the Tawárek. The
import of this article alone exceeds the value of ten millions. The
common articles of dress, of coarser workmanship, are made in Tripoli.
Red caps of very coarse description are now imported from Leghorn, and
find a sale, but are not liked by the free people.

Frankincense and spices—principally jáwi, benzoin, the resin obtained
from a species of styrax, “símbil” or _Valeriana Celtica_, and
cloves—form a not inconsiderable article of import, perhaps amounting to
fifteen millions. However, I exclude from this sum the value of the
rose-oil which is annually imported in considerable quantity, and, being
a dear article, forms also an important one; but very little of it comes
into the general trade, almost all of it being disposed of privately to
the princes and great men, or given to them in presents. I am inclined
to estimate the value of this article imported at about forty millions.
Tin and many other smaller articles may together be estimated at ten
millions.

In the trade of Kanó there is another very interesting article, which
tends to unite very distant regions of Africa; this is copper—“ja-n-
kárfi.” A good deal of old copper—say fifty loads, together with about
twenty loads of zinc—is imported from Tripoli; but a considerable supply
of this useful and handsome metal is also imported every year by the
Jellába of Nímro in Wadáy, who bring it from the celebrated copper-mine,
“el hófra,” situate to the south of Dar-Fúr, of which I shall have
occasion to speak in the following volume.[37] I estimate the whole
import of this metal at about from fifteen to twenty millions; but it is
to be remarked that, so far from being to the disadvantage of the
Kanáwa, it proves a new material of industry, while only the smaller
part remains in the country.

With regard to the precious metals, a small supply of silver is imported
by the merchants, but rather exceptionally, most of the latter being but
agents or commissioners engaged to effect the sale of the merchandise
forwarded from Tripoli and Fezzán. The silver likewise supplies a branch
of industry, the silversmiths, who are generally identical with the
blacksmiths, being very clever in making rings and anklets. In Kanó
scarcely any tradesman will object to receive a dollar in payment. With
regard to iron, which forms a very considerable branch of industry in
the place, I will only say that it is far inferior to that of Wándala or
Mándara and Bubanjídda, which I shall mention in the course of my
proceedings. Spears, daggers, hoes, and stirrups are the articles most
extensively produced in iron.

As for gold, though a general standard, of the mithkál at four thousand
kurdí, is usually maintained, in Timbúktu its price greatly varies, from
three thousand five hundred up to four thousand five hundred kurdí; but
this unreasonable fluctuation is but nominal, gold being scarcely ever
bought in Timbúktu for ready money, but for túrkedís, when a túrkedí
bought in Kanó for eighteen hundred, or at the utmost two thousand,
fetches there a mithkál. One hundred mithkáls of gold may easily be
bought in Kanó at any time. Even the common currency of the Kanó market,
the “urí” (_pl._ kurdí) or shell (_Cypræa moneta_), 2,500 of which are
equal to the Spanish or Austrian dollar[38], forms an important article
of import and commerce, though I have not been able to ascertain that a
large quantity is ever introduced at a time. Nevertheless that must
sometimes happen, as a great amount of shells has been exported to
Bórnu, where they have been recently introduced as currency; and this
obviously explains why since the year 1848 the demand for these shells
has so greatly increased on the coast.

These merely approximative figures cannot be reduced to the form of a
balance-sheet; but they will give a general idea of the commercial
activity of the place. I will conclude these few remarks by observing
that the market of Kanó is better supplied with articles of food than
any other market in Negroland; but meat as well as corn is dearer here
than in Kúkawa, particularly the latter. Besides the great market-place,
there are several smaller ones dispersed through the town, the most
noted of which are the káswa-n-kurmí, Mandáweli, Hanga, káswa-n-máta,
káswa-n-áyagi, káswa-n-Jírba, káswa-n-Yákase, káswa-n-kófan Wámbay, and
the káswa-n-kófan Náyisa.

The province of Kanó[39], which comprises a very fertile district of
considerable extent, contains, according to my computation, more than
two hundred thousand free people, besides at least an equal number of
slaves; so that the whole population of the province amounts to more
than half a million; though it may greatly exceed this number. The
governor is able to raise an army of seven thousand horse, and more than
twenty thousand men on foot. In the most flourishing state of the
country, the governor of Kanó is said to have been able to bring into
the field as many as ten thousand horse.

The tribute which he levies is very large, considering the state of the
country, amounting altogether to about one hundred millions of kurdí,
besides the presents received from merchants. The most considerable item
of his revenue consists in the “kurdí-n-kása” (what is called in Kanúri
“lárderám”), or the ground-rent. It is said to amount to ninety
millions, and is levied, both here and in the province of Kátsena, not
from the ground under cultivation, but every head of a family has to pay
two thousand five hundred kurdí, or just a Spanish dollar; in the
province of Zégzeg, on the contrary, the kurdí-n-kása is a tax of five
hundred kurdí levied on every fertáña or hoe, and a single hoe will
cultivate a piece of ground capable of producing from one hundred to two
hundred “démmi” or sheaves of grain (sorghum and pennisetum), each of
which contains two kél, while fifty kél are reckoned sufficient for a
man’s sustenance during a whole year. Besides the kurdí-n-kása, the
governor levies an annual tax called “kurdí-n-korófi,” of seven hundred
kurdí[40] on every dyeing-pot or korófi, of which there are more than
two thousand in the town alone; a “fítto” of five hundred kurdí on every
slave sold in the market; an annual tax, “kurdí-n-debíno,” of six
hundred kurdí on every palm-tree, and a small tax called “kurdí-n-ráfi”
on the vegetables sold in the market, such as dánkali or sweet potatoes,
gwáza or yams, rísga, rógo, &c. This latter tax is very singular, as the
meat, or the cattle brought into the town, as far as I know, does not
pay any tax at all. Clapperton was mistaken in stating that all the
date-trees in the town belong to the governor, which is not more true
than that all the sheds in the market belong to him.

The authority of the governor is not absolute, even without considering
the appeal which lies to his liege lord in Sókoto or Wúrno, if the
subjects’ complaints can be made to reach so far; a sort of ministerial
council is formed, to act in conjunction with the governor, which in
important cases he cannot well avoid consulting. At the head of this
council stands the ghaladíma, whose office originated, as we shall see,
in the empire of Bórnu, and who very often exercises, as is the case in
Kanó, the highest influence, surpassing that of the governor himself;
then follows the “serkí-n-dáwakay” (the master of the horse), an
important charge in barbarous countries, where victory depends almost
always on the cavalry; then the “bánda-n-Kanó” (a sort of commander-in-
chief); then the “alkáli” or chief justice, the “chiróma-n-Kanó” (the
eldest son of the governor, or some one assuming this title), who
exercises the chief power in the southern part of the province; the
“serkí-n-báy” (properly, the chief of the slaves), who has the
inspection of the northern districts of the province as far as Kazáure;
then the “gadó” or lord of the treasury, and finally the “serkí-n-sháno”
(the master of the oxen, or rather the quartermaster-general), who has
all the military stores under his care; for the ox, or rather the bull,
is the ordinary beast of burden in Negroland. It is characteristic that,
when the governor is absent paying his homage to his liege lord, it is
not the ghaladíma, but the gadó and the serkí-n-sháno who are his
lieutenants or substitutes.

With regard to the government in general, I think, in this province,
where there is so much lively intercourse, and where publicity is given
very soon to every incident, it is not oppressive, though the behaviour
of the ruling class is certainly haughty, and there is, no doubt, a
great deal of injustice inflicted in small matters. The etiquette of the
court, which is far more strict than in Sókoto, must prevent any poor
man from entering the presence of the governor. The Fúlbe marry the
handsome daughters of the subjugated tribe, but would not condescend to
give their own daughters to the men of that tribe as wives. As far as I
saw, their original type has been well preserved as yet, though, by
obtaining possession of wealth and comfort, their warlike character has
been greatly impaired, and the Féllani-n-Kanó have become notorious for
their cowardice throughout the whole of Negroland.[41]


[Footnote 26: Laird’s and Oldfield’s Narrative, vol. i. p. 233. As this
clear and rational conviction, which the meritorious man who has
laboured so long for that part of Africa entertained, has been entirely
confirmed by my succeeding discovery, I think it well to give to it all
the publicity which it deserves. The two learned geographers of Africa,
Mr. Cooley and MacQueen, concurred entirely in this opinion.]

[Footnote 27: ʿOthmán has since died of cholera, which made its
appearance in Kanó in 1855. I do not know the name of his successor. For
the sake of the country, I entertain the hope that he may be more
energetic than his predecessor.]

[Footnote 28: The very strong wind, which I had always the misfortune to
encounter when ascending Mount Dalá, did not allow me to enter into all
the details of the sketch, which would be requisite to give a true
picture of the variety of the scene; and the glowing, lively tone spread
over the whole has been inadequately caught by the artist. I must also
observe that the southern quarter of the town, which is at too great a
distance from this hill to be discernible, is far more picturesque than
the northern one.]

[Footnote 29: Clapperton and Denham’s Travels, vol. ii. p. 50.]

[Footnote 30: There is a great variety of this article, of which I shall
enumerate a few kinds:—“farí-n-zénne,” the white undyed one; “zenne
déffowa,” of light-blue colour; “fessagída,” with a broad line of silk;
“hammakúku,” with less silk, sold generally for 3000 kurdí; “mailémú,”
sold for 2500; “zelluwámi,” a peculiar zénne with a silk border;
“jumáda,” another similar kind; “da-n-katánga,” once a very favourite
article of female dress, and therefore called “the child of the market”
(of the word katánga, I have spoken on a former occasion), with red and
black silk in small quantity, and a little white; “albássa-n-Kwára” a
very peculiar name, chosen to denote a kind of zénne of three stripes of
mixed colours; “gódo,” white and black and of thick thread; “alkílla,”
white and black chequered; “sáki,” silk and cotton interwoven, and
forming small squares black and white; “kéki,” half túrkedí (that is to
say indigo-coloured), half “sáki,” or silk and cotton interwoven; “kéki
serkí bokoy,” four kinds. Besides, there are ten kinds of zénnwa
entirely of silk, but these are made better in Núpe than in Kanó. One of
these, called “biní da gáni” (follow me and look), a name which is also
given to a conspicuous kind of beads, is distinguished by three
colours—yellow, red, and blue. Then there is a zénne made of atlas,
called “massarchí;” another of coloured Manchester; and the simple one
of Manchester, which is called “béfta.”]

[Footnote 31: Among these specimens is also an undyed and a dyed
specimen of the “ríga tsámia,” which seems to deserve a good deal of
interest, as it consists half of home-made silk, obtained from a
peculiar kind of silkworm, which lives on the tamarind-tree. I also sent
home from Kúkawa, at a former period, a piece of native cloth of the
Kwána, a tribe of the Korórofa.]

[Footnote 32: There are many other branches of manufacture in Kanó which
are too minute to be enumerated here. I will only mention the framing of
the little looking-glasses, called lemmʿa, imported from Tripoli, and
the immense variety of bótta or múrta, small leathern boxes. There is
also a kind of small box made with great neatness from the kernel of the
dúm-fruit.]

[Footnote 33: This trade will now be greatly affected by the abolition
of the slave-trade in Tripoli.]

[Footnote 34: I need only refer to the memorable passage in his Journal,
Vol. ii. p. 203.—“The best of the slaves now go to Niffee, to be there
shipped for America. They are mostly males, and are minutely examined
before departure.” (This latter circumstance agrees exactly with my own
observations.) “From all reports there is _an immense traffic of slaves
that way exchanged against American goods_, which are driving out of the
markets all the merchandise of the North.” But another passage is not
less clear, p. 228. f. “Slaves are sent from Zinder to Niffee. Indeed it
now appears that all this part of Africa is put under contribution to
_supply the South American market with slaves_.”]

[Footnote 35: The names of the different kinds of beads, of which I have
collected thirty-five, bear evident testimony to the imaginative powers
and lively character of the Háusáwa.]

[Footnote 36: Originally these came from Nuremberg, but of late they
have been also produced in Leghorn.]

[Footnote 37: I will here only mention, that the profit on the copper
for the Jellába, if they do not go themselves to the hófra, but buy it
in Dar-Fúr, is as follows:—In Fúr they buy the kantár of copper for one
sedáshi (slave), equal to the value of a kantár of ivory, and sell it in
Kúkawa for 4000 rottls, equal to two kantárs of ivory. In Kanó the price
is about the same.]

[Footnote 38: There is no difference made between these two coins, women
in general even preferring Maria Theresa to the two columns on the
Spanish dollar, which they fancy to represent cannon.]

[Footnote 39: For a list of the principal places of the province see
Appendix, No. II.]

[Footnote 40: Other people have stated to me that the kurdí-n-korófi did
not exceed 500 kurdí.]

[Footnote 41: For some of the chief routes connecting Kanó with the
principal places around, and for an account of Korórofa and Wukári, see
Appendix, No. III.]




                              CHAP. XXVI.

             STARTING FOR KÚKAWA. — THE FRONTIER-DISTRICT.


[Sidenote: Sunday, March 9th.]

The traveller who would leave a place where he has made a long
residence, often finds that his departure involves him in a great deal
of trouble, and is by no means an easy affair. Moreover my situation
when, after much delay, I was about to leave Kanó was peculiarly
embarrassing. There was no caravan; the road was infested by robbers;
and I had only one servant upon whom I could rely, or who was really
attached to me, while I had been so unwell the preceding day as to be
unable to rise from my couch. However, I was full of confidence; and
with the same delight with which a bird springs forth from its cage,
I hastened to escape from these narrow, dirty mud-walls into the
boundless creation.

There being scarcely any one to assist my faithful Gatróni, the loading
of my three camels took an immense time, and the horseman destined to
accompany me to the frontier of the Kanó territory grew rather
impatient. At length, at about two o’clock in the afternoon, I mounted
my unsightly black four-dollar nag, and following my companion, who (in
a showy dress, representing very nearly the German costume about the
time of the Thirty Years’ war, and well mounted), gave himself all
possible airs of dignity, started forth from the narrow streets of Dalá
into the open fields.

I felt my heart lightened, and, forgetting what had passed, began to
think only of the wide field now opening before me, if fresh means
should reach us in Kúkawa. We had taken a very circuitous road in order
to pass through the widest of the fourteen gates of the town: but the
long passage through the wall was too narrow for my unwieldy luggage;
and my impatient, self-conceited companion fell into despair, seeing
that we should be unable to reach the night’s quarters destined for us.
At length all was again placed upon the patient animals; and my noble
Bu-Séfi taking the lead of the short string of my caravan, we proceeded
onwards, keeping at a short distance from the wall, till we reached the
highroad from the kófa-n-Wámbay. Here too is a considerable estate
belonging to a ba-Ásbenchí (a man from Ásben), who has a company of
slaves always residing here. Going slowly on through the well-cultivated
country, we reached a small watercourse. Being anxious to know in what
direction the torrent had its discharge, and unable to make it out from
my own observation, I took the liberty of asking my companion; but the
self-conceited courtier, though born a slave, thought himself insulted
by such a question, and by the presumption that he ever paid attention
to such trivial things as the direction of a watercourse, or the name of
a village!

Having watered our horses here, I and my friend went on in advance, to
secure quarters for the night, and chose them in a small hamlet, where,
after some resistance, a mʿallem gave us up part of his courtyard
surrounded with a fence of the stalks of Guinea corn. When the camels
came up we pitched our tent. The boy ʿAbd-Alla, however, seeing that my
party was so small, and fearing that we should have some misadventure,
had run away and returned to Kanó.

Though there was much talk of thieves, who indeed infest the whole
neighbourhood of this great market-town, and, excited by the hope of
remaining unpunished under an indolent government, very often carry off
camels during the night even from the middle of the town, we passed a
tranquil night, and got off at a tolerably early hour the next morning.
The character of the country is almost the same as that during our last
day’s march in coming from Kátsena, small clusters of huts and detached
farms being spread about over the cultivated country, where we observed
also some tobacco-fields just in flower: my attention was more attracted
by a small range of hills in the distance on our left. I was also
astonished at the little traffic which I observed on this route, though
we met a considerable natron-caravan coming from Zínder, the ass and the
bullock going on peaceably side by side, as is always the case in
Negroland. The country continued to improve; and the fields of Charó,
shaded as they were by luxuriant trees, looked fertile and well cared
for, while the clusters of neat huts scattered all about had an air of
comfort. Here we ought to have passed the previous night; and my
companion had gone in advance to deliver his order, and probably to get
a good luncheon instead of his missed supper. Beyond this village, or
rather district, cultivation seemed to be less careful; but perhaps the
reason was only that the villages were further from the road.

The quiet course of domestic slavery has very little to offend the mind
of the traveller; the slave is generally well treated, is not over
worked, and is very often considered as a member of the family. Scenes
caused by the running away of a slave in consequence of bad and severe
treatment occur every day with the Arabs, who generally sell their
slaves, even those whom they have had some time, as soon as occasion
offers; but with the natives they are very rare. However, I was
surprised at observing so few home-born slaves in Negroland—with the
exception of the Tawárek, who seem to take great pains to rear
slaves—and I have come to the conclusion, that marriage among domestic
slaves is very little encouraged by the natives; indeed I think myself
justified in supposing that a slave is very rarely allowed to marry.
This is an important circumstance in considering domestic slavery in
Central Africa; for if these domestic slaves do not of themselves
maintain their numbers, then the deficiency arising from ordinary
mortality must constantly be kept up by a new supply, which can only be
obtained by kidnapping or, more generally, by predatory incursions, and
it is this necessity which makes even domestic slavery appear so baneful
and pernicious. The motive for making these observations in this place
was the sight of a band of slaves, whom we met this morning, led on in
two files, and fastened one to the other by a strong rope round the
neck.

Our march was to be but a short one, as we were to pass the remainder of
the day and the following night in Gezáwa; and as it was still long
before noon, and we had the hottest time of the day before us, I was
anxious to encamp outside the town in the shade of some fine tree, but
my escort would not allow me to do so. We therefore entered the town,
which is surrounded with a clay wall in tolerable repair, and moreover
by a small ditch on the outside; but the interior presents a desolate
aspect, only about a third part of the space being occupied by detached
cottages. Here I was lodged in a small hot shíbki (reed hut), and passed
the “éni” most uncomfortably, cursing my companion and all the escorts
in the world, and resolved never again to take up my quarters inside a
town, except where I was to make a stay of some length. I was therefore
delighted, in the course of the afternoon, to hear from the man who had
taken the camels outside the town upon the pasture-ground, that the
sheríf Konché had arrived and sent me his compliments.

I had once seen this man in Kanó, and had been advised to wait for him,
as he was likewise on his way to Kúkawa; but knowing how slow Arabs are,
and little suspecting what a sociable and amiable man he was, I thought
it better to go on; whereupon he, thinking that my company was
preferable to a longer stay, hastened to follow me. To-day, however, I
did not see him, as he had encamped outside the town; still I had
already much reason to thank him, as he had brought back my fickle
runaway servant ʿAbd-Alla, whom after some reprimand, and a promise on
his side to remain with me in future, I took back, as I was very much in
want of a servant. He was a native of the country, a Baháushe with a
little Arab blood in him, and had been reduced to slavery. Afterwards,
in Bórnu, a man claimed him as his property. His mother, who was living
not far from Gérki, was also about this time carried into slavery,
having gone to some village where she was kidnapped. Such things are of
daily occurrence in these countries on the borders of two territories.
The lad’s sister had a similar fate.

The inhabitants of Gezáwa seem to be devoted almost entirely to cattle-
breeding; and in the market which was held to-day (as it is every
Monday) outside the town, nothing else was offered for sale but cattle
and sheep, scarcely a piece of cotton cloth being laid out, and very
little corn. Also round the town there are scarcely any traces of
cultivation. The mayor seemed not to be in very enviable circumstances,
and bore evident traces of sorrow and anxiety; indeed the laziness and
indolence of the governor of Kanó in neglecting the defence of the
wealth and the national riches of his province are incredible, and can
only be tolerated by a liege lord just as lazy and indifferent as
himself. But at that period the country still enjoyed some tranquillity
and happiness, while from the day on which the rebel Bokhári took
possession of Khadéja, as I shall soon have occasion to relate, the
inhabitants of all the eastern part of this beautiful province underwent
daily vexations, so that the towns on this road were quite deserted when
I passed a second time through this country, in December, 1854.

Early next morning we loaded our camels and left the town, in order to
join our new travelling companion, who by this time had also got ready
his little troop. It consisted of himself on horseback, his “sirríya,”
likewise on horseback, three female attendants, six natives, and as many
sumpter oxen. He himself was a portly Arab, with fine, sedate manners,
such as usually distinguish wealthy people of the Gharb (Morocco); for
he was a native of Fás, and though in reality not a sheríf (though the
title of a sheríf in Negroland means scarcely anything but an impudent,
arrogant beggar), yet, by his education and fine, noble character, he
deserved certainly to be called a gentleman. The name “Konché” (Mr.
Sleep) had been given to him by the natives, from his very reasonable
custom of sleeping, or pretending to sleep, the whole day during the
Rhamadán, which enabled him to bear the fasting more easily. His real
name was ʿAbd el Khafíf.

Our first salutation was rather cold; but we soon became friends; and I
must say of him that he was the most noble Arab merchant I have seen in
Negroland. Though at present he had not much merchandise of value with
him, he was a wealthy man, and had enormous demands upon several
governors and princes in Negroland, especially upon Múniyóma, or the
governor of Múniyo, who was indebted to him for about thirty
millions—shells, of course, but nevertheless a very large sum in this
country. Of his “sirríya,” who always rode at a respectful distance
behind him, I cannot speak, as she was veiled from top to toe; but if a
conclusion might be drawn from her attendants, who were very sprightly,
well-formed young girls, she must have been handsome. The male servants
of my new friend were all characteristically dressed, and armed in the
native fashion with bows and arrows,—knapsacks, water-bottles, and
drinking-vessels all hanging around them in picturesque confusion; but
among them there was a remarkable fellow, who had already given me great
surprise in Kanó. When lying one day in a feverish state on my hard
couch, I heard myself saluted in Romaic or modern Greek. The man who
thus addressed me had long whiskers, and was as black as any negro. But
I had some difficulty in believing him to be a native of Negroland. Yet
such he was, though by a stay in Stambúl of some twenty years, from his
boyhood, he had not only learned the language perfectly, but also
adopted the manners, and I might almost say the features, of the modern
Greeks.

In such company we continued pleasantly on, sometimes through a
cultivated country, at others through underwood, meeting now and then a
motley caravan of horses, oxen, and asses, all laden with natron, and
coming from Múniyo. Once there was also a mule with the other beasts of
burden; and on inquiry, on this occasion, I learnt that this animal,
which I had supposed to be frequent in Negroland, is very rare, at least
in these parts, and in Kanó always fetches the high price of from sixty
to eighty thousand kurdí, which is just double the rate of a camel. In
Wángara and Gónja the mule seems to be more frequent. But there is only
one in Kúkawa and in Timbúktu, the latter belonging to one of the
richest Morocco merchants.

Animated scenes succeeded each other:—now a well, where the whole
population of a village or zángo were busy in supplying their wants for
the day; then another, where a herd of cattle was just being watered; a
beautiful tamarind-tree spreading a shady canopy over a busy group of
talkative women selling victuals, ghussub-water, and sourmilk, or
“cotton.” About ten o’clock detached dúm-palms began to impart to the
landscape a peculiar character, as we approached the considerable but
open place Gabezáwa, which at present exhibited the busy and animated
scene of a well-frequented market. In this country the market-days of
the towns succeed each other by turns, so that all the inhabitants of a
considerable district can take advantage every day of the traffic in the
peculiar article in which each of these places excels.

While pushing our way through the rows of well-stocked sheds, I became
aware that we were approaching the limits of the Kanúri language; for
being thirsty, I wished to buy ghussub-water (“furá” in Háusa), but in
asking for it, received from the women fresh butter (“fulá” in Kanúri),
and had some difficulty in making them understand that I did not want
the latter. Continuing our march without stopping, we reached at noon
the well-known (that is to say, among the travelling natives) camping-
ground of Kúka mairuá, an open place surrounded by several colossal
specimens of the monkey-bread tree, kúka or _Adansonia digitata_, which
all over this region of Central Africa are not of that low, stunted
growth which seems to be peculiar to them near the coast, but in general
attain to a height of from sixty to eighty feet. Several troops of
native traders were already encamped here, while a string of some thirty
camels, most of them unloaded, and destined to be sold in Kanó, had just
arrived. A wide-spreading tamarind-tree formed a natural roof over a
busy market-scene, where numbers of women were selling all the eatables
and delicacies of the country. The village lay to the south-east. Here
we pitched our tents close together, as robbers and thieves are very
numerous in the neighbourhood; and I fired repeatedly during the night,
a precaution which the event proved to be not at all useless. The name
of the place signifies “the Adansonia with the water.” However, the
latter part of the name seemed rather ironical, as I had to pay forty
kurdí for filling a waterskin and for watering my horse and my camels;
and I would therefore not advise a future traveller to go to a
neighbouring village, which bears the name of “Kuka maífurá,” in the
belief that he may find there plenty of cheap furá or ghussub-water.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, March 12th.]

Our encampment was busy from the very first dawn of day, and exhibited
strong proof of industry on the part of the natives; for even at this
hour women were offering ready-cooked pudding as a luncheon to the
travellers. Some of our fellow-sleepers on this camping-ground started
early; and the two Welád Slimán also, who led the string of camels,
started off most imprudently in the twilight. As for us, we waited till
everything was clearly discernible, and then took the opposite direction
through underwood; and we had advanced but a short distance when a man
came running after us, bringing us the exciting news that a party of
Tawárek had fallen upon the two Arabs, and after wounding the elder of
them, who had made some resistance, had carried off all their camels but
three. I expressed my surprise to my horseman that such a thing could
happen on the territory of the governor of Kanó, and urged him to
collect some people of the neighbouring villages, in order to rescue the
property, which might have been easily done; but he was quite
indifferent, and smiling in his self-conceit, and pulling his little
straw hat on one side of his head, he went on before us.

Small villages belonging to the district of Zákara were on each side,
the inhabitants indulging still in security and happiness; the following
year they were plunged into an abyss of misery, Bokhári making a sudden
inroad on a market-day, and carrying off as many as a thousand persons.
I here had a proof of the great inconvenience which many parts of
Negroland suffer with regard to water, for the well at which we watered
our horses this morning measured no less than three and thirty fathoms;
but I afterwards found that this is a very common thing as well in Bórnu
as in Bagírmi, while in other regions I shall have to mention wells as
much as sixty fathoms deep. Beyond this spot we met a very numerous
caravan with natron, coming from Kúkawa; and I therefore eagerly
inquired the news of that place from the horsemen who accompanied it.
All was well; but they had not heard either of the arrival or of the
approach of a Christian. This natron, which is obtained in the
neighbourhood of the Tsád, was all in large pieces like stone, and is
carried in nets, while that coming from Múniyo consists entirely of
rubble, and is conveyed in bags, or a sort of basket. The former is
called “kílbu tsaráfu,” while the name of the latter is “kílbu bóktor.”
We soon saw other troops laden with this latter article; and there were
even several mules among the beasts of burden. The commerce of this
article is very important; and I counted to-day more than five hundred
loads of natron that we met on our road.

I then went on in advance with “Mr. Sleep,” and soon reached the village
Dóka, which by the Arabs travelling in Negroland is called, in semi-
barbarous Arabic, “Súk el karága,” karága being a Bórnu word meaning
wilderness. The village belongs to the Ghaladíma. Here we sat tranquilly
down near the market-place, in the shade of some beautiful tamarind-
trees, and indulged in the luxuries which my gentleman-like companion
could afford. I was astonished as well as ashamed at the comfort which
my African friend displayed, ordering one of the female attendants of
his sirríya to bring into his presence a basket which seemed to be under
the special protection of the latter, and drawing forth from it a
variety of well-baked pastry, which he spread on a napkin before us,
while another of the attendants was boiling the coffee. The barbarian
and the civilized European seemed to have changed places; and in order
to contribute something to our repast, I went to the market and bought a
couple of young onions. Really it is incredible what a European
traveller in these countries has to endure; for while he must bear
infinitely more fatigue, anxiety, and mental exertion than any native
traveller, he is deprived of even the little comfort which the country
affords—has no one to cook his supper, and to take care of him when he
falls sick, or to shampoo him;


  “And, ah! no wife or mother’s care

   For him the milk or corn prepare.”


Leaving my companion to indulge in the “kief” of the Osmánli, of which
he possessed a great deal, I preferred roving about. I observed that
during the rainy season a great deal of water must collect here, which
probably explains the luxurious vegetation and the splendid foliage of
the trees hereabouts; and I was confirmed in my observation by my
companion, who had travelled through this district during the rainy
season, and was strongly impressed with the difficulties arising from
the water, which covers a great part of the surface.

Having allowed our people, who by this time had come up, to have a
considerable start in advance of us, we followed at length, entering
underwood, from which we did not emerge till we arrived near Gérki.
According to instructions received from us, our people had already
chosen the camping-ground on the north-west side of the town; but my
horseman, who had gone in advance with them, thought it first necessary
to conduct me into the presence of the governor, or rather of one of the
five governors who rule over this place, each of them thinking himself
more important than his colleague. The one to whom he presented me was,
however, a very unprepossessing man, and not the same who on my return
from the west in 1854 treated me with extraordinary respect. Yet he did
not behave inhospitably to me; for he sent me a sheep (not very fat
indeed), with some corn and fresh milk. Milk during the whole of my
journey formed my greatest luxury; but I would advise any African
traveller to be particularly careful with this article, which is capable
of destroying a weak stomach entirely; and he would do better to make it
a rule always to mix it with a little water, or to have it boiled.

The town of Gérki is a considerable place, and under a strong government
would form a most important frontier-town. As it is, it may probably
contain about fifteen thousand inhabitants; but they are notorious for
their thievish propensities, and the wild state of the country around
bears ample testimony to their want of industry. The market, which is
held here before the S.W. gate, is of the most indifferent description.
The wall with its pinnacles is in very good repair. In order to keep the
thievish disposition of the natives in check, I fired some shots late in
the evening; and we slept undisturbed. On my return-journey, however, in
1854, when I was quite alone with my party, I was less fortunate, a most
enterprising thief returning thrice to his task, and carrying away, one
after the other, first the tobe, then the trowsers, and finally the cap
from one of my people.

[Sidenote: Thursday, March 13th.]

Not waiting for the new horseman whom I was to receive here early in the
morning, I went on in advance with my companion, in order to reach
Gúmmel before the heat of the day; and we soon met in the forest a
string of twelve camels, all laden with kurdí or shells, and belonging
to the rich Arab merchant Bú-héma, who resides in Múniyo, and carries on
a considerable commerce between Kanó and Kúkawa. I will here mention,
that in general 100,000 kurdí are regarded as a camel-load; fine
animals, however, like these will carry as much as a hundred and fifty
thousand, that is, just sixty dollars or twelve pounds’ worth. It is
easy to be understood that, where the standard coin is of so unwieldy a
nature, the commerce of the country cannot be of great value.

About two miles before we reached the frontier-town of the Bórnu empire
in this direction, we were joined by the horseman of the governor of
Gérki; and we here took leave of Háusa with its fine and beautiful
country, and its cheerful and industrious population. It is remarkable
what a difference there is between the character of the ba-Háushe and
the Kanúri—the former lively, spirited, and cheerful, the latter
melancholic, dejected and brutal; and the same difference is visible in
their physiognomies—the former having in general very pleasant and
regular features, and more graceful forms, while the Kanúri, with his
broad face, his wide nostrils, and his large bones, makes a far less
agreeable impression, especially the women, who are very plain and
certainly among the ugliest in all Negroland, notwithstanding their
coquetry, in which they do not yield at all to the Háusa women.

Birmenáwa is a very small town, but strongly fortified with an earthen
wall and two deep ditches, one inside and the other outside, and only
one gate on the west side. Around it there is a good deal of
cultivation, while the interior is tolerably well inhabited. Konché, who
was in a great hurry to reach Gúmmel, would have preferred going on
directly without entering the town; but as I was obliged to visit it in
order to change my horseman, it being of some importance to me to arrive
in Gúmmel with an escort, he accompanied me. The population consists of
mixed Háusa and Kanúri elements.

Having obtained another man, we continued our march through a country
partly under cultivation, partly covered with underwood, and were
pleased, near the village Tókun, to find the Háusa custom of a little
market held by the women on the roadside still prevailing; but this was
the last scene of the kind I was to see for a long time. We reached the
considerable town of Gúmmel just when the sun began to shine with great
power; and at the gate we separated, the sheríf taking his way directly
towards his quarters in the southern part of the town, while I was
obliged to go first to the house of the governor, the famous Dan-Tanóma
(the son of Tanóma, his own name being entirely unknown to the people);
but on account of his great age, neither on this nor on a later occasion
did I get a sight of him. Indeed he was soon to leave this world, and by
his death to plunge not only the town wherein he resided, but the whole
neighbouring country, into a destructive civil war between his two sons.

However, on my first visit Gúmmel was still a flourishing place, and
well inhabited, and I had to pass through an intricate labyrinth of
narrow streets enclosed between fences of mats and reeds surrounding
huts and courtyards, before I reached the dwellings of the few Arabs who
live here; and after looking about for some time I obtained quarters
near the house of Sálem Maidúkia (the Rothschild of Gúmmel), where my
Morocco friend was lodged. But my lodgings required building in the
first instance, as they consisted of nothing but a courtyard, the fence
of which was in a state of utter decay, and a hut entirely fallen in, so
that there was not the least shelter from the sun, whereas I had to wait
here two days at least for my new friend, whose company I was not
inclined to forego, without very strong reasons, on my journey to
Kúkawa.

However building is not so difficult in Negroland as it is in Europe;
and a most comfortable dwelling, though rather light, and liable to
catch fire, may be erected in a few hours; even a roof is very
sufficiently made, at least such as is here wanted during the dry
season, with those thick mats, made of reed, called “síggedi” in Bórnu.
But most fortunately Sálem had a conical roof just ready, which would
have afforded satisfactory shelter even from the heaviest rain. I
therefore sent immediately my whole remaining supply of kurdí to the
market to buy those mats and sticks; and getting four men practised in
this sort of workmanship, I immediately set to work, and, long before my
camels arrived, had a well-fenced private courtyard, and a splendid cool
shade, while my tent served as a store for my luggage, and as a bedroom
for myself.

Having, therefore, made myself comfortable, I was quite prepared to
indulge in the luxurious luncheon sent me by the maidúkia, consisting of
a well-cooked paste of Negro millet with sourmilk, after which I
received visits from the few Arabs residing here, and was pleased to
find one among them who had been Clapperton’s servant, and was well
acquainted with the whole proceedings of the first expedition. He had
been travelling about a good deal, and was able, with the assistance of
a companion of his, to give me a tolerably complete itinerary of the
route from Sókoto to Gónja, the gúro-country and the northern province
of Asianti. These Arabs necessarily lead here a very miserable sort of
existence; Sálem, however, a native of Sókna, has succeeded in amassing
a considerable fortune for these regions, and is therefore called by the
natives maidúkia. He had a freed slave of the name of Mohammed
Abbeakúta, who, though not at all an amiable man, and rather self-
conceited, nevertheless gave me some interesting information. Among
other things, he gave me a very curious list of native names of the
months[42], which are not, however, those used by the Háusáwa, nor, I
think, by the Yórubáwa, he having been evidently a native of Yóruba. He
also gave me the following receipt for an antidote in the case of a
person being wounded by poisoned arrows: a very young chicken is boiled
with the fruits of the chamsínda, the áddwa (_Balanites_), and the
tamarind-tree; and the bitter decoction so obtained, which is carried in
a small leathern bag ready for use, is drunk immediately after receiving
the poisonous wound, when, as he affirmed, the effect of the poison is
counteracted by the medicine. The chicken would seem to have very little
effect in the composition, but may be added as a charm.

The next morning I went with ʿAbd el Khafíf to pay our compliments to
old Dan-Tanóma. His residence, surrounded by high clay walls, and
including, besides numbers of huts for his household and numerous wives,
some spacious halls of clay, was of considerable extent; and the
courtyard, shaded by a wide-spreading, luxuriant tamarind tree, was a
very noble area. While we sat there awaiting the governor’s pleasure, I
had a fair insight into the concerns of this little court, all the well-
fed, idle parasites coming in one after the other, and rivalling each
other in trivial jokes. The Háusa language is the language of the court;
and the offices are similar to those which I mentioned above with regard
to Kanó. Having waited a long time in vain, the weak old man sending an
excuse, as he could not grant us an interview, we returned to our
quarters.

To-day being Friday was market-day; and in order to see the market in
its greatest activity I mounted at noon on horseback, and went out. In
all these parts of Negroland, the customs of which are in every respect
so different from those of Yóruba and the neighbouring countries, the
market (in Kúkawa and Maseña as well as in Kanó, Sókoto, and even
Timbúktu) is always most frequented and most busy in the hottest hours
of the day, notwithstanding the great fatigue which all the people, and
particularly the strangers, have to undergo.

The market of Gúmmel is held outside the town, between the two gates on
the west side, but nearer to the “chínna-n-yalá”[43] (the northern
gate), which is remarkable on account of its well-fortified condition.

Though I had heard a good deal about Gúmmel, I was nevertheless
surprised at the size and the activity of the market, although that held
on Saturday is said to be still more important. Gúmmel is the chief
market for the very extensive trade in natron, which, as I have
mentioned above, is carried on between Kúkawa and Múniyo on one side,
and Núpe or Nýffi on the other; for this trade passes from one hand into
another, and the Bórnu people very rarely carry this merchandise further
than Gúmmel. Large masses of natron, certainly amounting to at least one
thousand loads of both qualities mentioned above, were offered here for
sale—the full bullock’s load of the better quality for five thousand, an
ass’s load of the inferior sort for five hundred kurdí. There were also
about three hundred stalls or sheds, but not arranged in regular rows,
where a great variety of objects were offered for sale,—all sorts of
clothing, tools, earthenware pots, all kinds of victuals, cattle, sheep,
donkeys, horses—in short, everything of home or foreign produce which is
in request among the natives.

The Arabs have their place under a wide-spreading fig-tree, where I was
greatly pleased to make the acquaintance of a very intelligent man
called ʿAzi Mohammed Moníya, who gave me some valuable information,
particularly with regard to the route from Kanó to Tóto, and that from
Sókoto to Gónja. He also gave me the first accurate description of the
immense town Alóri, or Ilóri, the great centre of the conquering Fúlbe
in Yóruba, which I shall have frequent opportunity of mentioning in the
course of my proceedings. This man, who was really very intelligent, had
travelled a great deal, and had made a long stay in Stambúl, assured me
that Alóri was, without the least doubt, larger than the latter city.
Yet this immense town, of which the first accounts are due, I think, to
Capt. Clapperton, is sought for in vain in many of our most recent maps.

Greatly delighted with my visit to the market, though not a little
affected by the exposure to the sun during the hot hours, I returned to
my quarters; for though a practised traveller will bear very well the
most scorching power of the sun, if he sets out in the morning, and by
degrees becomes inured to greater and greater heat, he may suffer
fatally from exposing himself for a long time to the mid-day sun, after
having spent the morning in the shade. Later in the afternoon, the
governor sent, as a gift to me and ʿAbd el Khafíf, through his principal
courtiers (such as the ghaladíma, the chiróma, and others, who were
accompanied by a long train of followers), a young bullock, they being
instructed at the same time to receive in return the present, or
“salám,” as it is generally called, which we had prepared for him. I
gave them a subéta and a small flask with rose oil, which is an article
in great request with the fashionable world in Háusa and Bórnu. In the
evening, we received also corn for our horses.

[Sidenote: Saturday, March 15th.]

This was a most fortunate and lucky day for me; for suddenly, when I
least expected it, I was visited by an Arab from Sókna, of the name of
Mohammed el Mughárbi, who had just arrived with a little caravan of
Swákena from Múrzuk, and brought me a considerable number of letters
from friends in Tripoli, England, and Germany, after my having been
deprived of news from them for ten months. The letters gave me great
delight; but besides the letters there was something with them which
touched me more sensibly, by the providential way in which it supplied
my most urgent wants.

I was extremely short of cash, and having spent almost my whole supply
of shells in fitting up my quarters, paying my guides, and discharging
Makhmúd, who had proved quite unfit for service, I had very little left
wherewith to provide for our wants on our long journey to Kúkawa. How
surprised and delighted was I, then, on opening Mr. Gagliuffi’s letter,
at the unexpected appearance of two Spanish dollars, which he forwarded
to me in order to make good an error in my account with him. Two Spanish
dollars! it was the only current money I had at that time; and they were
certainly more valuable to me than so many hundreds of pounds at other
times. However, the rascal who brought me the letters had also
merchandise on the account of the mission, to the value of one hundred
pounds; but, either because he wished to deliver it to the director
himself, or in order to obtain also the hire stipulated for him if he
should be obliged to carry the merchandise on to Kúkawa, he declared
that the things had gone on in advance to Kanó,—an evident falsehood,
which eventually caused us much unnecessary expense, and brought Mr.
Overweg and myself into the greatest distress; for I did not, in fact,
receive this merchandise till after my return from Adamáwa—having
subsisted all the time upon “air and debts.”

This and the following day I was busy answering my letters, and I will
only mention here that from this place I intimated to one of my
friends,—Mr. Richard Lepsius, of Berlin,—my foreboding that it might be
my destiny, after trying in vain to penetrate to any great distance in a
south-eastern direction, to turn my steps westwards, and to fill up my
researches into the regions about Timbúktu by my personal experience.
Having finished my parcel of letters, I gave it to the Mughárbi to take
with him to Kanó, and entrust it to the care of one of my Tinýlkum
friends, who would soon forward it to Múrzuk.

Having been thus freshly imbued with the restless impulse of European
civilization, and strengthened with the assurance that highly respected
persons at such a distance took a deep interest in the results of our
proceedings, I resolved not to linger a moment longer in this place, but
rather to forego the company of my amiable friend, particularly as I
knew that he was going to Múniyo, and therefore, after a few days’
march, would at all events separate from me. And I did well; for my
friend did not reach Kúkawa before the middle of May, that is, six weeks
after me. Such are the Arabs, and woe to him who relies upon them! The
same thing happened to me on my successful return from Bórnu to the
coast in 1855. Every body assured me that the caravan was to leave
immediately: but I went on alone in May, and reached Tripoli in August,
while the caravan did not reach Múrzuk before March, 1856.

I therefore sent to Dan-Tanóma, begging him to furnish me with a
horseman who would escort me to Máshena, and he assented. It was a
hazardous and troublesome undertaking: I had only one servant, faithful,
but young, and who had never before travelled this road; besides a
little boy, delicate in body and unsteady in mind, and I was sure that I
myself should have to do half the work, as well in loading and unloading
the camels as in pitching the tent, and looking after everything.

[Sidenote: Monday, March 17th.]

Having taken a hearty leave of ʿAbd el Khafíf, I followed my camels
and—my good luck. This was the first time on my journey that I travelled
quite alone, and I felt very happy, though, of course, I should have
been glad to have had one or two good servants.

The country on the east side of Gúmmel, at least at this time of the
year, presented a very dull and melancholy appearance, and the most
decided contrast to that cheerful and splendid scenery which is peculiar
to the landscape round Kanó. Nevertheless, it seemed to be well
inhabited, and we passed several places, some of them of tolerable size,
and surrounded with earthen walls, of very inconsiderable elevation, and
ditches; the courtyards, especially in the first town which we passed,
the name of which is Kadángaré, “the lizard” in Háusa, were wide and
spacious. A little later in the season the drought must be terribly felt
in these quarters; for even at present we had great difficulty in
watering our horses and filling a waterskin. Trees of good size became
continually more scarce, but the country was still well inhabited, and
after ten o’clock, near the little town Gósuwa, surrounded likewise by a
low earthen wall, we reached a small market-place, consisting of about
thirty stalls, where a market is held every Sunday; the town, however,
was not thickly inhabited, and near its north-east corner especially
there were large empty spaces.

Beyond this place the country became a little richer in trees, and we
here passed a large village-called Gáreji, where a path branches off
leading to Maimágariá, a road generally taken by caravans. The
population of all these places is composed of Bórnu and Háusa people,
and many particular customs might be observed hereabouts, which are
rather peculiar to the latter race. Dull as the country appeared, a
feeling of tranquillity and security was communicated by the sight of
little granaries, such as I have described above, scattered about
without any protection in the neighbourhood of some villages. After we
had passed the empty market-place of the little walled town Kábbori, the
surface of the ground had a very peculiar look, being covered entirely
with colocynths, which were just in maturity. About a mile and a half
further on we took up our quarters in Benzári, a town belonging to the
province of Máshena, or Másena, and were well received and hospitably
treated by the Ghaladíma. The town is separated into two parts by a
spacious opening, wherein is the principal well which supplies almost
the whole population, but its depth is considerable, being more than
twenty fathoms. Here we filled our waterskin the next morning, before we
set out.

[Sidenote: March 18th.]

Scarcely had we left Benzári behind us when my ears were struck by the
distant sound of drums and singing, and I learnt on inquiry that it was
Bokhári, or, as the Bórnu people call him, Bowári, the deposed governor
of Khadéja,[44] and the brother of Áhmedu, the present ruler of that
town. Bokhári’s name was then new, not only to me, but even to the
natives of the neighbouring provinces. He had been governor of Khadéja,
but being a clever and restless man he, or rather his jealous brother,
had excited the suspicion of his liege lord ʿAlíyu, the ruler of Sókoto,
who had deposed him and given the government to his brother Áhmedu,
whereupon Bokhári had nothing else to do but to throw himself upon the
hospitality and protection of the Bórnu people, who received him with
open arms, the governor of Máshena, with the sanction of his liege lord
the sheikh of Bórnu, assigning to him a neighbouring place, Yerímarí,
for his residence. This is an incident of very frequent occurrence in
these loosely connected empires; but it is particularly so with the
Fúlbe, among whom one brother often cherishes the most inveterate hatred
against another. Exactly the same thing we have seen already in Kátsena.
Bokhári having remained some time quietly in this place, strengthening
his party and assisted underhand with arms and men by the vizier of
Bórnu, had just now set out to try his fortune against his brother, and
was beating the drums in order to collect as many people as possible.

Predatory incursions are nothing new in these quarters, where several
provinces and entirely distinct empires have a common frontier; but
this, as the event proved, was rather a memorable campaign for the whole
of this part of Negroland, and was to become “the beginning of sorrows”
for all the country around. For Bokhári having taken the strong town of
Khadéja, and killed his brother, was not only able to defend himself in
his new position, vanquishing all the armies sent against him, and
amongst them the whole military force of the empire of Sókoto, which was
led on by the vizier in person, ʿAbdu the son of Gedádo, Clapperton’s
old friend, but spread terror and devastation to the very gates of Kanó.
Indeed, on my second journey through these regions, I shall have the sad
duty of describing the state of misery into which districts, which on my
former visit I had found flourishing and populous, had been reduced by
this warlike chieftain, who instead of founding a strong kingdom and
showing himself a great prince, chose rather, like most of his
countrymen, to base his power on the destruction and devastation of the
country around him, and to make himself a slave-dealer on a grand scale.
Tens of thousands of unfortunate people, pagans as well as Mohammedans,
unprotected in their wellbeing by their lazy and effeminate rulers, have
from the hands of Bokhári passed into those of the slave-dealer, and
have been carried away from their native home into distant regions.

Kept in alarm by the drumming, and making some not very tranquillizing
reflections on the weakness of our little band, which consisted of three
men and a boy, in the turbulent state of the country through which we
were passing, we continued silently on, while the character of the
landscape had nothing peculiarly adapted to cheer the mind. Cultivation
beginning to cease, nothing was to be seen but an immense level tract of
country covered with the monotonous _Asclepias gigantea_, with only a
single poor _Balanites_ now and then. But the scene became more animated
as we approached Chifówa, a considerable town surrounded by a low
earthen wall, which I was greatly astonished to hear belonged still to
the territory of Gúmmel, and was also assigned to Bokhári during his
exile. The boundary between the provinces must run here in a very waving
line.

All that I observed here testified that the Háusa population still
greatly predominated; and as we had to turn close round the place on the
north side, where the ground rose, we had a fine view over the whole
interior of the town. It presented a very animated spectacle; and a
large number of horsemen were assembled here, evidently in connection
with the enterprise of Bokhári, while men and women were busy carrying
water into the town from a considerable distance. Of cultivation,
however, very few traces appeared; but a good many cattle and sheep, and
even some camels, were seen grazing about. In Kaselúwa also, the next
town, we were complimented with the usual Háusa salute. Having then
passed through a monotonous tract of country covered with tall reed-
grass and with the _Asclepias_, we reached the town of Yélkazá at half-
past nine o’clock in the morning. Here the governor of the province of
Máshena, who generally has his residence in the town of the same name,
was staying at present, apparently on account of the expedition of
Bokhári, which he was assisting underhand; and I accordingly had to pay
him my compliments, as my horseman, who was a servant of Dan Tanóma,
could not well conduct me any further.

We therefore entered the town by the north gate, and found people very
busy repairing the fortification, consisting of two walls and three
ditches of considerable depth, two of which ran outside round the outer
wall, while the third was inclosed between the two walls.

Having presented ourselves at the residence of the governor, which was
situated in the middle of the town, and consisted altogether of reed-
work, we obtained good quarters, with a spacious and cool shed, which
was the only thing we wanted; for being anxious not to lose any more
time, I had resolved to start again in the afternoon. In order,
therefore, to obtain a guide as soon as possible, I went to pay my
compliments to the governor, whose name was Mohammed. After a little
delay, he came out of the interior of his reed house into the audience-
hall, which likewise consisted entirely of reed-work, but was spacious
and airy; there he sat down upon a sort of divan, similar to the ánkaréb
used in Egypt, and made of the branches of the tukkurúwa, which had been
brought in expressly for the purpose. My interview, however, was short,
for neither was he himself a lively or inquisitive man, nor was my Tébu
servant, whom, as I myself was not yet able to speak Kanúri with
tolerable fluency, I was obliged to employ as interpreter, at all
distinguished either by eloquence or by frankness, though in other
respects he was an excellent lad.

I obtained, however, all that I wanted, the governor assigning me
immediately a man who should accompany me to Ghaladíma ʿOmár, the
governor of Búndi, and I was glad that he did not grumble at my present,
which consisted only of a small phial of rose oil and a quarter of a
pound of cloves. The best and most usual present for the governors on
this road, who are justly entitled to some gift, as no tolls are to be
paid, is a subéta, or white shawl with red or yellow border, such as are
brought from Egypt, which may be accompanied with some spices. The old
man also sent me, after a little while, when I had returned to my
quarters, a dish which at least was not richer than my present,
consisting in a very unpalatable paste of Negro corn, with a nasty sauce
of míya, or molukhíya. Háusa with its delicacies was behind us; and I
was unable to procure, either for hospitality’s sake or for money, a
dish of “fura,” which I had become very fond of.

The heat was very great, though a light fresh breeze from the east made
it supportable; and my new guide seemed by no means so anxious to go on
as I was, so that I was obliged to search for him a long while. Having
at length laid hold of him we started, passing through an undulating
country without cultivation, and covered only with brushwood, and with
the dreadfully monotonous káwo or _Asclepias_, when after three miles it
became a little varied by underwood, the scene being enlivened by a
karábka, or káfila, with nine camels coming from Kúkawa.

Thus we approached Taganáma, a considerable town, inclosed with a wall
and a double ditch. We were obliged, however, to go round the whole
town, the western gate being closed, and a sort of outwork, such as is
very rare in these countries, consisting in a cross ditch projecting to
a great distance, being made at its north-east corner. At length we
reached the eastern gate, and entered the town. Its interior left on us
an impression of good order and comfort; all the fences of the
courtyards were in excellent repair, the huts large and spacious, and a
certain air of wellbeing was spread over the whole place.

Having obtained tolerable quarters, and corn for my guide’s horse and my
own, we lay down early, in order to continue our journey with the first
dawn next morning, but were roused at midnight by some people arriving
and stating, with an air of great importance, that they had letters for
me. Greatly surprised, and wondering what these important despatches
could be, I got up, but found, when I had kindled a light, that the
letters were not for me at all, but addressed to persons in Kúkawa
unknown to me, by others in Kanó not better known. These unknown friends
most probably, after I had fairly set out, had determined not to let
slip this excellent opportunity of communicating with their friends in
Kúkawa. However, the carriers of the letters thinking, and perhaps
expressly made to think, that they had brought some important message
for me, expected a handsome present; and I had some difficulty in
persuading them that they were only giving me trouble for the sake of
other people. Nevertheless, as they were unprovided with food, I ordered
Mohammed to cook a supper for them; and after having disturbed my
night’s rest by their noisy conversation, they made off again long
before day-light. For in this whole district, where so many different
nationalities border close together, the greatest insecurity reigns, and
the inhabitants of one town cannot safely trust themselves to those of a
neighbouring place without fear of being sold as slaves, or at least of
being despoiled of the little they have.

My fine lancer, with whose manly bearing I had been very much pleased
yesterday, appeared to have thought that, instead of exposing himself
alone, by accompanying me further through a disturbed and infested
district, he would do better to retrace his steps in the company of
these people; for the next morning he was gone, and no trace of him was
to be found. Perhaps he was anxious to join the expedition against
Khadéja, where the soldier might make his fortune, while with me he
could only expect to gain a few hundred shells; but whatever was his
reason for decamping, he left me in a state of great perplexity, as I
was in a hurry to go on as fast as possible, and in a country where
there are no highroads, but where even tracks so important as that from
Kanó to Kúkawa are nothing but small paths leading from one village or
from one town to another, I could not well dispense with a guide. As
regards security, I could only rely upon Providence and my own courage.

Having in vain searched for my man, I loaded the camels, and mounting my
horse, proceeded to the residence of the governor, who is the vassal of
the ruler of Máshena. He, having been informed by his servants, soon
came forth, a tall imposing figure, and seeing that my complaint was
just, his liege lord having expressly assigned me the horseman in order
to conduct me to Búndi, he assured me that he would find another guide
for me; but as it would take some time, he ordered one of his servants
to lead me out of the town to a place where the camels meanwhile might
graze a little. Seeing that he was a just and intelligent man, I thanked
him for his kindness, and followed his servant, who conducted us a few
hundred yards from the town, where there was most excellent pasturage
for the camels.

While we were waiting here for the guide, my companion, who was a
sociable sort of man, helped me to pass the time most agreeably with his
instructive talk. I had observed a very curious object at the governor’s
house,—a leathern parcel of considerable dimensions, tied up with great
care and hung on a long pole, and I had fancied that it contained the
body of a criminal exposed there to every man’s sight as a warning
example of severe punishment; but to my great astonishment I now learned
that it was a powerful talisman suspended in order to protect the town
against the Felláta, as the Bórnu people call the Fúlbe, whose inroads
were greatly feared. He likewise informed me that four years ago there
was a desperate struggle for Taganáma, when that town very narrowly
escaped falling into the hands of those fanatical invaders. He praised
his master, whose name as I now learned was Ísa. The cheerful aspect of
the town seemed fully to confirm his praises, and I expressed my hope
that his watchfulness and energy might be a better safeguard to the
inhabitants than that monstrous talisman, the dimensions of which were
really frightful.

I was greatly pleased also to observe here the very first signs of
preparing the ground for the approaching season, the slaves being busy
clearing the soil with a sort of strong rake provided with four long
wooden teeth, called “kámga;” but this is very rarely done, and the
preparatory labours of agriculture must differ more or less in different
districts according to the peculiar nature of the ground.

At length we saw the guides coming towards us. Instead of a horseman
there were two archers on foot[45], short muscular men, clad only with a
leathern apron round their loins, and for arms bearing, besides bow and
arrows, the peculiar little Mánga battle-axe, which they carry on their
shoulders, while a good sized leathern pocket for carrying provisions,
and several diminutive garra bottles hung down by their sides. In short,
they were real Mánga warriors, though they certainly did not inspire us
with all the confidence which we should have wished to repose in a
guide. However, having made them promise in the presence of the
governor’s servant, who professed to know them well, that they would
accompany me to Búndi, I started with them.

Having lost the finest hours of the morning, I was naturally anxious not
to waste more time; and I was glad to perceive that the fine eastern
breeze, which had prevailed for some days, greatly lessened the power of
the sun. Soon afterwards we met the brother of the governor of Máshena,
with a troop of twelve horsemen, hastening towards the point where the
memorable campaign of Bokhári was to commence. The country was very
monotonous, being soon covered with a forest of mean growth,
uninterrupted by any tree of larger size, except the bare dismal-looking
kuka or monkey bread-tree, and presented evident signs of destructive
warfare waged throughout it; we passed the former sites of several small
towns and villages. The soil consisted here of deep white sand.

After a march of about eight miles, however, the vegetation began to
assume a different character, the ngílle or dúm-bush first appearing,
then a karáge or gáwo (the locust-tree) being seen now and then, after
which the dúm-palm began to prevail entirely. The substratum of this
district is evidently granite, which seems to lie very close to the
surface, as about noon a large mass of this rock projected near our
path. A little beyond this point the wilderness was agreeably
interrupted by an opening with stubble-fields, about which were
scattered small granaries, producing, at such a distance from any
inhabited place and without guardians, an agreeable feeling of security.

Half an hour afterwards we reached the stockade of Wuélleri, and
proceeded directly to the house of the bíllama or mayor, as I wished to
obtain here another guide, for it was only with the greatest difficulty
that I succeeded in dragging on thus far my two archers, who had shown
signs of the greatest anxiety during the latter part of the march, and
had tried several times to turn their backs; but further they would not
go on any account, and I was therefore obliged to dismiss them, paying
them three hundred shells. Unfortunately the bíllama was not at home,
and his brother proved to be a morose and surly fellow. I wished to stay
here only during the hot hours of the day, and to proceed in the evening
after having watered the camels; but he represented to me that the town
of Máshena was too distant to be reached before night, if I did not go
on directly. As this was impossible, I resolved to stay here for the
night, and pitched my tent in an open place in front of a cool shed.
However, we found great difficulty in watering our animals, the Mánga
pretending that there was no water, though we ourselves had passed the
well where the cattle had just been watered. Certainly the aquatic
element was very scarce; and, after much debate, I was at length obliged
to pay one hundred and fifty shells—an enormous charge, if the general
price of the necessaries of life in this country be considered.

Thus our poor camels got at length something to drink, and, with a good
feed in the afternoon, were prepared for a long march the following day.
However, we still wanted a guide; and, notwithstanding our begging,
promising, and threatening, we were unable to persuade any one to
accompany us on to Búndi. The reason of this, however, was not only on
account of the absence of the governor of Máshena from his capital, but
likewise owing to the unsettled state of the country, and the fear
entertained by these people of being caught and sold into slavery.
Indeed, between all these towns, there was scarcely any mutual
intercourse kept up by the natives themselves.

[Sidenote: Thursday, March 20th.]

Having exerted myself to the utmost to obtain a guide, I found myself
obliged to start alone with my two young lads, the eldest of whom was
eighteen, and the other not more than thirteen or fourteen years of age.
Field and forest succeeded alternately to each other; and after a little
less than two miles, we passed on our left a small village lightly
fenced. Here we met also a small caravan, as a faint symptom of
peaceable intercourse, though its array (covered as it went by an
advanced guard of three archers marching at some distance, and
performing at the same time the office of scouts, and by a rearguard of
two more) showed clearly their sense of insecurity. The country now
began to improve considerably; and a beautiful tamarind-tree vested in
the richest foliage, and closely embracing a colossal leafless
Adansonia, formed the beginning of a finer vegetation, while two mounts,
one on our right hand and the other on our left, interrupted the
monotonous level through which we had been travelling. Further on,
granitic masses projected on all sides, and a solitary date-palm spread
a peculiar charm over the landscape.

Having watered my horse at a well in the hollow between the two mounts,
I reached, with my camels, the ditch and thorny fence then forming the
only fortification of the town of Máshena, which place was strengthened,
in the following year, with a clay wall. It lies on the gentle southern
slope of an eminence the top of which is crowned with a rocky crest, and
is a considerable place for this country, having a population of
certainly not less than 10,000 souls, but without the least sign of
industry. A small káfila of Tébu and Arab merchants were encamped here;
but although we arrived at the very hottest time of the day, I was too
anxious to proceed to think of staying here; and having only asked the
news from Kúkawa, and heard that all was well, I continued my march. It
shows the slowness of intercourse in this country, that these people
were ignorant of Mr. Richardson’s death, although he had died twenty
days before at a place only six days’ march on this side of Kúkawa.

Keeping steadily on, first over open pasture-grounds, then through a
country well wooded, we reached, after a march of about seven miles, a
village, and entered it cheerfully with the intention of spending the
night there, but were greatly disappointed on discovering that it was
entirely deserted, and did not contain a living creature. Fortunately,
however, after consulting what was to be done, we found a traveller who
showed us a small path which was to lead us to the town of Álamáy. He
also informed us that the inhabitants of this village, the name of which
was Jáwel, had formed a new village further south. The little path
pointed out, however, was so overgrown and slightly marked that we soon
became doubtful and perplexed. I went, therefore, to inquire of a
shepherd whom we saw at some little distance on the right of our path;
but no sooner did he observe me approaching than he ran away, leaving
his flock at our discretion.

The state of this country is very miserable indeed, all the petty
governors around, as soon as they have any debts to pay, undertaking a
predatory expedition, and often selling even their own subjects.[46]
However, we were lucky in finding at last a more trodden path, which
soon brought us to an open, straggling village named Kárgímawa, which
displayed a most animated and cheerful picture of a wealthy and
industrious little community—the men sitting in the shade of some fine
caoutchouc tree, some of them busy making mats, others weaving, while
the women were carrying water, or setting the pot upon the fire for the
evening repast. Cattle, goats, and fowl roved about in considerable
quantities.

Quite delighted at arriving (in consequence of having strayed from the
direct road) at this sequestered place, we pitched our tent with a
grateful sense of security, and squatted comfortably down, while the
camels found a rich repast in the fields. In one thing, however, I was
disappointed. The sight of so many cattle had led me to anticipate a
good draught of milk; but the cattle did not belong to the inhabitants,
and before sunset they were driven away. In other respects we were
hospitably treated, and four little dishes were brought us in the
evening from different huts, three of which contained paste of Guinea
corn, and one beans. The latter always seemed to me an agreeable
variety; but a European must be very cautious how he indulges in them in
these regions, as they are apt to derange the stomach, and to bring on
serious illness.

[Sidenote: Friday, March 21st.]

Very early in the morning a numerous troop of small tradesmen, with
pack-oxen, passed through the village while we awaited day-light; and
then having gratefully taken leave of the hospitable villagers, we set
out, accompanied by one of them, to show us the road. Having passed the
former site of a little town, we soon gained the direct road, where we
fell in with a motley gipsy-looking troop of those Tébu-Jétko, who,
after the almost total annihilation of the commonwealth of Kánem, have
immigrated into Bórnu. Those we met here were coming from Zínder. They
had a few horses, oxen, and asses with them, but scarcely any luggage;
and the whole attire of men, women, and children was very poor. We then
passed the little town of Álamáy, surrounded not only with an earthen
wall and ditch, but also with a dense thorny fence some ten feet thick
on the outside. Here was exhibited the pleasant picture of a numerous
herd of fine cattle lying tranquilly on the spacious area inside the
wall, ruminating their last day’s repast, while a large extent of
cultivated ground around the town gave ample proof of the industry of
the people. But the wellbeing of the inhabitants of these regions has
very little guarantee; and when, toward the end of the year 1854, I
again travelled this same road, not a single cow was to be seen here,
and the whole place looked mournful and deserted, tall reed-grass
covering the fields which had been formerly cultivated.

Having then passed a thick forest of underwood, and some cultivated
ground, half an hour before noon we reached Búndi[47], the residence of
the ghaladíma ʿOmár, fortified in the same way as Álamáy, and went up
directly to the house of the governor, which consists entirely of reed-
work. However, the mats (“lágará”) which surround the whole
establishment are of very great height, at least fifteen feet, and of
considerable thickness, made of a peculiar reed called “súgu,” and being
sustained by long poles, and kept in a good state of repair, do not look
ill. Besides, they are in general strengthened still further on the
outside by a fence of thorny bushes.

The ghaladíma[48], or governor of the Gháladí, which (as we shall see in
the historical account of the Bórnu empire) comprised all the western
provinces of Bórnu from the komádugu Wáube (the so-called Yéou) to the
shores of the Kwára, having his residence in Bírni Ngurú, near Mármar,
in former times was an officer (or rather an almost independent feudal
vassal) of immense power; at present, however, he has sunk to great
insignificance, and in real power is much inferior to his neighbours the
governors of Múniyo, Zínder, and even that of Máshena. But the present
ghaladíma ʿOmár is an intriguing man; and it would have been imprudent
to pass on without paying him the compliment of a visit; and I was
justified in hoping that he would provide me with a guide in order that
I might reach as soon as possible the presence of his liege lord the
sheikh of Bórnu.

Not being able to see him directly, I was obliged to sacrifice half a
day, and to make up my mind to spend the night here. I therefore asked
for quarters, and was lodged in a spacious but dirty courtyard, where I
could procure but a very insufficient shade with my little English bell-
tent of thin canvass. Having passed two uncomfortable hours without any
refreshment, I was called in the afternoon into the presence of the
governor, and being obliged to leave my servant behind to take care of
my luggage while ʿAbd-Alla was pasturing the camels, I went alone, and
found the great man in a spacious room or hall formed entirely of
matwork, where he was lying upon an elevated platform or divan spread
with a carpet. He was a short, well-fed, dark-coloured man, of about
sixty years of age, his large, broad face looking forth from the hood of
a blue cloth bernús, with a neutral expression indicating neither
stupidity nor cleverness; his courtiers were grouped around him on the
ground. Having saluted him and made the usual polite inquiries, I
expressed my ardent desire to reach Kúkawa as soon as possible, as the
day which I had fixed with my elder brother (Mr. Richardson) for a
meeting in that place was drawing nigh; and I begged him, therefore, to
grant me a guide who might conduct me there by the most direct road, of
which I myself was ignorant, much time having been already lost in
groping my way from one place to another. I then delivered my little
present, consisting of an English razor and clasp-knife, a large mirror
of German silver, a parcel of English darning-needles, half a pound of
cloves, and a piece of scented soap. Having looked at these things with
satisfaction, he asked me if I had not anything marvellous with me; and
I consented to return to my quarters and fetch my musical box, with the
performance of which the ghaladíma was highly pleased, but greatly
desired to see some other curious things, such as pocket-pistols,
whereupon I told him that I had nothing else calculated to gratify his
curiosity. I was much fatigued, and on returning to my tent was not at
all pleased to be still troubled by the governor’s servant, who came to
ask, in the name of his master, for calico, sugar, rose oil, and sundry
other articles.

Búndi is a place of tolerable size, but with little industry; and the
province of which it is the capital is going to ruin more and more, on
account of the laziness and negligence of its governor,—a statement
which will be amply proved by the account of my journey through the same
district in 1854. The town probably contains eight or nine thousand
inhabitants, who belong to the Mánga nation, which seems to be the chief
element of the Kanúri, and preserves many very remarkable customs. The
special name of the clan of this tribe which dwells hereabouts is Kárda.
There is no market here of any importance; but the inhabitants seem to
be tolerably at their ease, and there was music and racing, or
“kadáske,” in the evening, accompanied by the joyous shrill voices, the
“wulúli,” of the women. We, however, seemed to be forgotten; and it was
nine o’clock at night, long after we had supped, when we received a dish
for ourselves, and corn for the horse. It is rather remarkable that
these western provinces of Bórnu were never conquered by the Fúlbe or
Felláta, though lying so much nearer to those countries of which they
have definitively taken possession than that part of Bórnu situated
between the old capital and the great lagoon. The consequence is, that a
certain degree of independence is allowed to them, and that they do not
pay any tithes to the sheikh.[49]


[Footnote 42: The names he gave me are as follow:—Dubberáno, Buténi,
Hákka, Hanʿaa, Syr-há, Néshyrá, Tárfa, Sábená, Harzána, Surfa, Iwák,
Shemák, Ikelíllu, Fáram makadám, Fáram makhéro. Of these fifteen names,
which I was unable to identify with the months of the Arab calendar, as
the man scarcely understood a word of Arabic, three may rather denote
the seasons.]

[Footnote 43: “Chínna-n-yalá” is an interesting specimen of the
corruption of a language in the border-districts; for while the words
are Kanúri, they are joined according to the grammar of the Háusa
language, for in Kanúri the expression ought to be “chínna yalabe.”]

[Footnote 44: Further on I shall give the itinerary from Kanó to this
important place, joining it with my own route.]

[Footnote 45: The drawing given by Denham of a Mánga warrior makes him
look much taller than the Kanémma, while the Mánga in general, though
more robust, is shorter than the former, though there are exceptions.
The battle-axe also and other characteristic details are wanting.]

[Footnote 46: The Anti-Slavery Society seems to be unaware of these
facts, as they suppose that a person in these regions is sufficiently
protected by his creed. They appear not to have read the late Mr.
Richardson’s Journal, the latter part of which is full of remarks and
exclamations on this melancholy state of the inhabitants. See especially
vol. ii. p. 223.]

[Footnote 47: “Búndi,” in Kanúri, means “wild beasts.” The inhabitants
still bear the particular name of Ngúru-bú, plural of Ngúru-ma, from the
name of the place or district Ngurú, generally called Ángarú.]

[Footnote 48: The termination -ma in Kanúri signifies the possession of
a thing, and is equivalent to the mai- in Háusa, placed before a word.
Thus bílla-ma is exactly identical with maí-gari, fír-ma with mai-dóki
(the horseman), and so on. With this termination almost all the names of
offices are formed in Kanúri, as yerí-ma, chiró-ma, kasél-ma, and so on.
Thus also the governor of the province Múniyo or Mínyo bears the title
Muniyó-ma or Minyó-ma, a name entirely misunderstood by Mr. Richardson.
I will only add here that the title of the governor of the Gháladí in
the Bórnu empire, on account of the immense extent of the latter, has
been introduced into the list of offices of all the courts of Central
Negroland, and that we find a ghaladíma in Sókoto as well as in every
little town of ʿAdamáwa. The same is to be said of some offices
originally belonging only to the court of the empire of Mélle, such as
that of feréng or fárma, mánso, and others.]

[Footnote 49: Here I will give the route from Kanó to Álamä́y, near
Búndi, by way of Khadéja, as it determines approximately the position of
this town, which has been also mentioned by Clapperton as a place of
importance. But its peculiar political situation, forced upon it by the
events of this period, when it became the residence of a rebel chief
waging war on all around, prevented my visiting it at a future period.

1st day. On leaving Kanó, sleep in Gógia, where the governor of Kanó has
a house, and where you arrive about two o’clock in the afternoon.

2nd. Gáya, another town of the province of Kanó, where you arrive about
the same hour, having crossed in the forenoon the bed of a torrent with
water only in the rainy season.

3rd. Dúchi or Dútsi; arrive about the ʿaser, having crossed in the
morning a torrent called Dedúrra, and passed about noon a half-deserted
place called Katákatá.

4th. Zogó, a large open place; about ʿaser. Many small villages on the
road.

5th. Khadéja, a large town surrounded with a beautiful and very strong
double clay wall, and well inhabited, the courtyards being inclosed with
clay walls, but containing only reed huts. The inhabitants employ
themselves exclusively in warlike expeditions, and have no industry; but
nevertheless there are still to be seen here a few dyeing-pots, marking
the eastern limit of this branch of industry. On the south side of the
town is a kogí, or komádugu, with a stream of running water in the rainy
season, but with only stagnant pools in summer, along which a little
wheat is cultivated. It is generally called Wáni.

6th. Garú-n-ghábbes, a middle-sized walled town, the first place of
Bórnu, on this side, with a good deal of cultivation around. Though
without importance in other respects, it is so in an historical point of
view; for this place being identical with the town Birám tá ghábbes,
mentioned above, is regarded as the oldest place of the seven original
settlements of the Háusa nation.

7th. Álamä́y, the place which I passed by this morning; arrive about
ʿaser. Country in a wild state; no cultivation.]




                              CHAP. XXVII.

                             BÓRNU PROPER.


[Sidenote: Saturday, March 22nd.]

The ghaladíma had promised to send me a horseman last evening, as I
wanted to start early in the morning; but as we neither saw nor heard
anything of him the whole night, I thought it better not to lose any
more time, but to rely upon my own resources, and accordingly left the
town quietly by the northern gate, while the people, after last night’s
merriment, were still buried in sleep.

Following the great road, we kept on through a light forest, at times
interrupted by a little cultivation. We met several parties—first of a
warlike character, armed, horse and foot, then a motley band of natron-
traders with camels, bulls, horses and asses, all laden with this
valuable article. Emerging at length from the forest, we came upon a
wide extent of cultivated land with a sandy soil, with hardly a single
tree at present, and, the labours of the field not having yet commenced,
still covered with the káwo or _Asclepias_, the characteristic weed of
Negroland, which every year, at the beginning of the agricultural
season, is cleared away, and which during the dry season grows again,
often to the height of ten or twelve feet. We then had a most
interesting and cheerful scene of African life in the open, straggling
village of Kálimarí or Kálemrí, divided into two distinct groups by a
wide open space, where numerous herds of cattle were just being watered
at the wells; but how melancholy, how mournful, became the recollection
of the busy animated scene which I then witnessed, when three years and
a half later, as I travelled again through this district, the whole
village, which now presented such a spectacle of happiness and well-
being, had disappeared, and an insecure wilderness, greatly infested by
robbers, had succeeded to the cheerful abode of man.

But inviting as the village was for a halt during the heat of the day,
we had, as conscientious and experienced travellers, the stomachs of our
poor animals more at heart than our own; and having watered the horse
and filled our skins, we continued on for a while, and then halted in
very rich herbage, where, however, there was scarcely a spot free from
the disagreeable “ngíbbu,” the _Pennisetum distichum_. On starting again
in the afternoon, the country began to exhibit a greater variety of bush
and tree; and after a march of two hours, we reached the village
Dármagwá, surrounded with a thorny fence, and encamped near it, not far
from another little trading-party. We were soon joined by a troop of
five Tébu merchants with two camels, a horse, and two pack-oxen, who
were also going to Kúkawa, but who, unfortunately, did not suit me as
constant companions, their practice being to start early in the morning
long before day-light, which was against my principle, as well in a
scientific as in a material point of view; for neither should I have
been able to lay down the road with correctness, nor would even the best
arms have guaranteed my safety while marching in the dark. We therefore
allowed them next morning to have the start of us for full two hours,
and then followed.

[Sidenote: Sunday, March 23rd.]

We now entered a district which may be most appropriately called the
exclusive region of the dúm-palm or _Cucifera Thebaïca_ in Negroland;
for though this tree is found, in large clusters or in detached
specimens, in many localities of Central Africa, yet it is always
limited to some favoured spot, especially to the bank of a watercourse,
as the komádugu near the town of Yó, and there is no other district of
such extent as this tract between Kálemrí and Zurríkulo where the
_Cucifera Thebaïca_ is the characteristic and almost the only tree. My
Gatróni thought that the trees would perhaps not bear fruit here; but on
my second journey, in the month of December, they were loaded with
fruit.

The country has a very peculiar open character, a sandy level very
slightly undulating, covered thinly with tall reed-grass shooting forth
from separate bunches, the line of view broken only now and then by a
cluster of slender fan-palms, without a single trace of cultivation. I
was anxious afterwards to know whether this tract has always had this
monotonous, deserted character, or whether it had contained formerly any
towns and villages; and from all that I could learn, the former seems to
be the case. However, our road was frequented, and we met several little
troops of native travellers, with one of whom I saw the first specimen
of the “kúri,” a peculiar kind of bull of immense size and strength,
with proportionately large horns of great thickness and curving inwards.
They are almost all of white colour. Their original home is Kárgá, the
cluster of islands and swampy ground at the eastern corner of the Tsád.

After five hours’ marching, when we had just traversed a small hollow
full of herbage, the dúm-palm was for a moment superseded by other
trees, chiefly by the gáwo or karáge; but it soon after again asserted
its eminence as the predominating tree. We encamped at length, ignorant
as we were of the country, a few minutes beyond a small village, the
first human abode we had met with since we had left Dármagwá, half an
hour before noon, in the shade of a tamarind-tree, surrounded by a thick
cluster of dúm-palms. Certainly the tamarind-tree indicated that water
was near; but I was not a little surprised, when ʿAbd-Alla, who was
tending the camels, brought me the news that a considerable river, now
stagnant, was close behind us. It was, as I afterwards learnt, the
“Wáni,” that branch of the komádugu Wáube (erroneously called “Yë́u”)
which runs past Khadéja and joins the other branch which comes from
Katágum. We therefore watered our camels here without being obliged to
pay a single shell, and gave them a good feed, after which we resumed
our march, and were not a little astonished when, having crossed the
komádugu where it formed a narrow meandering channel about fifty yards
broad, and bordered on both sides with trees, we discovered the town of
Zurríkulo at a short distance before us.

Going round the north side of the town, we entered the dilapidated wall
on the eastern side, where there was an open space, and pitched my tent
close to the Tébu, who had arrived already in the forenoon. Soon after,
there arrived also a káfila, with twelve camels and a number of oxen and
asses, from Kúkawa, and I was anxious to obtain some news of Mr.
Richardson; but these people were utterly ignorant of the actual or
expected arrival of any Christian in that place. They told me, however,
what was not very agreeable, that the sheikh of Bórnu was about to
undertake a pilgrimage to Mekka; but fortunately, though that was the
heart’s desire of that mild and pious man, he could not well carry it
into execution.

I had now entered Bórnu proper, the nucleus of that great Central
African empire in its second stage, after Kánem had been given up. It is
bordered towards the east by the great sea-like komádugu the Tsád or
Tsáde, and towards the west and north-west by the little komádugu which
by the members of the last expedition has been called Yéou, from the
town of that name, or rather Yó, near which they first made its
acquaintance on their way from Fezzán. I had now left behind me those
loosely-attached principalities which still preserve some sort of
independence, and henceforth had only to do with Bórnu officers.

Not feeling very well, I remained in my tent without paying my
compliments to the officer here stationed, whose name is Kashélla Sʿaid,
with whom I became acquainted on a later occasion, but the good man
being informed by the people that a stranger from a great distance, who
was going to visit his liege lord, had entered his town, sent his people
to welcome me, and regaled me with several bowls of very good paste,
with fresh fish, and a bowl of milk.

Zurríkulo was once a large town, and at the time of the inroad of Wadáÿ
revolted from the sheikh, but was obliged to surrender to his brother
ʿAbd e’ Rahmán. Since then it has gradually been decaying, and is now
half deserted. The neighbourhood of the town is full of wild animals;
and great fear was entertained by my companions for our beasts, as we
had no protection in our rear. The roaring of a lion was heard during
the night.

[Sidenote: Monday, March 24th.]

Next morning, when we resumed our march, the fan-palm for some time
continued to be the prevailing tree; but some kukas also, or _Adansonia
digitata_, and other more leafy trees began to appear, and after a while
a thick underwood sprang up. Then followed a few scattered, I might say
forlorn, date-trees, which looked like strangers in the country,
transplanted into this region by some accident. The sky was clear; and I
was leaning carelessly upon my little nag, musing on the original homes
of all the plants which now adorn different countries, when I saw
advancing towards us a strange-looking person of very fair complexion,
richly dressed and armed, and accompanied by three men on horseback,
likewise armed with musket and pistols. Seeing that he was a person of
consequence, I rode quickly up to him and saluted him, when he,
measuring me with his eyes, halted and asked me whether I was the
Christian who was expected to arrive from Kanó; and on my answering him
in the affirmative, he told me distinctly that my fellow-traveller Yakúb
(Mr. Richardson) had died before reaching Kúkawa, and that all his
property had been seized. Looking him full in the face, I told him that
this, if true, was serious news; and then he related some particulars,
which left but little doubt as to the truth of his statement. When his
name was asked, he called himself Ismʿaíl; I learned, however,
afterwards, from other people, that he was the sheríf el Habíb, a native
of Morocco, and really of noble blood, a very learned, but extremely
passionate man, who, in consequence of a dispute with Mʿallem Mohammed
had been just driven out of Kúkawa by the sheikh of Bórnu.

This sad intelligence deeply affected me, as it involved not only the
life of an individual, but the whole fate of the mission; and though
some room was left for doubt, yet in the first moment of excitement, I
resolved to leave my two young men behind with the camels, and to hurry
on alone on horseback. But Mohammed would not hear of this proposal; and
indeed as I certainly could not reach Kúkawa in less than four days, and
as part of the road was greatly infested by the Tawárek, such an attempt
might have exposed me to a great deal of inconvenience. But we
determined to go on as fast as the camels would allow us. We halted at
eleven o’clock, shaded by the trunk of an immense leafless monkey-bread-
tree, a little behind the walled place Kábi, the southern quarter of
which is alone inhabited, and where our friends the Tébu had encamped.
Starting then together with them at two o’clock in the afternoon, we
took the road by Déffowa, leaving on our right that which passes Donári,
the country now assuming a more hospitable and very peculiar character.

For here begins a zone characterized by sandy downs from 100 to 120 feet
high, and exhibiting on their summits a level plain of excellent arable
soil, but with few trees, while the dells separating these downs one
from the other, and which often wind about in the most anomalous manner,
are in general richly overgrown with a rank vegetation, among which the
dúm-palm and the dúm-bush are predominant. This curious formation, I
fancy, has some connection with the great lagoon, which in a former
period must have been of much greater extent.

The intercourse on the road this afternoon was exceedingly animated; and
one motley troop followed another,—Háusa fatáki, Bórnu traders or
“tugúrchi,” Kánembú Tébu, Shúwa Arabs, and others of the roving tribe of
the Welád Slimán, all mixed together,—while their beasts of burden
formed a multifarious throng of camels, oxen, horses, and asses. The
Welád Slimán, who were bringing camels for sale to the market of Kanó,
were greatly frightened when I told them what had happened to their
brethren near Kúka mairuá, as they were conscious that most of the
camels now with them were of the number of those which two years ago had
been taken from the Kél-owí in Bílma.

As evening came on, the dells which we had to traverse were thronged
with thousands of wild pigeons, carrying on their amorous play in the
cool twilight of approaching night. All was silent, with the exception
of a distant hum, becoming more and more distinct as we wound along the
side of an exuberant meandering valley. The noise proceeded from the
considerable town of Déffowa, which we reached at a quarter past seven
o’clock, and encamped at a little distance to the north. Lively music
never ceased in the town till a late hour.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, March 25th.]

All was still silent in the place when, early in the morning, I set out
with my little troop to follow the track of our temporary companions the
Tébu. The village was surrounded only by a light thorny fence; but it
seemed to be prosperous and densely inhabited. The country continued
similar in character, but better cultivated than the tract we had
traversed the day before; and the immense multitude of wild pigeons,
which found a secure and pleasant haunt in the rank vegetation of the
hollows, made it necessary to resort to some expedient to keep them off.
High platforms were therefore erected in the fields, in the shade of
some tree; and ropes drawn from them were fastened to poles and coated
with a peculiar vegetable extract, which caused them, if put into motion
by a person stationed upon the platform, to give forth a loud sound,
which kept the birds at a respectful distance.

We saw here also a small cotton-field. If the country were more densely
inhabited and the people more industrious and better protected by their
slave-hunting governors, all the lowlands and valley-like hollows, which
during the rainy season form so many water-channels, and retain a great
degree of moisture during the whole year, would afford the most splendid
ground for this branch of cultivation.

The repeated ascent and descent along steep slopes of deep sandy soil
more than a hundred feet high was very fatiguing for the camels. While
ascending one of these ridges, we had a very charming view over the
whole of the neat little village of Kálowa, lying along the slope and in
the hollow to our left. It was rather small, containing about two
hundred huts, but every yard was shaded by a korna or bíto-tree
(_Balanites_); and comfort (according to the wants felt by the natives)
and industry were everywhere manifested. In the midst was a large open
space, where the cattle were collecting round the wells to be watered,
while the people were drawing water to fill the large round hollows,
“kéle nkíbe,” made with little clay walls to serve as troughs. The
blacksmith was seen busy at his simple work, making new hoes for the
approaching season; the weaver was sitting at his loom; several were
making mats of reed; some women were carrying water from the wells, some
spinning or cleaning the cotton, while others pounded corn for their
daily consumption. The little granaries, in order to preserve the stock
of corn from the danger of conflagration, which every moment threatens
these light structures of straw and reed, were erected on the sandy
level near the edge of the slope. Even the fowls had their little
separate abodes, also of reed, very thrifty and neat, as the
accompanying woodcut will show. Such was the simple but nevertheless
cheerful picture which this little village exhibited. My two boys were a
long way ahead of me when I awoke from my reverie and followed them.

[Illustration]

It was shortly before we came to this village that we passed the
enormous skeleton of an elephant,—the first trace of this animal which I
had seen since Gazáwa (I mean the independent pagan place of that name
between Tasáwa and Kátsena). The road was frequented; early in the
morning we had met a party of tugúrchi with pack-oxen, who had been
travelling a great part of the night, as they generally do, on account
of this beast of burden bearing the heat of the day very badly. About an
hour’s march beyond Kálowa we met a party of horsemen coming from
Kúkawa; and as their head man appeared to be an intelligent person, I
approached him, and asked him the news of the place. He most probably
took me for an Arab, and told me that all was well, but that the
Christian who had been coming from a far distant country to pay his
compliments to the sheikh had died, more than twenty days ago, in a
place called Ngurútuwa, before reaching Kúkawa. There could now be no
more doubt of the sad event; and with deep emotion I continued my march,
praying to the Merciful to grant me better success than had fallen to
the lot of my companion, and to strengthen me, that I might carry out
the benevolent and humane purposes of our mission.

This district also has a very scanty supply of water; and it took us
more than half an hour to collect, from four wells near another small
village, a sufficient supply for my horse; but as to filling our
waterskins, it was not to be thought of. The wells were ten fathoms
deep. We halted half an hour before noon, not far from another well, at
the foot of a sandy swell upon which the little village “Mʿallem
Kerémerí” is situated. Here, as well as in the village passed in the
morning, we could not obtain beans, though the cultivation of them is in
general carried on to a great extent; but this district seemed to
produce millet or _Pennisetum typhoïdeum_ almost exclusively—at least no
sorghum was to be seen. Keeping generally along a hollow, which however
was not much depressed, and which consisted of arable sandy soil with a
few bushes and trees, we reached the little town or village Dunú,
surrounded with a ditch and earthen wall in decay, so that the gate had
become useless. There was a large open space inside, and as the
inhabitants, who gave us a very cheerful welcome, advised us not to
encamp outside, on account of the number of wild beasts infesting the
neighbourhood, we pitched the tent inside the wall.

We might have passed a very comfortable evening with the natives, who
took great interest in me, had it not been for my faithful old companion
the Bu-séfi, the best (or rather the only good one) of my three camels,
which, when it was growing dark, and ʿAbd-Alla went to bring the animals
back from their pasture, could not be found. The careless boy had
neglected to fasten the camel’s legs; and being very hungry, it had gone
in search of better herbage. This was a very disagreeable accident for
me, as I was in the greatest hurry; and my two young lads, who were well
aware of it, went for several hours, accompanied by the inhabitants of
the place, in every direction, through the whole tract where the camels
had been grazing, lighting the ground with torches, but all in vain.

Wearied and exhausted, they returned about midnight and lay down to
sleep, the music and dance also, which the cheerful natives had kept up,
dying away at the same time. About an hour later, being too much excited
from anxiety to obtain sleep, I went out once more to see if all was
right, when I saw my favourite coming slowly along towards the tent; and
on reaching it he laid down by the side of his two inferior companions.
There was no moonlight; the night was very dark; evidently only the
brightness of the well-known white tent guided the “stupid” animal. But
this was no great proof of stupidity; and I am rather afraid that
Europeans often make camels stupid by their own foolish treatment of
them, whereas I was wont to treat this noble animal, which had carried
myself or the heaviest of my things all the way from Tripoli, as a
sensible companion, giving it in the beginning the peel of the oranges I
was eating, of which it was particularly fond, or a few of my dates (for
which it did not fail to turn round its beautiful neck), or granting it
a little extra feed of Negro millet, which it ate like a horse. Rejoiced
at seeing my favourite, the absence of which had created such anxiety,
returning of its own accord to my tent, and lying down near it, I
aroused my servant from his sleep to tell him the joyful news. I wanted
to reward it with some corn, but it had taken such good care of itself,
that it refused its favourite food.

I was much grieved in consequence of being obliged to part with my old
companion; but camels from the coast will not stand the effects of a
rainy season in Negroland. I hoped it would safely return to its native
country; but the Arab who bought it from me, went first to Kanó when the
rainy season was already setting in, and the poor animal died not far
from the place where Mr. Richardson had succumbed. Its fidelity will
ever remain in my memory as one of the pleasantest recollections of my
journey.

Having thus got back our best carrier, though we had lost a good night’s
rest, we started early next morning over the same sort of ground we had
been traversing the last few days, and in two hours reached the little
town of Wádi, the noise from which, caused by the pounding of grain, had
been heard by us at the distance of almost a mile. Indeed the pounding
of grain has betrayed many a little village and many a caravan. The town
is considerable, but properly consists of two different quarters walled
all round, and separated from each other by a wide open space where the
cattle rest in safety. Approving very much of this way of building a
town in these turbulent regions, we kept along the open space, but were
greatly perplexed from the number of paths branching off in every
direction, and scarcely knew which road to take.

It had been my intention originally to go to Borzári, in the hope of
obtaining from the governor of that town a horseman to carry the news of
my approach to the sheikh of Bórnu; but being here informed that I
should be obliged to make a great circuit in order to touch at that
place, I changed my plan, and took another and more direct road, which
in the beginning seemed a well-trodden highroad, but soon became a
narrow footpath, winding along from village to village without any
leading direction. However, we met several small caravans as well of
Arabs, who were going to Kanó, as of native traders or tugúrchi with
natron. Passing now over open cultivated ground, then through a bushy
thicket, we reached, about ten o’clock in the morning, the considerable
open village Kábowa, where a well-frequented and very noisy market was
being held, and halted during the heat of the day under a shady
tamarind-tree about five hundred yards to the south, near a “kaudi” or
“kabéa tseggénabé” (a yard for weaving cotton).

We had scarcely unloaded our camels, when one of the weavers came, and,
saluting me most cordially, begged me to accept of a dish of very well
prepared “fura” or “tiggra,” with curdled milk, which evidently formed
their breakfast. The market was very partially supplied, and did not
furnish what we wanted. Natron, salt, and túrkedi, or the cloth for
female dress made in Kanó, constituted the three articles which were
plentiful; also a good many cattle, or rather pack-oxen, were there,
besides two camels and abundance of the fruit of the dúm-palm; but meat
was dear, onions extremely scarce, and beans not to be got at all, and,
what was worse, the people refused to accept shells (“kúngona” in
Kanúri), of which we had still a small supply, and wanted gábagá, or
cotton stripes, of which we had none. Our camels, therefore, which
hereabouts found plenty of their favourite and nourishing food, the
aghúl or _Hedysarum Alhaggi_, fared much better than we ourselves. The
neighbourhood had rather a dreary aspect; the east wind was very high
and troublesome; the well was distant, and, with a depth of eight
fathoms, did not furnish the supply necessary for the numerous visitors
to the market.

Early in the afternoon we continued our march, first in the company of
some market-people returning to their native village, then left to our
judgment to discriminate, among the numberless footpaths which
intersected the country in every direction, the one which was most
direct or rather least circuitous; for a direct highroad there is none.
We became at length so heartily tired of groping our way alone, that we
attached ourselves to a horseman who invited us to accompany him to his
village, till, becoming aware that it lay too much out of our way, we
ascended the slope of a sandy ridge to our right, on the summit of which
was situated the village Lúshiri, where we pitched our tent.

Here also the inhabitants behaved hospitably; and I had scarcely
dismounted, when a woman from a neighbouring hut brought me a bowl of
ghussub-water as a refreshment. We succeeded also in buying here a good
supply of beans and sorghum—or ngáberi, as it is called in Kanúri; for
my Kátsena horse refused to eat the millet or argúm, and sorghum is very
scarce in all this part of the country as well as in many other
districts of Bórnu, especially in the district of Koyám. The women of
the village, who were very curious to see the interior of my tent, were
greatly surprised to find that I was a bachelor, and without a female
partner, accustomed, as they were, to see travellers in this country, at
least those tolerably at their ease, with a train of female slaves. They
expressed their astonishment in much diverting chat with each other. I
got also milk and a fowl for my supper, and the bíllama afterwards
brought some “ngáji” (the favourite Kanúri dish) for my men. As the
situation of the village was elevated, it was most interesting to see in
the evening the numerous fires of the hamlets and small towns all
around, giving a favourable idea of the local population.

[Sidenote: Thursday, March 27th.]

Early in the morning we continued our march; but we lost a great deal of
time through ignorance of the direct way. Some of the paths appear, at
times, like a well-frequented highroad, when suddenly almost every trace
of them is lost. At length, at the walled town of Gobálgorúm, we learned
that we were on the road to Kashímma; and we determined to keep on as
straight as possible. The country which we traversed early in the
morning consisted of stiff clayey soil, and produced ngáberi; but this
was only a sort of basin of no great extent, and the landscape soon
changed its character. After we had passed Gobálgorúm, the country
became much richer in trees; and this circumstance, as well as the
increased number of waterfowl, indicated plainly that we were
approaching a branch of the wide-spreading net of the komádugu of Bórnu.

First we came to a hollow clothed with a great profusion of vegetation
and the freshest pasturage, but at present dry, with the exception of a
fine pond of clear water on our left; and we marched full three miles
through a dense forest before we came to the real channel, which here,
running south and north, formed an uninterrupted belt of water as far as
the eye could reach, but at present without any current. It looked just
like an artificial canal, having almost everywhere the same breadth of
about fifty yards, and, at the place where we crossed it, a depth of two
feet and a half.

We halted, during the heat of the day, on its eastern shore, in the
shade of one of the small gáwo-trees which border it on this side; and
after our dreary and rather uninteresting march from Kanó, I was greatly
delighted with the animated and luxuriant character of the scene before
us. The water of this komádugu, moreover, though it was fully exposed to
the power of the sun’s rays, was delightfully cool, while that from the
wells was disagreeably warm, having a mean temperature of 77°, and quite
unfit to drink until allowed to cool. The river was full of small fish;
and about twenty boys from the village of Shógo, which lay upon the
summit of the rising ground before us, were plashing about in it in
playful exercise, and catching the fish with a large net of peculiar
make, which they dragged through the water. This komádugu too is called
Wáni; and I think it more probable that this is the continuation of the
branch which passes Katágum, than that the latter joins the branch of
Khadéja to the southward of Zurríkulo.

While we were resting here, I was pestered a little by the curiosity of
a company of gipsy-like Jétko, who, with very little luggage, traverse
the country in every direction, and are the cleverest thieves in the
world. I shall, on another occasion, say something about the settlements
of these people along the komádugu Wáube.

A native of the village, whom we had met on the road, came afterwards,
with his wife, and brought me a dish of well-cooked hasty-pudding; and
on my complaining that, though in great haste, we were losing so much
time, owing to our being unacquainted with the nearest road, he promised
to serve us as a guide: but unfortunately I made him a present too soon;
and as he did not keep his word, we preferred groping our way onwards as
well as possible. Our camels had meanwhile got a good feed in the cool
shade of the trees; for if exposed to the sun, these animals will not
eat during the heat of the day, but prefer lying down.

With fresh spirit and energy we started, therefore, at half-past two in
the afternoon, ascending the considerable slope of the ridge upon which
the village stands. At this hour the sun was very powerful, and none of
the inhabitants were to be seen, with the exception of an industrious
female who, on a clean open spot near the road, was weaving the cotton
threads into gábagá. Opposite the village to the north of the path, was
a round cluster of light Kánembú cottages, formed in a most simple way,
with the long stalks of the native corn bent so as to meet at the top,
and fastened with a few ropes. Descending immediately from this
considerable ridge, we entered a dale thickly overgrown with trees,
where I was greatly astonished to see a herd of cattle watered, with
great trouble, from the wells, while the river was close at hand; but on
addressing the neatherds, I was informed by them that the stagnant water
of the komádugu at this season is very unwholesome for cattle.

All the trees hereabouts were full of locusts, while the air was
darkened by swarms of hawks (_Cenchreis_), which, with a singular
instinct, followed our steps as we advanced; for on our approaching a
tree, the locusts, roused from their fatal repose and destructive
revelling, took to flight in thick clouds, when the birds dashed down to
catch them, often not only beating one another with their wings, but
even incommoding us and our animals not a little.

The peculiar character of lofty sandy ridges and thickly overgrown
hollows continued also in this district; no dúm-palm was to be seen, but
only the dúm-bush, called ngílle by the Bórnu people. About two miles
and a half behind Shógo we passed a wide and most beautiful basin, with
rich pasture-grounds enlivened by numbers of well-fed cattle. Stubble-
fields, with small granaries such as I have described above, were
scattered about here and there. Then keeping on through a more level
country with patches of cultivation, we reached the fields of Bandégo.
The village introduced itself to our notice from afar by the sound of
noisy mirth; and I was surprised to hear that it was occasioned by the
celebration, not of a marriage, but of a circumcision. This was the
first and last time during my travels in Negroland that I saw this
ceremony performed with so much noise.

We were quietly pitching our tent on the east side of the village, and I
was about to make myself comfortable, when I was not a little affected
by learning that the girls, who had been bringing little presents to the
festival, and who were just returning in procession to their homes,
belonged to Ngurútuwa, the very place where the Christian (Mr.
Richardson) had died. I then determined to accompany them, though it was
late, in order to have at least a short glimpse of the “white man’s
grave,” and to see whether it were taken care of. If I had known, before
we unloaded the camels, how near we were to the place, I should have
gone there at once to spend the night.

Ngurútuwa,[50] once a large and celebrated place, but at present
somewhat in decay, lies in a wide and extensive plain, with very few
trees, about two miles N.E. from Bandégo; but the town itself is well
shaded, and has, besides kórna and bíto, some wide-spreading umbrageous
fig-trees, under one of which Mr. Richardson had been buried. His grave,
well-protected with thorn-bushes, appeared to have remained untouched,
and was likely to remain so. The natives were well aware that it was a
Christian who had died here; and they regarded the tomb with reverence.
The story of his untimely end had caused some sensation in the
neighbourhood. He arrived in a weak state in the evening, and early the
next morning he died. The people had taken great interest in the matter;
and the report they gave me of the way in which he was buried agreed in
the main circumstances with that which I afterwards received from his
servants, and of which I forwarded an account from Kúkawa. Unfortunately
I had no means of bestowing gifts on the inhabitants of the place where
my companion had died. I gave, however, a small present to a man who
promised to take especial care of the grave; and I afterwards persuaded
the vizier of Bórnu to have a stronger fence made round it.

It was late in the evening when I returned to my tent engrossed with
reflections on my own probable fate, and sincerely thankful to the
Almighty Ruler of all things for the excellent health which I still
enjoyed notwithstanding the many fatigues which I had undergone. My way
of looking at things was not quite the same as that of my late
companion, and we had therefore often had little differences; but I
esteemed him highly for the deep sympathy which he felt for the
sufferings of the native African, and deeply lamented his death. Full of
confidence I stretched myself upon my mat, and indulged in my simple
supper, accompanied with a bowl of milk which the inhabitants of Bandégo
had brought me. The people were all pleased with us; only the cattle,
when returning from their pastures, took offence at my strange-looking
tent, which I had pitched just in the path by which they were accustomed
to return to their usual resting-place.

[Sidenote: Friday, March 28th.]

At an early hour we were again on the march, conducted a little while by
an inhabitant of the village, who undertook to show us the direct road,
which passes on its south side. He represented the road which we were
about to take as much infested by the Kindín or Tawárek at that moment;
and he advised us, as we went on from one place to another, to make
strict inquiries as to the safety of the road before us. With this well-
meant advice he left us to our own discretion; and I pursued my way with
the unsatisfactory feeling that it might be again my fate to come into
too close contact with my friends the Tawárek, whom I had been so glad
to get rid of. Saddened with these reflections, my two young companions
also seeming a little oppressed, and trudging silently along with the
camels, we reached Aláune, once a considerable town, but now almost
deserted, and surrounded by a clay wall in a state of great decay.
Accosting the people, who were just drawing water from the well inside
the wall, and asking them about the state of the road, we were told
that, as far as Kashímma, it was safe; but beyond that they pronounced
it decidedly dangerous. We therefore continued our march with more
confidence, particularly as we met some market-people coming from
Kashímma.

Aláune is the same place which, by the members of the last expedition,
has been called Kabshári, from the name of the then governor of the
town—Bu-Bakr-Kabshári—after whom the place is even at present often
called “bílla Kabshári_be_” (the town of Kabshári). Keeping on through a
country partly cultivated, partly covered with thick underwood, which
was full of locusts, we were greatly delighted by obtaining at about
eight o’clock a view of a fine sheet of water, in the dale before us,
surrounded with a luxuriant vegetation, and descended cheerfully towards
its shore, where two magnificent tamarind-trees spread their canopy-like
foliage over a carpet of succulent turf. While enjoying this beautiful
picture, I was about to allow my poor horse a little feed of the grass,
when a woman, who had come to fetch water, told me that it was very
unwholesome.

This is the great komádugu of Bórnu, the real name of which is “komádugu
Wáube,” while, just from the same mistake which has caused Aláune to be
called Kabshári, and the river of Zyrmi, Zyrmi, it has been called Yeou;
for though it may be called the river of Yeou, or rather of Yó,
particularly in its lower course, where it passes the town of this name,
it can never be called “the river Yó,” any more than the Thames, on
account of its flowing through London, can be called the river London.

While ordering ʿAbd-Alla to follow with the camels along the lower road,
I ascended with Mohammed the steep slope of the sandy swell, rising to
about three hundred feet, on the top of which Kashímma is situated in a
fine healthy situation commanding the whole valley. It is an open place,
consisting entirely of huts made of corn-stalks and reeds, but is of
considerable size and well inhabited. However, I was not disposed to
make any halt here; and learning, to my great satisfaction, that no
Kindín had been seen as far as the Eastern Ngurútuwa, I determined to go
on as fast as possible, and persuaded a netmaker to point out clearly to
me the road which we were to take; for we had now rather difficult
ground before us—the wide bottom of the valley, with its thick forest
and its several watery channels.

The path led us gradually down from the eminence upon which Kashímma is
situated, into the bushy dale with a great quantity of ngílle, and also
a few dúm-palms. Here we saw numerous foot-prints of the elephant, and
some of enormous size; and truly the wanderer cannot be surprised that
this colossal animal has taken possession of these beautiful, luxuriant
shores of the komádugu, from which the native in his inborn laziness has
despairingly retired, and allowed them to be converted into an almost
impenetrable jungle. The thicket became for a while very dense, a real
jungle, such as I had not yet seen in Negroland, when a clearer spot
followed, overgrown with tall coarse grass ten feet high, fed by the
water which after the rainy season covers the whole of this low ground,
and offering a rich pasture to the elephant. Then we had to traverse a
branch of the real komádugu, at present very shallow, but at times to be
crossed only with the aid of a “mákara.” In the thick covert which
bordered upon this channel the dúm-palm was entirely predominant.

Though the thicket was here so dense, the path was well trodden, but as
soon as we reached a place which had been cleared for cultivation we
lost all traces of it, and then turned off to our right, where we saw a
small village and a farm situated in the most retired spot imaginable.
Here we found a cheerful old man, the master of the farm, who, on
hearing that we too were going eastwards, begged us, very urgently, to
spend the remainder of the day in his company, adding that he would
treat us well and start early the next morning with us for Ngurútuwa;
but however delightful it might appear to me to dream away half a day in
this wilderness, my anxiety to reach Kúkawa compelled me to reject his
proposal. However, the thicket became so dense, that we had the utmost
difficulty in getting my bulky luggage through it.

Having made a short halt about noon to refresh ourselves and our
animals, we continued our march through the forest, which here consisted
principally of dúm-palms, farʿaón, kálgo, talha-trees, and a little
siwák or _Capparis sodata_. The ground was covered with the heavy
footprints of the elephant, and even at this season it retained many
ponds in the channel-like hollows. A solitary maráya or mohhor
(_Antilope Soemmeringii_) bounded through the thicket; indeed antelopes
of any species are rare in these quarters, and on the whole road I had
seen but a single gazelle, near the village Díggere-báre. But it seems
remarkable that from the description of the natives there cannot be the
least doubt that that large and majestic variety of antelope called
_addax_, which is very much like a large stag, is occasionally found
here. A fine open space with rich pastures and with hurdle-inclosures
interrupted the thicket for about a mile, after which we had to traverse
another thick covert, and emerging from it were agreeably surprised at
beholding a lake of considerable dimensions on our left, and after a
short interval another still more considerable approaching from the
north and turning eastward, its surface furrowed by the wind and
hurrying along in little billows which dashed upon the shore. On its
eastern side lie the ruins of the celebrated town Ghámbarú, which
although not the official residence of the kings of Bórnu, was
nevertheless their favourite retreat during the flourishing period of
the empire; and those two lakes, although connected with the komádugu
and fed by it, were artificial basins, and seem to have considerable
depth; else they could scarcely have presented such a magnificent sheet
of water at this season of the year.

But at present all this district, the finest land of Bórnu in the proper
sense of the word, which once resounded with the voices and bustle of
hundreds of towns and villages, has become one impenetrable jungle, the
domain of the elephant and the lion, and with no human inhabitants
except a few scattered herdsmen or cattle-breeders, who are exposed
every moment to the predatory inroads of the Tawárek. This condition of
the finest part of the country is a disgrace to its present rulers, who
have nothing to do but to transfer hither a few hundreds of their lazy
slaves, and establish them in a fortified place, whereupon the natives
would immediately gather round them and change this fine country along
the komádugu from an impenetrable jungle into rich fields, producing not
only grain but also immense quantities of cotton and indigo.

The town of Ghámbarú was taken and destroyed by the Jemáʿa of the Fúlbe
or Felláta at the same time with Ghasréggomo, or Bírni, in the year of
the Héjra 1224, or 1809 of our era, and has not been since reoccupied,
so that the ruins are thickly overgrown and almost enveloped in the
forest. Although I had not leisure to survey attentively the whole area
of the town, I could not help dismounting and looking with great
interest at a tolerably well preserved building, evidently part of a
mosque, at the south-eastern corner of the wall. I knew, from the report
of the last expedition, that there were here remains of brick buildings;
but I did not expect to find the workmanship so good. The bricks are
certainly not so regularly-shaped as in Europe, but in other respects
they seemed quite as good. It is indeed a source of mournful reflection
for the traveller to compare this solid mode of building practised in
former times in this country, at least by its rulers, with the frail and
ephemeral architecture of the present day; but this impression of
retrograding power and resources is caused also by the history of the
country, which we shall soon lay before our readers. Even in the half-
barbarous country of Bagírmi we may still find the remains of very
extensive brick buildings.

Overtaking the two young companions of my adventurous journey, I
travelled on through an interesting but wild country, when at five
o’clock in the afternoon a branch of the river once more approached on
our left, and soon cut across our path, leaving no trace of it. I felt
sure that the track crossed the river here, but unfortunately allowed
myself to be overruled by my servant (who was in truth an experienced
lad); and accordingly we kept along the sandy border of the channel,
following the traces of cattle till we became assured that there was no
path in this place. Having searched for about two hours, we were at last
compelled, by the darkness which had set in, to encamp in the midst of
this dense forest; and I chose a small hillock on the border of the
river, in order to protect myself, as well as possible, from the noxious
exhalations, and spread my tent over my luggage, in the midst of which I
arranged my bed. I then strewed, in a circle round our little
encampment, dry wood and other fuel, to be kindled in case of an attack
of wild beasts, and, taking out a parcel of cartridges, prepared for the
worst. However, we passed a quiet night, disturbed only by the roaring
of a lion on the other side of the river, and by a countless multitude
of waterfowl of various species, playing and splashing about in the
water the whole night.

[Sidenote: Saturday, March 29th.]

Having convinced myself that the river could be crossed by the path only
at the place where we first came upon it, I mounted early in the
morning, after we had loaded the camels, and returned to that spot,
when, having crossed the stream, I found the continuation of the path on
the other side. At length we were again _en route_, having lost
altogether about three hours of our precious time. However, my
companions thought that nevertheless we should not have been able the
previous evening, in the twilight, to reach the next station, the name
of which is also Ngurútuwa; so dense was the forest in some places, and
such difficulty had we in getting through with our luggage, so that we
were at times almost reduced to despair.

Beyond the village mentioned we should not have succeeded in finding an
outlet, had we not met with some shepherds who were tending numerous
flocks of sheep and goats. All was one thorny covert, where kaña and
bírgim, the African plum-tree, were, together with mimosa, the
predominant trees. Near the village, however, which lies in the midst of
the forest, very fine fields of wheat occupied a considerable open
space, the corn standing now about a foot and a half high, and presented
a most charming sight, particularly when compared with the scanty
industry which we had hitherto observed in this, the finest part of the
country.

Keeping then close to the narrow path, we reached, half an hour before
noon, an open place of middle size called Míkibá, and halted between the
village and the well, which, being in a hollow, is only three fathoms
deep. Being obliged to allow the camels a good feed, as they had got
nothing the previous evening, we did not start again till four o’clock
in the afternoon; and it was in vain that I endeavoured to buy some
provisions from the inhabitants with the few indifferent articles which
I had to offer them: the small fancy wares of Nuremberg manufacture
proved too worthless and frail even for these barbarians. The people,
however, endeavoured to frighten us by their accounts of the roads
before us—and indeed, as it afterwards appeared, they were not quite
wrong; but we could not stay a night with people so inhospitable, and,
besides, I had lost already too much time.

Confiding, therefore, in my good luck, I was again in the saddle by four
o’clock, the country being now clearer of wood, though generally in a
wild, neglected state. After a little more than two miles’ march, near a
patch of cultivated ground I saw a group of three monkeys of the same
species, apparently, as those in Ásben. In general, monkeys seem not to
be frequent in the inhabited parts of Negroland. The day with its
brightness was already fading away, and darkness setting in filled us
with anxiety as to where we might pass the night with some security,
when, to our great delight, we observed in the distance to our right the
light of some fires glittering through a thicket of dúm-palms,
tamarinds, and other large trees. We endeavoured, therefore, to open a
path to them, cheered in our effort by the pleasing sound of dance and
song which came from the same direction.

It proved to be a wandering company of happy herdsmen, who bade us a
hearty welcome after they had recognized us as harmless travellers; and,
well satisfied at seeing our resolution thus rewarded, we pitched our
tent in the midst of their huts and numerous herds. Entering then into
conversation with them, I learnt to my astonishment that they were
neither Kanúri nor Háusa people, but Felláta, or Fúlbe of the tribe of
the Óbore[51], who, notwithstanding the enmity existing between their
kinsmen and the ruler of Bórnu, are allowed to pasture their herds here
in full security, so far as they are able to defend themselves against
the robberies of the Tawárek, and without even paying any tribute to the
sheikh. However, their immigration into this country does not date from
very ancient times; and they appear not to have kept their stock pure
from intermixture, so that they have lost almost all the national marks
of the Fulfúlde race.

They seemed to be in easy circumstances, the elder men bringing me each
of them an immense bowl of milk, and a little fresh butter as cleanly
prepared as in any English or Swiss dairy. This was a substantial proof
of their nationality; for all over Bórnu no butter is prepared except
with the dirty and disgusting addition of some cow’s urine, and it is
all in a fluid state. The hospitable donors were greatly delighted when
I gave to each of them a sailor’s knife; but on our part we were rather
perplexed by their bounty, as I and my two boys might easily have
drowned ourselves in such a quantity of milk. Meanwhile, as I was
chatting with the old people, the younger ones continued their singing
and dancing till a late hour with a perseverance most amusing, though
little favourable for our night’s rest; moreover, we were startled
several times by some of the cattle, which lay close to our tent,
starting up occasionally and running furiously about. There was a lion
very near; but the blaze of the fires kept him off. Our friends did not
possess a single dog—but this was another mark of nationality; they rely
entirely upon their own watchfulness.

In consequence of our disturbed night’s rest, we set out at rather a
late hour, accompanied by two of our friends, in order to show us the
ford of the komádugu, which, they told us, ran close to their
encampment. And it was well that we had their assistance; for though the
water was but three feet deep at the spot where they led us through, it
was much deeper on both sides, and we might easily have met with an
accident. It was here about five and thirty yards across, and was quite
stagnant. It is, doubtless, the same water which I had crossed at
Kashímma, where, with its several branches, it occupied an immense
valley, and again just before I came to the Eastern Ngurútuwa.

Our hospitable friends did not leave us till they had assisted us
through the extremely dense covert which borders the eastern bank of the
river. They then returned, recommending us very strongly to be on our
guard, as we should have the komádugu always on our left, where some
robbers were generally lurking. We had not proceeded far when we met an
archer on horseback following the traces of a band of Tawárek, who, as
he told us, had last night made an attack upon another encampment or
village of herdsmen, but had been beaten off. He pursued his way in
order to make out whether the robbers had withdrawn. An archer on
horseback is an unheard-of thing not only in Bórnu, but in almost all
Negroland, except with the Fúlbe; but even among them it is rare.
Fortunately the country was here tolerably open, so that we could not be
taken by surprise, and we were greatly reassured when we met a troop of
native travellers, three of whom were carrying each a pair of bukhsa or
ngibú, immense calabashes joined at the bottom by a piece of strong
wood, but open on the top.

These are the simple ferry-boats of the country, capable of carrying one
or two persons, who have nothing besides their clothes (which they may
deposit inside the calabashes), safely, but certainly not dryly across a
stream. In order to transport heavier things, three pairs, joined in the
way I shall have an opportunity of describing at another time, will form
a sufficiently buoyant raft. This would form the most useful expedient
for any European traveller who should undertake to penetrate into the
equatorial regions, which abound in water; but if he has much luggage,
he ought to have four pairs of calabashes, and a strong frame to extend
across them.

The great advantage of such a portable boat is, that the parts can be
most easily carried on men’s backs through the most rugged and
mountainous regions, while the raft so formed will be strong enough, if
the parts are well fastened together, for going down a river; but of
course if they came into contact with rocks, the calabashes would be
liable to break. Horses must swim across a river in these countries; but
even their crossing a powerful stream safely would be greatly
facilitated if they were protected against the current by such a float
lying along their sides. On my succeeding journeys I often wished to be
in the possession of such a boat.

Amusing myself with such thoughts, and indulging in happy anticipations
of future discoveries, I continued my solitary march cheerfully and with
confidence. To our left the channel of the komádugu once approached, but
soon receded again and gave way to the site of a considerable deserted
town, containing at present but a small hamlet of cattle-breeders, and
called significantly “fáto ghaná” (few huts). This was the site of the
celebrated town of Dámasak. The country was here adorned with trees of
fine foliage, and was enlivened besides by large flocks of goats and
sheep, and by a small caravan which we fell in with. We then passed, on
our right, a considerable pool of stagnant water, apparently caused by
the overflowing of the komádugu, and further on observed a few patches
of cotton-ground well fenced and protected from the cattle. Then
followed stubble-fields adorned with fine trees, in the shade of which
the cattle reposed in animated groups. The soil consisted of sand, and
was burrowed throughout in large holes by the earth-hog (_Orycteropus
Æthiopicus_).

Thus about half-past ten we reached the neat little village Ájirí, and
encamped at a short distance from it, under a cluster of beautiful and
shady tamarind-trees, not knowing that, as the cemetery of some
venerated persons, it was a sanctified place; however, on being informed
of this circumstance, we were careful not to pollute it. I now learned
that I had not followed the shortest track to Kúkawa, which passes by
Kamsándi, but that Yusuf (Mr. Richardson’s interpreter), with the
Christian’s property, had also taken this road. I might therefore have
pursued my journey directly to that residence, and should have had the
company of a corn-caravan, which was about to set forward in the
afternoon; but as it was absolutely necessary that I should send word to
the sheikh that I was coming, and as there was no other governor or
officer on the track before me from whom I might obtain a decent and
trustworthy messenger, I preferred going a little more out of my way in
order to visit the Kashélla Khér-Alla, an officer stationed by the
sheikh in the most exposed place of this district, in order to protect
it against the inroads of the Tawárek.

Having, therefore, taken a hearty leave of the villagers, who had all
collected round me, listening with astonishment and delight to the
performance of my musical box, I started again at an early hour in the
afternoon, accompanied, for a little while, by the bíllama, and
continuing in a north-easterly direction. The country in general
presented nothing but pasture-grounds, with only some cultivation of
grain and patches of cotton-fields near the hamlet Yerálla, which, after
a little more than three miles, we passed on our left. Further on the
komádugu again approached on the same side; and we were obliged to go
round it in a sharp angle to reach the village where the Kashélla had
his residence.

Having pitched the tent, I went to pay him my compliments, and had the
satisfaction to find him a friendly, cheerful person, who at once
ordered one of his best men to mount and to start for Kúkawa, in order
to carry to the vizier the news of my arrival. He is a liberated slave,
who, having distinguished himself by his valour in the unfortunate
battle at Kúsuri, has been stationed here at the vizier’s suggestion.
His power, however, is not great, considering the wide extent of the
district which he has to protect, as he has only seventy horsemen under
his command, twenty of whom are constantly employed in watching the
motions of the predatory bands of the Tawárek. These are chiefly the
inhabitants of the little principality of Alákkos, of which I have had
occasion to speak above, who, like all the Tawárek, in general are not
very fond of serious fighting, but rather try to carry off a good booty,
in slaves or cattle, by surprise. Khér-Alla has already done a great
deal for the security and welfare of the district where he resides, the
population of which is intermixed with Tébu elements, and cannot be
trusted; but he evidently cannot extend his protecting hand much further
westward than Ájiri.

Feeling deeply the disgraceful state of this, the finest portion of
Bórnu, I afterwards advised the vizier to build watch-towers all along
the komádugu, from the town Yó as far as the western Ngurútuwa, the
place where Mr. Richardson died, which would make it easy to keep off
the sudden inroads of those predatory tribes, and, in consequence, the
whole country would become the secure abode of a numerous population;
but even the best of these mighty men cares more for the silver
ornaments of his numerous wives than for the welfare of his people.

I presented Khér-Alla with a red cap, a pair of English scissors, and
some other small things; and he spent the whole evening in my tent,
listening with delight to the cheerful Swiss air played by my musical
box.

[Sidenote: Monday, March 31st.]

At a tolerably early hour, I set out to continue my march, accompanied
by a younger brother and a trusty servant of the kashélla, both on
horseback, and traversed the entire district. It is called Dúchi, and is
well inhabited in a great number of widely-scattered villages. The soil
is sandy, and corn-fields and pasture-grounds succeed each other
alternately; but I did not see much cattle. I was astonished also to
find so little cultivation of cotton. Having met a small troop of
tugúrchi with pack-oxen, we made a halt, a little after eleven o’clock,
near the first village of the district, Dímberwá.

My two companions wanted to obtain here a guide for me, but were
unsuccessful; however, after we had started again at three o’clock, they
procured a man from the bíllama of the next village, and then left me. I
wished to obtain a guide to conduct me at once to Kúkawa; but I was
obliged to submit to this arrangement, though nothing is more tedious
and wearisome than to be obliged to change the guide at every little
place, particularly if the traveller be in a hurry. It might be
inferred, from the number of little paths crossing each other in every
direction, that the country is thickly inhabited; and a considerable
troop of tugúrchi gave proof of some intercourse. Dark-coloured, swampy
ground, called “ánge,” at times interrupted the sandy soil, which was
covered with fine pasture; and we gradually ascended a little. I had
already changed my guide four times, when, after some trouble, I
obtained another at the village Gúsumrí; but the former guide had
scarcely turned his back, when his successor in office decamped, most
probably in order not to miss his supper, and, after some useless
threatening, I had again to grope my way onward as well as I could.
Darkness was already setting in when I encamped near the village Bággem,
where I was treated hospitably by the inhabitants of the nearest
cottage.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, April 1st.]

Keeping through an open country with sandy soil and good pasture, we
reached, a little after nine o’clock, the well of Úra, a village lying
at some distance to the left of the path, and here filled a waterskin,
and watered the horse; but, hurrying on as we were, perhaps we did not
allow the poor beast sufficient time to fill his stomach. Having then
marched on through an open country, where large trees cease altogether,
only detached clusters of bushes appearing here and there, and where we
saw a large herd of ostriches and a troop of gazelles, we halted a
little before noon in the scanty shade of a small _Balanites_.

About two o’clock in the afternoon, after man and beast had enjoyed a
little repose and food, we prepared to continue our march; and my horse
was already saddled, my bernús hanging over the saddle, when I perceived
that my two youngsters could not manage our swift and capricious she-
camel, and that, having escaped from their hands, although her forelegs
were tied together, she baffled all their efforts to catch her again.
Confiding, therefore, in the staid and obedient disposition of my horse,
I ran to assist them, and we at length succeeded in catching the camel;
but when I returned to the place where I had left my horse, it was gone,
and it was with some difficulty that we found its tracks, showing that
it had returned in the direction whence we had come. It had strayed
nearly as far as the well of Úra, when it was most fortunately stopped
by some musketeers marching to Kúkawa, who met my boy, when he had
already gone halfway in pursuit of it.

In consequence of this _contretemps_, it was five o’clock when we again
set out on our march; and in order to retrieve the lost time, I kept
steadily on till half an hour before midnight. At seven o’clock we
passed a considerable village called Búwa, where the troops, horse and
foot, which had passed us some time before, had taken up their quarters,
and two miles further on we had villages on our right and left; but
still there were few signs of population, probably because, owing to the
lateness of the hour, the fires were extinguished. We encamped, at
length, near a small village, but had reason to repent our choice; for
while we were unable to procure a drop of water, the inhabitants being
obliged to bring their supply from a considerable distance, we were
annoyed the whole night by a violent quarrel between a man and his two
wives. But here I must remark that I very rarely witnessed such
disgusting scenes during the whole of my travels in Negroland.


[Footnote 50: Ngurútuwa, properly meaning the place full of hippopotami,
is a very common name in Bórnu, just as in “Rúóa-n-dorina” (the water of
the hippopotami) is a wide-spread name given by Háusa travellers to any
water which they may find in the wilderness.]

[Footnote 51: The name looks rather strange to me, a tribe of the Fúlbe
of this name not having otherwise come to my knowledge; and I am almost
inclined to think that these poor herdsmen, separated from their
kinsmen, have corrupted the name originally Úrube. The Óbore, however,
are even known at present in other parts of the kingdom, and were met
with by Mr. Overweg on his journey to Gújeba.]




                             CHAP. XXVIII.

                           ARRIVAL IN KÚKAWA.


[Sidenote: Wednesday, April 2nd.]

This was to be a most momentous day of my travels; for I was to reach
that place which was the first distinct object of our mission, and I
was to come into contact with those people on whose ill or good-will
depended the whole success of our mission.

Although encamped late at night, we were again up at an early hour; but
in endeavouring to return to the track which we had left the preceding
night, we inadvertently crossed it, and so came to another village, with
a very numerous herd of cattle, where we became aware of our error, and
then had to regain the main road.

Two miles afterwards there was a very great change in the character of
the country; for the sandy soil which had characterized the district all
along the komádugu now gave way to clay, where water is only met with at
considerable depth. We met a troop of tugúrchi, who informed us that
none of the villages along our track at the present moment had a supply
of water, not even the considerable village Kangáruwa, but that at the
never-failing well of Beshér I should be able to water my horse. This
news only served to confirm me in my resolution to ride on in advance,
in order as well to water my poor beast before the greatest heat of the
day, as to reach the residence in good time.

I therefore took leave of my two young servants, and, giving Mohammed
strict orders to follow me with the camels as fast as possible, I
hastened on. The wooded level became now interrupted from time to time
by bare naked concavities, or shallow hollows, consisting of black
sedimentary soil, where, during the rainy season, the water collects
and, drying up gradually, leaves a most fertile sediment for the
cultivation of the másakwá. This is a peculiar kind of holcus, (_Holcus
cernuus_,) which forms a very important article in the agriculture of
Bórnu. Sown soon after the end of the rainy season, it grows up entirely
by the fructifying power of the soil, and ripens with the assistance
only of the abundant dews, which fall here usually in the months
following the rainy season. These hollows, which are the most
characteristic natural feature in the whole country, and which encompass
the south-western corner of the great lagoon of Central Africa
throughout a distance of more than sixty miles from its present shore,
are called “ghadír” by the Arabs, “fírki,” or “ánge,” by the Kanúri.
Indeed they amply testify to the far greater extent of the lagoon in
ante-historical times.

Pushing on through a country of this description, and passing several
villages, I reached about noon Beshér, a group of villages scattered
over the corn-fields, where numerous horsemen of the sheikh were
quartered; and being unable myself to find the well, I made a bargain
with one of the people to water my horse, for which he exacted from me
forty “kúngona” or cowries. However, when I had squatted down for a
moment’s rest in the shade of a small talha-tree, his wife, who had been
looking on, began to reprove him for driving so hard a bargain with a
young inexperienced stranger; and then she brought me a little tiggra
and curdled milk diluted with water, and afterwards some ngáji, or paste
of sorghum.

Having thus recruited my strength, I continued my march; but my horse,
not having fared so well, was nearly exhausted. The heat was intense;
and therefore we proceeded but slowly till I reached Kálilwá, when I
began seriously to reflect on my situation, which was very peculiar. I
was now approaching the residence of the chief whom the mission, of
which I had the honour to form part, was especially sent out to salute,
in a very poor plight, without resources of any kind, and left entirely
by myself owing to the death of the director. I was close to this place,
a large town, and was about to enter it without a single companion. The
heat being just at its highest, no living being was to be seen either in
the village or on the road; and I hesitated a moment, considering
whether it would not be better to wait here for my camels. But my timid
reluctance being confounded by the thought that my people might be far
behind, and that if I waited for them we should find no quarters
prepared for us, I spurred on my nag, and soon reached the western
suburb of Kúkawa.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

THE DENDAL IN KÚKAWA.

April, 1851.]

Proceeding with some hesitation towards the white clay wall which
encircles the town, and which from a little distance could scarcely be
distinguished from the adjoining ground, I entered the gate, being gazed
at by a number of people collected here, and who were still more
surprised when I inquired for the residence of the sheikh. Then passing
the little daily market (the dyrríya), which was crowded with people, I
rode along the déndal, or promenade, straight up to the palace, which
borders the promenade towards the east. It is flanked by a very
indifferent mosque, built likewise of clay, with a tower at its N.W.
corner, while houses of grandees inclose the place on the north and
south sides. The only ornament of this place is a fine chédia or
caoutchouc-tree in front of the house of ʿAli Ladán, on the south side;
but occasionally it becomes enlivened by interesting groups of Arabs and
native courtiers in all the finery of their dress, and of their richly
caparisoned horses.

The sheikh, though he usually resides in his palace in the eastern town,
was at present here; and the slaves stared at me, without understanding,
or caring to understand, what I wanted, until Díggama, the storekeeper,
was called, who, knowing something of me as ʿAbd el Kerím, ordered a
slave to conduct me to the vizier. Though I had heard some account of
the sheikh living out of the western town, I was rather taken by
surprise at seeing the large extent of the double town; and I was
equally astonished at the number of gorgeously-dressed horsemen whom I
met on my way.

Considering my circumstances, I could not have chosen a more favourable
moment for arriving. About two hundred horsemen were assembled before
the house of the vizier, who was just about to mount his horse in order
to pay his daily visit to the sheikh. When he came out, he saluted me in
a very cheerful way, and was highly delighted when he heard and saw that
I had come quite alone. He told me he had known me already, from the
letter which I had sent to his agent in Zínder stating that I would come
after I had finished my business, but not before. While he himself rode
in great state to the sheikh, he ordered one of his people to show me my
quarters. These were closely adjoining the vizier’s house, consisting of
two immense courtyards, the more secluded of which inclosed, besides a
half-finished clay dwelling, a very spacious and neatly-built hut. This,
as I was told, had been expressly prepared for the mission before it was
known that we were without means.

I had scarcely taken possession of my quarters when I received several
visits from various parties attached to the mission, who all at once
made me quite _au fait_ of all the circumstances of my not very enviable
situation as one of its surviving members. The first person who called
upon me was Ibrahím, the carpenter, who, at Mr. Richardson’s request,
had been sent up from Tripoli, at the monthly salary of twenty mahbúbs
besides a sum of four dollars for his maintenance. He was certainly a
handsome young man, about twenty-two years of age, a native of “the holy
house” (Bét el mogaddus) or Jerusalem, with big sounding phrases in his
mouth, and quite satisfied to return with me directly to Fezzán without
having done anything. Then came his more experienced and cheerful
companion, ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, a real sailor, who was not so loud in his
clamours, but urged more distinctly the payment of his salary, which was
equal to that of Ibrahím.

After I had consoled these dear friends, and assured them that I had no
idea at present of returning northwards, and that I should do my best to
find the means of satisfying the most urgent of their claims, there
arrived another of the bloodsuckers of the mission, and the most thirsty
of them all. It was my colleague, the bibulous Yusuf, son of Mukni the
former governor of Fezzán, accompanied by Mohammed ben Bu-Sʿad, whom Mr.
Richardson, when he discharged Yusuf in Zínder, had taken into his
service in his stead, and by Mohammed ben Habíb, the least serviceable
of Mr. Richardson’s former servants. Yusuf was mounted upon a fine
horse, and most splendidly dressed; but he was extremely gracious and
condescending, as he entertained the hope that my boxes and bags, which
had just arrived with my faithful Gatróni, were full of shells, and that
I should be able to pay his salary at once. He was greatly puzzled when
I informed him of my extreme poverty. Mr. Richardson’s other servants,
to my great regret, had gone off the day before, unpaid as they were, in
order to regain their various homes.

I now ascertained that the pay due to Mr. Richardson’s servants amounted
to more than three hundred dollars; besides which there was the
indefinite debt to the Sfáksi, amounting in reality to twelve hundred
and seventy dollars, but which, by the form in which the bill had been
given, might easily be doubled. I did not possess a single dollar, a
single bernús, nor anything of value, and moreover was informed by my
friends that I should be expected to make both to the sheikh and to the
vizier a handsome present of my own. I now saw also that what the sheríf
el Habíb had told me on the road (viz. that all Mr. Richardson’s things
had been divided and squandered) was not altogether untrue. At least,
they had been deposited with the vizier on very uncertain conditions, or
rather had been delivered up to him by the two interpreters of our late
companion, intimating to him that I and Mr. Overweg were quite
subordinate people attached to the mission, and that we had no right to
interfere in the matter.

Seeing how matters stood, I thought it best, in order to put a stop to
the intrigues which had been set a going, to take Mohammed ben Sʿad into
my service on the same salary which he had received from Mr. Richardson.
Besides, I pledged my word to all that they should each receive what was
due to him, only regretting that the rest of Mr. Richardson’s people had
already gone away.

After all these communications, fraught with oppressive anxiety, I
received a most splendid supper as well from the sheikh as from the
vizier, and, after the various exertions of the day, enjoyed a quiet
night’s rest in my clean cottage.

Thus strengthened, I went the next morning to pay my respects to the
vizier, taking with me a small present of my own, the principal
attractions of which lay in a thick twisted lace of silk of very
handsome workmanship, which I had had made in Tripoli, and a leathern
letter-case of red colour, which I had brought with me from Europe.
Destitute as I was of any means, and not quite sure as yet whether Her
Britannic Majesty’s Government would authorize me to carry out the
objects of the mission, I did not deem it expedient to assume too much
importance, but simply told the vizier that, though the director of the
mission had not been fortunate enough to convey to him and the sheikh
with his own mouth the sentiments of the British Government, yet I hoped
that, even in this respect, these endeavours would not be quite in vain,
although at the present moment our means were so exhausted that, even
for executing our scientific plans, we were entirely dependent on their
kindness.

The same reserve I maintained in my interview with the sheikh on the
morning of Friday, when I laid little stress upon the object of our
mission (to obtain security of commerce for English merchants), thinking
it better to leave this to time, but otherwise dwelling upon the
friendship established between the sheikh’s father and the English, and
representing to them that, relying upon this manifestation of their
friendly disposition, we had come without reserve to live awhile among
them, and under their protection and with their assistance to obtain an
insight into this part of the world, which appeared so strange in our
eyes. Our conversation was quite free from constraint or reserve, as
nobody was present besides the sheikh and the vizier.

I found the sheikh (ʿOmár, the eldest son of Mohammed el Amín el Kánemy)
a very simple, benevolent, and even cheerful man. He has regular and
agreeable features, rather a little too round to be expressive; but he
is remarkably black—a real glossy black, such as is rarely seen in
Bórnu, and which he has inherited undoubtedly from his mother, a
Bagirmaye princess. He was very simply dressed in a light tobe, having a
bernús negligently wrapped round his shoulder; round his head a dark-red
shawl was twisted with great care; and his face was quite uncovered,
which surprised me not a little, as his father used to cover it in the
Tawárek fashion. He was reclining upon a diván covered with a carpet, at
the back of a fine airy hall neatly polished.

My presents were very small, the only valuable article among them being
a nice little copy of the Kurán, which on a former occasion I had bought
in Egypt for five pounds sterling, and was now carrying with me for my
own use. That I made a present of this book to the prince may perhaps be
regarded with an unfavourable eye by some persons in this country; but
let them consider it as a sign of an unprejudiced mind, and of the very
high esteem in which he held me, that, although knowing me to be a
Christian, he did not refuse to accept from my hands that which was most
holy in his eyes. On the whole I could not have expected a more friendly
reception, either from the sheikh or from his vizier. But there was a
very delicate point which I was obliged to touch upon: what was to
become of Mr. Richardson’s property?

In the afternoon I went again to the vizier, and requested to see the
inventory of all that my late companion had left; and he showed it to me
and read it himself. He then ordered the box to be opened, which
contained clothes and papers; and I was glad to see that not only the
journals, upon the keeping of which Mr. Richardson had bestowed great
care, but also all his other collectanea were safe. Having taken the
inventory with me, I sent Mohammed the following day to him with the
request that Mr. Richardson’s property should be delivered to me. Having
been desired to call myself at noon, I went, but was surprised to find
only Lamíno (properly El Amín), the vizier’s confidential officer, of
whom I shall have occasion to speak hereafter. I was still more
surprised when only some of Mr. Richardson’s boxes were brought in, and
I was desired to select what I wanted, and leave the rest behind. This I
refused to do, and asked where the other things were, when Lamíno did
not hesitate to declare that the ornamented gun and the handsome pair of
pistols had been sold. Upon hearing this, though I had been treated very
kindly and hospitably on my arrival, and had received immense quantities
of provision of every kind, I could not refrain from declaring that if
in truth they had behaved so unscrupulously with other people’s property
I had nothing more to do here, and returned to my quarters immediately.

My firmness had its desired effect; and late in the evening I received a
message from the vizier, that if I wanted to have a private interview
with him I might come now, as during the daytime he was always troubled
by the presence of a great many people. The person who brought me this
message was Háj Edrís, a man of whom in the course of my proceedings I
shall have to speak repeatedly. Satisfied with having an opportunity of
conversing with the vizier without reserve, I followed the messenger
immediately, and found Háj Beshír quite alone, sitting in an inner court
of his house, with two small wax candles by his side. We then had a long
interview, which lasted till midnight, and the result of which was that
I protested formally against the sale of those things left by Mr.
Richardson, and insisted that all should be delivered to me and to Mr.
Overweg as soon as he should arrive, when we would present to the sheikh
and to the vizier, in a formal manner, all those articles which we knew
our companion had intended to give to them. Besides, I urged once more
the necessity of forwarding the news of Mr. Richardson’s death, and of
my safe arrival, as soon as possible, as, after our late misfortunes in
Aïr, Her Britannic Majesty’s Government, as well as our friends, would
be most anxious about our safety. I likewise tried to persuade my
benevolent and intelligent host that he might do a great service to the
mission, if he would enable us to carry out part of our scientific
purposes without delay, as Government would certainly not fail to honour
us with their confidence, if they saw that we were going on. Having
carried all my points, and being promised protection and assistance to
the widest extent, I indulged in a more friendly chat, and, delighted by
the social character of my host, and full of the most confident hopes
for my future proceedings, withdrew a little after midnight.

Having in this way vindicated the honourable character of the mission,
and my own, I applied myself with more cheerfulness to my studies and
inquiries, for which I found ample opportunity; for many distinguished
personages from distant countries were staying here at this time, partly
on their journey to or from Mekka, partly only attracted by the fame of
the vizier’s hospitable and bounteous character. But before I give any
account of my stay in Kúkawa previous to my setting out for Adamáwa, I
think it well to try to impart to the reader a more lively interest in
the country to which he has thus been transferred, by laying before him
a short account of its history, as I have been able to make it out from
original documents and from oral information.




                              CHAP. XXIX.

      AUTHENTICITY AND GENERAL CHARACTER OF THE HISTORY OF BÓRNU.


Any writer who attempts to recall from obscurity and oblivion the past
ages of an illiterate nation, and to lay before the public even the most
elementary sketch of its history, will probably have to contend against
the strong prejudices of numerous critics, who are accustomed to refuse
belief to whatever is incapable of bearing the strictest inquiry.

The documents upon which the history of Bórnu is based, besides the
scanty information contained in the narratives of recent explorers, are—

1. A chronicle (“diván”), or rather the dry and sterile abridgment of a
chronicle, comprising the whole history of Bórnu, from the earliest time
down to Ibrahím, the last unfortunate offspring of the royal family, who
had just ascended the crumbling throne of the Bórnu empire when the last
English expedition arrived in that country. 6 pp. 4to.[52]

2. Two other still shorter lists of the Bórnu kings.

3. A detailed history of the first twelve years of the reign of the king
Edrís Alawóma, consisting of two parts, in my copy one of 77 and the
other of 145 pages, and written by a contemporary of the above-mentioned
king, the imám Ahmed, son of Sofíya. Of this very interesting and
important history a copy was forwarded by the late vizier of Bórnu, Háj
Beshír ben Tiráb, at my urgent request[53], to Her Britannic Majesty’s
Government, and is now in the Foreign Office; another copy I myself have
brought back.

4. A few facts regarding the history of this country, mentioned by
Arabic writers, such as Ebn Sʿaid (A.D. 1282), Ebn Batúta (A.D. 1353),
Ebn Khaldún (A.D. 1381/2), and Makrízi (about A.D. 1400), Leo Africanus
(A.D. 1528).

5. A short document containing information about embassies sent to
Tripoli by some Bórnu kings, and published in the “Bulletin de la
Société Géographique de Paris,” 1849, 252. ff.

I now proceed to inquire into the character of the first of these
documents, which is the only one among them comprising the whole history
of Bórnu, and which therefore forms the basis of our tables. The most
momentous question is,—upon what authority this document rests, and when
it was compiled. As for the first point, I have been assured by Shitíma
Makarémma (a man intimately connected with the old dynasty, who made the
two copies for me, and of whom some notice will be found in my journal)
that it is a mere extract from a more voluminous work, which he
represented as still existing, but which I was unable to procure, as it
is carefully concealed. The whole business of collecting documents and
information relative to the history of the old dynasty was most
difficult, and demanded much discretion, as the new dynasty of the
Kánemíyín endeavours to obliterate as much as possible the memory of the
old Kanúri dynasty, and has assiduously destroyed all its records
wherever they could be laid hold of.

As regards the time when the chronicle, of which the manuscript in
question is a very meagre and incorrect abridgment, was written, it is
stated that the various parts of it were composed at different times, at
the beginning of every new reign; and the question is, when the Kanúri
people, or rather their ʿulama, began to commit to writing the most
important facts of their history. This question we are fortunately
enabled, from Imám Ahmed’s work, to answer satisfactorily; namely, that
there existed no written record whatever of the history of his country
previous to the king Edrís Katakarmábi, whose reign falls in the first
half of the sixteenth century of our era. For when that writer refers to
facts of the older history, he is only able to cite as his authority
oral information received from old men versed in historical tradition;
and he evidently mentions as the oldest author of a written history, the
fákih Masfárma ʿOmár ben ʿOthmán, who wrote the history of the king in
question.

The annals, therefore, of the time preceding the period of this king and
of his predecessor ʿAli Gajidéni, appear to be based entirely upon oral
information, and cannot but be liable to a certain degree of inaccuracy
as to the actions attributed to each king, the length of their
respective reigns, and even the order of succession, where it was not
dependent on genealogy or descent. For it would be the extreme of
hypercriticism to deny that the royal family of Bórnu, in the middle of
the 16th century, could not or may not justly be supposed to have
preserved with great precision their line of descent for fifteen or
twenty generations; and in this respect the chronicle No. 1. is entirely
confirmed and borne out by Imám Ahmed, who, in the introduction to his
History, gives the pedigree of his master Edrís Alawóma up to his first
royal ancestor, while the difference in the form of the names, and one
slight variance in the order of succession, as given by these two
documents, is a plain proof that they have not been borrowed from each
other, but have been based on independent authorities.

The disagreement in question is certainly a remarkable one; but it is
easily explained. For Makrízi, in harmony with the extract from the
chronicle, names the father of the kings Edrís and Dáud (whose reign he
places about the year 700 of the Hejra), Ibrahím, while Imám Áhmed calls
them sons of Nikále son of Ibrahím; and this is the general statement of
the natives of the country even at the present time, every educated man
knowing “Dáúd tata Nikálebe,” or Dáúd Nikálemi. The fact is, that the
name Bíri, which the chronicle attributes to the father of Ibrahím the
grandfather of Edrís and Dáúd, being a variation of the form Bíram, is
identical with Ibrahím; whence it appears that Nikále was another name
of Ibrahím the son of Bíri. The same is the case with regard to the
names Áhmed and Dúnama, which are identical, if not with regard to their
meanings, at least with regard to their applications, as well as the
names Sélma or Sélmama and ʿAbd el Jelíl.

This general harmony between the pedigree of the Bórnu kings as given by
the chronicle No. 1. and the Imám Áhmed, a learned and clever man in a
high position, and in constant connection with the court, is, I think,
very satisfactory, and the more so if we take into consideration that,
from a reason which I shall soon mention, and which at the same time is
a strong argument in favour of the authenticity of these two documents,
the pedigree as given by them is not the only one current in Bórnu, but
the line of descent and succession varies greatly in one of the two
other short chronicles which are mentioned in No. 2., while the third
one, which does not appear to make any pretensions to completeness,
cannot be taken into account here. Hence, as far as regards the line of
descent or succession, I have not thought these two lists worthy of
attention, except only with regard to the reign following that of the
58th king, if we count the reign of the usurper Sʿaíd ʿAlí, the son of
Háj ʿOmár. For here the chronicle No. 1. has omitted, by mistake or
negligence, the well-established reign of Edrís ben ʿAlí, who,
succeeding to his father ʿAlí, preceded his younger brother Dúnama ben
ʿAlí, and reigned 20 years.[54]

What I have here said with regard to the authenticity of the chronicle
refers only to the line of descent and succession of the kings
mentioned; but, of course, it is quite another question, if we take into
view the length of time attributed to the reign of each succeeding king.
But even here the dates of the chronicle are confirmed in a most
surprising and satisfactory manner by the history of Imám Áhmed, who, in
relating the successful expedition of Edrís Áʿaishámi to Kánem, states
that from the time when Dáúd Nikálemi was obliged to leave his capital
Njímiye, down to the period when Edrís made his entrance into it, 122
years had elapsed. Now, according to the dates of the chronicle, between
the end of the reign of Dáúd and the beginning of the reign of Edrís,
who is expressly stated by the historian to have undertaken that
expedition in the first year of his reign, there intervened exactly 121
years. And indeed we see from the Imám’s account, that most people
thought this was the real length of the period, and not 122 years; so
well were the educated inhabitants of Bórnu at that time acquainted with
the history of their country. Perhaps also Imám Áhmed wishes here to
refute Masfárma, the historian of Edrís Áʿaishámi, who adhered to the
general opinion.

Unfortunately, the length of the several reigns is our only guide with
regard to the chronology of this history, as neither the chronicle nor
even Imám Áhmed specifies particular years with reference to any of the
events which they mention. This is indeed a very great defect, not so
apparent in the dry chronicle as in the account of the learned priest;
and it seems almost inconceivable, as he is very particular, not only
with regard to seasons, but even to months and days, mentioning with
great exactness on what day of the month his master did so and so, and
even disputing, in this respect, slight variations of opinion. If he had
only given us the date of a single year, we should be much better off as
to the chronology of the history of Bórnu. As it is, if we put out of
account other chronological data which we are fortunately in possession
of, in order to reduce to chronology the events mentioned by the
chronicle, we can only reckon backwards the number of years attributed
by it to the reign of each successive king, commencing from the death of
Sultan Dúnama, who in the year A.H. 1233 was killed in the battle at
Ngála (written “Ghála” in Arabic, but called “Angala” by the members of
the former expedition).[55]

If we now count together the years attributed to each reign, proceeding
in a backward order, and beginning with the end of the year H. 1233, we
obtain, in an inverse order, the following chronological dates for the
more important periods of the history of Bórnu.

                                                  A.H.       A.D.

  Beginning of the reign of Ayúma                  391      1000, 1

  Beginning of the reign of Humé, the first        479       1086
  Moslim king

  Reign of Dúnama Díbalámi, the warlike and      618-658 1221-1259, 60
  daring king who spoiled the talisman of Bórnu

  Beginning of the reign of Ibrahím Nikálemi       707       1307

  Beginning of the reign of Edrís ben Ibrahím      754       1353

  End of the reign of Dáúd, who succumbed to       789       1387
  the Bulála

  End of the reign of ʿOthmán ben Edrís            795      1392, 3

  The reign of ʿOmár, who abandoned his          796-799   1393-1396
  residence in Kánem altogether, ceding it to
  the Bulála

  Beginning of the reign of ʿAlí Dúnamámi          877       1472

  Beginning of the reign of Edrís Katarkamábi      911       1505

  Beginning of the reign of Edrís Alawóma          980       1572

  Beginning of the reign of Háj ʿOmár             1036      1626, 7

  Beginning of the reign of ʿAlí ben Háj ʿOmár    1055       1645

Having obtained these dates, we have first to observe that to fill up
the period from Ayúma to Dhu Yazan, the presumed ancestor of the Séfuwa,
and even known as such to Abú ’l Fedá as well as to Makrízi, and whose
age (as being that of a man who predicted the coming of the prophet) is
fixed beyond all doubt, only six generations are left. This is the
circumstance which I mentioned above as speaking greatly in favour of
the authenticity of this chronicle and its genealogies, even with regard
to the more remote times. For if it had not been necessary to preserve
scrupulously a well-established line of succession, how easy would it
have been to introduce a few more individuals in order to fill up this
blank, as has been done in the other list (_b_), instead of admitting
the palpable nonsense of attributing to the two oldest kings a reign of
from 250 to 300 years. Even Séf and Ibrahím, the first two princes of
the line, are, I think, quite historical persons, whose existence was so
well established that a conscientious chronicler could not change
anything in the number of years attributed to the length of their
reigns.

Following, therefore, the hints given to us by the chronicle itself, we
fix the foundation of the dynasty of the Séfuwa in Kánem about the
middle of the third century after Mohammed, or a little before the year
900 of our era. We shall afterwards return to this circumstance.

Now we shall first see how triumphantly the authenticity of the
chronicle is confirmed in every respect by the occasional remarks made
by Makrízi and Ebn Batúta with regard to the history of Bórnu.

Unfortunately, the oldest date which Makrízi (on the authority, as it
would seem, of Ébn Sʿaíd) mentions with regard to Kánem[56], namely, an
expedition made by its king into the fertile districts of Mábiná in the
year H. 650, cannot be used as a sufficient test of the authenticity of
the chronicle, as the historian does not mention the name of the king;
but the deed itself harmonizes exceedingly well with the warlike and
enterprising character of Dúnama Díbalámi, whose reign, according to our
chronicle, falls between the years 618 and 658. Just the same is to be
said of the fact mentioned by Ébn Khaldún, who, in his valuable history
of the Berbers, which has been recently made accessible to all,
relates[57] the interesting fact that, among other valuable presents, a
giraffe was sent by the king of Kánem (to whom even at that early date
he gives the title of “master of Bórnu”) to Abú ʿAbd-Allah el Mostánser
the king of Tunis, in the year of the Hejra 655. The same historian, in
another passage of his work, referring to the year 656, mentions again
the king of Kánem as having caused the death of a son of Kárakosh el
Ghozzi el Modáfferi, the well-known adventurous chieftain who had tried
to establish himself in Wadán.[58]

But fortunately we have other data which afford us a very fair test.
According to Makrízi[59], not long after the close of the seventh
century of the Hejra (fi hedúd sennet sebʿa mayet), the king of Kánem
was Háj Ibrahím; after him reigned his son, el Háj Edrís—the historian
does not say expressly that he immediately succeeded his father; then
Dáúd, the brother of Edrís, and another son of Ibrahím; then ʿOmár, the
son of Dáúd’s elder brother Háj Edrís; and then ʿOthmán, the brother of
the former, and another son of Edrís. Makrízi adds that this last-named
king reigned shortly before A.H. 800; and then he states that the
inhabitants of Kánem revolted against the successors of Ibrahím, and
made themselves independent, but that Bórnu remained their kingdom.

All these dates given by Makrízi, as may be seen from the few most
important events which I have extracted from the chronicle, are in most
surprising harmony with the information conveyed in a dry and sterile
but uncorrupted way by the latter. Notwithstanding the slight
discrepancy in the order of succession of the later kings, whose reign
was of very short duration, and whose relationship is rather perplexing,
is it possible to find a harmony more complete than this, if we take
into consideration the only way in which Makrízi could have obtained his
information, that is to say, from merchants or pilgrims visiting Egypt
on their way to Mekka?[60]

We now come to Ébn Batúta; and we again find the same surprising harmony
between the fact regarding Bórnu, as mentioned by him, and the dates of
the chronicle. The famous and enterprising traveller of Tangiers, on his
return-journey from his visit to Western Sudán, left the capital of
Mélle or Máli (that is, Mungo Park’s Jára) the 22nd of Moharrem, 754,
and, proceeding by way of Timbúktu or Túmbutu, and thence down the Ísa
or Niger to Gágho or Gógo, and thence to Tekádda[61], in speaking about
the copper found in the mines near this town, relates that the bars made
of it were exported to Góber and Rágha (or rather Ragháy), and also to
Bórnu, and then adds the interesting fact that the name of the ruling
king of the latter country was Edrís.

Now, if we follow implicitly the dates of the chronicle, Edrís ben
Ibrahím (Nikále) ascended the throne in that very year (753) when,
according to this precious and unimpeachable testimony of the
illustrious and intelligent traveller, he actually occupied the throne.

The very remarkable and really surprising harmony here shown to exist
between the chronicle and the dates which have come to our knowledge
from other sources, will, I hope, give to any unprejudiced mind some
degree of confidence in the authenticity of that document, and will make
him aware of its superiority over the information of a man like Leo
Africanus, or rather Hasen Ebn Mohammed el Wasás, who, though he
undoubtedly has, and will always have, the merit of having given to
Europe a clear general view of the political and linguistic groups of
Central Africa, yet, on account of the manner in which his report was
drawn up (merely from memory, after the lapse of many years), cannot be
a decisive authority on any special circumstance. Hence, when he states
that the name of the king of Bórnu, at the time when he visited the
country, was Abraham (Ibrahím), we may confidently assume that he is
wrong, and that he speaks of the illustrious conqueror ʿAlí ben Dúnama,
who restored peace and glory to that distracted country, and, on account
of his warlike character and his various expeditions, obtained the
surname el Gházi. I shall return to this subject in the chronological
table, in speaking of the reign of ʿAlí ben Dúnama.

As for the document mentioned above as No. 5., it contains a few
valuable dates with regard to those Bórnu kings who reigned near the
time when the author obtained his information in Tripoli, while for the
older times, about which the people could only inform him “_par
tradition de leurs pères_” his information is of little value. The most
important dates which it contains are those which have reference to the
time of the accession to the throne of the three Bórnu kings, ʿAbd-Allah
ben Dúnama, Háj ʿOmár, and Háj ʿAlí; and these vary but little from the
dates computed from the chronicle, and serve therefore to confirm its
accuracy.

However, it is not my design to vindicate this chronicle from all
possibility of error; but my object is to show that its general
character, dry and meagre as it is, has the strongest claim to
authenticity. Indeed I am sure that it can be fully relied upon, all
uncertainty being reduced to a space of one or two years; I may
therefore be allowed to assert that the chronological table, which I
shall give in the Appendix, is something more than a mere fairy tale.
But in this place, I think it well to offer a few general remarks on the
characteristic features of the history of Bórnu.

I have first to speak of the origin of the Séfuwa or Dúguwa. We have
already seen that the chronology of the Bórnu people, if palpable
absurdities be left out of consideration, does not carry their history
further down than the latter half of the ninth century of our era.
Accordingly there can be no further question as to whether Séf was
really the son of the celebrated Dhu Yazan, and identical with Séf Dhu
Yazan, the last native ruler of the Himyaritic kingdom, who celebrated
his accession to the throne in the famous castle of Gumdán, and with the
assistance of Khosru Parvis liberated Yeman from the dominion of the
Abyssinians. I frankly confess that, while Ibrahím the son of Séf, as
“father of the king” (as he appears to have been entitled occasionally),
seems to me to have a really historical character, I entertain sincere
doubts whether Séf be not a mere imaginary personage, introduced into
the pedigree expressly in order to connect it with Yeman. Indeed, in one
short list of Bórnu kings which I possess, several princes are mentioned
before Séf, whose names, such as Futírmi, Hálar Sukayámi, Halármi,
Bunúmi, Rizálmi, Mairími, have quite a Kanúri character. As the reader
will see, I do not at all doubt of some connection existing between the
ruling family of Bórnu and the Himyaritic or Kushitic stock; but I doubt
its immediate descent from the royal Himyaritic family.

But be this as it may, I think that Leo Africanus, who is a very good
authority for general relations, is right in stating that the kings of
Bórnu originated from the Libyan tribe of the Bardoa, a tribe also
mentioned by Makrízi as Berdʿoa. That there is an ethnological
connection between the names Bérnu or Bórnu, Bórgu, Berdʿoa, Berdáma,
Berauni, Berber, can scarcely be doubted; but to many the Berdʿoa might
seem to have nearer relation with the Tedá or Tébu than with the real
Berber or Mazígh. Sultan Béllo certainly, in the introduction to his
history of the conquests of the Fúlbe, expressly says that the Bórnu
dynasty was of Berber origin; and it is on this account that the Háusa
people call every Bórnu man “ba-Bérberche,”[62] and the Bórnu nation
“Bérbere.” This view of the subject is confirmed by the distinct
statement of Makrízi[63], who says that that was the common tradition of
the people at his time—“it is said that they are descended from the
Berbers,”—and moreover in another passage[64] informs us that the king
of Kánem was a nomade, or wanderer; although it seems that this
statement refers properly to the Bulála dynasty.

Before the time of Sélma, or Sélmama, the son of Bíkoru, whose reign
began about A.H. 581, the kings are stated by the chronicle to have been
of a red complexion[65], like the Arabs; and to such an origin from the
red race, the Syrian-Berber stock, is certainly to be referred their
custom of covering the face and never showing the mouth, to which custom
Ébn Batúta adverts in speaking of King Edrís, who ruled in his time. To
this origin is also to be referred the custom, till recently practised,
of putting the new king upon a shield, and raising him up over the heads
of the people[66], as well as the polity of the empire, which originally
was entirely aristocratical, based upon a council of twelve chiefs,
without whose assent nothing of importance could be undertaken by the
king.

We have a very curious statement concerning the Bórnu empire, emanating
from Lucas, the traveller employed by the African Association[67], and
based on the authority of his Arab informants, principally Ben ʿAlí, who
no doubt was a very clever and intelligent man. He describes the Bórnu
kingdom as an elective monarchy, the privilege of choosing a successor
among the sons of a deceased king, without regard to priority of birth,
being conferred by the nation on three of the most distinguished men of
the country. He does not say whether these belonged to the courtiers, or
whether every private individual might be called upon promiscuously to
fulfil this important duty; but the strict etiquette of the court of
Bórnu makes it probable that the former was the case.

Be this as it may, the choice being made, the three electors proceeded
to the apartment of the sovereign elect, and conducted him in silence to
the gloomy place in which the unburied corpse of his deceased father was
deposited; for till this whole ceremony was gone through the deceased
could not be interred. There, over the corpse of his deceased father,
the newly elected king seems to have entered into some sort of
compromise sanctioned by oath, binding himself that he would respect the
ancient institutions, and employ himself for the glory of the country.

I shall have to mention a similar custom still prevailing at the present
day in the province of Múniyó, which belonged to that part of the empire
called Yerí, while the dynasty of the Múniyóma probably descended from
the Berber race. Every newly elected Múniyóma, still at the present day,
is in duty bound to remain for seven days in a cave hollowed out by
nature, or by the hand of man, in the rock behind the place of sepulchre
of the former Múniyóma, in the ancient town of Gámmasak, although it is
quite deserted at present, and does not contain a living soul.

But that not only the royal family, but even a great part of the whole
nation, or rather one of the nations which were incorporated into the
Bórnu empire, was of Berber origin, is still clear so late as the time
of Edrís Alawóma, that is to say, only two centuries and a half ago; for
in the report of his expeditions, constant mention is made of the Berber
tribes (“kabáíl el Beráber”) as a large component part of his army, and
constantly two parts of this army are distinguished as the Reds, “el
Áhhmar,” and the Blacks, “e’ Súd.”[68]

This part of the population of Bórnu has separated from the rest, I
suspect, in consequence of the policy of ʿAlí, the son and successor of
Háj ʿOmár, a very warlike prince, who, in the second half of the 17th
century, waged a long war with Ágades.

Viewed in the light thus shed by past history, the continual and
uninterrupted warlike expeditions made by the Tawárek at the present
time against the northern regions of Bórnu and against Kánem assume
quite a new and far more interesting character.

Now if it be objected that the Kanúri or Bórnu language does not appear
to contain any Berber elements[69] (which indeed it does not), I have
only to adduce the exactly parallel example of the Bulála, a brother
dynasty of the Bórnu royal family, descended from the same stock, who,
having settled and founded a dynasty among the tribe of the Kúka, in the
territory of Fíttri, still continued to speak their native language,
that is the Kanúri, in the time of Leo[70], but have now entirely
forgotten it, adopting the language of the people over whom they ruled;
and similar examples are numerous.

A second point which deserves notice is, that the Kanúri even at the
present day call people in general, but principally their kings, always
after the name of their mother, and that the name of the mother’s tribe
is almost continually added in the chronicle as a circumstance of the
greatest importance. Thus the famous king Dúnama ben Selmʿaa is known in
Bórnu generally only under the name of Díbalámi, from the name of his
mother Díbala; and the full form of his royal title is Díbalámi Dúnama
Selmámi, his mother’s name, as the most noble and important, preceding
his individual name, which is followed by the name derived from his
father. It is also evident, even from the dry and jejune report of the
chronicle, what powerful influence the Walíde or “Mágira”—this is her
native title—exercised in the affairs of the kingdom; I need only
mention the examples of Gúmsu (“gúmsu” means the chief wife) Fasámi, who
imprisoned her son Bíri, when already king, for a whole year, and of
Áʿaishad or ʿAisa, the mother of Edrís, who for a number of years
exercised such paramount authority, that in some lists, and even by many
ʿulama at the present time, her name is inserted in the list of the
sovereigns of the country.

These circumstances may be best explained by supposing that a kind of
compromise took place between the strangers—Berbers, or rather Imóshagh
(Mazígh) from the tribe of the Berdʿoa—and the tribe or tribes among
whom they settled, just in the same manner as we have seen that a
stipulation of the same kind was probably made between the conquering
Kél-owí and the ancient inhabitants of Aïr of the Góber race; and the
same circumstances, with similar results, are observable in ancient
times, in the relations subsisting between the Grecian colonists and the
original inhabitants of Lycia.

The most important among the indigenous tribes of Kánem are the Kíye or
Beni Kíya, also mentioned in the time of Edrís Alawóma[71], the
Meghármah, who may possibly be identical with the Ghemármah, the
Temághera[72] (evidently a Berber name), the Débiri, the Kúnkuna, at
present established in Kárgá, and finally the Tébu or Tubu, or rather
Tedá. Of all these the last-named constituted by far the most important
and most numerous tribe. To them belonged the mother of Dúnama ben Humé,
the most powerful of the older kings of Bórnu, who appears to have
thrice performed the pilgrimage to Mekka. Indeed it would seem that the
real talisman which Díbalámi Dúnama Selmámi spoiled consisted in the
friendly relation between the Berauni or Kanúri and the Tébu, which was
so intimate that the name of Berauni, which originally belonged to the
inhabitants of Bórnu, is still at present the common name given by the
Tawárek to the Tébu; or rather, the latter are a race intimately related
to the original stock of the Kanúri, as must become evident to every
unprejudiced mind that investigates their language.[73]

How powerful a tribe the Tedá were, is sufficiently shown by the length
of the war which they carried on with that very king Dúnama Selmámi, and
which is said to have lasted more than seven years. Indeed, it would
seem as if it had been only by the assistance of this powerful tribe
that the successors of Jíl Shikomémi were able to found the powerful
dynasty of the Bulála, and to lay the foundation of the great empire
called by Leo Gaoga, comprehending all the eastern and north-eastern
parts of the old empire of Kánem, and extending at times as far as
Dóngola, so that in the beginning of the 16th century it was larger than
Bórnu.[74] Even in the latter half of the 16th century, the Tedá appear
to have constituted a large proportion of the military force of the
Bulála in Kánem; and great numbers of them are said, by the historian of
the powerful king Edrís Alawóma, to have emigrated from Kánem into
Bórnu, in consequence of the victories obtained by that prince over the
Bulála. At that time they seem to have settled principally in the
territories of the Koyám, a tribe very often mentioned in the book of
Imám Ahmed as forming part of the Bórnu army, and with whom at present
they are completely intermixed.[75] It is very remarkable, that neither
by the chronicle, nor by the historian of Edrís Alawóma, the large tribe
of the Mánga, which evidently formed a very considerable element in the
formation of the Bórnu nation, is ever once mentioned.

While the tribes above enumerated were more or less absorbed by the
empire of Kánem, and, in the course of time, adopted the Mohammedan
religion professed by its rulers, there was, on the other hand, a very
numerous indigenous tribe which did not become amalgamated with the
conquering element, but, on the contrary, continued to repel it in a
hostile manner, and for a long time threatened its very existence. These
were the “Soy” or “Só,” a tribe settled originally in the vast territory
inclosed towards the north and north-west by the komádugu Wáube,
erroneously called the Yeou, and towards the east by the Shári, and
divided, as it would seem, into several small kingdoms.

This powerful tribe was not completely subjugated before the time of
Edrís Alawóma, or the latter part of the 16th century; and it might be
matter of surprise that they are not mentioned at all by the chronicle
before the middle of the 14th century, if it were not that even
circumstances and facts of the very greatest importance are passed over
in silence by this arid piece of nomenclature. It would therefore be
very inconsistent to conclude from this silence, that before the period
mentioned the princes of Kánem had never come into contact with the
tribe of the Soy; the reason why the chronicle, sparing as it is of
information, could not any longer pass them over in silence, was that in
the space of three years they had vanquished and killed four successive
kings. The places mentioned in the list, where the first three of these
princes were slain, cannot be identified with absolute certainty; but as
for Nánighám, where Mohammed ben ʿAbd Allah was killed, it certainly lay
close to, and probably in, the territory of the Soy. After this period
we learn nothing with regard to this tribe until the time of Edrís
Alawóma, although it seems probable that Edrís Nikálemi, the successor
of Mohammed ben ʿAbd Allah, and the contemporary of Ebn Batúta, had
first to gain a victory over the Soy, before he was able to sit down
quietly upon his throne.

Altogether, in the history of Bórnu we can distinguish the following
epochs. First, the rise of power in Kánem, Njímiye being the capital of
the empire, silent and imperceptible till we see on a sudden, in the
beginning of the 12th century, the powerful prince Dúnama ben Humé start
forth under the impulse of Islám, wielding the strength of a young and
vigorous empire, and extending his influence as far as Egypt. The acme,
or highest degree of prosperity, of this period coincides with the reign
of Díbalámi Dúnama Selmámi, in the middle of the 13th century, during
the prime of the dynasty of the Beni Háfis in Tunis. But this reign
already engendered the germs of decay; for during it the two cognate
elements of which the empire consisted, namely the Tedá and the Kanúri,
were disunited, and it yielded too much influence to the aristocratical
element, which was represented by the twelve great offices, an
institution which seems to deserve particular attention.[76]

The consequence was, that a series of civil wars and regicides ensued,
interrupted only by the more tranquil reign of Ibrahím Nikálemi in the
first half of the 14th century, which was followed, however, by the most
unfortunate period of the empire, when the great native tribe of the Soy
burst forth and killed four kings in succession. Then followed another
respite from turmoil, just at the time when Ebn Batúta visited
Negroland; but the son of the very king who in the time of that
distinguished traveller ruled over Bórnu fell the first victim in the
struggle that ensued with a power which had arisen from the same root,
had gained strength during the civil wars of Bórnu, and which now
threatened to swallow it up altogether. This was the dynasty of the
Bulála, which, originating with the fugitive Bórnu prince Jíl Shikomémi,
had established itself in the district of Fíttri over the tribe of the
Kúka, and from thence spread its dominion in every direction till, after
a sanguinary struggle, it conquered Kánem, and forced the Kanúri dynasty
to seek refuge in the western provinces of its empire, about the year
1400 of our era.

The Bórnu empire (if we may give the name of empire to the shattered
host of a belligerent tribe driven from their home and reduced to a few
military encampments) for the next seventy years seemed likely to go to
pieces altogether, till the great king ʿAli Dúnamámi opened another
glorious period; for having at length mastered the aristocratical
element, which had almost overwhelmed the monarchy, he founded as a
central point of government a new capital or “bírni,” Ghasréggomo, the
empire having been without a fixed centre since the abandonment of
Njímiye. It was in his time that Leo Africanus visited Negroland, where
he found the Bulála empire (Gaoga) still in the ascendant: but this was
changed in the beginning of the 16th century, even before the
publication of his account; for in the hundred and twenty-second (lunar)
year from the time when ʿOmár was compelled to abandon his royal seat in
Njímiye, ceding the rich country of Kánem, the very nucleus of the
empire, to his rivals, the energetic king Edrís Katakarmábi entered that
capital again with his victorious army, and from that time down to the
beginning of the present century Kánem has remained a province of Bórnu,
although it was not again made the seat of government.

Altogether the 16th century is one of the most glorious periods of the
Bórnu empire, adorned as it is by such able princes as the two Edrís’
and Mohammed, while in Western Negroland the great Sónghay empire went
to pieces, and was finally subjugated by Mulay Hámed el Mansúr, the
emperor of Morocco. Then followed a quieter period, and old age seemed
gradually to gain on the kingdom, while pious and peaceful kings
occupied the throne, till in the middle of the last century the
energetic and enterprising king ʿAli ʿOmármi began a violent struggle
against that very nation from which the Bórnu dynasty had sprung, but
which had now become its most fearful enemy—the Imóshagh or Tawárek. He
made great exertions in every direction; but his efforts seem to have
resembled the convulsions of death, and being succeeded by an indolent
king, for such was Ahmed, the fatal hour which was to accomplish the
extinction of the dynasty of the Séfuwa rapidly approached. At last,
when the very centre of the empire had already fallen a prey to a new
nation which had started forth on a career of glory, the Fúlbe or
Felláta, there arose a stranger, a nationalized Arab, who, in saving the
last remains of the kingdom, founded a new dynasty, that of the
Kánemíyín, which, after having shone forth very brightly under its
founder, was recently reduced by civil discord, and seems now destined
to a premature old age.

Having here offered this general view of the empire of Bórnu, I refer
for particulars to the appended chronological tables, which I trust,
although very imperfect, particularly in the beginning, will yet form a
sufficient groundwork wherewith to begin more profitable inquiries into
the history of those regions than have been hitherto made.


[Footnote 52: Of this document I have sent a copy from Kúkawa to the
Leipsic Oriental Society; and a translation of it has been published in
the Journal (Zeitschrift) of that society in the year 1852, p. 305. ff.,
with notes by M. Blau.]

[Footnote 53: See a letter of mine from Kúkawa, Nov. 20. 1852, addressed
to Chevalier Bunsen, and published in Petermann’s Mittheilungen, 1855,
p. 7.]

[Footnote 54: Indeed, in the copy which I sent to Europe, the copyist
has corrected this error; but unfortunately, instead of inserting this
reign in the right place, he has added the twenty years to the thirty-
three years of the reign of the elder Edrís ben ʿAlí.]

[Footnote 55: I have here to correct an error made by Mr. Blau, the
translator of the chronicle, who, owing to a mere slip of the pen in the
document, has been induced to insert between the reign of the 50th, or
according to him (as he does not count the usurper Sʿaíd) the 49th king,
Mohammed son of Edrís, and the 51st, ʿAlí son of Zíneb, another king
also named Mohammed, with a reign likewise of 19 years. But to every one
who reads the chronicle with attention, and is aware of its negligent
character, it must be evident that in the article in question it is only
by mistake that Mohammed, when mentioned the second time, is called the
son of Dúnama instead of Edrís. There is certainly some difficulty in
the passage in question, with regard to the circumstance that this
prince is said to have resided 19 (years?) at Ladé; but it is easily to
be explained when we remember that even at the present day there is such
a place in the neighbourhood of old Bírni. (Denham and Clapperton’s
Travels, vol. i. pp. 150. 152.); another place of the same name was
situated a few days N.E. from Ghámbarú on the road to Kánem. But be this
as it may, the historical introduction of Imám Áhmed to his account of
the reign of Edrís Áʿaishámi Alawóma, where he passes in review the
proceedings of this king’s predecessors with regard to Kánem, leaves not
the least doubt about the line of succession.—As for the length of the
reign of Edrís ben ʿAlí, the 54th king, there was, as I have mentioned
above, a mistake in the copy from which the translation was made, giving
53 years instead of 33; but these 20 years just compensate for the 20
years of the homonymous king Edrís ben ʿAlí, which, just on account of
the homonymy, have been left out by mistake, adding the 20 years due to
him to the reign of the elder king of the same name.]

[Footnote 56: Hamaker, Specimen Catal., p. 107.]

[Footnote 57: Ébn Khaldún, ed. Macguckin de Slane, Algér. 1847, vol. i.
p. 429. With regard to the friendship existing between the Bení Háfis
and the kings of Kánem, see Ébn Khaldún, vol. i. p. 263.]

[Footnote 58: Ébn Khaldún, vol. i. p. 300., transl. vol. ii. p. 96. Ébn
Khaldún, according to his own statement, follows here the authority of
the sheikh Abú-Mohammed, e’ Tijáni. Compare Journal Asiatique, 4me
série, vol. xx. p. 158.]

[Footnote 59: Makrízi, Hamaker, Specimen Catal. p. 206. Makrízi is
mistaken in supposing Kánem to be a town and the capital of Bórnu.]

[Footnote 60: Makrízi has two other interesting statements with regard
to the kings of Kánem, which, although they certainly cannot lay claim
to absolute accuracy, nevertheless have evidently reference to certain
facts which the diligent historian, placed at such a distance from the
object of his inquiry, has not rightly understood. The first of these
passages (Hamaker, p. 206.) states that Mohammed the son of Jíl
(so—جيل—the name is to be read, instead of the absurd Jebl or Jabal),
that is, most probably, Jíl Shikomémi, the founder of the dynasty of the
Bulála, was the first of them who accepted the Mohammedan creed; this
statement evidently regards the dynasty of the Bulála, who, at the time
when Makrízi wrote, had driven the Bórnu dynasty out of Kánem, and it
does not at all affect the statement of the chronicle, which calls Humé
the first Moslim king of Bórnu. The second passage of the celebrated
historian of Egypt (Quatremère, Mémoires sur l’Egypte, t. ii. p. 28.;
Burckhardt, Travels in Nubia, 2nd ed. app. iii. p. 456. f.) is very
remarkable; and although we are not yet able to understand perfectly its
real purport, nevertheless it seems to refer to some circumstance of
great interest: for, according to this statement, the Islám was
introduced into Kánem by Hády el ʿOthmáni, a pretended descendant of the
khalíf ʿOthmán, even before the period of the Séfuwa, or the Yazaníyín
(descendants of Dhu Yazan). Here the excellent inquirer has most
probably confounded the successors of Humé with the Dúguwa, forgetting
that even the dynasty of the pagan Dúguwa belonged to the Séfuwa. In
other respects this statement is in perfect harmony with the common
tradition of the Bórnu people—that the Islám was brought to the Séfuwa,
when they were still settled in Búrgu, by a special messenger of the
Prophet.]

[Footnote 61: See Vol. I. p. 464. I will here only mention that the
forty days’ journey stated by Ébn Batúta to intervene between Tekádda
and Bórnu are to be counted, as it seems, to Njímiye, the old capital of
Kánem; Bírni, or rather Ghasréggomo, at least, not being founded at that
time.]

[Footnote 62: This “ba” is evidently the indefinite article a,
corresponding to the Berber “va.” Compare what I have said in Vol. I.
about “ba-Túre.”]

[Footnote 63: See the second passage referred to in the note, p. 265.]

[Footnote 64: Makrízi, Hamaker, p. 206., وهو بدوي رحال.]

[Footnote 65: Even the governor of Zínder is still complimented in the
songs to his praise as “já” (red).]

[Footnote 66: Compare with this custom Ébn Batúta’s description of a
similar custom in Timbúktu, Journal Asiat., série iv. t. i. p. 226.]

[Footnote 67: Proceedings of the African Association, vol. i. p. 148.
f.]

[Footnote 68: Makrízi says of the inhabitants of Kánem in general, that
they were moláthemún; that is to say, they covered their faces with a
lithám. The names of towns like Bérberwá and others may be also
mentioned here. Compare Leo’s expression—“Negri e Bianchi.”]

[Footnote 69: In the vocabulary of the Kanúri language, a few words may
easily be discovered which have some relation to the Berber language,
the most remarkable amongst which seems to me the term for ten, “meghú,”
which is evidently connected with the Temáshight word “meraú,” or rather
“meghaú;” but the grammar is entirely distinct, and approaches the
Central Asiatic or Turanian stock.]

[Footnote 70: Leo, when he says that the language of Gaoga is identical
with the Bórnu language, does not speak of the language of the whole
nation, but only of that of the ruling tribe, the Bulála. But of this
interesting fact I shall say more on another occasion.]

[Footnote 71: قبيله كي or بني كيه من اهل درق. The diacritic points over
ق in the word درق have been omitted in the copy of the chronicle which I
forwarded to Leipsic, and Mr. Blau therefore reads “Derw;” but where the
name is mentioned by Imám Ahmed the points are never omitted. However,
where the country Derk or Derg is to be looked for I cannot say with any
degree of certainty. I once thought that اهل درق might be “the people of
the shields,” or “armed with shields,” like the Kánembú at present; but
I have satisfied myself that this is not the case.—The Kíye still at the
present day form the chief portion of the Koyám.]

[Footnote 72: تماغره من اهل كرا. Kerá, not Keraw, is the name of the
place which Mr. Blau (p. 322.) tries to identify with Keráwa, the old
capital of Mándará. But this is evidently wrong.—There can be scarcely
any doubt that the Temághera have given their name to the province
Demágherim or Damágherim. The letter beginning the name was a ط.]

[Footnote 73: I shall say more on this subject in the historical
introduction to my vocabularies. At present I can only refer the reader
to a few remarks which I have made on the relation between the módi Tedá
(the Tébu language) and the Kanúri, in a letter addressed to M. Lepsius,
and published in Gumprecht’s Monatsberichte (Journal of the Geographical
Society of Berlin), 1854, vol. ii. p. 373. The Tedá, together with the
Kanúri, formed the stock called by Makrízi زغاي (Zagháí) and السكى by
Masúdi. (Meadows l. xxxiii. p. 138.)]

[Footnote 74: This, I think, is also the meaning of Leo, when he says
(l.c. c. 7.), “Il dominio del re di Borno, il quale ne à la minore”
(parte). But Leo wrote just at the time when Bórnu was about again to
rise to new splendour.]

[Footnote 75: However, even in the time of Lucas (Proceedings of the
Afric. Assoc., vol. i. p. 119.), great part at least of the Koyám were
still living in Kánem. The Íkeli, or rather “people of Íkeli,” اهل اكلي,
mentioned by Makrízi, seem not to have constituted a separate tribe,
although they had a chief or ملك of their own, there being not the least
doubt that they were the inhabitants of the celebrated place Ikeli,
اكله, usually called Fúrtwa by the Bórnu people, about which I shall
speak in the course of my journey to Kánem.—A peculiar tribe is
mentioned frequently by the imám Ahmed as el Kenaníyín; but I am not yet
able to offer a well-established opinion with regard to them.—With
regard to the Arabs who are mentioned several times in Imám Ahmed’s
history, as a powerful element in the population of Kánem, I shall have
occasion to speak hereafter.]

[Footnote 76: I shall say more of it in the chronological table, under
the reign of Mohammed.]




                               CHAP. XXX.

                         THE CAPITAL OF BÓRNU.


Having endeavoured to impart to the reader a greater interest in the
country, by relating its former history, as far as I was able to make it
out, I shall now give an account of my stay in Kúkawa before setting out
on my journey to Adamáwa.

Regarding Kúkawa only as the basis of my further proceedings, and as a
necessary station already sufficiently known to the European public by
the long stay of the former expedition, I endeavoured to collect as much
information as possible with regard to the surrounding countries. Two of
my friends were distinguished by a good deal of Mohammedan learning, by
the precision with which they recollected the countries they had
wandered through, and by dignified manners; but they differed much in
character, and were inclined to quarrel with each other as often as they
happened to meet in my house.

These two men, to whom I am indebted for a great deal of interesting and
precise information, were the Arab Ahmed bel Mejúb, of that division of
the tribe of the Welád bu-Sebʿa who generally live in the Wadi Sákiyet
el Hamra, to the south of Morocco, and the Púllo Ibrahím, son of the
Sheikh el Mukhtár, in Kaháide on the Senegal, and cousin of the late
Mohammed el Amín, the energetic prince of Fúta-Tóro. Ahmed had travelled
over almost the whole of Western Africa, from Arguín on the ocean as far
as Bagírmi, and had spent several years in Adamáwa, of which country he
first gave me an exact description, especially with regard to the
direction of the rivers. He was a shrewd and very intelligent man; yet
he was one of those Arabs who go round all the courts of the princes of
Negroland, to whatever creed or tribe they may belong, and endeavour to
obtain from them all they can by begging and by the parade of learning.
I esteemed him on account of his erudition, but not in other respects.

Quite a different person was the Púllo Ibrahím—a very proud young man,
fully aware of the ascendancy, and strongly marked with the
distinguishing character, of the nation to which he belonged. He had
performed the pilgrimage to Mekka, crossing the whole breadth of Africa
from west to east, from warm religious feeling mixed up with a little
ambition, as he knew that such an exploit would raise him highly in the
esteem of his countrymen, and secure to him a high position in life. He
had been two years a hostage in Ndér (St. Louis), and knew something
about the Europeans. It had struck him that the French were not so eager
in distributing bibles as the English, while he had truly remarked that
the former were very sensible of the charms of the softer sex, and very
frequently married the pretty daughters of the Dembaséga. He obtained
from me, first the Zabúr, or the Psalms of David, which even the Arabs
esteem very highly, and would esteem much more if they were translated
into a better sort of Arabic, and afterwards the whole Bible, which he
wished to take with him on his long land-journey.

The Arabs and the Fúlbe, as is well known, are in almost continual
warfare all along the line from the Senegal as far as Timbúktu; and it
was most interesting for me to see him and Ahmed in violent altercation
about the advantages of their respective nations, while I was thereby
afforded an excellent means of appreciating their reports with regard to
the state of the tribes and countries along the Senegal. The way in
which they began to communicate to me their information was in itself
expressive of their respective characters, Ahmed protesting that, before
he dared to communicate with me, he was compelled to ask the permission
of the vizier, while Ibrahím laughed at him, declaring that he felt
himself fully authorized to give me any information about Negroland.
Ibrahím became an intimate friend of mine, and took a lively interest in
me, particularly commiserating my lonely situation in a foreign country,
far from home, without the consolations of female companionship.

As an example of the risks which European travellers may incur by giving
medicines to natives to administer to themselves at home, I will relate
the following incident. Ibrahím told me one day that he wanted some
cooling medicine; and I gave him two strong doses of Epsom salts, to use
occasionally. He then complained the following day that he was suffering
from worms; and when I told him that the Epsom salts would not have the
effect of curing this complaint, but that worm-powder would, he begged
me to give him some of the latter; and I gave him three doses to use on
three successive days. However, my poor friend, though an intelligent
man, thought that it might not be amiss to take all this medicine at
once, viz. four ounces of Epsom salts and six drachms of worm-powder;
and the reader may imagine the effect which this dose produced upon a
rather slender man. Unfortunately, I had just taken a ride out of the
town; and he remained for full two days in a most desperate state, while
his friends, who had sent in vain to my house to obtain my assistance,
were lamenting to all the people that the Christian had killed their
companion, the pious pilgrim.

Besides these two men, there were many interesting strangers at that
time in Kúkawa, from whom I learnt more or less. Some of them I shall
here mention, as their character and story will afford the reader a
glance at one side of life in Negroland. A man who had performed travels
of an immense extent, from Khórasán in the east as far as Sansándi in
the west, and from Tripoli and Morocco in the north as far as Asiantí
and Jenakhéra and Fertít towards the south, would have been of great
service, if he had preserved an exact recollection of all the routes
which he had followed in his devious wanderings; but as it was, I could
only gather from him some general information, the most interesting part
of which had reference to Mósi or rather Móre, a large and populous
country known by name already, from Sultan Béllo’s curious
communications to Captain Clapperton, but always misplaced in the maps,
and its capital Wóghodoghó.

This enterprising man, who generally travelled as a dervish, had gone
from Sofára on the Máyo balléo or Niger, between Hamdalláhi and Ségo,
across a most unsettled country, to Wóghodoghó; but he was unable to
give me any precise details with regard to it, and I never met another
person who had travelled this dangerous route. He had also travelled all
along the pagan states to the south of Bagírmi and Wadáy, and advised me
strongly, if it were my plan to penetrate to the upper Nile (as, indeed,
I then intended, notwithstanding my total want of means), to adopt the
character of a dervish, which he deemed essential for my success. But
while such a character might, indeed, insure general success, it would
preclude the possibility of making any accurate observations, and would
render necessary the most painful, if not insupportable, privations. And
on the whole this poor fellow was less fortunate than I; for in the year
1854 he was slain on that very route from Yóla to Kúkawa which I myself
had twice passed successfully. He was a native of Baghdád, and called
himself Sheríf Ahmed el Baghdádi.

There was another singular personage, a native of Sennár, who had been a
clerk in the Turkish army, but, as malicious tongues gave out, had been
too fond of the cash intrusted to his care, and absconded. He afterwards
resided some years in Wadáy, where he had drilled a handful of the
sultan’s slaves, had come to this kingdom to try his fortune, and was
now about to be sent to Wadáy by the sheikh of Bórnu, as a spy, to see
if the prince of that country had still any design of recommencing
hostilities. From all persons of this description a traveller may learn
a great deal; and, intriguing fellows as they generally are, and going
from court to court spreading reports everywhere, prudence requires that
he should keep on tolerably good terms with them.

Most interesting and instructive was a host of pilgrims from different
parts of Másena or Mélle, partly Fúlbe, partly Sónghay, who having heard
of the white man, and of his anxiety to collect information respecting
all parts of the continent, came repeatedly to me to contribute each his
share. I used to regale them with coffee, while they gave me ample
opportunities of comparing and testing their statements. The most
interesting and best informed amongst them were Bu-Bakr, a native of
Hamdalláhi, the capital of the sheikh (sekho) Ahmedu ben Ahmedu, who
having made a pilgrimage to Mekka, had long resided in Yeman, and was
now returning homeward with a good deal of knowledge; and another
cheerful and simple-hearted old man from Sá on the Isa or Niger, between
Hamdalláhi and Timbúktu. Indeed, as the report of Ahmed bel Mejúb about
Adamáwa had confirmed me in my determination to sacrifice everything in
order to visit that country as soon as possible, so the manifold
information of these people with respect to the countries on the middle
course of the so-called Niger excited in me a most ardent desire to
execute the design, previously but vaguely entertained, of accomplishing
also a journey westward to Timbúktu.

Among my Bórnu friends at this time, the most instructive were Shitíma
Makarémma and Ámsakay. The former, who had been a courtier under the old
dynasty, and who had saved his life by his intrigues, was a very
intelligent old man, but an acknowledged rascal, to whom unnatural
vices, which seem in general entirely unknown in these regions, were
imputed. Nevertheless he was the only man who was master of all the
history of the old dynasty; and he spoke the Kanúri language with such
exquisite beauty as I have never heard from anybody else. He had two
very handsome daughters, whom he succeeded in marrying, one to the
vizier and one to his adversary, ʿAbd e’ Rahmán; but in December 1853 he
was executed, together with the vizier, but on totally different
grounds, as having long forfeited his life. Quite a different sort of
man was Ámsakay, a simple Kánemma chief, who has been represented in one
of my sketches. He had formerly distinguished himself by his expeditions
against the Búdduma, till those enterprising islanders succeeded in
conciliating him by the gift of one of their handsome daughters for a
wife, when he became half settled amongst them.

I had also some interesting pagan instructors, among whom I will only
mention Agíd Búrku, a very handsome youth, but who had undergone the
horrible process of castration. The abolition of this practice in the
Mohammedan world ought to be the first object of Christian governments
and missionaries, not merely on account of the unnatural and desecrated
state to which it reduces a human being, but on account of the dreadful
character of the operation itself, which, in these countries at least,
is the reason why scarcely one in ten survives it. With extreme delight
Agíd Búrku dwelt upon the unconstrained nudity in which his countrymen
indulged, and with great _naïveté_ described a custom of the pagans,
which is identical with a custom of the civilized Europeans, but is an
abomination in the eyes of every Mohammedan. He had wandered about a
good deal in the southern provinces of Bagírmi and Wadáy, and gave me
the first information about the interesting mountain-group near Kénga
Matáya.

But I must principally dwell upon my relations to the vizier el Háj
Beshír ben Ahmed Tiráb, upon whose benevolent disposition the whole
success of the mission depended, as he ruled entirely the mind of the
sheikh, who was more sparing of words, and less intelligent.

Mohammed el Beshír, being the son of the most influential man in Bórnu
after the sheikh, enjoyed all the advantages which such a position could
offer for the cultivation of his mind, which was by nature of a superior
cast. He had gone on a pilgrimage to Mekka in the year 1843, by way of
Ben-Gházi, when he had an opportunity both of showing the Arabs near the
coast that the inhabitants of the interior of the continent are superior
to the beasts, and of getting a glimpse of a higher state of
civilization than he had been able to observe in his own country.

Having thus learned to survey the world collectively from a new point of
view, and with an increased eagerness after everything foreign and
marvellous, he returned to his native country, where he soon had an
opportunity of proving his talent, his father being slain in the
unfortunate battle at Kúsuri, and Sheikh ʿOmár, a fugitive in his native
country, having much need of a faithful counsellor in his embarrassed
situation. The sheikh was beset by a powerful and victorious host,
encamping in the largest of the towns of his kingdom, while the party of
the old dynasty was rising again, and not only withdrawing from him the
best forces wherewith to face the enemy, but threatening his very
existence, at the same time that a brother was standing in fierce
rivalry to him at the head of a numerous army. Sheikh ʿOmár was
successful, the host of Wadáy was obliged to withdraw, and, abandoning
the purpose for which they had come, namely, that of re-establishing the
old dynasty, commenced a difficult retreat of many hundred miles at the
beginning of the rainy season; the partisans of the old dynasty were
entirely crushed, the last prince of that family slain, the residence of
the sultans levelled to the ground, and even the remembrance of the old
times was almost effaced. There remained to be feared only his brother
ʿAbd e’ Rahmán. ʿAbd e’ Rahmán was a good soldier, but a man of a very
loose and violent character. When a youth he had committed all sorts of
violence and injustice, carrying off young brides by force, to indulge
his passions: he was besides a man of little intelligence. Being but a
few months younger than ʿOmár, he thought himself equally entitled to
the succession; and if once admitted into a high position in the empire,
he might be expected to abuse his influence on the very first
opportunity.

Sheikh ʿOmár, therefore, could not but choose to confide rather in the
intelligent son of his old minister, the faithful companion in the field
and counsellor of his father, than in his own fierce and jealous
brother; and all depended upon the behaviour of Háj Beshír, and upon the
discretion with which he should occupy and maintain his place as first,
or rather only minister of the kingdom. Assuredly his policy should have
been to conciliate, as much as possible, all the greater “kokanáwa” or
courtiers, in order to undermine the influence of ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, whom
it might be wise to keep at a respectful distance. But in this respect
the vizier seems to have made great mistakes, his covetousness blinding
him to his principal advantages; for covetous he certainly was—first,
from the love of possessing, and also in order to indulge his luxurious
disposition, for he was certainly rather “kamúma,” that is to say,
extremely fond of the fair sex, and had a harím of from three to four
hundred female slaves.

In assembling this immense number of female companions for the
entertainment of his leisure hours, he adopted a scientific principle;
in fact, a credulous person might suppose that he regarded his harím
only from a scientific point of view;—as a sort of ethnological
museum—doubtless of a peculiarly interesting kind—which he had brought
together in order to impress upon his memory the distinguishing features
of each tribe. I have often observed that, in speaking with him of the
different tribes of Negroland, he was at times struck with the novelty
of a name, lamenting that he had not yet had a specimen of that tribe in
his harím, and giving orders at once to his servants to endeavour to
procure a perfect sample of the missing kind. I remember, also, that on
showing to him one day an illustrated ethnological work in which he took
a lively interest, and coming to a beautiful picture of a Circassian
female, he told me, with an expression of undisguised satisfaction, that
he had a living specimen of that kind; and when, forgetting the laws of
Mohammedan etiquette, I was so indiscreet as to ask him whether she was
as handsome as the picture, he answered only with a smile, at once
punishing and pardoning my indiscreet question. I must also say that,
notwithstanding the great number and variety of the women who shared his
attention, he seemed to take a hearty interest in each of them; at least
I remember that he grieved most sincerely for the loss of one who died
in the winter of 1851. Poor Háj Beshír! He was put to death in the last
month of 1853, leaving seventy-three sons alive, not counting the
daughters, and the numbers of children which may be supposed to die in
such an establishment without reaching maturity.

But to return to his political character. I said that he neglected to
attach to himself the more powerful of the courtiers, with whose
assistance he might have hoped to keep the rival brother of Sheikh ʿOmár
at some distance; indeed, he even alienated them by occasional, and
sometimes injudicious use of his almost unlimited power, obliging them,
for instance, to resign to him a handsome female slave or a fine horse.
If he had possessed great personal courage and active powers, he might
have mastered circumstances and kept his post, notwithstanding the ill-
will of all around him; but he wanted those qualities, as the result
shows: and yet, well aware of the danger which threatened him, he was
always on his guard, having sundry loaded pistols and carbines always
around him, upon and under his carpet. Shortly before I arrived, an
arrow had been shot at him in the evening, while he was sitting in his
courtyard.

I have peculiar reason to thank Providence for having averted the storm
which was gathering over his head during my stay in Bórnu, for my
intimacy with him might very easily have involved me also in the
calamities which befell him. However, I repeat that altogether he was a
most excellent, kind, liberal, and just man, and might have done much
good to the country, if he had been less selfish and more active. He was
incapable, indeed, of executing by himself any act of severity, such as
in the unsettled state of a semi-barbarous kingdom may at times be
necessary; and, being conscious of his own mildness, he left all those
matters to a man named Lamíno, to whom I gave the title of “the
shameless left hand of the vizier,” and whom I shall have frequent
occasion to mention.

I pressed upon the vizier the necessity of defending the northern
frontier of Bórnu against the Tawárek by more effectual measures than
had been then adopted, and thus retrieving, for cultivation and the
peaceable abode of his fellow-subjects, the fine borders of the
komádugu, and restoring security to the road to Fezzán. Just about this
time the Tawárek had made another expedition into the border-districts
on a large scale, so that Kashélla Belál, the first of the war chiefs,
was obliged to march against them; and the road to Kanó, which I, with
my usual good luck, had passed unmolested, had become so unsafe that a
numerous caravan was plundered, and a well-known Arab merchant, the
sheríf el Gháli, killed.

I remonstrated with him on the shamefully neglected state of the shores
of the lake, which contained the finest pasture-grounds, and might yield
an immense quantity of rice and cotton. He entered with spirit into all
my proposals; but in a short time all was forgotten. He listened with
delight to what little historical knowledge I had of these countries,
and inquired particularly whether Kánem had really been in former times
a mighty kingdom, or whether it would be worth retaking. It was in
consequence of these conversations that he began to take an interest in
the former history of the country, and that the historical records of
Edrís Alawóma came to light; but he would not allow me to take them into
my hands, and I could only read over his shoulders. He was a very
religious man; and though he admired Europeans very much on account of
their greater accomplishments, he was shocked to think that they drank
intoxicating liquors. However, I tried to console him by telling him
that, although the Europeans were also very partial to the fair sex, yet
they did not indulge in this luxury on so large a scale as he did, and
that therefore he ought to allow them some other little pleasure.

He was very well aware of the misery connected with the slave-trade; for
on his pilgrimage to Mekka, in the mountainous region between Fezzán and
Ben-Gházi he had lost, in one night, forty of his slaves by the extreme
cold, and he swore that he would never take slaves for sale, if he were
to travel again. But it was more difficult to make him sensible of the
horrors of slave-hunting, although, when accompanying him on the
expedition to Músgu, I and Mr. Overweg urged this subject with more
success, as the further progress of my narrative will show. He was very
desirous to open a commerce with the English, although he looked with
extreme suspicion upon the form of articles in which the treaty was
proposed to be drawn up; but he wished to forbid to Christians the sale
of two things, viz. spirituous liquors and bibles. He did not object to
bibles being brought into the country, and even given as presents; but
he would not allow of their being sold. But the difficulties which I had
to contend with in getting the treaty signed will be made more
conspicuous as my narrative proceeds.

The most pressing matter which I had with the vizier in the first
instance, after my arrival, was to obtain some money, in order to
settle, at least partly, the just claims of the late Mr. Richardson’s
servants, and to clear off debts which reflected little credit on the
government which had sent us. I could scarcely expect that he would lend
me the money without any profit, and was therefore glad to obtain it at
the rate of 1000 cowries, or kúngona as they are called in Bórnu, for a
dollar, to be paid in Fezzán; and I lost very little by the bargain, as
the creditors, well aware of the great difficulty I was in, and
acknowledging my desire to pay them off, agreed to receive for every
dollar of the sum which they claimed, only 1280 cowries, while in the
market the dollar fetched a much higher price. Indeed it was most
grateful to my feelings to be enabled, on the 13th of April, to
distribute among the eight creditors 70,000 shells; and it was the more
agreeable, as the more arrogant among them, seeing my extreme poverty,
had assumed a tone of great insolence towards me, which I found it
difficult to support in silence. Being now relieved a little in
circumstances, I immediately rid myself of the carpenter, the
grandiloquent Son of Jerusalem, and sent him away. He died on the road
before reaching Múrzuk—a fact which the natives attributed to the curse
which I had given him for having stolen something from my house.

My household now became more comfortable. Already, on the 10th of April,
late in the evening, I had removed my quarters from the large empty
courtyard in the eastern town, or billa gedíbe, to a small clay house in
the western, or billa futébe.

This dwelling consisted of several small but neatly-made rooms, and a
yard. Afterwards we succeeded in obtaining in addition an adjoining
yard, which was very spacious, and included several thatched huts; and
all this together formed “the English house,” which the sheikh was kind
enough to concede to the English mission as long as anybody should be
left there to take care of it.

Its situation was very favourable, as will be seen from the plan a few
pages further on, being situated almost in the middle of the town, and
nevertheless out of the way of the great thoroughfares; the internal
arrangement is shown in the annexed woodcut.

[Illustration:

1. Segífa, or “soró chínnabe,” into which a person coming from the
small yard before the house first enters through the principal gate.
In the corner there is a spacious clay bench, “dágali,” raised three
feet from the ground.

2. Small open courtyard, with a very fine chédia or caoutchouc-tree
(3.), in which we had generally a troop of monkeys, while at the
bottom a couple of squirrels (_Sciurus_) were living in a hole.

4. A second courtyard with a henhouse. (5.)

6. Inner segífa, where, in the beginning, the servants loitered, and
which was afterwards changed into a simple dining-room. Here generally
the water-jars were kept.

7. Small courtyard, with water-jar.

8. Inner room, where I used to live, and afterwards Mr. Vogel.

9. Inner large courtyard, where, in the corner, the kitchen was
established.

10. Room with a large claybank, where Mr. Overweg used to recline in
the daytime.

11. Bedroom of Mr. Overweg, and afterwards of the Sappers, Corporal
Church and Macguire.

12. Small back courtyard.

13. Storeroom.

14. Outer enclosure of great courtyard in the beginning of our
residence in Kúkawa. This wall we afterwards pulled down, when we
obtained a very large yard for our horses and cattle. We, at times,
had six horses and five or six cows.

15. Very large well-built conical hut, with clay wall and thatched
roof. In the interior there were two spacious raised claybanks of the
kind called “dágali.” and “zinzin,” and in the background a raised
recess, separated by a wall two feet high, for luggage or corn. This
hut I occupied during my last stay in Kúkawa after my return from
Timbúktu, when I built in front of it a large shed with that sort of
coarse mats called síggedí.

16. Hut occupied by Maʿadi, a liberated slave, first in the service of
Mr. Richardson, afterwards in that of Mr. Overweg, and lastly, Mr.
Vogel’s head servant. Having been wounded in the service of the
expedition, a small pension has been granted to him.

17. Hut occupied by another servant.

18. Place for our cattle.

19. A well. The sandy soil, as I have said, obliged us to change the
place of our well very often, and we had great trouble in this
respect.

20. A clayhouse which, during the latter part of our stay, fell to
ruins.]

I immediately took possession of the room No. 8., which, although very
small, was altogether the best, and was very cool during the hot hours
of the day. Mr. Vogel too, when he afterwards arrived, immediately fixed
upon this room. There was a most splendid kórna-tree in the neighbouring
courtyard, which spread its shade over the terrace of this room, and
over part of the small courtyard in front of it. In our own yard we had
only a very fine specimen of a chédia or caoutchouc-tree (in the first
yard, No. 3.), which was afterwards a little damaged by Mr. Overweg’s
monkeys, besides two very small kórna-trees in the great yard around the
huts Nos. 16 and 17. Having thus made myself as comfortable as possible,
I began without delay to dig a well in the small court before the house,
as we had to fetch the water from another well at some distance, which
was much used by the people. My attempt caused some amusement to the
vizier, who soon heard of it, and recognised in it a feature of the
European character; for digging a well is no small undertaking in
Kúkawa, although water is to be found at only nine fathoms depth; for
the ground, consisting of loose sand under an upper thin layer of clay,
is very apt to fall in, while the slender boughs with which the shaft is
upheld, offer but little resistance. We had a great deal of trouble with
our well, not only in constantly repairing it, but in the course of our
stay we were thrice obliged to change the spot and dig a new well
altogether. We should have been glad to set an example to the natives by
building up our shaft with bricks; but with our scanty means, or rather
our entire want of means, we could scarcely think of undertaking such a
costly work. At a later period Mr. Overweg found a layer of shell lime
in a spot of our courtyard, and got our house neatly whitewashed. The
great point in this place is to protect oneself against the countless
swarms of fleas which cover the ground, the best preservative being
considered a frequent besmearing of the walls and the floor with
cowdung. The large white ant too is most troublesome; and sugar
particularly is kept with difficulty from its voracious attacks. Our
rooms swarmed also with bugs, “bermáde,” but I am almost afraid that we
ourselves imported them with our books. The bug, however, in Bórnu is
not regarded as that nasty insect which creates so much loathing in
civilized countries; on the contrary the native thinks its smell
aromatic.

My poor Kátsena nag, the present of the extraordinary governor of that
place, almost against my expectation, had successfully carried me as far
as Kúkawa, but at that point it was quite exhausted, wanting at least
some months’ repose. I was, therefore, without a horse, and was obliged
at first to walk on foot, which was very trying in the deep sand and hot
weather. I had once entreated the vizier to lend me a horse, but Lamíno
had in consequence sent me such a miserable animal that I declined
mounting it. The sheikh being informed afterwards that I was bargaining
for a horse, sent me one as a present; it was tall and well-formed, but
of a colour which I did not like, and very lean, having just come from
the country where it had got no corn, so that it was unfit for me, as I
wanted a strong animal, ready to undergo a great deal of fatigue. I was
already preparing for my journey to Adamáwa, and having made the
acquaintance of Mʿallem Katúri, a native of Yákoba, or rather, as the
town is generally called, Garún Báuchi, and an excellent man, who had
accompanied several great ghazzias in that country, and particularly
that most remarkable one of Amba-Sambo, the governor of Chámba, as far
as the Igbo country, at the Delta of the Niger, I hired him and bought
for his use a strong good travelling horse. I bought also a tolerable
pony for my servant, Mohammed ben Sʿad, so that, having now three horses
at my command, I entered with spirit upon my career as an explorer of
Negroland. All this of course was done by contracting a few little
debts.

The vizier, who was well aware of the difficulties and dangers attending
my proposed excursion to Adamáwa, was rather inclined to send me to the
Músgu country, whither it was intended to despatch an expedition under
the command of Kashélla Belál; but fortunately for me, and perhaps,
also, for our knowledge of this part of the continent, the design was
frustrated by an inroad of the Tawárek, which demanded the presence of
this officer, the most warlike of the empire. This incursion of the
plundering Kindín was made by a considerable body of men; who, having in
vain tried to surprise some town on the frontier of Bórnu, turned their
march towards Kánem, and went as far as Báteli, where, however, they met
with but little success.

Having now a horse whereon to mount, I rode every day, either into the
eastern town to pay a visit to the sheikh, or to the vizier, or roving
around the whole circuit of the capital, and peeping into the varied
scenes which the life of the people exhibited. The precincts of the town
with its suburbs are just as interesting, as its neighbourhood
(especially during the months that precede the rainy season) is
monotonous and tiresome in the extreme. Certainly, the arrangement of
the capital contributes a great deal to the variety of the picture which
it forms, laid out as it is in two distinct towns, each surrounded with
its wall, the one, occupied chiefly by the rich and wealthy, containing
very large establishments, while the other, with the exception of the
principal thoroughfare which traverses the town from west to east,
consists of rather crowded dwellings, with narrow winding lanes. These
two distinct towns are separated by a space about half a mile broad,
itself thickly inhabited on both sides of a wide open road which forms
the connection between them, but laid out less regularly, and presenting
to the eye a most interesting medley of large clay buildings and small
thatched huts, of massive clay walls surrounding immense yards, and
light fences of reeds in a more or less advanced state of decay, and
with a variety of colour, according to their age, from the brightest
yellow down to the deepest black. All around these two towns there are
small villages or clusters of huts, and large detached farms surrounded
with clay walls, low enough to allow a glimpse from horseback over the
thatched huts which they inclose.

[Illustration:

_Explanation of References in the Engraving on the preceding page._

1. English house, of which a special plan is given on page 299.

2. Palace, “fáto maibe,” of the sheikh, in the western town or billa
futébe, with the mosque, “máshidí,” at the corner.

3. Minaret of mosque.

4. Square at the back of the palace, with a most beautiful caoutchouc-
tree, the finest in Kúkawa.

5. Déndal, or principal street.

6. Area before the southern gate where all the offal and dead bodies
of camels and cattle, and sometimes even of slaves, are thrown, and
which, during the rainy season, is changed into a large and deep pond.

7. Palace of the sheikh in the eastern town, or billa-gedíbe.

8. Palace of the vizier el Háj Beshír.

9. House where I was first lodged on my arrival, afterwards occupied
by Lamíno, the vizier’s head man.

10. (The house west from this) Palace belonging to Abu-Bakr, the
sheikh’s eldest and favourite son, with a very large caoutchouc-tree
in front.

11. House belonging to Abba Yusuf, second brother of the sheikh.

12. House occupied during my later stay by Lamíno.

13. Hollows from whence the clay has been taken for building material,
and which, during the rainy season, are changed into deep pools of
stagnant water.

14. Cemetery.]

In this labyrinth of dwellings a man, interested in the many forms which
human life presents, may rove about at any time of the day with the
certainty of finding never-failing amusement, although the life of the
Kanúri people passes rather monotonously along, with the exception of
some occasional feasting. During the hot hours, indeed, the town and its
precincts become torpid, except on market-days, when the market-place
itself, at least, and the road leading to it from the western gate, are
most animated just at that time. For, singular as it is, in Kúkawa, as
well as almost all over this part of Negroland, the great markets do not
begin to be well attended till the heat of the day grows intense; and it
is curious to observe what a difference prevails in this as well as in
other respects between these countries and Yóruba, where almost all the
markets are held in the cool of the evening.

The daily little markets, or durríya, even in Kúkawa, are held in the
afternoon, and are most frequented between the ʿaser (lásari) and the
mughreb (almágribu) or sunset. The most important of these durríyas is
that held inside the west gate of the billa futébe; and here even
camels, horses, and oxen are sold in considerable numbers: but they are
much inferior to the large fair, or great market, which is held every
Monday on the open ground beyond the two villages which lie at a short
distance from the western gate. Formerly it was held on the road to
Ngórnu, before the southern gate; but it has been removed from thence,
on account of the large pond of water formed during the rainy season in
the hollow close to this gate.

I visited the great fair, “kásukú letenínbe,” every Monday immediately
after my arrival, and found it very interesting, as it calls together
the inhabitants of all the eastern parts of Bórnu, the Shúwa and the
Koyám, with their corn and butter, the former, though of Arab origin and
still preserving in purity his ancient character, always carrying his
merchandise on the back of oxen, the women mounted upon the top of it,
while the African Koyám employs the camel, if not exclusively, at least
with a decided preference[77]; the Kánembú with their butter and dried
fish, the inhabitants of Mákari with their tobes (the kóre berné): even
Búdduma, or rather Yédiná, are very often seen in the market, selling
whips made from the skin of the hippopotamus, or sometimes even
hippopotamus meat, or dried fish, and attract the attention of the
spectator by their slender figures, their small handsome features
unimpaired by any incisions, the men generally wearing a short black
shirt and a small straw-hat, “súni ngáwa,” their neck adorned with
several strings of kúngona, or shells, while the women are profusely
ornamented with strings of glass beads, and wear their hair in a very
remarkable way, though not in so awkward a fashion as Mr. Overweg
afterwards observed in the island Belárigo.

On reaching the market-place from the town the visitor first comes to
that part where the various materials for constructing the light
dwellings of the country are sold, such as mats, of three different
kinds, the thickest, which I have mentioned above as lágará, then
síggedí, or the common coarse mat made of the reed called kalkálti, and
the búshi, made of dúm-leaves, or “ngílle,” for lying upon; poles and
stakes; the framework, “léggerá,” for the thatched roofs of huts, and
the ridge-beam or “késkan súmo;” then oxen for slaughter, “fé
debáterám,” or for carrying burdens, “knému lápterám;” further on, long
rows of leathern bags filled with corn, ranging far along on the south
side of the market-place, with either “kéwa,” the large bags for the
camel, a pair of which form a regular camel’s load, or the large
“jerábu,” which is thrown across the back of the pack-oxen, or the
smaller “fállim,” a pair of which constitutes an ox-load, “kátkun
knémube.” These long rows are animated not only by the groups of the
sellers and buyers, with their weatherworn figures and torn dresses, but
also by the beasts of burden, mostly oxen, which have brought the loads
and which are to carry back their masters to their distant dwelling
places; then follow the camels for sale, often as many as a hundred or
more, and numbers of horses, but generally not first-rate ones, which
are mostly sold in private. All this sale of horses, camels, &c., with
the exception of the oxen, passes through the hands of the dilélma or
broker, who, according to the mode of announcement, takes his percentage
from the buyer or the seller.

The middle of the market is occupied by the dealers in other merchandise
of native and of foreign manufacture, the “amagdí” or tob from Ujé, and
the kóre, or rébshi; the farásh, or “fetkéma,” and the “selláma,” the
people dealing in cloths, shirts, túrkedís, beads of all sizes and
colours, leatherwork, coloured boxes of very different shape and size,
very neatly and elegantly made of ox-hide. There are also very neat
little boxes made of the kernel, or “náge,” of the fruit of the dúm-
tree. Then comes the place where the kómbuli disposes of his slaves.

There are only a few very light sheds or stalls (“kaudi”), erected here
and there. In general, besides a few of the retail dealers, only the
dilélma or broker has a stall, which, on this account, is called
diléllam; and, no shady trees being found, both buyers and sellers are
exposed to the whole force of the sun during the very hottest hours of
the day, between eleven and three o’clock, when the market is most full
and busy, and the crowd is often so dense that it is difficult to make
one’s way through it: for the place not being regularly laid out, nor
the thoroughfares limited by rows of stalls, each dealer squats down
with his merchandise where he likes. There are often from twelve to
fifteen thousand people crowded together in the market; but the noise is
not very great, the Kanúri people being more sedate and less vivacious
than the Háusáwa, and not vending their wares with loud cries. However,
the wanzám or barber, going about, affords amusement by his constant
whistling, “kangádi.” In general, even amusements have rather a sullen
character in Bórnu; and of course, in a place of business like the
market, very little is done for amusement, although sometimes a serpent-
tamer (“kadíma”) or a story-teller (“kosgolíma”) is met with. Also the
luxuries offered to the people are very few in comparison with the
varieties of cakes and sweetmeats in the market-places of Háusa; and
“kólché” (the common sweet groundnut), “gángala” (the bitter groundnut),
boiled beans or “ngálo,” and a few dry dates from the Tébu country, are
almost the only things, besides water and a little nasty sour milk,
offered as refreshment to the exhausted customer.

The fatigue which people have to undergo in purchasing their week’s
necessaries in the market is all the more harassing, as there is not at
present any standard money for buying and selling; for the ancient
standard of the country, viz. the pound of copper, has long since fallen
into disuse, though the name, “rotl,” still remains. The “gábagá,” or
cotton-strips, which then became usual, have lately begun to be
supplanted by the cowries or “kúngona,” which have been introduced, as
it seems, rather by a speculation of the ruling people, than by a
natural want of the inhabitants[78], though nobody can deny that they
are very useful for buying small articles, and infinitely more
convenient than cotton strips. Eight cowries or kúngona are reckoned
equal to one gábagá, and four gábagá, or two-and-thirty kúngona, to one
rotl. Then, for buying larger objects, there are shirts of all kinds and
sizes, from the “dóra,” the coarsest and smallest one, quite unfit for
use, and worth six rotls, up to the large ones, worth fifty or sixty
rotls. But while this is a standard value, the relation of the rotl and
the Austrian dollar[79], which is pretty well current in Bórnu, is
subject to extreme fluctuation, due, I must confess, at least partly, to
the speculations of the ruling men, and principally to that of my friend
the Háj Beshír. Indeed, I cannot defend him against the reproach of
having speculated to the great detriment of the public; so that, when he
had collected a great amount of kúngona, and wished to give it currency,
the dollar would suddenly fall as low as to five-and-forty or fifty
rotls, while at other times it would fetch as much as one hundred rotls,
or three thousand two hundred shells; that is, seven hundred shells more
than in Kanó. The great advantage of the market in Kanó is, that there
is one standard coin, which, if a too large amount of dollars be not on
a sudden set in circulation, will always preserve the same value.

But to return to the market. A small farmer who brings his corn to the
Monday market, or the “kásukú létenínbe,” in Kúkawa, will on no account
take his payment in shells, and will rarely accept of a dollar: the
person, therefore, who wishes to buy corn, if he has only dollars, must
first exchange a dollar for shells, or rather buy shells; then with the
shells he must buy a “kúlgu,” or shirt; and after a good deal of
bartering he may thus succeed in buying the corn, be it some kind of
argúm, wheat, or rice. However, these two latter articles are not always
to be got, while more frequently they are only in small quantities. The
rice sold in Kúkawa is wild rice, the refuse of the elephants, and of a
very inferior description.

The fatigue to be undergone in the market is such that I have very often
seen my servants return in a state of the utmost exhaustion. Most of the
articles which are sold on the great Monday fair may also be found in
the small afternoon markets or durríya, but only in small quantity, and
at a higher price, and some articles will be sought for there in vain.
But while there is certainly a great deal of trouble in the market of
Kúkawa, it must be acknowledged that the necessaries of life are cheaper
there than in any other place which I have visited in Central Africa,
almost half as cheap again as in Kátsena and Sókoto, a third cheaper
than in Kanó, and about a fourth cheaper than in Timbúktu. About the
cheapness of meat and corn in the latter place, which is indeed a very
remarkable fact, and struck me with the utmost surprise when I first
reached that celebrated town, I shall speak in the proper place. But I
must remark that dukhn, argúm móro, or millet (_Pennisetum typhoïdeum_),
is in greater quantity, and therefore cheaper, in Kúkawa than the durra
or sorghum, “ngáberi,” just as it is in Timbúktu and Kanó, while in
Bagírmi durra is much cheaper. The ngáberi of Bórnu, however,
particularly that kind of it which is called matíya, and which is
distinguished by its whiteness, is most excellent; and the “senásin,” a
kind of thin pancake prepared from this grain, is the lightest and best
food for a European in this country.

Of course the price of corn varies greatly according to the season, the
lowest rates ruling about a month or two after the harvest, when all the
corn in the country has been thrashed, and the highest rates just about
the harvest time. In general a dollar will purchase in Kúkawa three ox-
loads, “kátkun knémube,” of argúm; a dollar and a half will buy a very
good ox of about six hundred pounds’ weight; two dollars fetch a pack ox
(“knému”), or a milch-cow (“fé mádarabé”); one dollar, two good sheep;
from seventeen to twenty rotls, a “téndu” of butter, containing about
four pounds’ weight. For wheat and rice the general rule in Negroland
is, that they fetch double the price of the native corn. Rice might seem
to be indigenous in Central Africa, growing wild everywhere, as well in
Bághena, in Western Africa, as in Kótoko or Bagírmi. Wheat, on the
contrary, was evidently introduced some hundred years ago, together with
onions, the favourite food of the Arab, to the merits of which the
native African is insensible, although it is a most wholesome article of
diet in this climate, as I shall have repeatedly occasion to state.

Of fruits the most common are—the two sorts of groundnut, “kólché” and
“gángala,” the former of which is a very important article of food,
though by no means on so large a scale as in the eastern parts of
Adamáwa; the “bíto,” the fruit of the hajilíj or _Balanites Ægyptiaca_
(which is so much valued by the Kanúri that, according to a common
proverb, a bíto-tree and a milch-cow are just the same,—“Késka bítowa
féwa mádarabé kal”); a kind of _Physalis_, the native name of which I
have forgotten; the bírgim, or the African plum, of which I shall speak
further on; the kórna, or the fruit of the _Rhamnus lotus_; and the
fruit of the dúm-palm, “kírzim” or _Cucifera Thebaïca_.

Of vegetables, the most common in the market are—beans of various
descriptions, which likewise form a very important article of food in
many districts, certainly as much as the third of the whole consumption;
onions, consumed in great quantity by the Arabs, but not by the natives,
who prefer to season their food with the young leaves of the monkey-
bread tree, “kálu kúka,” or the “karás,” or with a sauce made from dried
fish. There are no sweet potatoes and no yams in this part of Bórnu, the
consequence of which is that the food of the natives is less varied than
in Háusa, Kébbi, or Yóruba. Yams are brought to this country as
rarities, and are given as presents to influential persons.

Camels sell at from eight to twenty dollars. When there is no caravan in
preparation, a very tolerable beast may be bought for the former price;
but when a caravan is about to start, the best will fetch as much as
twenty dollars—very rarely more; and a good camel may always be had for
about fifteen dollars. Some camels may be bought for four or five
dollars each, but cannot be relied on.

Very strong travelling horses for servants were during my first visit
purchasable for from six to eight dollars, while an excellent horse
would not fetch more than thirty dollars; but in the year 1854 the price
had risen considerably, in consequence of the exportation of horses,
which had formerly been forbidden, having been permitted, and great
numbers having been exported to the west—chiefly to Múniyo, Kátsena, and
Márádi. A first-rate horse of foreign race, however, is much dearer, and
will sometimes fetch as much as three hundred dollars. I shall have
another opportunity of speaking of the horses of Bórnu, which is rather
an interesting and important subject, as the breed is excellent, and,
besides being very handsome and of good height, they bear fatigue
marvellously—a fact of which one of my own horses gave the best proof,
having carried me during three years of almost incessant fatigue on my
expedition to Kánem, to the Músgu country, to Bagírmi, to Timbúktu, and
back to Kanó, where my poor dear companion died in December, 1854: and
let it be taken into consideration that, though I myself am not very
heavy, I constantly carried with me a double-barrelled gun, one or two
pairs of pistols, a quantity of powder and shot, several instruments, my
journals, and generally even my coffeepot and some little provision.

But to return to the picture of life which the town of Kúkawa presents.
With the exception of Mondays, when just during the hottest hours of the
day there is much crowd and bustle in the market-place, it is very dull
from about noon till three o’clock in the afternoon; and even during the
rest of the day, those scenes of industry, which in the varied panorama
of Kanó meet the eye, are here sought for in vain. Instead of those
numerous dyeing-yards or máriná full of life and bustle, though
certainly also productive of much filth and foul odours, which spread
over the town of Kanó, there is only a single, and a very poor máriná in
Kúkawa; no beating of tobes is heard, nor the sound of any other
handicraft.

There is a great difference of character between these two towns; and,
as I have said above, the Bórnu people are by temperament far more
phlegmatic than those of Kanó. The women in general are much more ugly,
with square short figures, large heads, and broad noses with immense
nostrils, disfigured still more by the enormity of a red bead or coral
worn in the nostril. Nevertheless, they are certainly quite as
coquettish, and, as far as I had occasion to observe, at least as wanton
also, as the more cheerful and sprightly Háusa women. I have never seen
a Háusa woman strolling about the streets with her gown trailing after
her on the ground, the fashion of the women of Kúkawa, and wearing on
her shoulders some Manchester print of a showy pattern, keeping the ends
of it in her hands, while she throws her arms about in a coquettish
manner. In a word, their dress, as well as their demeanour, is far more
decent and agreeable. The best part in the dress or ornaments of the
Bórnu women is the silver ornament (the “fállafálle kélabé”) which they
wear on the back of the head, and which in taller figures, when the hair
is plaited in the form of a helmet, is very becoming; but it is not
every woman who can afford such an ornament, and many a one sacrifices
her better interests for this decoration.

The most animated quarter of the two towns is the great thoroughfare,
which, proceeding by the southern side of the palace in the western
town, traverses it from west to east, and leads straight to the sheikh’s
residence in the eastern town. This is the “déndal” or promenade, a
locality which has its imitation, on a less or greater scale, in every
town of the country. This road, during the whole day, is crowded by
numbers of people on horseback and on foot; free men and slaves,
foreigners as well as natives, every one in his best attire, to pay his
respects to the sheikh or his vizier, to deliver an errand, or to sue
for justice or employment, or a present. I myself very often went along
this well-trodden path—this highroad of ambition; but I generally went
at an unusual hour, either at sunrise in the morning, or while the heat
of the mid-day, not yet abated, detained the people in their cool
haunts, or late at night, when the people were already retiring to rest
or, sitting before their houses, beguiling their leisure hours with
amusing tales or with petty scandal. At such hours I was sure to find
the vizier or the sheikh alone; but sometimes they wished me also to
visit and sit with them, when they were accessible to all the people;
and on these occasions the vizier took pride and delight in conversing
with me about matters of science, such as the motion of the earth, or
the planetary system, or subjects of that kind.


[Footnote 77: This custom, I think, confirms the opinion that the Koyám
migrated from Kánem into Bórnu. They are expressly called “áhel el
bil.”]

[Footnote 78: I shall have occasion to mention what an influence the
introduction of cowries into Bórnu, by draining the Háusa country of
this article, has exercised upon the demand for cowries in Yoruba and on
the coast in the years following 1849.]

[Footnote 79: The Austrian dollar, the “bú-tér,” though less in
intrinsic value, is better liked in Bórnu than the Spanish one, the “bú
medfʿa.”]




                              CHAP. XXXI.

                               THE TSÁD.


My stay in the town was agreeably interrupted by an excursion to Ngórnu
and the shores of the lake.

[Sidenote: Thursday, April 24th.]

Sheikh ʿOmár, with his whole court, left Kúkawa in the night of the 23rd
of April, in order to spend a day or two in Ngórnu, where he had a
tolerably good house; and, having been invited by the vizier to go
there, I also followed on the morning of the next day. This road to
Ngórnu is strongly marked with that sameness and monotony which
characterize the neighbourhood of Kúkawa. At first nothing is seen but
the melancholy “káwo,” _Asclepias procera_ or _gigantea_; then “ngílle,”
low bushes of _Cucifera_, appear, and gradually trees begin to enliven
the landscape, first scattered here and there, further on forming a sort
of underwood. The path is broad and well-trodden, but consists mostly of
deep sandy soil. There are no villages on the side of the road, but a
good many at a little distance. In the rainy season some very large
ponds are formed by its side. Two miles and a half before the traveller
reaches Ngórnu the trees cease again, being only seen in detached
clusters at a great distance, marking the sites of villages, while near
the road they give way to an immense fertile plain, where beans are
cultivated, besides grain. However, this also is covered at this season
of the year with the tiresome and endless _Asclepias_. Among the sites
of former towns on the east side of the road is that of New Bírni, which
was built by the Sultan Mohammed, when residing in Berberuwá, about the
year 1820, and destroyed by Háj Beshír in the year 1847, and does not
now contain a living soul. Farther on is a group of kitchen-gardens
belonging to some grandees, and adorned with two or three most splendid
tamarind-trees, which in this monotonous landscape have a peculiar
charm.

It was about one o’clock in the afternoon when I entered Ngórnu, the
town of “the blessing.” The heat being then very great, scarcely anybody
was to be seen in the streets; but the houses, or rather yards, were
full of people, tents having been pitched to accommodate so many
visitors, while fine horses looked forth everywhere over the low fences,
saluting us as we passed by. Scarcely a single clay house was to be
seen, with the exception of the house of the sheikh, which lies at the
end of the déndal; but nevertheless the town made the impression of
comfort and ease, and every yard was neatly fenced with new “síggedí”
mats, and well shaded by kórna-trees, while the huts were large and
spacious.

Having in vain presented myself at the house of the vizier, where the
people were all asleep, and wandered about the town for a good while, I
at length took up my quarters provisionally with some Arabs, till the
cool of the afternoon aroused the courtiers from their long midday
slumber, which they certainly may have needed, inasmuch as they had been
up at two o’clock in the morning. But even after I had the good fortune
to see Háj Beshír, I found it difficult to obtain quarters, and I was
obliged to pitch my tent in a courtyard.

Being tired of the crowd in the town, I mounted on horseback early next
morning in order to refresh myself with a sight of the lake, which I
supposed to be at no great distance, and indulged beforehand in
anticipations of the delightful view which I fondly imagined was soon to
greet my eye. We met a good many people and slaves going out to cut
grass for the horses; and leaving them to their work we kept on towards
the rising sun. But no lake was to be seen, and an endless grassy plain
without a single tree extended to the furthest horizon. At length, after
the grass had increased continually in freshness and luxuriance, we
reached a shallow swamp, the very indented border of which, sometimes
bending in, at others bending out, greatly obstructed our progress.
Having struggled for a length of time to get rid of this swamp, and
straining my eyes in vain to discover the glimmering of an open water in
the distance, I at length retraced my steps, consoling myself with the
thought that I had seen at least some slight indication of the presence
of the watery element, and which seemed indeed to be the only thing
which was at present to be seen here.

How different was this appearance of the country from that which it
exhibited in the winter from 1854 to 1855, when more than half of the
town of Ngórnu was destroyed by the water, and a deep open sea was
formed to the south of this place, in which the fertile plain as far as
the village of Kúkiya lay buried. This great change seems to have
happened in consequence of the lower strata of the ground, which
consisted of limestone, having given way in the preceding year, and the
whole shore on this side having sunk several feet; but even without such
a remarkable accident, the character of the Tsád is evidently that of an
immense lagoon, changing its border every month, and therefore incapable
of being mapped with accuracy. Indeed, when I saw to-day the nature of
these swampy lowlands surrounding the lake, or rather lagoon, I
immediately became aware that it would be quite impossible to survey its
shores, even if the state of the countries around should allow us to
enter upon such an undertaking. The only thing possible would be on one
side to fix the furthest limit reached at times by the inundation of the
lagoon, and on the other to determine the extent of the navigable
waters.

Having returned to the town, I related to the vizier my unsuccessful
excursion in search of the Tsád, and he obligingly promised to send some
horsemen to conduct me along the shore as far as Káwa, whence I should
return to the capital.

[Sidenote: Saturday, April 26th.]

The sheikh, with his court, having left Ngórnu before the dawn of day,
on his return to Kúkawa, I sent back my camel, with my two men also, by
the direct road; and then having waited awhile in vain for the promised
escort, I went myself with Bu-Sʿad, to look after it, but succeeded only
in obtaining two horsemen, one of whom was the Kashélla Kótoko, an
amiable, quiet Kánemma chief, who ever afterwards remained my friend,
and the other a horseguard of the sheikh’s, of the name of Sále. With
these companions we set out on our excursion, going north-east; for due
east from the town, as I now learned, the lagoon was at present at more
than ten miles’ distance. The fine grassy plain seemed to extend to a
boundless distance, uninterrupted by a single tree, or even a shrub; not
a living creature was to be seen, and the sun began already to throw a
fiery veil over all around, making the vicinity of the cooling element
desirable. After a little more than half an hour’s ride we reached
swampy ground, and began to make our way through the water, often up to
our knees on horseback. We thus came to the margin of a fine open sheet
of water, encompassed with papyrus and tall reed, of from ten to
fourteen feet in height, of two different kinds, one called “méle,” and
the other “bóre,” or “bóle.” The méle has a white tender core, which is
eaten by the natives, but to me seemed insipid; the bóre has a head like
the common bulrush, and its stalk is triangular. The thicket was
interwoven by a climbing plant with yellow flowers, called “bórbuje” by
the natives, while on the surface of the water was a floating plant
called, very facetiously, by the natives, “fánna-billa-bágo” (the
homeless fánna). This creek was called “Ngíruwá.”

Then turning a little more to the north, and passing still through deep
water full of grass, and most fatiguing for the horses, while it seemed
most delightful to me, after my dry and dreary journey through this
continent, we reached another creek, called “Dímbebér.” Here I was so
fortunate as to see two small boats, or “mákara,” of the Búdduma, as
they are called by the Kanúri, or Yédiná, as they call themselves, the
famous pirates of the Tsád. They were small flat boats, made of the
light and narrow wood of the “fógo,” about twelve feet long, and managed
by two men each; as soon as the men saw us, they pushed their boats off
from the shore. They were evidently in search of human prey; and as we
had seen people from the neighbouring villages, who had come here to cut
reeds to thatch their huts anew for the rainy season, we went first to
inform them of the presence of these constant enemies of the inhabitants
of these fertile banks of the lagoon, that they might be on their guard;
for they could not see them, owing to the quantity of tall reeds with
which the banks and the neighbouring land was overgrown.

We then continued our watery march. The sun was by this time very
powerful; but a very gentle cooling breeze came over the lagoon, and
made the heat supportable. We had water enough to quench our
thirst—indeed more than we really wanted; for we might have often drunk
with our mouth, by stooping down a little, on horseback, so deeply were
we immersed. But the water was exceedingly warm, and full of vegetable
matter. It is perfectly fresh, as fresh as water can be. It seems to
have been merely from prejudice that people in Europe have come to the
conclusion that this Central African basin must either have an outlet,
or must be salt. For I can positively assert that it has no outlet, and
that its water is perfectly fresh. Indeed I do not see from whence
saltness of the water should arise in a district in which there is no
salt at all, and in which the herbage is so destitute of this element,
that the milk of the cows and sheep fed on it is rather insipid, and
somewhat unwholesome. Certainly, in the holes around the lagoon, where
the soil is strongly impregnated with natron, and which are only for a
short time of the year in connection with the lake, the water, when in
small quantity, must savour of the peculiar quality of the soil; but
when these holes are full, the water in them likewise is fresh.

While we rode along these marshy, luxuriant plains, large herds of
“kelára” started up, bounding over the rushes, and sometimes swimming,
at others running, soon disappeared in the distance. This is a peculiar
kind of antelope, which I have nowhere seen but in the immediate
vicinity of the lake. In colour and size it resembles the roe, and has a
white belly. The kelára is by no means slender, but rather bulky, and
extremely fat; this, however, may not be a specific character, but
merely the consequence of the rich food which it enjoys here. It may be
identical with, or be a variety of the _Antilope Arabica_, and the
Arabs, and those of the natives who understand a little Arabic, call
both by the same name, “el áriyel.”

Proceeding onwards, we reached about noon another creek, which is used
occasionally by the Búdduma as a harbour, and is called “Ngúlbeá.” We,
however, found it empty, and only inhabited by ngurútus, or river-
horses, which, indeed, live here in great numbers, snorting about in
every direction, and by two species of crocodiles. In this quarter there
are no elephants, for the very simple reason that they have no place of
retreat during the night; for this immense animal (at least in Africa)
appears to be very sensible of the convenience of a soft couch in the
sand, and of the inconvenience of mosquitoes too; wherefore it prefers
to lie down on a spot a little elevated above the swampy ground, whither
it resorts for its daily food. On the banks of the northern part of the
Tsád, on the contrary, where a range of low sandhills and wood
encompasses the lagoon, we shall meet with immense herds of this animal.

Ngúlbeá was the easternmost point of our excursion; and, turning here a
little west from north, we continued our march over drier pasture-
grounds, placed beyond the reach of the inundation, and, after about
three miles, reached the deeply-indented and well-protected creek called
“Ngómarén.” Here I was most agreeably surprised by the sight of eleven
boats of the Yédiná. Large, indeed, they were considering the ship-
building of these islanders; but otherwise they looked very small and
awkward, and, resting quite flat on the water, strikingly reminded me of
theatrical exhibitions in which boats are introduced on the stage. They
were not more than about twenty feet long[80], but seemed tolerably
broad; and one of them contained as many as eleven people, besides a
good quantity of natron and other things. They had a very low waist, but
rather a high and pointed prow. They are made of the narrow boards of
the fógo-tree, which are fastened together with ropes from the dúm-palm,
the holes being stopped with bast.

The Kánembú inhabitants of many neighbouring villages carry on trade
with the islanders almost uninterruptedly, while elsewhere the latter
are treated as most deadly enemies. Two parties of Kánembú happened to
be here with argúm or millet, which they exchange for the natron. They
were rather frightened when they saw us, the Búdduma being generally
regarded as enemies; but the sheikh and his counsellors are well aware
of this intercourse, and, wanting either the spirit or the power to
reduce those islanders to subjection, they must allow their own
subjects, whom they fail to protect against the continual inroads of the
Búdduma, to deal with the latter at their own discretion. It was my
earnest wish to go on board one of the boats, and to examine their make
attentively; and, with the assistance of Kashélla Kótoko, who was well-
known to the Búdduma, I should perhaps have succeeded, if Bú-Sʿad, my
Mohammedan companion, had not behaved like a madman: indeed I could
scarcely restrain him from firing at these people, who had done us no
harm. This was certainly a mere outbreak of fanaticism. When the people
in the boats saw my servant’s excited behaviour, they left the shore,
though numerous enough to overpower us; and we then rode on to another
creek called Méllelá, whence we turned westwards, and in about an hour,
partly through water, partly over a grassy plain, reached Maduwári.

Maduwári, at that time, was an empty sound for me—a name without a
meaning, just like the names of so many other places at which I had
touched on my wanderings; but it was a name about to become important in
the history of the expedition, to which many a serious remembrance was
to be attached. Maduwári was to contain another white man’s grave, and
thus to rank with Ngurútuwa.

When I first entered the place from the side of the lake, it made a very
agreeable impression upon me, as it showed evident signs of ease and
comfort, and, instead of being closely packed together, as most of the
towns and villages of the Kanúri are, it lay dispersed in eleven or
twelve separate clusters of huts, shaded by a rich profusion of korna-
and bíto-trees. I was conducted by my companion, Kashélla Kótoko, to the
house of Fúgo ʿAli. It was the house wherein Mr. Overweg, a year and a
half later, was to expire; while Fúgo ʿAli himself, the man who first
contracted friendship with me, then conducted my companion on his
interesting navigation round the islands of the lake, and who frequented
our house, was destined to fall a sacrifice in the revolution of 1854.
How different was my reception then, when I first went to his house on
this my first excursion to the lake, and when I revisited it with Mr.
Vogel in the beginning of 1855, when Fúgo ʿAli’s widow was sobbing at my
side, lamenting the ravages of time, the death of my companion, and that
of her own husband.

The village pleased me so much that I took a long walk through it before
I sat down to rest; and after being treated most sumptuously with fowls
and a roasted sheep, I passed the evening very agreeably in conversation
with my black friends. The inhabitants of all these villages are
Kánembú[81], belonging to the tribe of the Sugúrti, who in former times
were settled in Kánem, till by the wholesale devastation of that country
they were compelled to leave their homes and seek a retreat in these
regions. Here they have adopted the general dress of the Kanúri; and
only very few of them may at present be seen exhibiting their original
native costume, the greatest ornament of which is the head-dress, while
the body itself, with the exception of a tight leathern apron, or
“fúno,” is left naked. This is a remarkable peculiarity of costume,
which seems to prevail among almost all barbarous tribes. The original
head-dress of the Sugúrti, that is to say, of the head men of the tribe,
consists of four different articles: first the “jóka,” or cap, rather
stiff, and widening at the top, where the second article, the “ariyábu”
(aliyáfu), is tied round it; from the midst of the folds of the ariyábu,
just over the front of the head, the “múllefu” stands forth, a piece of
red cloth, stiffened, as it seems, by a piece of leather from behind;
and all round the crown of the head a bristling crown of reeds rises
with barbaric majesty to a height of about eight inches. Round his neck
he wears a tight string of white beads, or “kulúlu,” and hanging down
upon the breast, several small leather pockets, containing written
charms or láya, while his right arm is ornamented with three rings, one
on the upper arm, called “wíwi or bíbi,” one made of ivory, and called
“chíla,” above the elbow, and another, called “kúllo,” just above the
wrist. The shields of the Sugúrti, at least most of them, are broad at
the top as well as at the base, and besides his large spear or kasákka,
he is always armed with three or four javelins, “bállem.” But besides
the Sugúrti there happened to be just then present in the village some
Búdduma, handsome, slender, and intelligent people, their whole attire
consisting in a leathern apron and a string of white beads round the
neck, which, together with their white teeth, produces a beautiful
contrast with the jet-black skin. They gave me the first account of the
islands of the lake, stating that the open water, which in their
language is called “Kalilémma,” or rather Kúlu kemé, begins one day’s
voyage from Káya, the small harbour of Maduwári, stretching in the
direction of Sháwi, and that the water is thenceforth from one to two
fathoms deep. I invariably understood from all the people with whom I
spoke about this interesting lake, that the open water, with its islands
of elevated sandy downs, stretches from the mouth of the Sháry towards
the western shore, and that all the rest of the lake consists of swampy
meadow-lands, occasionally inundated. I shall have occasion to speak
again about this point when briefly reporting my unfortunate companion’s
voyage on the lake.[82]

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

KÁLU-KEMÉ.

the open water of the Tsád.]

Having closed my day’s labour usefully and pleasantly, I lay down under
a sort of shed, but had much to suffer from musquitoes, which, together
with fleas, are a great nuisance near the banks of the lagoon.

[Sidenote: Sunday, April 27th.]

Before sunrise we were again in the saddle, accompanied by Fúgo or Púfo
ʿAli, who had his double pair of small drums with him, and looked well
on his stately horse. It was a beautiful morning, and I was delighted
with the scene around. Clear and unbroken were the lines of the horizon,
the swampy plain extending on our right towards the lake, and blending
with it, so as to allow the mind that delights in wandering over distant
regions a boundless expanse to rove in—an enjoyment not to be found in
mountainous regions, be the mountains ever so distant. For


  “’Tis distance lends enchantment to the view.”


Thus we went on slowly northwards, while the sun rose over the patches
of water, which spread over the grassy plain; and on our left the
village displayed its snug yards and huts, neatly fenced and shaded by
spreading trees. We now left Maduwári, and after a little while passed
another village called Dógoji, when we came to a large hamlet or “berí”
of Kánembú cattle-breeders, who had the care of almost all the cattle of
the villages along the shores of the lake, which is very credibly
reported to amount together to eleven thousand head. The herd here
collected—numbering at least a thousand head, most of them of that
peculiar kind, called kúri, mentioned before—was placed in the midst,
while the men were encamped all around, armed with long spears and light
shields; at equal distances long poles were fixed in the ground, on
which the butter was hung up in skins or in “kórió,” vessels made of
grass. Here we had some delay, as Fúgo ʿAli, who was the inspector of
all these villages, had to make inquiries respecting three head of
cattle belonging to the vizier, which had been stolen during the night.
On our left the considerable village of Bínder, which is at least as
large as Maduwári, exhibited an interesting picture; and I had leisure
to make a sketch.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

SHORES OF THE TSÁD.

April 26th. 1851.]

Having here indulged in a copious draught of fresh milk, we resumed our
march, turning to the eastward; and having passed through deep water, we
reached the creek “Kógorám,” surrounded by a dense belt of tall rushes
of various kinds. We were just about to leave this gulf, when we were
joined by Zíntelma, another Kánemma chief, who ever afterwards remained
attached to me and Mr. Overweg, with five horsemen. Our troop having
thus increased, we went on cheerfully to another creek called Tábirám,
whence we galloped towards Bolé, trying in vain to overtake a troop of
kelára (the antelope before mentioned), which rushed headlong into the
water and disappeared in the jungle. Before, however, we could get to
this latter place, we had to pass very deep water, which covered my
saddle, though I was mounted on a tall horse, and swamped altogether my
poor Bú-Sʿad on his pony; nothing but his head and his gun were to be
seen for a time. But it was worth while to reach the spot which we thus
attained at the widest creek of the lake as yet seen by me,—a fine open
sheet of water, the surface of which, agitated by a light east wind,
threw its waves upon the shore. All around was one forest of reeds of
every description, while the water itself was covered with water-plants,
chiefly the water-lily or _Nymphæa lotus_. Numberless flocks of
waterfowl of every description played about. The creek has an angular
form; and its recess, which makes a deep indentation from E. 30 N. to W.
30 S., is named Nghélle.

Having made our way through the water and rushes, and at length got
again on firm ground, we made a momentary halt to consider what next to
do. Háj Beshír had taught me to hope that it would be possible to reach
on horseback the island Sóyurum[83], which extends a long way into the
lake, and whence I might have an extensive view over the Kúlu kemé and
many of the islands; but my companions were unanimously of opinion that
the depth of the water to be crossed for many miles exceeded the height
of my horse; and although I was quite ready to expose myself to more
wetting, in order to see a greater portion of this most interesting
feature of Central Africa, I nevertheless did not think it worth while
to ride a whole day through deep water, particularly as in so doing I
should not be able to keep my chronometer and my compass dry; for these
were now the most precious things which I had on earth, and could not be
replaced or repaired so easily as gun and pistols. But moreover my
horse, which had never been accustomed to fatigue, and had not been well
fed, had become quite lame, and seemed scarcely able to carry me back to
Kúkawa. I therefore gave up the idea of visiting the island, which in
some years, when the lake does not rise to a great height, may be
reached with little inconvenience[84], and followed my companions
towards the large village of Káwa.[85]

Passing over fields planted with cotton and beans, but without native
corn, which is not raised here at all, we reached Káwa after an hour’s
ride, while we passed on our left a small swamp. Káwa is a large
straggling village, which seems to enjoy some political preeminence
above the other places hereabouts, and on this account is placed in a
somewhat hostile position to the independent inhabitants of the islands,
with which the Kánembú in general keep up a sort of peaceful
intercourse. What to me seemed the most interesting objects were the
splendid trees adorning the place. The sycamore under which our party
was desired to rest in the house of Fúgo ʿAli’s sister was most
magnificent, and afforded the most agreeable resting-place possible, the
space overshadowed by the crown of the tree being inclosed with a
separate fence, as the “fágé,” or place of meeting. Here we were feasted
with a kind of “boló-boló,” or water mixed with pounded argúm or dukhn,
sour milk, and meat, and then continued our march to Kúkawa, where we
arrived just as the vizier was mounting on horseback to go to the
sheikh. Galloping up to him, we paid him our respects; and he expressed
himself well pleased with me. My companions told him that we had been
swimming about in the lake for the last two days, and that I had written
down everything. The whole cavalcade, consisting of eight horsemen, then
accompanied me to my house, where I gave them a treat.

I returned just in time from my excursion; for the next day the caravan
for Fezzán encamped outside the town, and I had to send off two of my
men with it. One of them was the carpenter Ibrahím, a handsome young
man, but utterly unfit for work, of whom I was extremely glad to get
rid; the other was Mohammed el Gatróni, my faithful servant from Múrzuk,
whom I dismissed with heartfelt sorrow. He had had a very small salary;
and I therefore promised to give him four Spanish dollars a month, and
to mount him on horseback, but it was all in vain; he was anxious to see
his wife and children again, after which he promised to come back. I,
therefore, like the generals of ancient Rome, gave him leave of
absence—“pueris procreandis daret operam.”

On the other side, it was well worth a sacrifice to send a trustworthy
man to Fezzán. The expedition had lost its director, who alone was
authorized to act in the name of the Government which had sent us out;
we had no means whatever, but considerable debts, and without immediate
aid by fresh supplies, the surviving members could do no better than to
return home as soon as possible. Moreover, there were Mr. Richardson’s
private things to be forwarded, and particularly his journal, which,
from the beginning of the journey down to the very last days of his
life, he had kept with great care,—more fortunate he, and more provident
in this respect than my other companion, who laughed at me when, during
moments of leisure, I finished the notes which I had briefly written
down during the march, and who contended that nothing could be done in
this respect till after a happy return home. I therefore provided
Mohammed, upon whose discretion and fidelity I could entirely rely, with
a camel, and intrusted to him all Mr. Richardson’s things and my parcel
of letters, which he was to forward by the courier, who is generally
sent on by the caravan after its arrival in the Tébu country.

There were two respectable men with the caravan, Háj Hasan, a man
belonging to the family of El Kánemi, and in whose company Mr. Vogel
afterwards travelled from Fezzán to Bórnu, and Mohammed Titíwi. On the
second of May, therefore, I went to pay a visit to these men, but found
only Titíwi, to whom I recommended my servant. He promised to render him
all needful assistance. I had but little intercourse with this man, yet
this little occurred on important occasions, and so his name has become
a pleasant remembrance to me. I first met him when sending off the
literary remains of my unfortunate companion. I at the same time
ventured to introduce myself to her Majesty’s Government, and to try if
it would so far rely upon me, a foreigner, as to intrust me with the
further direction of the expedition, and to ask for means; it was then
Titíwi again who brought me the most honourable despatches from the
British Government, authorizing me to carry out the expedition just as
it had been intended, and at the same time means for doing so. It was
Titíwi, who, on the day when I was leaving Kúkawa on my long adventurous
journey to Timbúktu, came to my house to wish me success in my arduous
undertaking; and it was Titíwi again, who, on the second of August,
1855, came to the consul’s house, in Tripoli, to congratulate me on my
successful return from the interior.

He was an intelligent man, and being informed that I was about to
undertake a journey to Adamáwa, the dangers of which he well knew, he
expressed his astonishment that I should make the attempt with a weak
horse, such as I was then riding. My horse, though it had recovered a
little from its lameness, and was getting strength from a course of
dumplings made of the husk of Negro corn mixed with natron, which it had
to swallow every morning and evening, was anything but a good charger;
and having previously determined to look about for a better horse, I was
only confirmed in my intention by the observation of the experienced
merchant.

This was one of the largest slave caravans which departed during my stay
in Bórnu; for, if I am not mistaken, there were seven hundred and fifty
slaves in the possession of the merchants who went with it. Slaves are
as yet the principal export from Bórnu, and will be so till the slave
trade on the north coast is abolished.[86]

Overweg had not yet arrived, although we had received information that
he was on his way directly from Zínder, having given up his intention of
visiting Kanó. Before I set out on my journey to Adamáwa, it was
essential that I should confer with him about many things, and
particularly as to what he himself should first undertake, but the rainy
season was fast approaching even here, while in Adamáwa it had set in
long ago, and it seemed necessary that I should not delay any longer. In
the afternoon of the fifth of May, we had the first unmistakeable token
of the rainy season—a few heavy claps of thunder followed by rain. But I
did not tarry; the very same day I bought in the market all that was
necessary for my journey, and the next day succeeded in purchasing a
very handsome and strong gray horse, “kerí bul,” for twelve hundred and
seventy rotls, equal at that moment to two and thirty Austrian dollars,
while I sold my weak horse which the sheikh had given me for nine
hundred rotls, or twenty-two dollars and a half.

Having also bought an Arab saddle, I felt myself quite a match for
anybody, and hearing in the afternoon that the sheikh had gone to
Gawánge, a place two miles and a half E. from the town towards the lake,
I mounted my new steed, and setting off at a gallop, posted myself
before the palace just when ʿOmár was about to come out with the
flourishing of the trumpets, sounding the Háusa word “gashí, gashí,”
“here he is, here he is.” The sheikh was very handsomely dressed in a
fine white bernús over another of light blue colour, and very well
mounted on a fine black horse, “fir kéra.” He was accompanied by several
of his and the vizier’s courtiers, and about two hundred horsemen, who
were partly riding by his side, partly galloping on in advance and
returning again to the rear, while sixty slaves, wearing red jackets
over their shirts, and armed with matchlocks, ran in front of and behind
his horse. The vizier, who saw me first, saluted me very kindly, and
sent Hámza Weled el Góni to take me to the sheikh, who made a halt, and
asked me very graciously how I was going on, and how my excursion to the
lake had amused me. Having then taken notice of my sprightly horse, the
vizier called my servant, and expressed his regret, that the horse which
they had presented to me had not proved good, saying that I ought to
have informed them, when they would have given me a better one. I
promised to do so another time, and did not forget the warning.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, May 7th.]

Mr. Overweg arrived. The way in which he was announced to me was so
singular as to merit description. It was about an hour before noon, and
I was busy collecting some interesting information from my friend
Ibrahím el Futáwi about Tagánet, when suddenly the little Mʿadi arrived.
This lad, a liberated slave, had been Mr. Richardson’s servant, and is
frequently mentioned in that gentleman’s journal. As he had been among
those of my companion’s people who, to my great regret, had left Kúkawa
the day before I arrived without having their claims settled, I was very
glad when he came back, but could not learn from him how it happened
that he returned; when, after some chat, he told me, incidentally, that
the tabíb (Mr. Overweg) was also come, and was waiting for me in
Kálilwá. Of course it was the latter who, meeting the lad on the road,
had brought him back, and had sent him now expressly to inform me of his
arrival. This dull but good-natured lad, who was afterwards severely
wounded in the service of the mission, is now Mr. Vogel’s chief servant.

As soon as I fully understood the purport of this important message, I
ordered my horse to be saddled, and mounted. The sun was extremely
powerful just about noon, shortly before the setting-in of the rainy
season, and as I had forgotten, in the hurry and excitement, to wind a
turban round my cap, I very nearly suffered a sun-stroke. A traveller
cannot be too careful of his head in these countries.

I found Overweg in the shade of a nebek-tree near Kálilwá. He looked
greatly fatigued and much worse than when I left him, four months ago,
at Tasáwa; indeed, as he told me, he had been very sickly in Zínder—so
sickly, that he had been much afraid lest he should soon follow Mr.
Richardson to the grave. Perhaps the news which he just then heard of
our companion’s death made him more uneasy about his own illness.
However, we were glad to meet again alive, and expressed our hopes to be
able to do a good deal for the exploration of these countries. He had
had an opportunity of witnessing, during his stay in Góber and Marádi,
the interesting struggle going on between this noblest part of the Háusa
nation and the Fúlbe, who threaten their political as well as religious
independence[87]; and he was deeply impressed with the charming scenes
of unrestrained cheerful life which he had witnessed in those pagan
communities; while I, for my part, could assure him, that my reception
in Bórnu seemed to guarantee success, although, under existing
circumstances, there seemed to be very little hope that we should ever
be able to make a journey all round the Tsád; but I thought that, with
the assistance of those people in Bínder and Maduwári whom I had just
visited, and who appeared to be on friendly terms with the islanders, it
might be possible to explore the navigable part of the lagoon in the
boat.

Mr. Overweg was, in some respects, very badly off, having no clothes
with him except those which he actually wore, all his luggage being
still in Kanó, though he had sent two men to fetch it. I was therefore
obliged to lend him my own things, and he took up his quarters in
another part of our house, though it was rather small for our joint
establishment. The vizier was very glad of his arrival, and, in
fulfilment of his engagement to deliver all the things left by Mr.
Richardson[88] as soon as Mr. Overweg should arrive, he sent all the
half-empty boxes of our late companion in the evening of the next day;
even the gun and pistols, and the other things which had been sold, were
returned, with the single exception of Mr. Richardson’s watch, which, as
the sheikh was very fond of it, and kept it near him night and day, I
thought it prudent to spare him the mortification of returning.

Mr. Overweg and I, having then made a selection from the articles that
remained to us, presented to the vizier, on the morning of the ninth,
those destined for him, and in the afternoon we presented the sheikh
with his share. These presents could not be now expected to please by
their novelty, or to awaken a feeling of gratitude in the receivers, who
had long been in possession of them; but although made to understand by
Mr. Richardson’s interpreters that he alone had been authorized by the
British Government, Mr. Overweg and I not being empowered to interfere,
and that consequently they might regard themselves as legitimate
possessors of our deceased companion’s property, they must yet have
entertained some doubt about the equity of their claim; and as soon as I
arrived, and began to act with firmness, they grew ashamed of having
listened to intriguing servants. In short, though we had put them to
shame, they esteemed us all the better for our firmness, and received
their presents in a very gracious manner.

We now spoke also about the treaty, the negotiation of which, we said,
had been specially intrusted to our companion, but now, by his death,
had devolved on us. Both of them assured us of their ardent desire to
open commercial intercourse with the English, but at the same time they
did not conceal that their principal object in so doing was to obtain
fire-arms. They also expressed their desire that two of their people
might return with us to England, in order to see the country and its
industry, which we told them we were convinced would be most agreeable
to the British Government. Our conversation was so unrestrained and
friendly, that the sheikh himself took the opportunity of excusing
himself for having appropriated Mr. Richardson’s watch.

But the following narrative will show how European travellers,
endeavouring to open these countries to European intercourse, have to
struggle against the intrigues of the Arabs; who are well aware that as
soon as the Europeans, or rather the English, get access to Negroland,
not only their slave-trade, but even their whole commerce, as they now
carry it on, will be annihilated.

We had scarcely re-entered our house when, the rumour spreading through
the Arab quarter of the manner in which we had been received, and of the
matters talked of, El Khodr, a native of Dar-Fúr, and the foremost of
the native traders, went to the sheikh with the news that seven large
vessels of the English had suddenly arrived at Núpe, and that the
natives were greatly afraid of them. This announcement was soon found to
be false, but nevertheless it served its purpose, to cool a little the
friendly and benevolent feeling which had been manifested towards us.

The following day we went to pitch the large double tent, which we had
given to the sheikh, on the open area before his palace in the eastern
town; and having fully succeeded in arranging it, although a few pieces
were wanting, it was left the whole day in its place, and made a great
impression upon the people. At first it seemed rather awkward to the
natives, whose tents, even if of large size, are mere bell-tents; but in
the course of time it pleased the sheikh so much, that when I finally
left the country, he begged me to entreat the British Government to send
him another one like it.[89]

We also paid our respects to the principal of the sheikh’s brothers, as
well as to his eldest son. Having obtained permission, we visited ʿAbd
e’ Rahmán, the brother and rival of the sheikh, as we could not
prudently be wanting in civility to a person who might soon get the
upper hand. We presented him with a fine white heláli bernús, and sundry
small things; he received us very graciously, and laughed and chatted a
good deal with us on the first as well as on a second visit, when I was
obliged to show him the pictures in Denham’s and Clapperton’s work, and
the drawing I had myself made of his friend, the Kánemma chief, Ámsakay,
of which he had heard; but his manners did not please us very much. His
countenance had a very wild expression, and he manifested little
intelligence or princely demeanour, wrangling and playing the whole day
with his slaves. Besides, we were obliged to be cautious in our dealings
with him; for we had scarcely made his acquaintance, when he sent us a
secret message, begging for poison, with which he most probably wished
to rid himself of his deadly enemy the vizier. Quite a different man was
Yúsuf, the sheikh’s second brother, with whom during my last stay in
Kúkawa, in the beginning of 1855, I became intimately acquainted. He was
a learned and very religious man, always reading, and with a very acute
sense of justice; but he was not a man of business. As for Bú-Bakr, the
eldest son of ʿOmár, who now unfortunately seems to have the best claim
to the succession, he was a child, devoid of intelligence or noble
feelings. Twice was I obliged to have recourse to his father to make him
pay me for some articles which he had bought of me.

The much desired moment of my departure for Adamáwa drew nearer and
nearer. The delay of my starting on this undertaking, occasioned by the
late arrival of Mr. Overweg, had been attended with the great advantage
that, meanwhile, some messengers of the governor of that country had
arrived, in whose company, as they were returning immediately, I was
able to undertake the journey with a much better prospect of success.
The subject of their message was, that Kashélla ʿAlí Ladán, on his late
predatory incursion into the Marghí country, had enslaved and carried
away inhabitants of several places to which the governor of Adamáwa laid
claim, and it was more in order to establish his right, than from any
real concern in the fate of these unfortunate creatures, that he was
pleased to lay great stress upon the case. Indeed, as the sequel shows,
his letter must have contained some rather harsh or threatening
expressions, to which the ruler of Bórnu was not inclined to give way,
though he yielded[90] to the justice of the specific claim. At first
these messengers from Adamáwa were to be my only companions besides my
own servants, and on the 21st of May I was officially placed under their
protection in the house of the sheikh by several of the first courtiers
or kokanáwa, among whom were the old Ibrahím Wadáy, the friend and
companion of Mohammed el Kánemi in his first heroical proceedings,
Shítima Náser, Hámza, and Kashélla ʿAli, and the messengers promised to
see me safe to their country, and to provide for my safe return.

Ibrahíma, the head man of these messengers, who were all of rather
inferior rank, was not such a man as I wished for; but fortunately there
was among them another person named Mohámmedu, who, although himself a
Púllo by descent, had more of the social character of the Háusa race,
and was ready to gratify my desire for information. He proved most
useful in introducing me into the new country which I was to explore,
and would have been of immense service to me if I had been allowed to
make any stay there.

After much delay, and having twice taken official leave of the sheikh in
full state, I had at length the pleasure of seeing our little band ready
for starting in the afternoon of Thursday, the 29th May, 1851. Rather
more, I think, with a view to his own interest, than from any
apprehension on my account, the sheikh informed me, in the last
interview which I had with him, that he would send an officer along with
me. This move puzzled me from the beginning, and caused me some
misgiving; and there is not the least doubt, as the sequel will show,
that to the company of this officer it must be attributed that I was
sent back by Mohammed Láwl, the governor of Adamáwa, without being
allowed to stay any time in the country; but, for truth’s sake, I must
admit that if I had not been accompanied by this man it is doubtful
whether I should have been able to overcome the very great difficulties
and dangers which obstruct this road.


[Footnote 80: This certainly did not belong to the largest craft of the
islanders; for one of the boats which accompanied Mr. Overweg afterwards
on his voyage on the lake was almost fifty feet long, and six and a half
wide.]

[Footnote 81: Kánembú is the plural of Kánémma.]

[Footnote 82: The Yédiná named to me the following islands as the
largest and most important:—Gúriyá, Yíwaa Dóji, Belárge, Húshiyá Billán,
Purrám, Maibuluwá, Fidda, Kóllea Dallabórme, Turbó Dakkabeláya, Fujiá
Chílim, and Bréjaré, the latter having many horses. Almost all these
names have been since confirmed by Mr. Overweg, although he spells some
of them in a different way, and perhaps less accurately, as he obtained
all his information from his Kanúri companions; indeed, notwithstanding
his long sojourn among the islanders, he did not even learn their real
name, viz.—Yédiná. The Yédiná belong evidently to the Kótoko, and are
most nearly related to the people of Nghála; they are probably already
indicated by Makrízi under the name اتعنا and their language was
originally entirely distinct from the Kanúri, although in process of
time they have adopted many of their terms.]

[Footnote 83: Mr. Overweg writes Sëurum.]

[Footnote 84: The distance of the western shore of this island cannot be
more than at the utmost thirty miles from the shore of the lagoon, at
least at certain seasons. Mr. Overweg’s indications in respect to this
island, which he would seem to have navigated all round, are very vague.
At all events, I think that it must be considerably nearer the shore
than it has been laid down by Mr. Petermann, but it is difficult, nay
impossible, to fix with precision the form or size of these islands,
which, according to season, vary continually.]

[Footnote 85: One of the horsemen from Bínder informed me of some other
harbours hereabouts, named Kelá kemágenbe (elephant’s head), Daláwa,
Kabáya, and Ngíbia.]

[Footnote 86: This is now really the case. I shall speak of the articles
of trade in Bórnu at the end of my work.]

[Footnote 87: Unfortunately Mr. Overweg made no report on this his
excursion, most probably on account of his sickness in Zínder, and his
afterwards being occupied with other things. His memoranda are in such a
state that, even for me, it would be possible only, with the greatest
exertion, to make anything out of them, with the exception of names.]

[Footnote 88: A complete list of all these things was forwarded to the
Government at the time.]

[Footnote 89: Such a tent has lately been sent through the liberality of
the Earl of Clarendon, together with some other presents.]

[Footnote 90: I will here give verbatim a few extracts of my despatch to
Government, dated Kúkawa, May 24, 1851, from which it will be seen how
sure I was already at that time of the immense importance of the river
which I was about to discover.

“My Lord,—I have the honour to inform your Lordship that, on Tuesday
next, I am to start for Adamáwa, as it is called by the Fellátah
(Fullan), or Fúmbiná, a very extensive country, whose capital, Yóla, is
distant from here fifteen days SSW., situated on _a very considerable
river_ called Fáro, which, joining another river not less considerable,
and likewise navigable, called Bénuwé, falls into the Kwára, or Niger,
at a place between Kakanda and Adda, not more than a few days distant
from the mouth of that celebrated river.” “My undertaking seemed to me
the more worthy, _as it has long been the intention of Government to
explore that country;_ for orders had been given to the Niger expedition
to turn aside, if possible, from the course of that river, and to reach
Bórnu by a southern road, which it was presumed might be effected partly
or entirely by water, &c. As for my part, I can at present certify, with
the greatest confidence, that there is _no connection whatever between
those two rivers_, the Chadda, which is identical with the Bénuwé, on
the one, and the Sháry, the principal tributary of Lake Tsád, on the
other side. Nevertheless, the Fáro as well as the Bénuwé seem to have
their sources to the E. of the meridian of Kúkawa; and the river formed
by these two branches being navigable for large boats into the very
heart of Adamáwa, there will be _a great facility for Europeans to enter
that country_ after it shall have been sufficiently explored.”—After
speaking of the northern road into the interior by way of Bílma, I
concluded with these words:—

“By and by, I am sure, _a southern road will be opened_ into the heart
of Central Africa, but the time has not yet come.”]




[Illustration: DR. BARTH’S TRAVELS IN NORTH AND CENTRAL AFRICA Sheet No.
8. MAP OF THE ROUTE from KÚKAWA TO YÓLA 29. May to 24. July 1851.

Constructed and drawn by A. Petermann.

Engraved by E. Weller, _Duke Strt. Bloomsbury._

_London, Longman & Co._]


                              CHAP. XXXII.

  SETTING OUT ON MY JOURNEY TO ADAMÁWA. — THE FLAT, SWAMPY GROUNDS OF
                                 BÓRNU.


[Sidenote: Thursday, May 29th.]

At four o’clock in the afternoon I left the “chínna ánumbe,” the
southern gate of Kúkawa, on my adventurous journey to Adamáwa. My
little troop was not yet all collected. For being extremely poor at
the time, or rather worse than poor, as I had nothing but considerable
debts, I had cherished the hope that I should be able to carry all my
luggage on one camel; but when the things were all packed up,
provisions, cooking utensils, tent, and a few presents, I saw that
the one weak animal which I had was not enough, and bought another of
Mr. Overweg, which had first to be fetched from the pasture-ground. I
therefore left two servants and my old experienced Háusa warrior, the
Mʿallem Katúri, whom, as I have stated above, I had expressly hired for
this journey, behind me in the town, in order to follow us in the night
with the other camel.

Mr. Overweg, attended by a spirited little fellow, named ʿAli, a native
of Ghát, who had brought his luggage from Kanó, accompanied me. But the
most conspicuous person in our troop was Bíllama[91], the officer whom
the sheikh had appointed to accompany me, a tall handsome Bórnu man,
mounted on a most splendid grey horse of great size, and of a very quick
pace. He had two servants with him, besides a man of Malá Ibrám,
likewise mounted on horseback, who was to accompany us as far as the
Marghí country. The messengers from Adamáwa, as we proceeded onward,
gradually collected together from the hamlets about, where they had been
waiting for us, and the spearmen among them saluted me by raising their
spears just in my face, and beating their small round hippopotamus
shields; Mohámmedu was armed with a sword and bow and arrows. They had
not been treated so well as, with reference to my prospects, the sheikh
ought to have treated them, and Ibrahíma, instead of a handsome horse
which was promised to him, had received a miserable poor mare, quite
unfit for himself, and scarcely capable of carrying his little son and
his small provision bag.

As soon as I had left the town behind me, and saw that I was fairly
embarked in my undertaking, I indulged in the most pleasant feelings. I
had been cherishing the plan of penetrating into those unknown countries
to the south for so long a time, that I felt the utmost gratification in
being at length able to carry out my design. At that time I even
cherished the hope that I might succeed in reaching Báya, and thus
extend my inquiries even as far as the equator; but my first design was,
and had always been, to decide by ocular evidence the question with
regard to the direction and the tributaries of the great river which
flowed through the country in the south.

Leaving the Ngórnu road to our left, we reached the village Kárba at
sunset, but were received so inhospitably, that, after much opposition
from a quarrelsome old woman, we took up our quarters not inside, but
outside, her courtyard, and with difficulty obtained a little fire, with
which we boiled some coffee, but had not firewood enough for cooking a
supper, so that we satisfied our appetite with cold “díggwa,” a
sweetmeat made of meal, honey, and butter. The inhabitants of the
villages at no great distance from the capital are generally very
inhospitable; but the traveller will find the same in any country.

[Sidenote: Friday, May 30th.]

At an early hour we were ready to resume our march, not having even
pitched a tent during the night. The morning was very fine; and, in
comparison with the naked and bare environs of the capital, the country
seemed quite pleasant to me, although the flora offered scarcely
anything but stunted acacias of the gáwo and kindíl kind, while dúm-bush
and the _Asclepias procera_ formed the underwood, and coarse dry grass
full of “ngíbbu” or _Pennisetum distichum_ covered the ground. Now and
then a fine tamarind-tree interrupted this monotony, and formed a
landmark; indeed both the well which we passed (Tamsúkú-korí) and the
village Tamsúkwá, have received their names from this most beautiful and
useful tree, which in Kanúri is called tamsúku or temsúku.

After only four hours’ march we halted near the village Pírtwa, as Mr.
Overweg was now to return, and as I wished my other people to come up.
Having long tried in vain to buy some provisions with our “kúngona” or
shells, Mr. Overweg at length succeeded in purchasing a goat with his
servant’s shirt. This article, even if much worn, is always regarded as
ready money in the whole of Negroland; and as long as a man has a shirt
he is sure not to starve. Afterwards the inhabitants of the village
brought us several bowls of “bírri,” or porridge of Negro corn; and we
employed ourselves in drinking coffee and eating, till it was time for
Mr. Overweg to depart, when we separated with the most hearty wishes for
the success of each other’s enterprise: for we had already fully
discussed his undertaking to navigate the lagoon in the English boat.

We then started at a later hour, and, following a more westerly path,
took up our night’s quarters at Dýnnamarí, the village of Dýnnama or
Ámade. Instead of this most westerly road, my people had taken the most
easterly; and we at length joined them, a little before noon of the
following day, at the village Úlo Kurá, which, with the whole district,
belongs to the “Mágirá” (the mother of the sheikh), and so forms a
distinct domain called “Mágirári.” But the country for thirty or forty
miles round Kúkawa is intersected by so many paths, that it is very
difficult for parties to meet, if the place of rendezvous has not been
precisely indicated. The country hereabouts at this time of the year
presents a most dreary appearance, being full of those shallow hollows
of deep-black argillaceous soil called “fírki” by the Kanúri, and
“ghadír” by the Arabs, which during the rainy season form large ponds of
water, and when the rainy season draws to an end, and the water
decreases, afford the most excellent soil for the cultivation of the
“másakwá,” a species of holcus (_H. cernuus_), which constitutes a very
important article of cultivation in these alluvial lowlands round the
Tsád, or even for wheat. At a later season, after the grain is
harvested, these hollows, being sometimes of an immense extent, and
quite bare and naked, give the country a most dismal appearance. The
water in Úlo Kurá was extremely disagreeable, owing to this nature of
the ground.

Continuing our march in the afternoon, after the heat had decreased, we
passed, after about four miles, the first encampment of Shúwa, or berí
Shúwabe, which I had yet seen in the country. Shúwa is a generic name,
denoting all the Arabs (or rather eastern Arabs) settled in Bórnu and
forming a component part of the population of the country; in Bagírmi
they are called Shíwa. No Arab from the coast is ever denoted by this
name; but his title is Wásirí, or Wásilí. This native Arab population
appears to have immigrated from the east at a very early period,
although at present we have no direct historical proof of the presence
of these Arabs in Bórnu before the time of Edrís Alawóma[92], about two
hundred and fifty years ago.

Of the migration of these Arabs from the east, there cannot be the least
doubt. They have advanced gradually through the eastern part of
Negroland, till they have overspread this country, but without
proceeding further towards the west. Their dialect is quite different
from the Mághrebí, while in many respects it still preserves the purity
and eloquence of the language of Hijáz, particularly as regards the
final vowels in the conjugation. Many of their national customs, also,
still point to their ancient settlements, as we shall see further on. I
became very intimate with these people at a later period, by taking into
my service a young Shúwa lad, who was one of my most useful servants on
my journey to Timbúktu. These Shúwa are divided into many distinct
families or clans, and altogether may form in Bórnu a population of from
200,000 to 250,000 souls, being able to bring into the field about
20,000 light cavalry. Most of them have fixed villages, where they live
during the rainy season, attending the labours of the field, while
during the remaining part of the year they wander about with their
cattle. I shall say more about them in the course of my proceedings, as
opportunity occurs. The clan, whose encampment or berí we passed to-day
are generally called Kárda by the Bórnu people—I cannot say
why[93],—while their indigenous name, “Bajáudi,” seems to indicate an
intermixture with the Fúlbe or Felláta, with whom the Shúwa in general
are on the most friendly terms, and may often be confounded with them on
account of the similarity of their complexion and manners. In fact there
is no doubt that it was the Shúwa who prepared and facilitated the
settlement of the Fúlbe or Felláta in Bórnu.

We took up our quarters for the night in one of the four clusters of
huts which form the village Múngholo Gezáwa, and which, by the neatness
and cleanliness of its yards and cottages, did honour to its lord, the
vizier of Bórnu. It was here that I first observed several small pools
of rain-water, which bore testimony to the greater intensity and the
earlier setting in of the rainy season in these regions. There were also
great numbers of water-fowl seen hereabouts.

[Sidenote: Sunday, June 1st.]

When we left our quarters in the morning we hesitated a while as to what
road to take, whether that by “Múbiyó,” or that by “Úda” or “Wúda;” but
at length we decided for the latter. The country exhibited a peculiar
but not very cheerful character, the ground consisting, in the
beginning, of white clay, and further on of a soil called “gárga” by the
Kanúri people, and now and then quite arid and barren, while at other
times it was thickly overgrown with prickly underwood, with a tamarind-
tree shooting up here and there. We then came to a locality covered with
a dense forest, which at a later period in the rainy season forms one
continuous swamp, but at present was dry, with the exception of some
deep hollows already filled with water. Here we found some of the
inhabitants of the district, all of whom are Shúwa, busy in forming
watering-places for the cattle, by inclosing circular hollows with low
dikes. One of these people was of a complexion so light as to astonish
me; indeed he was no darker than my hands and face, and perhaps even a
shade lighter: his features were those of the Shúwa in general, small
and handsome; his figure slender. The general size of these Arabs does
not exceed five feet and a half: but they look much taller, on account
of the peculiar slenderness of their forms; for, although I have seen
many specimens of stout Fúlbe, I have scarcely ever seen one robust
Shúwa. The forest was enlivened by numberless flocks of wild pigeons.

We then emerged into a more open country, passing several villages of a
mixed population, half of them being Shúwa, the other half Kanúri. All
their huts have a thatched roof of a perfectly spherical shape, quite
distinct from the general form of huts in this country, the top, or
“kógi ngímbe,” being entirely wanting. One of these villages, called
Dásedísk, is well remembered by the people on account of the sheikh,
Mohammed el Kánemi, having been once encamped in its neighbourhood. At a
rather early hour we halted for the heat of the day in a village called
Ménoway, where an old decrepit Shúwa from Úda, led by his equally aged
and faithful better half, came to me in quest of medicine for his
infirmities. To my great vexation, a contribution of several fowls was
laid by my companions upon the villagers for my benefit; and I had to
console an old blind man, who stumbled about in desperate search after
his cherished hen. There was a numerous herd of cattle just being
watered at the two wells of the village.

Starting again in the afternoon, we reached one of the hamlets forming
the district Magá just in time to avoid the drenching of a violent storm
which broke forth in the evening. But the lanes formed by the fences of
the yards were so narrow that we had the greatest difficulty in making
our camels pass through them—an inconvenience which the traveller
experiences very often in these countries, where the camel is not the
indigenous and ordinary beast of burden. The well here was nine fathoms
deep.

[Sidenote: Monday, June 2nd.]

Starting tolerably early, we reached after two miles an extensive fírki,
the black boggy soil of which, now dry, showed a great many footprints
of the giraffe. This I thought remarkable at the moment, but still more
so when, in the course of my travels, I became aware how very rarely
this animal, which roams over the extensive and thinly-inhabited plains
on the border of Negroland, is found within the populous districts. This
“fírki” was the largest I had yet seen, and exceeded three miles in
length. Much rain had already fallen hereabouts; and further on, near a
full pond, we observed two wild hogs (gadó), male (bí) and female
(kúrgurí), running one after the other. This also was a new sight for
me, as heretofore I had scarcely seen a single specimen of this animal
in this part of the world; but afterwards I found that, in the country
between this and Bagírmi, this animal lives in immense numbers. We here
overtook a small troop of native traders, or “tugúrchi,” with sumpter
oxen laden with natron, while another with unloaded beasts was just
returning from Ujé. A good deal of trade is carried on in this article
with the last-named place.

Having gone on in advance of the camels with Bíllama and Mʿallem Katúri,
I waited a long time under a splendid “chédia,” or “jéja” (the Háusa
name), the caoutchouc tree, indicating the site of a large town of the
Gámerghú, called Muná (which has been destroyed by the Fúlbe or
Felláta), expecting our people to come up, as we intended to leave the
direct track and go to a neighbouring village, wherein to spend the hot
hours of the day; but as they delayed too long, we thought we might give
them sufficient indication of our having left the road by laying a fresh
branch across it. This is a very common practice in the country; but it
requires attention on the part of those who follow, and may sometimes
lead to confusion. On one occasion, when I had, in like manner, gone on
in advance of my people, a second party of horsemen, who had likewise
left their people behind, came between me and my baggage-train, and, as
they were pursuing a by-way, they laid a branch across the chief road;
my people, on coming up to the branch, thought that it was laid by me,
and, following the by-way, caused much delay. Other people make a mark
with a spear. I and my horsemen went to the village and lay down in the
cool shade of a tamarind-tree; but we soon became convinced that our
people had not paid attention to the mark. With difficulty we obtained
something to eat from the villagers.

The heat had been very oppressive; and we had just mounted our horses
when a storm broke out in the south, but fortunately without reaching
us. Proceeding at a swift pace, we found our people encamped in a
village called Íbramrí, and, having roused them, immediately continued
our march. Beyond this village I observed the first cotton-field
occurring on this road. The country was thickly inhabited, and gave
evidence of a certain degree of industry; in the village Bashírorí I
observed a dyeing-place. The country was laid out in corn-fields of
considerable extent, which had just been sown. All this district then
belonged to Mestréma, as an estate in fee; but after the revolution of
1854, this man was disgraced and the estate taken from him.

I had already felt convinced that the kúka, or _Adansonia digitata_, is
one of the commonest trees of Negroland; but all the numerous specimens
which I had hitherto seen of this colossal tree were leafless, forming
rather gloomy and unpleasant objects: here, however, I saw it for the
first time adorned with leaves; and though the foliage seemed to bear no
proportion to the colossal size of the boughs, yet the tree had a much
more cheerful aspect. We took up our quarters for the night in Ujé
Maidúgurí, a large and comfortable-looking place, such as I had not yet
met with since I left Kúkawa; but the yard, which was assigned to us by
the slaves of Mestréma, was in the very worst state, and I was obliged
to pitch my tent. However, we were hospitably treated, and fowls and a
sheep, as well as bírri, were brought to us.

We had now reached one of the finest districts of Bórnu, which is
collectively called Ujé, but which really comprises a great many places
of considerable size. This was once the chief province of the Gámerghú,
a tribe often mentioned in the history of Edrís Alawóma[94], and who, as
their language shows, are closely related to the Wándalá or, as they are
generally called, Mándara.[95] This tribe has at present lost all
national independence, while its brethren in Morá and the places around,
protected by the mountainous character of the country, still maintain
their freedom against the Kanúri and Fúlbe, but, as it seems, will soon
be swallowed up by the latter. While the greater part of the Gámerghú
have been exterminated, the rest are heavily taxed, although the tribute
which they have to deliver to the sheikh himself consists only in
butter. Every large place in this district has a market of its own; but
a market of very considerable importance is held in Ujé, and is from
this circumstance called Ujé Kásukulá—“kásukú” means “the market.” In
Ujé Maídugurí[96] a market is held every Wednesday on the west side of
the town, where a small quadrangular area is marked out with several
rows of stalls or sheds. The place was once surrounded by an earthen
wall, the circumference of which seems to show its greater magnitude in
former times.

Escorted by a troop of Mestréma’s idle servants, we entered, on the
following morning, the fine open country which stretches out on the
south side of Maídugurí. The whole plain appeared to be one continuous
corn-field, interrupted only by numerous villages, and shaded here and
there by single monkey-bread trees, or Adansonias, and various species
of fig-trees, such as the ngábbore, with their succulent dark-green
foliage, and báure with large fleshy leaves of a bright-green colour.
Since I left Kanó I had not seen so fine a country. The plain is
traversed by a large fiumara or komádugu, which comes from the
neighbourhood of Aláwó, where there is a great collection of water, and
reaches the Tsád by way of Díkowa, Nghála, and Mbulú. At the three
latter places I have crossed it myself in the course of my travels; and
between Ujé and Díkowa it has been visited by Mr. Vogel, but I do not
know whether he is able to lay down its course with accuracy.

We had to cross the watercourse twice before we reached Mábaní, a
considerable place situated on a broad sandy hill, at a distance of
little more than four miles from Maídugurí. To my great astonishment, at
so early an hour in the morning, my party proceeded to take up quarters
here; but the reason was, that the messengers from Ádamáwa had to
inquire hereabouts for some of the people, who, as I have stated before,
had been carried away by Kashélla ʿAli. However, in the absence of the
bíllama or head man of the town, a long time elapsed before we could
procure quarters; but at length we succeeded in obtaining a sort of open
yard, with two huts and two stalls, or “fáto síggidibé,” when I gave up
the huts to my companions, and took possession of the best of the
stalls, near which I pitched my tent. The town covers not only the whole
top of the hill, but, descending its southern slope, extends along its
foot and over another hill of less size. It may contain from nine to ten
thousand inhabitants, and seems to be prosperous: indeed all the
dwellings, despicable as they may appear to the fastidious European,
bear testimony to a certain degree of ease and wealth; and few people
here seem destitute of the necessaries of life. Besides agriculture,
there appears to be a good deal of domestic industry, as the market-
place, situated on the eastern slope of the hill, and consisting of from
a hundred and fifty to two hundred stalls, and a dyeing-place close by
it, amply testify.[97] I have already mentioned in another place the
shirts which are dyed in this district, and which are called “ámaghdí.”

When the heat had abated a little I made a pleasant excursion on
horseback, accompanied by Bíllama and Bú-Sʿad, first in an easterly
direction, through the plain to a neighbouring village, and then turning
northward to the komádugu, which forms here a beautiful sweep, being
lined on the north side by a steep grassy bank adorned with fine trees.
The southern shore was laid out in kitchen-gardens, where, a little
further in the season, wheat and onions are grown. In the bottom of the
fiumara we found most delicious water only a foot and a half beneath the
surface of the sand, while the water which we obtained in the town, and
which was taken from the pools at the foot of the hill, was foul and
offensive. These pools are enlivened by a great number of water-fowl,
chiefly herons and flamingoes.

The forenoon of Wednesday also I gave up to the solicitation of my
Ádamáwa companions, and usefully employed my time in writing “bolíde
Fulfúlde,” or the language of the Fúlbe, and more particularly the
dialect spoken in Ádamáwa, which is indeed very different from the
Fulfúlde spoken in Góber and Kébbi. Meanwhile old Mʿallem Katúri was
bitten by a scorpion, and I had to dress the wound with a few drops of
ammonia, for which he was very grateful.

In the afternoon we pursued our march; and I then became aware that we
had made a great _détour_, Maídugurí, as well as Mábaní, not lying on
the direct route. We had been joined in the latter place by a party of
“pilgrim traders” from the far distant Másena, or, as in European maps
the name is generally written, Massina, on their home-journey from
Mekka, who excited much interest in me. The chief person among them was
a native of Hamd-Alláhi[98], the capital of the new Púllo kingdom of
Mélle, or Másena, who carried with him a considerable number of books,
which he had bought in the east more for the purposes of trade than for
his own use. He was mounted on a camel, but had also a pack-ox laden
with salt, which he had been told he might dispose of to great advantage
in Ádamáwa. Thus pilgrims are always trading in these countries. But
this poor man was not very successful; for his books were partly spoiled
in crossing the river Bénuwé, and his camel died during the rainy season
in Ádamáwa. However, he thence continued his journey homewards, while
his four companions returned eastward and met with me once more in
Logón, and the last time on the banks of the Shári. Two of them were
mounted on fine asses, which they had brought with them from Dár-Fúr.

Our way led us through a populous and fertile country, first along the
meandering course of the komádugu, which was here lined with ngábbore or
_ficus_, and with the birgim or diña (as it is called in Háusa), a tree
attaining a height of from thirty to forty feet, but not spreading wide,
with leaves of a darkish green, and fruit like a small plum, but less
soft, and of a black colour, though it was not yet ripe. Here I was
greeted by the cheerful sight of the first corn-crop of the season,
which I had yet seen—having lately sprung up, and adorning the fields
with its lively fresh green. Rain had been very copious hereabouts; and
several large pools were formed along the komádugu, in which the boys of
the neighbouring villages were catching small fish three or four inches
long, while in other places the banks of the river were overgrown with
beautifully-fresh grass. Having crossed and re-crossed the fiumara, we
ascended its steep left bank, which in some places exhibited regular
strata of sandstone. Here we passed a little dyeing-yard of two or three
pots, while several small patches of indigo were seen at the foot of the
bank, and a bustling group of men and cattle gathered round the well.
Villages were seen lying about in every direction; and single cottages,
scattered about here and there, gave evidence of a sense of security.
The corn-fields were most agreeably broken by tracts covered with the
bushes of the wild gonda, which has a most delicious fruit, of a fine
cream-like taste, and of the size of a peach, a great part of which,
however, is occupied by the stone. The country through which we passed
was so interesting to me, and my conversation with my Háusa mʿallem
about the labours of the field so animated, that we made a good stretch
without being well aware of it, and took up our quarters in a place
called Pálamarí[99] when it was already dark. However, our evening rest
passed less agreeably than our afternoon’s ride, owing to a violent
conjugal quarrel in an adjoining cottage, the voices of the leading pair
in the dispute being supported by the shrill voices of village gossips.

[Sidenote: Thursday, June 5th.]

In riding through the village, as we set out in the morning, I observed
that the yards were unusually spacious, and the cottages very large; but
it struck me that I did not see a single “bóngo,” or hut of clay walls,
and I thought myself justified in drawing the conclusion that the
inhabitants must find shelter enough under their light thatched walls,
and consequently that the rainy season is moderate here.

We had scarcely emerged from the narrow lanes of the village, when I was
gratified with the first sight of the mountainous region; it was Mount
Deládebá or Dalántubá, which appeared towards the south, and the sight
of which filled my heart with joyous anticipations not unlike those with
which, on my first wandering in 1840, I enjoyed the distant view of the
Tyrolian Alps from the village Semling, near Munich. But our march was
but a pretence; we had not been a full hour on the road, crossing a
country adorned chiefly with the bushes of the wild gonda, when Bíllama
left the path and entered the village Fúgo Mozári. The reason was, that
to-day (Thursday) the market was held in the neighbouring Ujé Kasúkulá,
and it was essential that some of our party should visit, or (to use
their expression) “eat” this market.

However, I did not stay long in our quarters, which, though comfortable,
were rather close, and of an extremely labyrinthine character, being
divided into several small yards separated from each other by narrow
passages inclosed with high síggedi mats. After a brief delay I mounted
again with Bíllama and Bú-Sʿad, and after two miles reached the market-
town, crossing on our path a shallow branch of the komádugu, overgrown
with succulent herbage, and exhibiting a scene of busy life.

The market was already well attended, and answered to its fame. As it is
held every Thursday and Sunday, it is visited not only by people from
Kúkawa, but also from Kanó[100], for which reason European as well as
Háusa manufactures are often cheaper in Ujé than in Kúkawa. This we
found to be the case with common paper, “tre lune.” The articles with
which the market is provided from Kúkawa are chiefly natron and salt;
and I myself bought here a good supply of this latter article, as it has
a great value in Ádamáwa, and may be used as well for buying small
objects as for presents. Ujé, however, derives also great importance
from the slave-trade, situated as it is on the border of several Pagan
tribes; and I have often heard it said that in the neighbourhood of Ujé
a husband will sell his wife, or a father his child, when in want of
money: but this may be an exaggeration. It is true, however, that slaves
who have run away from Kúkawa are generally to be found here. There
might be from five to six thousand customers; but there would be many
more, if any security were guaranteed to the visitors, from the many
independent tribes who are living round about, especially the Marghí,
Bábir, and Kerékeré. But, as it is, I did not see a single individual in
the market who by his dress did not bear testimony to his Mohammedan
profession.

Making several times the round of the market, I greatly excited the
astonishment of the native traders, who had never seen a European. I
then started with Bíllama on an excursion to Aláwó, the burial place of
the great Bórnu king Edrís Alawóma, although the weather was extremely
sultry, and the sun almost insupportable. The whole country is densely
inhabited; and my companion, who had formerly been governor of the
district, was everywhere kindly saluted by the inhabitants, particularly
the women, who would kneel down by the roadside to pay him their
respects. However, I was prevented from seeing the sepulchre itself by
an immense morass extending in front of the town of Aláwó, and the
turning of which would have demanded a great circuit. Numberless flocks
of waterfowl enlivened it, while rank herbage and dense forest bordered
it all round.

We therefore thought it better to return, particularly as a storm was
evidently gathering; but we first went to an encampment of Shúwa, where
we found a numerous family engaged, under the shade of a wide-spreading
ngábbore, in all the various occupations of household work; but we were
very inhospitably received when we begged for something to drink. I
shall often have occasion to mention the inhospitality of these people,
whom I was sometimes inclined to take for Jews by descent, rather than
real Arabs. Passing then the village Pálamarí, and keeping along the
lovely bed of the fiumara, bordered by fine wide-spreading trees, and
richly overgrown with succulent grass, upon which numbers of horses were
feeding, we reached our quarters just in time; for shortly afterwards
the storm, which had been hanging in the air the whole day, and had made
the heat about noon more insupportable than I ever felt it in my life,
came down with considerable violence. The consequence was that I was
driven from the cool shed which I had occupied in the morning, into the
interior of a hut, where flies and bugs molested me greatly. The sheds
or stalls, which are often made with great care, but never waterproof,
have the great inconvenience in the rainy season, that while they do not
exclude the rain, they retain the humidity, and at the same time shut
out the air from the huts to which they are attached.

In the course of the day we obtained the important news, that Mohammed
Lowel, the governor of Ádamáwa, had returned from his expedition against
the Bána, or rather Mbána, a tribe settled ten days’ march north-
eastward from Yóla, but at less distance from Ujé. Bíllama gave me much
interesting information about the country before us, chiefly with
reference to Sugúr, a powerful and entirely independent pagan chief in
the mountains south from Mándará. With regard to this latter country, I
perceived more clearly, as I advanced, what a small province it must be,
comprehending little more than the capital and a few hamlets lying close
around. There came to me also an intelligent-looking Púllo merchant, who
was trading between Kanó and Ujé along the route indicated above; but
unluckily he did not call on me until sunset, just as the prayer of the
almákárifú was approaching, and he did not return in the evening as I
wished him to do.


[Footnote 91: “Bíllama” properly means mayor, from “bílla,” a town; but
in many cases it has become a proper name.]

[Footnote 92: See the chronological tables in the Appendix.]

[Footnote 93: Kárda is properly the name of that division of the Mánga
which is settled in the province of Máshena.]

[Footnote 94: See chronological tables.]

[Footnote 95: The Mándara people, or rather Ur-wándalá, call the
Gámerghú Múks-amálguwá, which I think is a nickname, the word múkse
meaning woman; but the latter part of the name, Amálguwá, may be the
original form of Gámerghú. I had no opportunity of asking the people
themselves about their original name.]

[Footnote 96: Maídugurí means the Place of the Maídugu or nobleman.]

[Footnote 97: It was in this place, as I have ascertained with some
difficulty, that Mr. Vogel made the astronomical observation which he
assigns to Ujé, whereas Ujé is an extensive district. He has made a
similar mistake with regard to his observation at Múniyo or Mínyo.
Unfortunately there seems to be a mistake or slip of the pen in the
cipher representing the longitude of the place; and I have therefore not
been able to make use of it.]

[Footnote 98: This is the only form of the name actually used by the
natives, as the founders of that city have not taken the trouble to ask
scholars if that was grammatically right. However, there is a small
village of the name of Hamdu-lilláhi, as we shall see, but entirely
distinct from the former.]

[Footnote 99: It might seem that the name should rather be Bíllamarí;
but that is not the case. I do not know the meaning of “pálama.”]

[Footnote 100: The route from Kanó to Ujé passes by Katágum, from hence
to Mésaw, five days; from hence to Gújeba, eight days; and from hence to
Ujé, five days—at a slow rate.]




                             CHAP. XXXIII.

                   THE BORDER-COUNTRY OF THE MARGHÍ.


[Sidenote: Friday, June 6th.]

We now commenced travelling more in earnest. Ibrahíma had been busy
looking after his master’s subjects, who had been carried away into
slavery, all about the villages in the neighbourhood, but with very
little success. Our road passed close by Ujé Kásukulá, which to-day
looked quite deserted; and then through a populous country with numerous
villages and fine pasture-grounds, where I saw the plant called “wálde”
by the Fúlbe.

I had taken great pains in Kúkawa, while gathering information about the
country whither I was going, to ascertain from my informants whether
snow ever lies there on the tops of the mountains or not; but I could
never get at the truth, none of the natives whom I interrogated having
ever visited North Africa, so as to be able to identify what he saw on
the tops of the mountains in his country with the snow seen in the
north. Áhmedu bel Mejúb, indeed, knew the Atlas, and had seen snow on
some of the tops of that range; but he had paid little attention to the
subject, and did not think himself justified in deciding the question.
Now this morning, when we obtained once more a sight of Mount Dalántubá,
marking out as it were, the beginning of a mountainous region, we
returned again to the subject; and all that my companions said led me to
believe that I might really expect to see snow on the highest mountains
of Ádamáwa. But after all I was mistaken; for they were speaking of
clouds. Unfortunately Bíllama had taken another path, so that to-day I
had no one to tell me the names of the villages which we passed. Some
geographers think this a matter of no consequence—for them it is enough
if the position of the chief places be laid down by exact astronomical
observation; but to me the general character of a country, the way in
which the population is settled, and the nature and character of those
settlements themselves, seem to form some of the chief and most useful
objects of a journey through a new and unknown country.

Having marched for more than two hours through an uninterrupted scene of
agriculture and dense population, we entered a wild tract covered
principally with the beautiful large bush of the tsáda, the fruit of
which, much like a red cherry, has a pleasant acid taste, and was eaten
with great avidity, not only by my companions, but even by myself. But
the scene of man’s activity soon again succeeded to this narrow border
of wilderness; and a little before we came to the village Túrbe, which
was surrounded by open cultivated country, we passed a luxuriant
tamarind-tree, in the shade of which a blacksmith had established his
simple workshop. The group consisted of three persons, the master
heating the iron in the fire; a boy blowing it with a small pair of
bellows, or “búbutú,” and a lad fixing a handle in a hatchet. On the
ground near them lay a finished spear. Riding up to salute the smith, I
asked him whence the iron was procured, and learnt that it was brought
from Madégelé, in Búbanjídda. This is considered as the best iron
hereabouts; but a very good sort of iron is obtained also in Mándará.

We halted for the hot hours of the day near a village belonging to the
district Shámo, which originally formed part of the Marghí country, but
has been separated from it and annexed to Bórnu, its former inhabitants
having either been led into slavery or converted to Islám—that is to
say, taught to repeat a few Arabic phrases, without understanding a word
of them. The inhabitants of the village brought us paste of Guinea corn
and milk, which, mixed together, make a palatable dish. From this place
onward, ngáberi, or holcus, prevails almost exclusively, and argúm móro,
or _Pennisetum typhoïdeum_, becomes rare.

Some native traders, armed with spears and driving before them asses
laden with salt, here attached themselves to our troop; for the road
further on is so much infested by robbers, that only a large body of men
can pass it in safety. The country which we now entered bore but too
evident proofs of the unfortunate condition to which it is reduced,
forming a thick forest, through which nevertheless, here and there, the
traces of former cultivation and the mouldering remains of huts are to
be seen. According to Bíllama, as late as a few years ago a large
portion of this district was inhabited by Kanúri and Gámerghú, the
latter, most probably, having taken possession of the lands abandoned by
the Marghí; but ʿAli Déndal, who has ruled it for Abú Bakr, the son of
ʿOmár, a youth without intelligence, and only anxious to make the most
of his province, has ruined it by his rapacity: he, however, was soon to
be ruined himself. There was a small spot where the forest had been
cleared away for cultivation,—a proof that the natives, if they were
only humanely treated by the government, would not be wanting in
exertion.

The forest was partly filled up by a dense jungle of reed-grass, of such
a height as to cover horse and rider. The soil is of a black, boggy,
argillaceous nature, and full of holes, which make the passage through
this tract extremely difficult in the latter part of the rainy season.
My companions also drew my attention to the bee-hives underground, from
which a peculiar kind of honey is obtained, which I shall repeatedly
have occasion to mention in the course of my narrative.

After three hours’ march through this wild and unpleasant country, we
reached a small village called Yerímarí, which, according to Bíllama,
had formerly been of much greater size; at present it is inhabited by a
few Marghí Mohammedan proselytes. There being only one hut in the yard
assigned to us, I preferred pitching my tent, thinking that the storm
which had threatened us in the afternoon had passed by, as the clouds
had gone westwards. However, I soon learned that, in tropical climes,
there is no certainty of a storm having passed away, the clouds often
returning from the opposite quarter.

We had already retired to rest when the tempest burst upon us with
terrible fury, threatening to tear my weak little tent to pieces.
Fortunately the top-ropes were well-fastened; and, planting myself
against the quarter from whence the wind blew, I succeeded in keeping it
upright. The rain came down in torrents; and, though the tent excluded
it tolerably well from above, the water rushed in from below and wetted
my luggage. But as soon as it fairly begins to rain, a traveller in a
tolerable tent is safe; for then the heavy gale ceases. Sitting down
upon my camp-stool, I quietly awaited the end of the storm, when I
betook myself to the hut, where I found Mʿallem Katúri and Bú-Sʿad
comfortably stretched.

[Sidenote: Saturday, June 7th.]

We set out at a tolerably early hour, being all very wet. The rain had
been so heavy that the labours of the field could be deferred no longer;
and close to the village we saw a couple sowing their little field, the
man going on in advance, and making holes in the ground at equal
distances with a hoe of about five feet long (the “kíski kúllobe”),
while his wife, following him, threw a few grains of seed into each
hole. These people certainly had nothing to lose; and in order not to
risk their little stock of seed, they had waited till the ground was
thoroughly drenched, while some people commit their grain to the ground
at the very setting in of the rainy season, and risk the loss of it if
the rains should delay too long. After we had passed a small village
called Keríkasáma, the forest became very thick; and for a whole hour we
followed the immense footprints of an elephant, which had found it
convenient to keep along the beaten path, to the great annoyance of
succeeding travellers, who had, in consequence, to stumble over the deep
holes made by the impression of its feet.

About eleven o’clock we reached the outskirts of Molghoy, having passed,
half an hour before, a number of round holes, about four feet wide and
five feet deep, made intentionally, just at the spot where the path was
hemmed in between a deep fiumara to the left and uneven ground to the
right, in order to keep off a sudden hostile attack, particularly of
cavalry. Molghoy is the name of a district rather than of a village; as
the pagan countries, in general, seem to be inhabited, not in distinct
villages and towns, where the dwellings stand closely together, but in
single farms and hamlets, or clusters of huts, each of which contains an
entire family, spreading over a wide expanse of country, each man’s
fields lying close around his dwelling. The fields, however, of Molghoy
had a very sad and dismal aspect, although they were shaded and
beautifully adorned by numerous karáge-trees. Though the rainy season
had long set in, none of these fine fields were sown this year, but
still presented the old furrows of former years; and all around was
silent and inert, bearing evident signs, if not of desolation, at least
of oppression.

I had already dismounted, being a little weak and fatigued after my last
sleepless night’s uncomfortable drenching, hoping that we should here
pass the heat of the day; but there seemed to be nothing left for us to
eat, and after some conversation with a solitary inhabitant, Bíllama
informed me that we were to proceed to another village, which likewise
belongs to Molghoy. We therefore continued our march, and soon after
entered a dense forest, where we had more enjoyment of wild fruits,
principally of one called “fóti,” of the size of an apricot, and with
three large kernels, the pulp of which was very pleasant. Behind the
little hamlet Dalá Dísowa I saw the first specimen of the sacred groves
of the Marghí—a dense part of the forest surrounded with a ditch, where,
in the most luxuriant and widest-spreading tree, their god “Tumbí” is
worshipped.

It was one o’clock in the afternoon when we reached the village where we
expected to find quarters. It also is called Molghoy, and is divided
into two groups by a water-course or komádugu (as the Kanúri, dílle as
the Marghí call it) about twenty-five yards wide, and inclosed by steep
banks. My kashélla, deprived of his former irresistible authority, was
now reduced to politeness and artifice; and having crossed the channel,
which at present retained only a pool of stagnant water, and was richly
overgrown with succulent grass, we lay down on its eastern bank in the
cool shade of some luxuriant kúrna-trees, the largest trees of this
species I have ever seen, where we spread all our luggage, which had
been wetted the preceding night, out to dry, while the horses were
grazing upon the fresh herbage. In this cool and pleasant spot, which
afforded a view over a great part of the village, I breakfasted upon
“chébchebé,” a light and palatable Kanúri sweetmeat, and upon “núfu,” or
habb’ el azíz, dug up in large quantities almost over the whole of
Bórnu.

By and by, as another storm seemed impending, we looked about for
quarters, and I with my three servants and Mʿallem Katúri took
possession of a small courtyard inclosed with a light fence four feet
high composed of mats and thorny bushes, which contained four huts,
while a fifth, together with the granary, had fallen in. The huts,
however, were rather narrow, encumbered as they were with a great deal
of earthenware, besides the large “gébam” or urn, containing the
necessary quantity of corn for about a week, and the “bázam” or the
water-jar; and the doors—if doors they could be called—were so extremely
small, while they were raised about a foot from the ground, that a
person not accustomed to the task had the greatest difficulty to creep
in. These narrow doors were direct proofs of the great power of the
rains in these climes, against which the natives have to protect
themselves, as well as the raised and well-plastered floors of the huts,
while reed is still the prevalent and almost exclusive material for the
whole building. As for my own hut, it had the advantage of a contrivance
to render the passage of the opening a little more easy, without
diminishing the protection against the inclemency of the weather; for
that part of the front of the hut which intervened between the doorway
and the floor of the hut was movable, and made to fold up. Each family
has its own separate courtyard, which forms a little cluster of huts by
itself, and is often a considerable distance from the next yard. This
kind of dwelling has certainly something very cheerful and pleasant in a
simple and peaceable state of society, while it offers also the great
advantage of protecting the villages against wholesale conflagrations,
but it is liable to a very great disadvantage in a community which is
threatened continually by sudden inroads from relentless enemies and
slave-hunters.

The storm luckily passing by, I walked through the village, and visited
several courtyards. The inhabitants, who, at least outwardly, have
become Mohammedans, go entirely naked, with the exception of a narrow
strip of leather, which they pass between the legs and fasten round
their waist. But even this very simple and scanty covering they seem to
think unnecessary at times. I was struck by the beauty and symmetry of
their forms, which were thus entirely exposed to view, and by the
regularity of their features, which are not disfigured by incisions, and
in some had nothing of what is called the Negro type; but I was still
more astonished at their complexion, which was very different in
different individuals, being in some of a glossy black, and in others of
a light copper, or rather rhubarb colour, the intermediate shades being
almost entirely wanting. Although the black shade seemed to prevail, I
arrived at the conclusion that the copper colour was the original
complexion of the tribe, the black shade being due to intermixture with
surrounding nations. But the same variety of shades has been observed in
many other tribes, as well on this continent as in Asia.

[Illustration]

Being allowed to stray about at my leisure, I observed in one house a
really beautiful female in the prime of womanhood, who, with her son, a
boy of about eight or nine years of age, formed a most charming group,
well worthy of the hand of an accomplished artist. The boy’s form did
not yield in any respect to the beautiful symmetry of the most
celebrated Grecian statues, as that of the praying boy, or that of the
_diskophóros_. His legs and arms were adorned with strings of iron
beads, such as I shall have occasion to describe more distinctly further
on, made in Wándalá, which are generally worn by young people; his legs
were as straight as possible: his hair, indeed, was very short, and
curled, but not woolly. He, as well as his mother and the whole family,
were of a pale or yellowish-red complexion, like rhubarb. His mother,
who was probably twenty-two years of age, was a little disfigured by a
thin pointed metal plate about an inch long, of the figure represented
here, which was stuck through her under lip. This kind of barbarous
ornament is called in the language of these people “seghéum,” and is
very differently shaped, and generally much smaller than that worn by
this woman; indeed it is often a mere thin tag. It is possible that its
size varies according to the character of the females by whom it is
worn. However small it may be, it can hardly be fastened in the lip
without being very inconvenient, and even painful, at least at first: at
any rate it is less monstrous than the large bone which is worn by the
Músgu women in the same way. These simple people were greatly amused
when they saw me take so much interest in them; but while they were
pleased with my approval, and behaved very decently, they grew
frightened when I set about sketching them. This is the misfortune of
the traveller in these regions, where everything is new, and where
certainly one of the most interesting points attaches to the character
of the natives,—that he will very rarely succeed in persuading one of
them to stand while he makes an accurate drawing of him. The men are
generally tall, and while they are young, rather slender; some of the
women also attain a great height, and in that state, with their hanging
breasts, form frightful objects in their total nakedness, especially if
they be of red colour.

In another courtyard, I saw two unmarried young girls busy at house-
work: they were about twelve years of age, and were more decently clad,
wearing an apron of striped cotton round their loins; but this was
evidently a result of Mohammedanism. These also were of copper colour;
and their short curled hair was dyed of the same hue by powdered camwood
rubbed into it. They wore only thin tags in their under lips, and
strings of red glass beads round their neck. Their features were
pleasing, though less handsome than those of the woman above described.
They were in ecstasies when I made them some little presents, and did
not know how to thank me sufficiently.

I had scarcely returned from my most interesting walk, when the
inhabitants of the neighbouring yards, seeing that I was a good-natured
sort of man who took great interest in them, and hearing from my people
that in some respects I was like themselves, sent me a large pot of
their intoxicating beverage, or “komíl,” made of Guinea corn, which,
however, I could not enjoy, as it was nothing better than bad muddy
beer. Instead of confusing my brains with such a beverage, I sat down
and wrote about two hundred words in their own language, which seemed to
have no relation to any of the languages with which I had as yet become
acquainted, but which, as I found afterwards, is nearly related to, or
rather only a dialect of the Batta language, which is spread over a
large part of Ádamáwa or Fúmbiná, and has many points of connection with
the Músgu language, while in certain general principles it approaches
the great South African family. Having received, besides my home-made
supper of mohámsa, several bowls of “déffa” or paste of Guinea corn from
the natives, I had a long pleasant chat in the evening with the two
young girls whom I have mentioned above, and who brought two fowls for
sale, but were so particular in their bartering, that the bargain was
not concluded for full two hours, when I at length succeeded in buying
the precious objects with shells, or kúngona, which have no more
currency here than they had since we left Kúkawa, but which these young
ladies wanted for adorning their persons. They spoke Kanúri with me, and
their own language between themselves and with some other women who
joined them after a while. In vain I tried to get a little milk;
although the inhabitants in general did not seem to be so badly off, yet
they had lost all their horses and cattle by the exactions of the Bórnu
officers. Indeed it is really lamentable to see the national wellbeing
and humble happiness of these pagan communities trodden down so
mercilessly by their Mohammedan neighbours. The tempest which had
threatened us the whole afternoon discharged itself in the distance.

[Sidenote: Sunday, June 8th.]

We set out at a tolerably early hour to pass a forest of considerable
extent. In the beginning it was rather light, such as the Kanúri call
“dírridé,” and at times interrupted by open pasture-ground covered with
the freshest herbage, and full of the footprints of elephants of every
age and size. Pools of stagnant water were seen in all directions, and
flowers filled the air with a delicious fragrance; but the path, being
full of holes, and of a miry consistence, became at times extremely
difficult, especially for the camels. As for ourselves, we were well
off, eating now and then some wild fruit, and either sucking out the
pulp of the “tóso,” or devouring the succulent root of the “katakírri.”

The tóso is the fruit of the _Bassia Parkii_, called kadeña by the Háusa
people, and consists almost entirely of a large kernel of the colour and
size of a chestnut, which is covered with a thin pulp inside the green
peel: this pulp has a very agreeable taste, but is so thin that it is
scarcely worth sucking out. The tree in question, which I had lost sight
of entirely since I left Háusa, is very common hereabouts; and the
people prepare a good deal of butter from the kernel, which is not only
esteemed for seasoning their food, but also for the medicinal qualities
ascribed to it, and which I shall repeatedly have occasion to mention.
As for the katakírri, it is a bulbous root, sometimes of the size of a
large English potato, the pulp being not unlike that of the large
radish, but softer, more succulent, and also very refreshing and
nutritious. The juice has a milky colour. A man may easily travel for a
whole day with nothing to eat but this root, which seems to be very
common during the rainy season in the woody and moist districts of
Central Africa—at least as far as I had occasion to observe. It is not
less frequent near the Niger and in Kébbi than it is here; but I never
observed it in Bórnu, nor in Bagírmi. It requires but little experience
to find out where the bulbous root grows, its indication above ground
being a single blade about ten inches high; but it sometimes requires a
good deal of labour to dig up the roots, as they are often about a foot
or a foot and a half under ground.

The soil gradually became worse; the trees were of a most uniform
description, being all mimosas, and all alike of indifferent growth,
while only here and there a large leafless _Adansonia_ stretched forth
its gigantic arms as if bewailing the desolation spread around, where
human beings had formerly subsisted: for the kúka or baobab likes the
dwelling of the Negro, and he, on the other hand, can scarcely live
without it; for how could he season his simple food without the baobab’s
young fresh leaves, or sweeten and flavour his drink without the
slightly acid pulp wherein the kernels are imbedded? The herbage was
reduced to single tufts of coarse grass four or five feet high; and the
path became abominable, not allowing a moment’s inattention or
thoughtful abstraction, from fear of being thrown off the next minute
into a swampy hole.

Thus we went on cheerlessly, when about eleven o’clock the growth of the
trees began to improve, and I observed a tree, which I did not remember
to have seen before, of middle size, the foliage rather thin, and of
light-green colour; it is called “kamándu” in Kanúri, and “bóshi” in
Háusa. The country, however, does not exhibit a single trace of
habitation, either of the past or present time; and on our right no
village was said to be nearer than Díshik at the distance of half a
day’s journey, and even that was reported to be now deserted by its
inhabitants. At length the monotonous gloomy forests gave way to
scattered clusters of large trees, such as generally indicate the
neighbourhood of man’s industry; and we soon after emerged upon
beautiful green meadow-lands stretching out to the very foot of the
Wándalá mountains, the whole range of which, in its entire length from
north to south, lay open to view. It was a charming sight, the beautiful
green of the plain against the dark colour of the mountains, and the
clear sunny sky; and I afterwards regretted deeply that I had not made a
slight sketch of the country from this spot, as near the village the
same wide horizon was no longer visible.

It was one o’clock in the afternoon when we reached the first cluster of
huts belonging to the village or district of Ísge, or Íssege, which
spread to a considerable extent over the plain, while horses and sheep
were feeding on the adjacent pastures, and women were cultivating the
fields. A first glance at this landscape impressed me with the
conviction that I had at length arrived at a seat of the indigenous
inhabitants, which, although it had evidently felt the influence of its
overbearing and merciless neighbours, had not yet been altogether
despoiled by their hands. Vigorous and tall manly figures, girt round
the loins with a short leathern apron, and wearing, besides their
agricultural tools, the “danísko” (hand-bill), or a spear, were proudly
walking about or comfortably squatting together in the shade of some
fine tree, and seemed to intimate that this ground belonged to them, and
that the foreigner, whoever he might be, ought to act discreetly. As for
their dress, however, I almost suspected that, though very scanty, it
was put on only for the occasion; for, on arriving at the first cluster
of huts, we came abruptly upon a hollow with a pond of water, from which
darted forth a very tall and stout bronze-coloured woman, totally naked,
with her pitcher upon her head,—not only to my own amazement, but even
to that of my horse, which, coming from the civilized country of Bórnu,
which is likewise the seat of one of the blackest races in the interior,
seemed to be startled by such a sight. However, I have observed that
many of those simple tribes deem some sort of covering, however scanty
it might be, more essential for the man than the woman.

We first directed our steps towards the western side of the village,
where in a denser cluster of huts was the dwelling of the nominal
“bíllama,” that is to say, of a man who, betraying his native country,
had placed himself under the authority of the Bórnu people, in the hope
that, with their assistance, he might gratify his ambition by becoming
the tyrant of his compatriots. Here we met Ibrahíma, who with his
countrymen had arrived before us. Having obtained from the important
bíllama a man who was to assign us quarters, we returned over the wide
grassy plain towards the eastern group, while beyond the quarter which
we were leaving I observed the sacred grove, of considerable
circumference, formed by magnificent trees, mostly of the ficus tribe,
and surrounded with an earthen wall.

At length we reached the eastern quarter; but the owners of the
courtyards which were selected for our quarters, did not seem at all
inclined to receive us. I had cheerfully entered with Bú-Sʿad the
courtyard assigned to me, in order to take possession of it, and my
servant had already dismounted, when its proprietor rushed furiously in,
and, raising his spear in a most threatening attitude, ordered me to
leave his house instantly. Acknowledging the justice of his claims to
his own hearth, I did not hesitate a moment to obey his mandate; but I
had some difficulty in persuading my servant to go away peaceably, as he
was more inclined to shoot the man. This dwelling in particular was very
neatly arranged; and I was well able to sympathize with the proprietor,
who saw that his clean yard was to be made a stable and littered with
dirt. The yards contained from five to seven huts, each of different
size and arrangement, besides a shed, and gave plain indications of an
easy and comfortable domestic life.

Bíllama, that is to say, my guide, who seemed not to have been more
fortunate than myself in his endeavour to find a lodging, being rather
crest-fallen and dejected, we thought it best to give up all idea of
sheltered quarters, and, trusting to our good luck, to encamp outside.
We therefore drew back altogether from the inhabited quarter into the
open meadow, and dismounted beneath the wide-spreading shade of an
immense kúka, or “bokki,” at least eighty feet high, the foliage of
which being interwoven with numbers of climbing plants, such as I very
rarely observed on this tree, formed a most magnificent canopy. While my
tent was being pitched here, a number of natives collected round us, and
squatting down in a semicircle eyed all my things very attentively,
drawing each other’s attention to objects which excited their curiosity.
They were all armed; and as there were from thirty to forty, and
hundreds more might have come to their assistance in a moment, their
company was not so agreeable as under other circumstances it might have
been. The reason, however, why they behaved so inhospitably towards me
evidently was, that they took me for an officer of the king of Bórnu:
but this impression gave way the longer they observed my manners and
things; indeed, as soon as they saw the tent, they became aware that it
was not a tent like those of their enemies, and they came to the same
conclusion with regard to the greater part of my luggage. In many places
in Negroland I observed that the bipartite tentpole was a most wonderful
object to the natives, and often served to characterize the Christian.
This time, however, we did not come to friendly terms; but the reader
will be gratified to see how differently these people treated me on my
return from Fúmbiná.

While our party was rather quietly and sullenly sitting near the tent, a
number of Fúlbe, who had been staying in this district for some time,
came to pay their respects to me. They were a very diminutive set of
people, and excepting general traits of resemblance, and language, were
unlike those proud fellow countrymen of theirs in the west; but I
afterwards found that the Fúlbe in the eastern part of Ádamáwa are
generally of this description, while those about the capital have a far
more noble and dignified appearance. I think this may be not so much a
mark of a difference of tribe, as a consequence of the low circumstances
of those settled at a great distance from the seat of government, who,
being still engaged in struggling for their subsistence, have not raised
themselves from their original condition of humble cattle-breeders, or
“berroróji,” to the proud rank of conquerors and religious reformers.
Their colour certainly was not the characteristic rhubarb-colour of the
Fúta Púllo, nor the deep black of the Toróde, but was a greyish sort of
black, approaching what the Frenchmen call the _chocolat-au-lait_
colour, while their small features wanted the expressiveness which those
of the light Púllo generally have. They all wore shirts, which however
were deficient in that cleanliness which in general is characteristic of
this race. These simple visitors might perhaps have proved very
interesting companions, if we had been able to understand each other;
but as they spoke neither Arabic, nor Háusa, nor Kanúri, while I was but
a beginner in their language, our conversation flowed but sluggishly.

I had observed in all the dwellings of the natives a very large species
of fish laid to dry on the roofs of the huts; and being not a little
astonished at the existence of fish of such a size in this district,
where I was not aware that there existed any considerable waters, I took
the earliest opportunity of inquiring whence they were brought, and,
having learnt that a considerable lake was at no great distance, I
intimated to Bíllama my wish to visit it. I therefore mounted on
horseback with him in the afternoon, and then passing behind the eastern
quarter of Íssege, and crossing a tract covered with excellent herbage,
but so full of holes and crevices, that the horses had great difficulty
in getting over it, we reached a fine sheet of water of considerable
depth, stretching from west to east, and full of large fish. All along
the way we were met by natives returning from fishing, with their nets
and their spoil. The fish measure generally about twenty inches in
length, and seem to be of the same kind as that caught in the Tsád. The
banks of the water, except on the west side, where we stood, were so
hemmed in with rushes that I could not form a satisfactory estimate of
its magnitude or real character; but it seems to be a hollow which is
filled by the rivulet or torrent which I surveyed in its upper course
the following day, and which seems to pass at a short distance to the
east of this lake. The latter, however, is said always to contain water,
which, as far as I know, is not the case with the river; but certainly
even the lake must become much shallower in the dry season.

A small torrent joins the lake near its south-western corner; and on the
bank of this torrent I observed a rounded mass of granite rising to the
height of about fifteen feet, this being the only eminence in the whole
plain. Though it was not elevated enough to allow me a fair survey of
the plain itself, it afforded a splendid and interesting panorama of the
mountains.

The whole range of mountains, which forms the western barrier of the
little country of Wándalá, lay open before me at the distance of about
twenty miles, while behind it, towards the south, mountains of more
varied shape, and greater elevation, became visible. It was here that I
obtained the first view of Mount Méndefi, or Mindif, which, since it was
seen by Major Denham on his adventurous expedition against some of the
Felláta settlements to the south of Morá, has become so celebrated in
Europe, giving rise to all sorts of conjectures and theories. It might,
indeed, even from this point be supposed to be the centre of a
considerable mountain mass, surrounded as it is by several other summits
of importance, particularly the Mechíka and Umshi, while it is in
reality nothing more than a detached cone starting up from a level
plain, like the Mount of Mbutúdi on a smaller scale, or that of
Tákabéllo, with both of which Ibrahíma used to compare it, or the
Alantíka on a larger scale. Its circumference at the base certainly does
not exceed probably from ten to twelve miles, as it is partly
encompassed by the straggling village of the same name, which seems to
stretch out to a considerable length, or rather to be separated into two
or three distinct clusters. The place has a market every Friday, which
is of some importance.

From my position the top of the mount presented the shape here
delineated; and even through the telescope the Mindif, as well as the
singular mount of Kamálle, of which I shall soon have to speak, seemed
to be of a whitish or greyish colour, which led me to the conclusion
that it consisted of a calcareous rock. It was not till a much later
period that I learnt, from a native of the village of Mindif, that the
stone was originally quite black, not only on the surface, but all
through, and extremely hard, and that the white colour is merely due to
immense numbers of birds, which habitually frequent it, being nothing
else than guáno. I think, therefore, that this mount will eventually
prove to be a basaltic cone, an ancient volcano—a character which seems
to be indicated by the double horn of its summit. Its height scarcely
exceeds five thousand feet above the surface of the sea, or less than
four thousand feet above the plain from which it rises.

[Illustration]

But while my attention was engaged by this mountain, on account of its
having been so much talked of in Europe, another height attracted my
notice much more, on account of its peculiar shape. This was Mount
Kamálle, which just became visible behind the continuous mountain-chain
in the foreground, like a columnar pile rising from a steep cone, it
likewise seemed of a greyish colour. Between this remarkable peak and
Mount Mindif several cones were descried from a greater distance, while
west from the latter mountain the elevated region seemed to cease.

The highest elevation of the Wándalá range, which is called Magár, I
estimated at about three thousand feet, while the chain in general did
not rise more than two thousand five hundred feet above the level of the
sea, or about one thousand five hundred feet above the plain. This part
of the mountain-chain forms the natural stronghold of a pagan king whom
my Kanúri companion constantly called “Mai Sugúr,”[101] but whose proper
name, or title, seems to be “Lá.”

Overjoyed at having at length reached the region of the famous Mindif,
and full of plans for the future, I remounted my horse. While returning
to our encampment, my companion, who was altogether a sociable and
agreeable sort of person, gave me some more information with regard to
the Marghí, whom he represented as a numerous tribe, stronger even at
the present time than the Manga, and capable of sending thirty thousand
armed men into the field. He told me that it was their peculiar custom
to mourn for the death of a young man, and to make merry at the death of
an old one—an account which I found afterwards confirmed, while his
statement that they buried the dead in an upright position together with
their weapons, furniture, and some paste of Indian corn, did not prove
quite correct. In many respects they claim great superiority over their
neighbours; and they practise even to a great extent inoculation for
smallpox, which in Bórnu is rather the exception than the rule.

Fortunately for us in our out-of-doors encampment, the sky remained
serene; and while, after a very frugal supper, we were reclining on our
mats in the cool air of the evening, an interesting and animated dispute
arose between Bíllama, Mʿallem Katúri, and Mohámmedu—the Ádamáwa
messenger whom I have represented above as a very communicative,
sociable person—about the water of Íssege, whence it came, and whither
it flowed. Mohámmedu, who notwithstanding his intelligence and
sprightliness was not free from absurd prejudices, contended, with the
utmost pertinacity, that the water in question issued from the river
Bénuwé at Kobére and ran into the Sháry, a river with which he was
acquainted only by hearsay. But my prudent and experienced old mʿallem
contested this point successfully, demonstrating that the river rose in
the mountains far to the north of the Bénuwé. Thus we spent the evening
quite cheerfully; and the night passed without any accident, all the
people sleeping in a close circle round my tent.

[Sidenote: Monday, June 9th.]

At an early hour we set out on our journey, being joined by several of
the Fúlbe, who had come the day before to salute me, while only one of
our caravan remained behind, namely, the horseman of Malá Ibrám. This
whole district had formerly belonged to the last-named person; but he
had lately ceded it to Abú-Bakr, the son of Sheikh ʿOmár: but we have
seen what a precarious possession it was. The country through which we
passed was varied and fertile, although the sky was overcast; and I was
struck with the frequency of the poisonous euphorbia, called “karúgu” by
the Kanúri. Further on, the crop stood already a foot high, and formed a
most pleasant object. We then entered a dense forest, where the danger
became considerable, an evident proof of the lawless state of this
country being seen in the village Yésa, which was in some degree subject
(“imána,” as the people call it, with an Arabic name) to the sheikh
ʿOmár, but had been ransacked and burnt about forty days previously by
the tribe of the Gulúk. It was the first village on this road the huts
of which were entirely of the construction called by the Kanúri “bóngo.”

Having stopped here a few minutes to allow the people to recruit
themselves, we pushed on with speed, and soon passed the site of another
village, which had been destroyed at an earlier period, having close on
our left a fertile plain in a wild state, over which the mountain chain
was still visible, with a glance now and then at the Mindif and Kamálle.
Suddenly there was visible on this side a river from thirty to forty
yards broad, and inclosed by banks about twelve feet high, with a
considerable body of water, flowing through the fine but desolate plain
in a northerly direction, but with a very winding course and a moderate
current; and it henceforth continued on our side,—sometimes approaching,
at others receding, and affording an agreeable cool draught, instead of
the unwholesome stagnant water from the pools, impregnated with
vegetable matter, and very often full of worms, and forming certainly
one of the chief causes of disease to the foreign traveller. In this
part of the forest the karáge was the most common tree, while besides it
there was a considerable variety,—the tóso or kadeña, the koráwa, the
kabúwi, the zíndi, and the acacia-like paipáya; the fruit of the tóso,
or rather its thin pulp, and the beautiful cream-fruit of the gonda-bush
(_Annona palustris?_) remaining our favourite dainties.

Suddenly the spirit of our little troop was roused; some naked pagans
were discovered in the bushes near the stream, and so long as it was
uncertain whether or not they were accompanied by a greater number, my
companions were in a state of fright; but as soon as it was ascertained
that the black strangers were but few, they wanted to rush upon and
capture them as slaves; but Ibrahíma, with a dignified air, cried out,
“imána, imána,” intimating that the tribe was paying tribute to his
master the governor of Yóla; and whether it was true or not, certainly
he did well to keep these vagabonds from preying upon other people while
their own safety was in danger.

At a quarter past eleven o’clock we reached the outskirts of Kófa, a
village, which had been ransacked and destroyed entirely by Kashélla
ʿAli,—the very act which had given rise to the complaints on the side of
the governor of Ádamáwa, who claimed the supremacy over this place.
Several huts had been already built up again very neatly of bongo; for
this had now become the general mode of architecture, giving proof of
our advancing into the heart of the tropical climes. And as the
dwellings were again rising, so the inhabitants were likewise returning
to their hearths.

A most interesting and cheerful incident in these unfortunate and
distracted lands, where the traveller has every day to observe domestic
happiness trodden under foot, children torn from the breasts of their
mothers, and wives from the embraces of their husbands, was here
exhibited before us. Among the people recovered from slavery by
Ibrahíma’s exertions was a young girl, a native of this village, who, as
soon as she recognised the place from which she had been torn, began to
run as if bewildered, making the circuit of all the huts. But the people
were not all so fortunate as to see again those whom they had lost;
there were many sorrowful countenances among those who inquired in vain
for their sons or daughters. However, I was pleased to find that Bíllama
was saluted in a friendly way by the few inhabitants of the place,
proving, as I thought, that, when governor of this southernmost district
of Bórnu, he had not behaved so cruelly.

The country hereabouts showed a far more advanced state of vegetation
than that from whence we had come, the young succulent grass reaching to
the height of a foot and a half, while the corn (dáwa, or holcus) in one
field measured already thirty inches in height. The fresh meadow grounds
were interspersed with flowers; and a beautiful specimen of the
“kangel,” measuring eight inches in diameter, was brought to me by
Bíllama, being the only specimen which I have ever observed of this
peculiar flower. Mr. Vogel, however, told me afterwards that he had
occasionally observed it in Mándará (Wándalá).

Having dismounted under a tamarind-tree for the hot hours of the day,
Bíllama, with the assistance of my old Mʿallem, gave me a list of some
of the larger places in the Marghí country.[102] W.S.W. from the Marghí
live the Bábur or Bábir, scattered in small hamlets over a mountainous
basaltic district, with the exception of their principal seat Biyú[103],
which is called after the name, or probably rather the title, of their
chief. This place is said to be as far from Kófa as Kúkawa is from the
same place, and is reported to be of large size. The Bábur have in
certain respects preserved their independence, while in others, like the
Marghí, they have begun to yield to the overwhelming influence of their
Mohammedan neighbours. But the Marghí claim superiority over their
kinsmen in point of personal courage; for of their relationship there
can be no doubt.

When the sun began to decline, we pursued our march, in order to reach
Laháula, where we were to pass the night. The unsafe state of the
country through which we were passing was well indicated by the
circumstance that even the circumspect Ibrahíma mounted the poor mare
given to him by Sheikh ʿOmár, which he had spared till now. He moreover
exchanged his bow for a spear. A thick tempest was gathering on the
Wándalá mountains, while our motley troop wound along the narrow
path,—at times through forest or underwood, at others through fine
cornfields; but the country afforded a wilder and more varied aspect
after we had crossed a little watercourse,—rocks projecting on all
sides, sandstone and granite being intermixed, while in front of us a
little rocky ridge, thickly overgrown with trees and bushes, stretched
out, and seemed to hem in our passage. Suddenly, however, a deep recess
was seen opening in the ridge, and a village appeared, lying most
picturesquely in the natural amphitheatre thus formed by the rocks and
trees protruding everywhere from among the granite blocks, and giving a
pleasant variety to the whole picture.

This was Laháula; but we had some difficulty in getting into it, the
entrance to the amphitheatre being closed by a strong stockade, which
left only a very narrow passage along the cliffs on the eastern side,
not nearly large enough for camels; and while our troop, pushing forward
in vain, fell into great confusion, the storm came on, and the rain
poured down upon us in torrents. Fortunately, the shower, although
heavy, did not last long, and we succeeded at length in getting in, and
soon reached the first huts of the village; but our reception was not
propitious. The first person who came to meet us was a mother, roused by
the hope of seeing her son return as a free man from Kúkawa, where he
had been carried into slavery, and filling the whole village with her
lamentations and curses of the Kanúri, when she heard that her beloved
had not come back, and that she should never see him again. This of
course made a bad impression upon the inhabitants, and while ʿAshi,
their chief, a man who after an unsuccessful struggle with my companion
Bíllama, when governor of these districts, had submitted to the sheikh,
received us with kindness and benevolence, his son, in whose recently
and neatly built hut the old man wished to lodge me, raised a frightful
alarm, and at length, snatching up his weapon, ran off with the wildest
threats. I therefore thought it best not to make use of the hut unless
forced by another storm, and notwithstanding the humidity, I took up my
quarters under a shed before the hut, spreading my carpet and
jirbíye—woollen blanket from Jirbi—over a coarse mat of reed, as
unfortunately at that time I had no sort of couch with me.

There was an object of very great interest in our courtyard. It was a
large pole about nine feet high above the ground, with a small cross
pole which sustained an earthern pot of middling size. This was a
“sáfi,” a sort of fetish, a symbolic representation, as it seems, of
their god “féte,” the sun. It was a pity that we were not placed in a
more comfortable position, so as to be enabled to make further inquiries
with regard to this subject.

ʿAshi was kind enough to send me a large bowl of honey-water, but I was
the only one of the caravan who received the least proof of hospitality;
and I made myself quite comfortable, though we thought it best to look
well after our firearms. During the night we were alarmed by a great
noise, proceeding from the frightful shrieks of a man; and, on inquiry,
we found that he had been disturbed in his sleep by a hyæna catching
hold of one of his legs. Ibrahíma informed us the next morning, that a
very large party among the inhabitants had entertained the design of
falling during the night upon our troop and plundering us; and that
nothing but the earnest representations of ʿAshi had restrained them
from carrying out their intention,—the old man showing them how
imprudent it would be, by one and the same act to draw upon themselves
the vengeance of their two overwhelming neighbours, the sheikh of Bórnu
in the north, and the governor of Fúmbiná in the south. Altogether the
night was not very tranquil; and a storm breaking out at some distance,
I crept into the hut, but there was no rain, only thunder and lightning.
All the huts here are provided with a serír, or diggel, made of
branches, upon which a coarse mat of reeds is spread.

The village seems not to be very large, containing certainly not more
than about five hundred single huts, but the situation is very
advantageous, enabling the inhabitants in an instant to retire upon the
natural fortress of blocks overhead. They possess scarcely a single cow,
but seem to prepare a great deal of vegetable butter. At least large
heaps of the chestnut-like kernels of the _Bassia Parkii_ were lying
about in the courtyards. They have also a great deal of excellent honey.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, June 10th.]

Leaving our quarters early, and emerging from the rocky recess by the
same opening through which we had entered it the preceding evening, we
halted a short time in order that the whole caravan might form closely
together, for we had now the most dangerous day’s march before us, where
stragglers are generally slain or carried into slavery by lurking
enemies. Our whole troop was not very numerous, consisting of five
horsemen and about twenty-five armed men on foot, with three camels, six
sumpter oxen, and three asses, our strength consisting entirely in my
four muskets and four pairs of pistols.

It was a very fine morning, and after the last night’s storm the whole
country teemed with freshness and life. Moreover, it was of a varied
nature, the ground consisting, at times, of bare granite, with large
blocks of quartz, at others covered with black vegetable soil, with
ironstone here and there, and torn by numerous small periodical
watercourses descending from the rocky chain on our right, and carrying
the moisture of the whole region towards the river, which still flowed
on the left of our track; while granite-blocks and small ridges
projected everywhere, the whole clothed with forest more or less dense,
and with a great variety of foliage. Having kept on through this kind of
country for about two miles and a half, we reached the deserted
“ngáufate,” or encampment of Bú-Bakr, a brother of Mohammed Lowel, the
governor of Ádamáwa, who had last year made an expedition into these
districts, and stationing his army on this spot, had overrun the country
in all directions. The encampment consisted of small round huts made of
branches and grass, such as the guro caravan generally erects daily on
its “zango” or halting-place. Here we began to quicken our pace, as we
were now at the shortest distance from the seats of the Báza, a powerful
and independent pagan tribe, with a language, or probably dialect, of
their own, and peculiar customs, who live at the foot of the eastern
mountain-chain, while we left on our right Kibák and some other Marghí
villages. In order to lessen a little the fatigue of the march, my
attentive companion Bíllama brought me a handful of “gaude,” a yellow
fruit of the size of an apricot, with a very thick peel, and, instead of
a rich pulp, five large kernels filling almost the whole interior, but
covered with a thin pulp of a very agreeable taste, something like the
gonda.

At half-past nine, when the forest was tolerably clear, we obtained a
view of a saddle mount at some distance on our right, on the other side
of which, as I was informed, the village Womde is situated: further
westward lies Úgu, and, at a still greater distance, Gáya. Meanwhile we
pushed on with such haste—the old Mʿallem and Bú-Sʿad, on horseback,
driving my two weak camels before them as fast as they could—that the
line of our troop became entirely broken; the fatáki, or tugúrchi, with
their pack-oxen, and several of the dangarúnfu—namely the little
tradesmen who carry their small parcels of merchandise on the
head—remaining a great distance behind; but although I wished several
times to halt, I could not persuade my companions to do so; and all that
I was able to do for the safety of the poor people who had trusted
themselves to my protection, was to send Bíllama to the rear with orders
to bring up the stragglers. I shall never forget the euphonious words of
the old mʿallem with which he, though usually so humane, parried my
entreaties to give the people time to come up; mixing Háusa with Kanúri,
he kept exclaiming, “awennan karága babu dádi” (“This is by no means a
pleasant forest”), while he continued beating my poor camels with his
large shield of antelope’s hide. At length, having entered a very dense
thicket, where there was a pond of water, we halted for a quarter of an
hour, when Bíllama came up with the rear, bringing me, at the same time,
a splendid little gonda fruit, which he knew I was particularly fond of.

Continuing then our march with our wonted expedition, we reached a
little before one o’clock cultivated fields, where the slaves—“field-
hands,” as an American would say—of the people of Úba were just resting
from their labour in the shade of the trees. As the slaves of
Mohammedans, they all wore the leathern apron. Here we began to ascend,
having a small rocky eminence on our right, and a more considerable one
on our left, while in the distance, to the west, various mountain groups
became visible. This line of elevation might seem to form the water
partition between the basin of the Tsád and that of the Great River of
Western Africa, but I am not sure of it, as I did not become distinctly
aware of the relation of the rivulet of Múbi to that of Báza.

Be this as it may, this point of the route probably attains an elevation
of about 2,000 feet, supposing that we had ascended about 800 feet from
Ujé, the elevation of which is 1,200 feet above the level of the sea.
Having then crossed, with some difficulty, on the part of the camels, a
rugged defile, enclosed by large granite blocks, we began to descend
considerably, while Mohámmedu drew my attention to the tree called
“bijáge” in Fulfúlde, which grows between the granite blocks, and from
which the people of Fúmbiná prepare the poison for their arrows. However
I was not near enough to give even the most general account of it; it
seemed to be a bush of from ten to twelve feet in height, with tolerably
large leaves of an olive colour.

Emerging from this rocky passage, we began gradually to overlook the
large valley stretching out to the foot of the opposite mountain chain,
which seemed from this place to be uninterrupted. Its general elevation
appeared to be about 800 feet above the bottom of the valley. We then
again entered upon cultivated ground, and turning round the spur of the
rocky chain on our right, on the top of which we observed the huts of
the pagans, we reached the wall of Úba at two o’clock in the afternoon.

The eastern quarter of this town, the northernmost Púllo settlement in
Ádamáwa on this side, consisting of a few huts scattered over a wide
space, has quite the character of a new and cheerless colony in Algeria;
the earthen wall is low, and strengthened with a light double fence of
thorn bushes. The western quarter, however, is more thickly and
comfortably inhabited; and each cluster of huts, which all consist of
bongo, or rather búkka bongo, “jwarubokáru,” is surrounded with a little
cornfield. It was pleasant to observe how the fences of mats,
surrounding the yards, had been strengthened and enlivened by young
living trees of a graceful slender appearance, instead of dull stalks,
giving to the whole a much more cheerful character than is generally the
case with the villages in other parts of Negroland, particularly in
Bórnu Proper, and promising in a short time to afford some cool shade,
which is rather wanting in the place.[104]

Passing the mosque, the “judírde,” a spacious quadrangular building,
consisting entirely of halls built of mats and stalks, which must be
delightfully cool in the dry season, but extremely damp during the
rains, and including a large open space, we reached the lamórde (the
house of the governor, or lámido); it lies on one side of a small
square, or “belbel.” Bíllama and Bú-Sʿad having here fired a couple of
rounds, we were soon shown into our quarters. These were of rather an
indifferent description, but lying at the northern border of the
inhabited quarter, and not far from the foot of the rocky ridge, they
had the advantage of allowing us freedom of movement.


[Footnote 101: From Íssege to Sugúr there seem to be two roads, the
shortest of which is a good day and a half’s march, passing the night in
a place called Shámbela, or Chámbela, first going E. then more S.; the
other road following a general direction S.E., and going in shorter
stations, first to Gulúg, a pagan settlement, which I shall soon have to
mention, situated on the offshoots of the mountain-range, then keeping
on the mountains to Magár, which seems to be the highest point of
elevation, and from hence to Sugúr. Sugúr is said to be fortified by
nature, there being only four entrances between the rocky ridges which
surround it. The prince of Sugúr overawes all the petty neighbouring
chiefs; and he is said to possess a great many idols, small round
stones, to which the people sacrifice fowls of red, black, and white
colour, and sheep with a red line on the back. The road from Sugúr to
Morá is very difficult to lay down from hearsay, with any approach to
truth. It is said first to cross a very difficult passage or defile
called Lámaja, beyond a mountain of great elevation inhabited by naked
pagans. From hence, in another moderate march, it leads to Madágelé, in
the territory of Ardon Jídda, of whom I shall have to speak in the
progress of my narrative. From here it leads to Dísa, joins there the
road coming from Ujé, and the next day reaches Morá. This evidently
seems to be a circuitous way, but may depend on the mountainous
character or the unsafe state of the country. Karáwá, the capital of
Wándalá, is said to lie about fifteen miles west from Morá, at the foot
of a large mountain mass called Wélle, inhabited by pagans.]

[Footnote 102: Kóbchi[a], the principal place of the country, Molghoy,
Íssege, Kuyúm, situate upon the longer western road from Úba to Íssege,
one day’s march from the latter; Músa about one day from Kuyúm, Dille,
Womde, Laháula (the place I was soon to visit), Cherári, Sháwa, Modé,
Kirbet, Kibák, Nsúda, Kóradé, all towards the west and south-west: more
eastward there are Móda, Gorám, Lúgu, Chámbelá (the village I mentioned
above), Gulób, Jú.]

[Footnote a: This place is already mentioned in the history of Edrís
Alawóma, where it is written Kofchi, _f_, _b_, and _p_, being frequently
interchanged in these languages. The name seems to be the royal title,
although the general name for chief or prince in the Marghí language is
“ibthá.”]

[Footnote 103: Mr. Overweg, in the unfinished journal of his excursion
to Fíka, a place interesting in other respects as well as on account of
its date-grove, mentions four principal places of the Bábir, viz. Kogo,
or Koger, Fadem, Multa, and Gim. He also mentions, as the three most
powerful chiefs in the country, Mai Mári residing in Fadem, Mai Doigí
(who died some time ago) in Iíra, and Mai Ali, who resides in Koger.
After all, Mai Mári seems to be the chief man, and Fadem to be identical
with Biyú.]

[Footnote 104: The nature of these trees may be seen from the fence of
the yard in the view of Demsa.]




                              CHAP. XXXIV.

            ÁDAMÁWA. MOHAMMEDAN SETTLEMENTS IN THE HEART OF
                             CENTRAL-AFRICA.


We had now reached the border of Ádamáwa, the country after which I had
been panting so long, and of which I had heard so many interesting
accounts, a Mohammedan kingdom engrafted upon a mixed stock of pagan
tribes,—the conquest of the valorous and fanatic Púllo chieftain, Ádama,
over the great pagan kingdom of Fúmbiná.

I was musing over the fate of the native races of this country, when the
governor, with a numerous suite, came to pay me a visit. Neither he nor
any of his companions were dressed with any degree of elegance, or even
cleanliness. I had endeavoured in vain to obtain information from my
companions as to the period when the Fúlbe had begun to emigrate into
this country; but they were unable to give me any other answer, than
that they had been settled in the country from very ancient times, and
that not only the fathers but even the grandfathers of the present
generation had inhabited the same region as cattle-breeders,
“berroróji.” Neither the governor nor any of his people were able to
give me more precise information, so that I was obliged to set my hopes
upon the capital, where I was more likely to find a man versed in the
history of his tribe. I then communicated to my visitor my wish to
ascend the ridge, which overlooks the place, and on the top of which,
according to Mohámmedu, a spring bubbled up between the rocks. The
governor advised me to defer the excursion till the morrow, but as the
weather was fine at the time, and as at this season it was very doubtful
whether it would be so the next morning, I expressed a wish to obtain at
once a view at least over the opposite mountain-chain. He then told me
that I might do as I liked, and followed me with his whole suite. The
ridge, on this side at least, consisted entirely of enormous blocks of
granite heaped one upon the other in wild confusion, and making the
ascent extremely difficult, nay, impossible, without ropes, so that,
with the utmost trouble, we reached the height of a little more than a
hundred feet, which gave me, however, an advantageous position for
obtaining a view over the broad valley and the mountain range beyond, of
which, on my return journey, I made a sketch, which is represented in
the following woodcut.

Some of the governor’s people, however, were very agile in climbing
these blocks, and they need to be so if they wish to subject the native
inhabitants, who, when pursued, retire to these natural strongholds,
which are scattered over nearly the whole of this country.

[Illustration]

We had scarcely returned to our quarters, when a storm broke out, but it
was not accompanied with a great quantity of rain. Our cheer was
indifferent; and we passed our evening in rather a dull manner.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, June 11th.]

Seeing that the weather was gloomy, and being afraid of the fatigue
connected with the ascent of the ridge even along a more easy path, as I
was well aware how much my constitution had been weakened, I preferred
going on, and gave orders for starting. On leaving the western gate of
the town, which is formed of very large trunks of trees, we entered on a
tract of corn-fields in a very promising condition, while at the same
time a number of young jet black slave girls, well fed, and all neatly
dressed in long aprons of white clean gábagá, and having their necks
adorned with strings of glass beads, were marched out to their daily
labour in the field.

The town formerly extended much further in this direction, till it was
ransacked and plundered by Ramadhán, a slave and officer of the sheikh
Mohammed el Kánemi. Before the Fúlbe occupied these regions, the slave-
hunting expeditions of the people of Bórnu often extended into the very
heart of Ádamáwa. The Fúlbe certainly are always making steps towards
subjugating the country, but they have still a great deal to do before
they can regard themselves as the undisturbed possessors of the soil.
Even here, at no great distance beyond the little range which we had on
our right, an independent tribe called Gílle still maintains itself, and
on my return journey I shall have to relate an unsuccessful expedition
of the governor of Úba against the Kilba-gáya.

Our camels, “gelóba,” began now to be objects of the greatest curiosity
and wonder to the natives; for it happens but rarely that this animal is
brought into the country, as it will not bear the climate for any length
of time. This is certainly a circumstance not to be lost sight of by
those who contemplate trade and intercourse with the equatorial regions;
but of course the European, with his energy and enterprise, might easily
succeed in acclimatizing the camel by preparing himself for great losses
in the beginning.

When the range on our right terminated, our view extended over a great
expanse of country, from which several mountain groups started up,
entirely detached one from the other and without any connecting chain,
and I sketched three of them, which are here represented. Of the names
of the first two, my companions were not quite sure; but they all agreed
in calling the last Kilba-Gáya. In front of us a considerable mountain
mass called Fingting developed itself, and behind it another with the
summits Bá and Yaurogúdde. Keeping along the plain, sometimes over fine
pasture-grounds, at other times over cultivated fields, and crossing
several little streams, we at length came to a brook or rivulet of a
somewhat larger size, which is said to issue from mount Gúri, towards
the south-east, and receiving another brook coming from mount Dáwa, runs
westward.[105]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Having here considered whether we should go on or take up our quarters
in Múbi, which was close by, we decided upon the latter, and entered the
place. But we had to wait a long while in front of the governor’s house,
and were at length conducted into quarters so insufficient that we
preferred encamping outside the town, and pitched our tent near a tree,
which promised to afford us a shady place during the hot hours of the
day. But we had scarcely made ourselves comfortable when the governor’s
servants came and requested me most urgently to come into the town,
promising us good lodgings; I therefore gave way, and told them that I
would go to my promised quarters towards night. As long as the weather
was dry, the open air was much more agreeable; and I turned our open
encampment to account by taking accurate angles of all the summits
around; but a storm in my small and weak tent was a very uncomfortable
thing, and I gladly accepted the offer of good quarters for the night.

In the course of the afternoon almost the whole population of the town
came out to see me and my camels, and the governor himself came on
horseback, inviting me into his own house, when I showed him my
chronometer, compass, and telescope, which created immense excitement,
but still greater was the astonishment of those particularly who knew
how to read, at the very small print in my prayer-book. The amiable side
of the character of the Fúlbe is their intelligence and vivacity, but
they have a great natural disposition to malice, and are not by any
means so good-natured as the real Blacks; for they really are—certainly
more in their character than in their colour—a distinct race between the
Arab and Berber on the one side and the Negro stock on the other,
although I would not suppose that the ancients had taken their prototype
of Leucaethiopes from them. However striking may be the linguistic
indications of a connection of this tribe with the Kaffers of South
Africa, there can be no doubt that historically they have proceeded from
the west towards the east. But of this more on another occasion.

I staid out till the sun went down, and before leaving my open dwelling
sketched the long range of mountains to the east, together with the
Fingting.

[Illustration]

Between mount Meshíla and mount Kírya a road leads to the seats of the
Komá.

The whole plain affords excellent pasture, and the town itself is a
straggling place of great extent. That part of the governor’s house
which he assigned to me consisted of a courtyard with a very spacious
and cool hut, having two doors or openings, and the ground-floor was
strewn with pebbles instead of sand, which seems to be the custom here
throughout the rainy season. My host spent a great part of the evening
in our company. I made him a present of ten sheets of paper, which, as a
learned man in a retired spot who had never before seen so much writing
material together, caused him a great deal of delight, though he seemed
to be of a sullen temper. He informed me that the Fúlbe settled here
belonged to the tribe of the Híllega.

[Sidenote: Thursday, June 12th.]

Although the weather was very gloomy, we set out in the morning through
the rich grassy plain, which only round the settlements was laid out in
cultivated fields; we crossed and re-crossed the river of the day
before, which keeps meandering through the plain. When we reached the
village Bagma, which was cheerfully enlivened by a numerous herd of
cattle, I was struck with the size and shape of the huts, which
testified to the difference of the climate which we had entered, not
less than to the mode of living of the inhabitants. Some of these huts
were from forty to sixty feet long, about fifteen broad, and from ten to
twelve high, narrowing above to a ridge, and thatched all over, no
distinction being made between roof and wall; others had a very peculiar
shape, consisting of three semicircles.

The reason for making the huts so spacious is the necessity of
sheltering the cattle, particularly young cattle, against the inclemency
of the weather. Some of them were nothing better than stables, while
others combined this distinction with that of a dwelling-house for the
owner. The village is separated into two quarters by the river, and is
inhabited entirely by Mohammedans. The news of a marvellous novelty soon
stirred up the whole village, and young and old, male and female, all
gathered round our motley troop, and thronged about us in innocent
mirth, and as we proceeded the people came running from the distant
fields to see the wonder; but the wonder was not myself, but the camel,
an animal which many of them had never seen, fifteen years having
elapsed since one had passed along this road. The chorus of shrill
voices, “gelóba, gelóba,” was led by two young wanton Púllo girls,
slender as antelopes, and wearing nothing but a light apron of striped
cotton round their loins, who, jumping about and laughing at the
stupidity of these enormous animals, accompanied us for about two miles
along the fertile plain. We passed a herd of about three hundred cattle.
Gradually the country became covered with forest, with the exception of
patches of cultivated ground, and we entered between those mountains
which had been during the whole morning in front of us; here also
granite prevailed, and all the mountains were covered with underwood.

About nine o’clock the path divided, and my companions for a long time
were at a loss to decide which of the two they should follow; Bíllama
having some objection to pass the night in Mbutúdi, which he thought was
only inhabited by pagans, and preferring Múglebú, where he had
acquaintances; but at length the people of Ádamáwa carried their point,
and we chose the westernmost road, which passes by Mbutúdi. The
wilderness now gave way to open pastures, and we passed some corn-fields
when we came to the farm of a wealthy Púllo named Alkáso, who in the
midst of a numerous family was leading here the life of a patriarch.
Hearing that a stranger from a far distant country was passing by, the
venerable old man came out of his village to salute me, accompanied by
his sons, and two of the latter, who had evidently no idea of the heresy
of the Christian religion, ran a long distance by the side of my horse,
and did not turn back till I had given them my blessing. Pleasant as was
their innocent behaviour, showing a spirit full of confidence, I was
rather glad when they were gone, as I wished to take some angles of the
mountains which appeared scattered through the wild and gloomy plain on
our right.

After a while the low chain of hills on our left was succeeded by a
range of higher mountains attached to the broad cone of the Fáka. A
little before we had obtained a view of the rocky mount of Mbutúdi, and
we now observed the first gigiña (“dugbi” in Fulfúlde), or deléb-palm,
the kind of _Hyphæna_ which I have already occasionally mentioned as
occurring in other localities, but which distinguishes this place in a
most characteristic way. The ground was covered with rich herbage, from
which numerous violets peeped forth.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

MBUTÚDI.

June 12th. 1851.]

We had now reached Mbutúdi, a village situated round a granite mount of
about six hundred yards’ circumference, and rising to the height of
about three hundred feet. It had been a considerable place before the
rise of the Fúlbe, encompassing on all sides the mount, which had served
as a natural citadel; but it has been greatly reduced, scarcely more
than one hundred huts altogether now remaining; and were it not for the
picturesque landscape—the steep rocky mount overgrown with trees, and
the slender deléb-palms shooting up here and there, and forming some
denser groups on the south-east side,—it would be a most miserable
place.

My companions were greatly astonished to find that, since they went to
Kúkawa, some Fúlbe families had settled here: for formerly none but
native pagans lived in the village. It was, therefore, necessary that we
should address ourselves to this ruling class; and after we had waited
some time in the shade of some caoutchouc-trees, a tall, extremely
slender Púllo, of a very noble expression of countenance, and dressed in
a snow-white shirt, made his appearance, and after the usual exchange of
compliments, and due inquiry on the part of my companions after horse,
cattle, mother, slaves, and family[106], conducted us to a dwelling not
far from the eastern foot of the rock, consisting of several small huts,
with a tall gigiña in the middle of its courtyard, which was never
deserted by some large birds of the stork family,—most probably some
European wanderers. However, it had the great disadvantage of being
extremely wet, so that I preferred staying outside; and going to some
distance from the huts, I laid myself down in the shade of a tree, where
the ground was comparatively dry. The weather had been very cool and
cheerless in the morning, and I was glad when the sun at length came
forth, increasing the interest of the landscape, of which the
accompanying view may give a slight idea.[107]

I here tried, for the first time, the fruit of the deléb-palm, which was
just ripe; but I did not find it worth the trouble, as it really
requires a good deal of effort to suck out the pulp, which is nothing
but a very close and coarse fibrous tissue, not separating from the
large stone, and having a mawkish taste, which soon grows disagreeable.
It cannot be at all compared with the banana, and still less with the
fruit of the gonda-tree. It is, when full-grown, from six to eight
inches long and four inches across, and of a yellowish brown colour; the
kernel is about two inches and a half long and one inch thick. However,
it is of importance to the natives, and, like the fruit of the dúm-palm,
it yields a good seasoning for some of their simple dishes. They make
use of the stone also, breaking and planting it in the ground, when, in
a few days, a blade shoots forth with a very tender root, which is eaten
just like the kelingoes; this is called “múrrechi” by the Háusa people,
“báchul” by the Fúlbe, both of whom use it very extensively. But it is
to be remarked that the gigiña, or deléb-palm, is extremely partial in
its local distribution, and seems not at all common in Ádamáwa, being,
as my companions observed, here confined to a few localities, such as
Láro and Song; while in the Músgu country it is, according to my own
observation, the predominant tree; and, from information, I conclude
this to be the case also in the southern provinces of Bagírmi,
particularly in Sómray and Day. However, the immense extension of this
palm, which, probably, is nearly related to the _Borassus
flabelliformis_[108], through the whole breadth of Central Africa, from
Kordofán to the Atlantic, is of the highest importance.

While resting here I received a deputation of the heads of families of
the Fúlbe, who behaved very decently, and were not a little excited by
the performances of my watch and compass. I then determined to ascend
the rock, which commands and characterises the village, although, being
fully aware of the debilitated state of my health, I was somewhat afraid
of any great bodily exertion. It was certainly not an easy task, as the
crags were extremely steep, but it was well worth the trouble, although
the view over an immense expanse of country was greatly interrupted by
the many small trees and bushes which are shooting out between the
granite blocks.

After I had finished taking angles I sat down on this magnificent rocky
throne, and several of the natives having followed me, I wrote from
their dictation a short vocabulary of their language, which they call
“Záni,” and which I soon found was intimately related to that of the
Marghí. These poor creatures, seeing, probably for the first time, that
a stranger took real interest in them, were extremely delighted in
hearing their words pronounced by one whom they thought almost as much
above them as their god “féte,” and frequently corrected each other when
there was a doubt about the meaning of the word. The rock became
continually more and more animated, and it was not long before two young
Fúlbe girls also, who from the first had cast a kindly eye upon me, came
jumping up to me, accompanied by an elder married sister. One of these
girls was about fifteen, the other about eight or nine years of age.
They were decently dressed as Mohammedans, in shirts covering the bosom,
while the pagans, although they had dressed for the occasion, wore
nothing but a narrow strip of leather passed between the legs, and
fastened round the loins, with a large leaf attached to it from behind;
the women were, besides, ornamented with the “kadáma,” which is the same
as the seghéum of the Marghí, and worn in the same way, stuck through
the under-lip, but a little larger. Their prevailing complexion was a
yellowish red, like that of the Marghí, with whom, a few centuries ago,
they evidently formed one nation. Their worship, also, is nearly the
same.

At length I left my elevated situation, and with a good deal of trouble
succeeded in getting down again; but the tranquillity which I had before
enjoyed was now gone, and not a moment was I left alone. All these poor
creatures wanted to have my blessing; and there was particularly an old
blacksmith, who, although he had become a proselyte to Islám, pestered
me extremely with his entreaties to benefit him by word and prayer. They
went so far as to do me the honour, which I of course declined, of
identifying me with their god “féte,” who, they thought, might have come
to spend a day with them, to make them forget their oppression and
misfortunes. The pagans, however, at length left me when night came on,
but the Fúlbe girls would not go, or if they left me for a moment,
immediately returned, and so staid till midnight. The eldest of the
unmarried girls made me a direct proposal of marriage, and I consoled
her by stating, that I should have been happy to accept her offer if it
were my intention to reside in the country. The manners of people who
live in these retired spots, shut out from the rest of the world, are
necessarily very simple and unaffected; and this poor girl had certainly
reason to look out for a husband, as at fifteen she was as far beyond
her first bloom as a lady of twenty-five in Europe.

[Sidenote: Friday, June 13th.]

Taking leave of these good people, the girl looking rather sorrowful, as
I mounted my horse, we resumed our march the following morning, first
through cornfields,—the grain here cultivated being exclusively géro, or
pennisetum,—then over rich and thinly wooded pastures, having the
mountain-chain of the “Fálibé” constantly at some distance. The
atmosphere was extremely humid, and rain-clouds hung upon the mountains.
Further on the ground consisted entirely of red loam, and was so torn up
by the rain, that we had great difficulty and delay in leading the
camels round the gaps and ravines. Dense underwood now at times
prevailed, and a bush called “baubaw,” producing an edible fruit, here
first fell under my observation; there was also another bulbous plant,
which I had not observed before. The karáge here, again, was very
common. Gradually the whole country became one continuous wilderness,
with the surface greatly undulating, and almost hilly; and here we
passed a slave village, or “rúmde,” in ruins, the clay-walls being all
that remained.

The country wore a more cheerful appearance after nine o’clock, when we
entered on a wide extent of cultivated ground, the crops standing
beautifully in the fields, and the village or villages of Segéro
appearing higher up on the slope of the heights, in a commanding
situation. Segéro consists of two villages separated by a ravine, or
hollow with a watercourse, the northernmost of them, to which we came
first, being inhabited jointly by the conquering tribe of the Fúlbe and
the conquered one of the Holma, while the southern village is
exclusively occupied by the ruling race. To this group we directed our
steps, passing close by the former, where I made a hasty sketch of the
outlines of mount Holma.

[Illustration]

The lámido, or mayor, being absent at the time, we dismounted under the
public shade in front of his house, till a comfortable spacious shed in
the inner courtyard of his dwelling was placed at my disposal; and here
I began immediately to employ my leisure hours in the study of the
Fulfúlde, as I became fully aware that the knowledge of this language
was essential to my plans, if I wished to draw all possible advantage
from my proceedings. For these simple people, who do not travel, but
reside all their life long in their secluded homes, with the exception
of a few predatory expeditions against the pagans, know no other
language than their own; several of them, however, understand the
written Arabic tolerably well, but are unable to speak it. Meanwhile, a
large basket full of groundnuts, in the double shell, just as they came
from the ground, was placed before us; and after a while, three immense
calabashes of a thick soup, or porridge, made of the same material, were
brought in for the refreshment of our whole troop.

Groundnuts form here a very large proportion of the food of the people,
just in the same proportion as potatoes do in Europe, and the crops of
corn having failed the last year, the people had very little besides.
Groundnuts, that is to say, the species of them which is called “kolche”
in Kanúri, and “biríji” in Fulfúlde, which was the one grown here, as it
seems, exclusively, I like very much, especially if roasted, for
nibbling after supper, or even as a substitute for breakfast on the
road, but I should not like to subsist upon them. In fact, I was
scarcely able to swallow a few spoonfuls of this sort of porridge, which
was not seasoned with honey: but I must confess that the spoons, which
the people here use for such purposes, are rather large, being something
like a scoop, and made likewise of a kind of gourd; the half of the
_Cucurbita lagenaria_ split in two, so that the handle at the same time
forms a small channel, and may be used as a spout. Nature in these
countries has provided everything; dishes, bottles, and drinking-vessels
are growing on the trees, rice in the forest, and the soil without any
labour produces grain. The porridge can certainly be made more palatable
by seasoning; and, if boiled with milk, is by no means disagreeable. The
other kind of ground-nut, the “gángala,” or “yerkúrga,” which is far
more oily, and which I did not see at all in Ádamáwa, I do not like;
though the people used to say that it is much more wholesome than the
other kind. For making oil it is evidently the more valuable of the two.
I will only add, that on this occasion I learned that the Fúlbe in this
part of the country make also a similar porridge of sesamum, which they
call “marasíri,” and even of the habb el ʿazíz, or the gojíya of the
Háusa—the nebú of the Bórnu people. Sesamum I have frequently eaten in
Negroland as a paste, or hasty pudding, but never in the form of a
porridge.

The reason why the corn had failed was, that most of the men had gone to
the war last year; the turbulent state of the country thus operating as
a great drawback upon the cultivation of the ground. I must also observe
how peculiarly the different qualities of the soil in neighbouring
districts are adapted for different species of grain; while in Mbutúdi,
as I said, millet, géro, or _Pennisetum typhoideum_, was cultivated
almost exclusively, here it was the dáwa, “báiri” in Fulfúlde, or
sorghum, and principally the red sort, or “báiri bodéri.”

Having restored our vital strength with this famous pap of ground-nuts,
and having filled our pockets, and the nose-bags of the horses too, with
the remains of the great basket, we set out again on our journey in the
afternoon, for it appeared to me evident that none of my companions was
fond of a strict ground-nut diet, and hence would rather risk a storm
than a supper of this same dish. It had become our general rule to
finish our day’s journey in the forenoon, as the tempest generally set
in in the afternoon.

The fields were well cultivated; but the corn on the more elevated spots
stood not more than a foot high. The ground-nuts are cultivated between
the corn, the regular spaces which are left between each stalk being
sufficient for growing a cluster of nuts under ground; just in the same
way as beans are cultivated in many parts of Negroland. The fields were
beautifully shaded and adorned by the butter-tree, “tóso,” or, as the
Fúlbe call it, “kárehi,” in the plural form “karéji,” which was here the
exclusively predominant tree, and of course is greatly valued by the
natives. Everywhere the people were busy in the fields; and altogether
the country, inclosed by several beautifully shaped mountain ranges and
by detached mountains, presented a most cheerful sight, all the patches
of grass being diversified and embellished with a kind of violet-
coloured lily.

We now gradually approached the foot of Mount Holma, behind which
another mountain began to rise into view; while on our left we passed a
small “rúmde,” or slave-village, and then entered a sort of defile. We
were greatly afraid lest we should be punished for the gastronomic
transgression of our travelling rule, as a storm threatened us from
behind; but we had time to reach Badaníjo in safety. Punished, however,
we were, like the man who despised his peas; for, instead of finding
here full bowls of pudding, we could not even procure the poor ground-
nuts; and happy was he who had not neglected to fill his pockets from
the full basket in Segéro.

We had the utmost difficulty in buying a very small quantity of grain
for the horses; so that they also came in for a share in the remains of
the ground-nuts of Segéro; and my host especially was such a shabby,
inhospitable fellow, that it was painful to speak a word to him.
However, it seemed that he had reason to complain, having been treated
very harshly by oppressive officers, and having lost all his cattle by
disease. Not a drop of milk was to be got in the village, all the cattle
having died. The cattle, at least those of the large breed, which
apparently has been introduced into the country by the Fúlbe, seem not
yet quite acclimatized, and are occasionally decimated by disease.

Badaníjo is very picturesquely situated in a beautiful irregularly-
shaped valley, surrounded on all sides by mountains, which are seen from
the interior of the village. The scarcity of provisions was entirely due
to the great expedition of last year, which had taken away all hands
from the labours of the field; for the land around here is extremely
fertile, and at present, besides sorghum or holcus, produced dánkali, or
sweet potatoes, góza, or yams, manioc, and a great quantity of gunna, a
large variety of calabash (_Fueillea trilobata_, _Cucurbita maxima?_).
Badaníjo is also interesting and important to the ethnologist, as being
the northernmost seat of the extensive tribe of the Falí, or Farí,
which, according to the specimens of its language which I was able to
collect, is entirely distinct from the tribe of the Bátta and their
kinsmen the Záni and Marghí, and seems to have only a remote affinity
with the Wándalá and Gámerghú languages. At present the village is
principally, but not exclusively, inhabited by the ruling race, and I
estimated the population at about three thousand.

[Sidenote: Saturday, June 14th.]

After we had left the rich vegetation which surrounds the village, we
soon entered a wild and hilly district, and while passing over the spur
of a rocky eminence on our left, observed close to the brink of the
cliffs overhanging our heads the huts of the pagan village Búggela, and
heard the voices of the natives, while at some distance on our right
detached hills, all of which seemed to consist of granite, rose from the
rugged and thickly-wooded plain. The rugged nature of this country
increases the importance of Badaníjo in a strategetical point of view.
The country became continually more rocky and rugged, and there was
scarcely a narrow path leading through the thick underwood, so that my
friend the pilgrim from Mélle, who rode his tall camel, had the greatest
possible trouble to make his way through; however, I had reason to
admire his dexterity. All through Negroland, where so many extensive
tracts are covered with forest, travelling on camel’s back is very
troublesome. It was certainly very lucky for us that for the last five
days scarcely any rain had fallen, otherwise the path would have been
extremely difficult.

However, when we reached the village Kurúlu, the country improved,
spreading out into wide pastures and cultivated fields, although it
remained hilly and rather rugged; even close to the village a lower
range appeared, and granite masses projected everywhere. A short
distance further on I sketched mount Kurúlu and the heights near it.

[Illustration]

Several of our party had gone into the village, and obtained some cold
paste, made of a peculiar species of sorghum, of entirely red colour.
This red grain, “ja-n-dáwa,” or “báiri bodéri,” which I have already had
occasion to mention, is very common in the southern parts of Negroland,
below the tenth degree of latitude, and in some districts, as in the
Músgu country, seems to prevail almost exclusively; but it was at the
time new to me, and I found it extremely nauseous. The paste of white
durra, “fári n dáwa,” or “báiri dhannéri,” is generally so well cooked
in Ádamáwa, being formed into large rolls of four inches in length, and
from two to three inches thick in the middle, that even when cold it is
quite eatable, and in this state generally formed my breakfast on the
road; for my palatable chébchebé from Kúkawa, like all nice things in
the world, were soon gone.

Gradually we entered another rugged wilderness, from which we did not
emerge till a quarter before ten o’clock, when a máriná, or dyeing
place, indicated the neighbourhood of a centre of civilization unusual
in this country. A few minutes more, and we reached the northern village
of Saráwu, which is inhabited almost exclusively by Bórnu people, and is
therefore called Saráwu Beréberé. On the side from which we arrived the
village is open, and does not seem to be thickly inhabited, but further
to the south the population is denser. Having halted some time on a
small open space in the middle of the village in the shade of a small
terebinth, we were conducted into very excellent quarters, which seem to
deserve a short description.

[Illustration]

It was a group of three huts, situated in the midst of a very spacious
outer yard which was surrounded by a light fence of corn stalks. The
huts consisted of clay walls with a thatched roof of very careful
workmanship, and were joined together by clay walls. The most spacious
of these huts (_a_), of about twelve feet in diameter, formed the
entrance-hall and the parlour, being furnished with two doors or
openings, one on the side of the outer, and the other on the side of the
inner courtyard, from which the two other huts (_b_ and _c_), destined
for the women, had their only access. The outer opening or door of the
chief hut (_a_), therefore, although rather small according to our
ideas, was very large considering the general custom of the country,
measuring three feet and a half in height, and sixteen inches in the
widest part, its form being that of an egg.

In this hut there was only one very large couch measuring seven feet and
a half in length by five in width, and raised three feet above the
floor, made of clay over a frame of wood, on the right side of the door,
where the landlord used to receive his guests, the remaining part of the
hut being empty, and capable of receiving a good many people. Between
the couch and the door there was a fire-place, or fúgodí, or fúgo
kánnurám in Kanúri, “hobbunírde” in Fulfúlde, formed by three stones of
the same size. Of this airy room I myself took possession, spreading my
carpet upon the raised platform, while the mʿallem, my servants, and
whosoever paid me a visit, found a place on the floor. The wall, which
was rather thicker than usual, was all coloured with a reddish brown
tint, and upon this ground several objects had been so unartistically
delineated, that, with the exception of wooden tablets, “alló,” such as
the boys here use in learning to write, it was impossible to tell what
they were intended for.

The hut opposite this parlour (_b_), which was smaller than (_a_) but
larger than (_c_), seemed intended for the ordinary dwelling of the
landlady, being ornamented in the background with the “gángar,” as it is
called in Kanúri, “nanne” in Fulfúlde, a raised platform or sideboard
for the cooking utensils; here four large-sized new jars were placed, as
in battle array, surmounted by smaller ones. With regard to the other
arrangements the two huts were of similar construction, having on each
side a couch, one for the man and the other for his wife. In both the
woman’s couch was the better one, being formed of clay on a wooden
frame, and well protected from prying eyes by a thin clay-wall, about
five feet high, and handsomely ornamented in the following way: running
not only along the side of the door, but enclosing also half of the
other side, it excluded all impertinent curiosity; while the man’s
couch, which was less regular and comfortable, reached to the very
border of the door, and on this side had the protection only of a thin
clay-wall, without ornaments. With the privacy thus attained, the size
of the doors was in entire harmony, being of an oval shape, and very
small, particularly in (_c_), measuring only about two feet in height,
and ten inches in width, a size which I am afraid would refuse a passage
to many a European lady; indeed, it might seem rather intended to keep a
married lady within doors, after she had first contrived to get in.

[Illustration]

Notwithstanding the scanty light falling into the interior of the hut,
through the narrow doorway, it was also painted, (_c_) in this respect
surpassing its sister hut in the harmony of its colours, which formed
broad alternate bands of white and brown, and gave the whole a very
stately and finished character. The whole arrangement of these two huts
bore distinct testimony to a greatly developed sense of domestic
comfort.

In the wall of the courtyard, between (_b_) and (_c_), there was a small
back-door, raised above the ground, and of diminutive size (_f_),
apparently intended for admitting female visitors, without obliging them
to pass through the parlour, and at the same time showing much
confidence in the discretion of the female department. In the courtyard
were two large-sized jars, (_g_) the larger one being the bázam or corn-
jar, and the smaller (_d_) the gébam or water-jar. In the corner, formed
between the hut (_a_) and the wall of the courtyard, was the “fúgodí,”
or kitchen, on a small scale.

The house belonged to a private man, who was absent at the time. From
the outer courtyard, which, as I have observed, was spacious, and fenced
only with corn-stalks, there was an interesting panorama over a great
extent of country to the south, and I was enabled to take a great many
angles. From this place also I made the following sketch of a cone which
seemed to me very picturesque, but the exact name of which I could not
learn.

[Illustration]

Saráwu is the most elevated place on the latter part of this route,
although the highest point of the water-partition, between the basin of
the Tsád and that of the so-called Niger, as I stated before, seems to
be at the pass north of Úba. The difference between the state of the
corn here and in Múbi and thereabout was very remarkable. The crop stood
here scarcely a few inches above the ground.[109] The soil also around
the place is not rich, the mould being thin upon the surface of the
granite, which in many places lies bare. The situation of Saráwu is very
important on account of its being the point where the road from Logón
and all the north-eastern part of Ádamáwa, which includes some very
considerable centres of industry and commerce, particularly Fátawel, the
_entrepôt_ of all the ivory trade in these quarters, joins the direct
road from Kúkawa to the capital. Cotton is cultivated here to some
extent. Ádamáwa is a promising country of colonies.

Saráwu, too, was suffering from dearth from the same reason which I have
explained above; the second crop, which is destined to provide for the
last and most pressing period, while the new crop is ripening, not
having been sown at all last year on account of the expedition, so that
we had great difficulty in obtaining the necessary corn for our five
horses. It would, however, have been very easy for me to obtain a
sufficient supply if I had demanded a small fee for my medical
assistance, as I had a good many patients who came to me for remedies;
but this I refrained from doing. I had here some very singular cases,
which rather exceeded my skill; and among others there was a woman who
had gone with child full two years, without any effort on the part of
her imaginary offspring to come forth, and who came to me now with full
confidence that the far-famed stranger would be able to help her to
motherhood. Among the people who visited me there was also a Tébu, or
rather Tedá, who in his mercantile rambles had penetrated to this spot;
indeed these people are very enterprising, but in general their journeys
lie more in the direction of Wándalá, where they dispose of a great
quantity of glass beads. This man had resided here some time, but was
not able to give me much information.[110] He, however, excited my
curiosity with regard to two white women, whom I was to see in Yóla,
brought there from the southern regions of Ádamáwa, and who he assured
me were at least as white as myself. But, after all, this was not saying
much; for my arms and face at that time were certainly some shades
darker than the darkest Spaniard or Italian. I had heard already several
people speak of these women, and the natives had almost made them the
subject of a romance, spreading the rumour that my object in going to
Yóla was to get a white female companion. I shall have occasion to speak
about a tribe of lighter colour than usual in the interior, not far from
the coast of the Cameroons, and there can be no doubt about the fact. My
short and uncomfortable stay in the capital of Ádamáwa deprived me of
the opportunity of deciding with regard to the exact shade of these
people’s complexion, but I think it is a yellowish brown.

[Sidenote: Sunday, June 15th.]

Having been busy in the morning writing Fulfúlde, I mounted my horse
about ten o’clock, accompanied by Bíllama and Bú-Sʿad, in order to visit
the market, which is held every Thursday and Sunday, on a little
eminence at some distance from the Bórnu village, and close to the S.E.
side of Saráwu Fulfúlde, separated from the latter by a ravine. The
market was furnished with thirty-five stalls made of bushes and mats,
and was rather poorly attended. However, it must be taken into
consideration, that during the season of field-labours all markets in
Negroland are much less considerable than at other seasons of the year.
There were a good many head of cattle for sale, while two oxen were
slaughtered for provision, to be cut up and sold in small parcels. The
chief articles besides were groundnuts, butter, a small quantity of
rice, salt, and soap. Soap, indeed, is a very important article in any
country inhabited by Fúlbe, and it is prepared in every household; while
very often, even in large places inhabited by other tribes, it is quite
impossible to obtain this article, so essential for cleanliness. No
native grain of any kind was in the market,—a proof of the great dearth
which prevailed throughout the country. A few túrkedí were to be seen;
and I myself introduced a specimen of this article, in order to obtain
the currency of the country for buying small matters of necessity.

The standard of the market is the native cotton, woven, as it is, all
over Negroland, in narrow strips called “léppi,” of about two inches and
a quarter in width, though this varies greatly. Shells (“kurdí,” or
“chéde”) have no currency. The smallest measure of cotton is the
“nánandé,” measuring ten “drʿa” or “fóndudé” (_sing._ “fóndukí”), equal
to four fathoms, “káme” or “nándudé” (_sing._ “nándukí[111]”). Seven
nánandé make one “dóra”—meaning a small shirt of extremely coarse
workmanship, and scarcely to be used for dress; and from two to five
dóra make one thób or “gaffaléul”[112] of variable size and quality. The
túrkedí which I introduced into the market, and which I had bought in
Kanó for 1800 kurdí, was sold for a price equivalent to 2500 shells,
which certainly is not a great profit, considering the danger of the
road. However, it must be borne in mind that what I bought for 1800, a
native certainly would have got for 1600, and would perhaps have sold
for 2800 or more.

Having caused some disturbance to the usual quiet course of business in
the market, I left Bú-Sʿad behind me to buy some articles which we
wanted, and proceeded with my kashélla towards the ravine, and ascending
the opposite bank, entered the straggling quarter of the Fúlbe, which,
in a very remarkable manner, is adorned with a single specimen of the
charming gonda-tree, or “dukúje” (the _Carica papaya_), and a single
specimen of the gigiña or dugbi, the _Hyphæna_ which I have frequently
mentioned; at all events not more than these two specimens are seen
rearing their tapering forms above the huts and fences. Then we directed
our steps towards the dwelling of the governor, which impressed me by
its magnificence when compared with the meanness of the cottages around.
A very spacious oblong yard, surrounded with a high clay wall, encircled
several apartments, the entrance being formed by a round cool hut of
about twenty-five feet diameter, the clay walls of which, from the
ground to the border of the thatched roof, measured about ten feet in
height, and had two square doors of about eight feet in height, one
towards the street, and the other on the inside,—altogether a splendid
place in the hot season. Here, too, the floor was at present thickly
strewn with pebbles.

But the master of this noble mansion was an unhappy blind man, who,
leaning upon the shoulders of his servants, was led into the room by a
mʿallem or módibo, one of the finest men I have seen in the country, and
more like a European than a native of Negroland, tall and broad-
shouldered, and remarkably amiable and benevolent. The governor himself,
also, was remarkably tall and robust for a Púllo. The módibo, who spoke
Arabic tolerably well, and officiated as interpreter, had heard a good
deal about me, and was most anxious to see those curious instruments
which had been described to him; and as I wore the chronometer and
compass constantly attached to my waist, I was able to satisfy his
curiosity, which, in so learned a man, was less vain and more
interesting than usual. But the poor blind governor felt rather uneasy
because he could not see these wonders with his own eyes, and
endeavoured to indemnify himself by listening to the ticking of the
watch, and by touching the compass. But he was more disappointed still
when I declared that I was unable to restore his sight, which, after all
the stories he had heard about me, he had thought me capable of doing;
and I could only console him by begging him to trust in “Jaumiráwo” (the
Lord on High). As, on setting out, I did not know that we were going to
pay our respects to this man, I had no present to offer him except a
pair of English scissors, and these of course, in his blindness, he was
unable to value, though his companion found out immediately how
excellent they were for cutting paper. The governor is far superior in
power to his neighbours, and besides Saráwu, Kurúndel, or Korúlu, and
Bíngel are subject to his government.

While recrossing the ravine on my return to Saráwu Beréberé, I observed
with great delight a spring of water bubbling up from the soil, and
forming a small pond—quite a new spectacle for me. After I had returned
to my quarters I was so fortunate as to make a great bargain in cloves,
which I now found out were the only article in request here. The Bórnu
women seemed amazingly fond of them, and sold the nánande of léppi for
thirty cloves, when, seeing that they were very eager to buy, I raised
the price of my merchandise, offering only twenty-five. I had also the
luck to buy several fowls and sufficient corn for three horses, with a
pair of scissors; and as my mʿallem Katúri had several old female
friends in the village who sent him presents, we all had plenty to eat
that day. But nevertheless my old friend the mʿallem was not content,
but, in the consciousness of his own merits, picked a quarrel with me
because I refused to write charms for the people, while they all came to
me, as to the wisest of our party; and had I done so, we might all have
lived in the greatest luxury and abundance.

In the evening, while a storm was raging outside, Bíllama gave me a list
of the most important persons in the capital of the country which we
were now fast approaching. Mohammed Lowel, the son of Mʿallem Ádama, has
several full-grown brothers, who all figure occasionally as leaders of
great expeditions, and also others of more tender age. The eldest of
these is Bú-Bakr (generally called Mʿallem Bágeri), who last year
conducted the great expedition towards the north; next follows Aíjo;
then Mʿallem Mansúr, a man whom Bíllama represented to me as of special
importance for me, on account of his being the favourite of the people,
and amicably disposed towards Bórnu; ʿOmáro; Zubéru; Hámidu. Of the
other people, he represented to me as the most influential—Móde Hassan,
the kádhi; Móde ʿAbd-Alláhi, the secretary of state; and the Ardo
Ghámmawa, as commander of the troops. As the most respectable Háusa
people settled in Yóla, he named Káiga Hámma, Serkí-n-Góber, Mai Konáma,
Mágaji-n-Hadder, Mai Hadder, and Búwári (Bokhári).

I introduce this notice, as it may prove useful in case of another
expedition up the river Bénuwé.

[Sidenote: Monday, June 16th.]

Starting at an early hour we passed the market-place, which to-day was
deserted, and then left the Púllo town on one side. The country being
elevated, and the path winding, we had every moment a new view of the
mountains around us; and before we began to descend I made the
accompanying sketch of the country behind us, stretching from N. 30 E.
to E. 20 N.

[Illustration]

The country continued rugged and rocky, though it was occasionally
interrupted by cultivated ground, and a mountain group of interesting
form, called Kónkel, stood out on our right.

[Illustration]

Having entered at eight o’clock upon cultivated ground of great extent,
we reached a quarter of an hour afterwards Bélem, the residence of
Mʿallem Dalíli, a man whom I had heard much praised in Saráwu. Bíllama
wished to spend the day here, but I was very anxious to proceed, as we
had already lost the preceding day; but at the same time I desired to
make the acquaintance of, and to pay my respects to, a person whom every
one praised for his excellent qualities. I therefore sent forward the
camels with the men on foot, while I myself entered the village with the
horsemen. Crossing a densely inhabited quarter, we found the mʿallem
sitting under a tree in his courtyard, a venerable and benevolent-
looking old man, in a threadbare blue shirt and a green “báki-n-záki.”
We had scarcely paid our respects to him, and he had asked a few general
questions in Arabic, when an Arab adventurer from Jedda, with the title
of sheríf, who had roved a good deal about the world, made his
appearance, and was very inquisitive to know the motives which had
carried me into this remote country; and Bú-Sʿad thought it prudent to
pique his curiosity, by telling him that we had come to search for the
gold and silver in the mountains. Old Mʿallem Dalíli soon after began to
express himself to the effect that he should feel offended if I would
not stay with him till the afternoon; and I was at length obliged to
send for the camels, which had already gone on a good way.

A rather indifferent lodging being assigned to me, I took possession of
the shade of a rími, or béntehi,—the bentang-tree of Mungo Park
(_Eriodendron Guinense_), of rather small size, and there tried to
resign myself quietly to the loss of another day, while in truth I
burned with impatience to see the river, which was the first and most
important object of my journey. However, my quarters soon became more
interesting to me, as I observed here several peculiarities of
arrangement, which, while they were quite new to me, were most
characteristic of the equatorial regions which I was approaching. For
while in Bórnu and Háusa it is the general custom to expose the horses,
even very fine ones, to all changes of the weather—which on the whole
are not very great,—in these regions, where the wet season is of far
longer duration and the rains much heavier, it is not prudent to leave
the animals unsheltered, and stables are built for them on
purpose,—round spacious huts with unusually high clay walls; these are
called “debbíru” by the Fúlbe of Ádamáwa, from the Háusa word “débbi.”
Even for the cattle there was here a stable, but more airy, consisting
only of a thatched roof supported by thick poles, and enclosed with a
fence of thorny bushes.

The vegetation in the place was very rich, and an experienced botanist
might have found many new species of plants, while to me the most
remarkable circumstance was the quantity of _Palma Christi_ scattered
about the place, a single specimen of the gonda-tree, and the first
specimen of a remarkable plant which I had not observed before on my
travels,—a smooth soft stem about ten inches thick at the bottom, and
shooting up to a height of about twenty-five feet, but drawn downwards
and inclined by the weight and size of its leaves, which measured six
feet in length and about twenty inches in breadth. The Háusa people gave
it the name “alléluba,” a name generally given to quite a different tree
which I have mentioned in speaking of Kanó. The plant bears some
resemblance to the _Musa_, or banana; fruits or flowers it had none at
present.

I had been roving about for some time when the sheríf, whom I mentioned
above, came to pay me a visit, when I learned that he had come to this
place by way of Wadáy and Logón, and that he had been staying here
already twenty days, being engaged in building a warm bath for the
mʿallem, as he had also done for the sultan of Wadáy.

The reader sees that these wandering Arabs are introducing civilization
into the very heart of this continent, and it would not be amiss if they
could all boast of such accomplishments; but this rarely happens. Even
this very man was a remarkable example of those saintly adventurers so
frequently met with in Negroland, but who begin to tire out the patience
of the more enlightened princes of the country. He brought me a lump of
native home-made soap, with which, as he said, I might “wash my clothes,
as I came from the dirty, _soapless_ country of Bórnu.” This present was
not ill-selected, although I hope that the reader will not thence
conclude that I was particularly dirty,—at least not more so than an
African traveller might be fairly expected to be. I had laid in a good
store of cloves, which, as I have had already occasion to mention, are
highly esteemed here, so I made him very happy by giving him about half
a pound weight of them.

More interesting, however, to me than the visit of this wandering son of
the East was the visit of two young native noblemen, sons of the Ardo
Jídda, to whom belongs the country between Sugúr and Wándalá or Mándará,
and the younger of whom was a remarkably handsome man, of slender form,
light complexion, and a most agreeable expression of countenance. This,
however, is a remark which I have often made on my travels, that the
males among the Fúlbe are very handsome till they reach the age of about
twenty years, when they gradually assume an apish expression of
countenance, which entirely spoils the really Circassian features which
they have in early life. As for the females, they preserve their beauty
much longer. While these young men were giving unrestrained vent to
their admiration of my things, the old mʿallem came with a numerous
suite of attendants; whereupon they drew shyly back, and sat silently at
a distance. In this part of the world there is a great respect for age.

The mʿallem and his companions were not only astonished at my
instruments, but manifested much curiosity about the map of Africa,
which I unfolded before their eyes, being greatly struck by the extent
of the continent towards the south, of which they had previously no
idea. I shall show in another part of this work how far the Fúlbe have
become acquainted with the regions about the equator, and how a faint
rumour of the strong pagan kingdom of Muropúwe has spread over the
kingdoms of North Central Africa. Their esteem for me increased when I
showed them my little prayer-book, which I wore in a red case slung
round my shoulders, just as they wear their Kurán; indeed a Christian
can never be more sure of acquiring the esteem of a Moslim—at least of a
learned one—than when he shows himself impressed with the sentiments of
his religion; but he must not be a zealous Roman Catholic, nor broach
doctrines which seem to deny the Unity of God. He took great delight in
hearing a psalm of the well-known “nebí Dáúd” (David) read in English.
He, as well as almost all his companions, spoke Arabic; for, as Saráwu
Beréberé is a colony of Bórnu people, Bélem is a pure Arabic colony,
that is to say, a colony of the Sálamát, a tribe widely-scattered over
Bórnu and Wadáy. Mʿallem Óro, or, as he is popularly called, on account
of his humility and devoutness, Mʿallem Dalíli, was born in Wadáy, but
settled in Bórnu, from whence at the time of the conquest of the country
by the Fúlbe or Felláta (in the year 1808) he fled to avoid famine and
oppression, like so many other unfortunate inhabitants of that kingdom,
and founded a village in this promising region. This is the country for
colonies, and I do not see why a colony of the liberated slaves of
Sierra Leone might not be advantageously established here. All these
people wear indigo-coloured shirts, and in this manner, even by their
dress, are distinguished from the Fúlbe. They are tolerated and
protected, although a Púllo head man has his residence here, besides the
mʿallem.

We were to start in the afternoon; but my stupid Fezzáni servant,
Mohammed ben Habíb, had almost killed himself with eating immoderately
of ground-nuts, and was so seriously ill that I was reduced to the
alternative either of leaving him behind or waiting for him. Choosing
the latter, I made a day of feasting for the whole of my little company,
the mʿallem sending me a goat for my people, a couple of fowls for
myself, and corn for my horses; besides which, I was so fortunate as to
buy a supply of rice. In consideration of his hospitable treatment, I
sent the old mʿallem a bit of camphor and a parcel of cloves. Camphor is
a most precious thing in these regions, and highly esteemed by the
nobler classes, and I cannot too strongly recommend a traveller to
provide himself with a supply of it. It is obvious that a small
quantity, if well kept, will last him a long time. He may find an
opportunity of laying a man of first-rate importance under lasting
obligations by a present of a small piece of camphor.

[Sidenote: Tuesday, June 17th.]

We at length set out to continue our journey. The morning was
beautifully fresh and cool after the last night’s storm, the sky was
clear, and the country open and pleasant. A fine grassy plain, with many
patches of cultivated ground, extended on our right to the very foot of
Mount Kónkel, which as I now saw is connected by a lower ridge with
Mount Holma. We passed the ruins of the village Bíngel, the inhabitants
of which had transferred their settlement nearer to the foot of the
mountains. Then followed forest, interrupted now and then by corn-
fields. My friends, the young sons of Ardo Jídda, accompanied me for
full two hours on horseback, when they bade me a friendly farewell,
receiving each of them, to his great delight, a stone-set ring, which I
begged them to present to their ladies as a memorial of the Christian
traveller. I now learnt that the young men were already mixing a good
deal in politics; the younger brother, who was much the handsomer, and
seemed to be also the more intelligent of the two, had till recently
administered the government of his blind father’s province, but had been
deposed on account of his friendly disposition towards Wándalá, having
married a princess of that country, and the management of affairs had
been transferred to his elder brother.

Forest and cultivated ground alternately succeeded each other; a little
after nine o’clock we passed on our left a small “rúmde,” or slave-
village, with ground-nuts and holcus in the fields, and most luxuriant
pasture all around. The country evidently sloped southwards, and at a
little distance beyond the village I observed the first watercourse,
running decidedly in that direction; on its banks the corn stood already
four feet high. The country now became quite open to the east and south,
and everything indicated that we were approaching the great artery of
the country which I was so anxious to behold. In the distance to the
west, a range of low hills was still observable, but was gradually
receding. About ten o’clock we passed the site of a straggling but
deserted village, called Melágo, the inhabitants of which had likewise
exchanged their dwelling-place in this low level country, for a more
healthy one at the foot of the mountains where there is another village
called Kófa, homonymous with that in the Marghí country; for this
district belongs to the country of the Bátta, a numerous tribe nearly
related, as I have stated above, to the Marghí. All the ruins of the
dwellings in Melágo were of clay, and the rumbú or rumbúje—the stacks of
corn—were of a peculiar description; fine corn-fields spread around and
between the huts.

Having rested about noon for a little more than two hours on a rather
damp and gloomy spot near a dirty pond, we continued our march, the
country now assuming a very pleasant park-like appearance, clothed in
the most beautiful green, at times broken by corn-fields, where the
corn—_Pennisetum_ or géro—stood already five feet high. We soon had to
deliberate on the very important question which way to take, as the road
divided into two branches, the northern or western one leading by way of
Búmánda, while the southern or eastern one went by way of Sulléri. Most
of my companions were for the former road, which they represented as
much nearer, and as I afterwards saw, with the very best reason; but
fortunately the more gastronomic part of the caravan, headed by Bíllama,
who was rather fond of good living, rejected Búmánda, as being inhabited
by poor inhospitable pagans, and decided for the promising large dishes
of Mohammedan Sulléri. This turned out to be a most fortunate
circumstance for me, although the expectations of my friends were most
sadly disappointed. For if we had followed the route by Búmánda, we
should have crossed the Bénuwé lower down, and I should not have seen
the “Tépe,” that most interesting and important locality, where the
Bénuwé is joined by the Fáro, and swelled to that majestic river which
is at least equal in magnitude to the Kwára. Of this circumstance I was
then not aware, else I should have decided from the beginning for the
route by Sulléri. Unfortunately, owing to my very short stay in the
country, I cannot say exactly where Búmánda lies; but I should suppose
that it is situated about ten miles lower down, at a short distance from
the river, like the place of the same name near Hamárruwa[113], and I
think it must lie opposite to Yóla, so that a person who crosses the
river at that place, goes over directly to the capital, without touching
either at Ribáwo, or at any of the neighbouring places.

Having, therefore, chosen the eastern road, we soon reached the broad,
but at present dry sandy channel of the máyo Tíyel, which runs in a
south-westerly direction to join the Bénuwé; water was to be found close
underneath the surface of the sand, and several women heavily laden with
sets of calabashes, and belonging to a troop of travellers encamped on
the eastern border of the watercourse, were busy in scooping a supply of
most excellent water from a shallow hollow or “kénkenu.” The banks of
the river, or rather torrent, were lined with luxuriant trees, amongst
which I observed the dorówa or meráya (_Parkia_), in considerable
numbers.

Forest and cultivated ground now succeeded alternately, till we reached
a beautiful little lake called “gére[114] Páriyá” by the Bátta, and
“barre-n-dáke” by the Fúlbe, at present about fourteen hundred yards
long, and surrounded by tall grass, everywhere impressed with tracks of
the hippopotami or “ngábba,” which emerge during the night from their
watery abode to indulge here quietly in a rich pasturage. This is the
usual camping-ground of expeditions which come this way. A little beyond
this lake a path branched off from our road to the right, leading to
Ródi, a place of the Bátta, whose villages, according to Mohámmedu’s
statement, are all fortified with stockades, and situated in strong
positions naturally protected by rocky mounts and ridges.

There had been a storm in the afternoon at some distance; but when the
sun was setting, and just as we began to wind along a narrow path
through a thick forest, a black tempest gathered over our heads. At
length we reached the fields of Sulléri, and, having stumbled along them
in the deepest darkness, illumined only at intervals by flashes of
lightning, we entered the place and pushed our way through the narrow
streets, looking round in vain for Ibrahíma, who had gone on to procure
quarters.

To our great disappointment we found the house of the governor shut up;
and, notwithstanding our constant firing and knocking at the door,
nobody came to open it, while the heavy clouds began to discharge their
watery load over our heads. At length, driven to despair, we turned
round, and by force entered his son’s house, which was situated opposite
to his own. Here I took possession of one side of the spacious, clean,
and cool entrance-hall, which was separated from the thoroughfare by a
little balustrade raised above the floor. Spreading my mat and carpet
upon the pebbles with which, as is the general custom here, it was
strewn, I indulged in comfort and repose after the fatiguing day’s
march, while outside the tempest, and inside the landlord, were raging;
the latter being extremely angry with Bíllama on account of our forced
entry. Not the slightest sign of hospitality was shown to us; and
instead of regaling themselves with the expected luxurious dishes of
Sulléri, my companions had to go supperless to bed, while the poor
horses remained without any thing to eat, and were drenched with the
rain.


[Footnote 105: I think it probable that this stream joins the Góngola,
or rather, as it seems, “the river of the Góngola,” Góngola being most
probably the name of a tribe, that small northern branch of the Bénuwé
which has quite recently been discovered by Mr. Vogel, and has been
crossed by him at four different points; but I am not certain whether he
has also ascertained the point of junction by actual observation.]

[Footnote 106: The Fúlbe of Adamáwa are especially rich in compliments,
which, however, have not yet lost their real and true meaning. Thus the
general questions, “num báldum” (are you well?), “jám wáli” (have you
slept?), are followed by the special questions, “no yímbe úro” (how is
the family?), “no inna úro” (how is the landlady?), “to púchu máda,” or
“kórri púchu májám,” (how is your horse?), “to erájo máda” (how is your
grandfather?), “to máchudo máda” (how is your slave?), “to bíbe máda”
(and your children?), “to sukábe máda” (how are your lads?) “bíbe hábe
májám” (how are the children of your subjects?) “korri nay májám” (how
are your cattle?); all of which in general are answered with “se jám.”
Between this strain occasionally a question about the news of the
world—“tó hábbarú dúnia;” and with travellers at least a question as to
the fatigue—“tó chómmeri”—is inserted. There is still a greater variety
of compliments, the form of many, as used in Ádamáwa, varying greatly
from that usual in other countries occupied by the Fúlbe, and of course
all depends on the time of the day when friends meet.]

[Footnote 107: Unfortunately, I had not energy enough to finish it in
detail; so that many little interesting features have not been
expressed.]

[Footnote 108: See a paper read by Dr. Berthold Seeman in the Linnæan
Society, November 18th, 1856.]

[Footnote 109: I made some observations with the boiling-water
instrument on this road, but unfortunately my thermometers for this
purpose were entirely out of order.]

[Footnote 110: The only thing which I learned from him was, that there
is a village called Zum, inhabited by Fúlbe, near Holma, and about half
a day’s journey from Saráwu, situated in a level tract of country; and a
little to the west from it another place, called Debá, also inhabited by
Fúlbe.]

[Footnote 111: This is the origin of the word nánandé, which is a
corruption from “nai nándudí”—four fathoms.]

[Footnote 112: “Gaffaléul” is a provincialism only used by the Fúlbe of
Fúmbiná, and not understood either in Kébbi or in Másena, where
“toggóre” is the common expression.]

[Footnote 113: Búmánda probably means a ford, or rather place of
embarkation. It can scarcely have any connection with the Kanúri word
“mánda,” meaning salt, although salt is obtained in the western place of
this name.]

[Footnote 114: This word “gére” is identical with “éré,” or “arre,” the
name the Músgu give to the river of Logón.]




                              CHAP. XXXV.

           THE MEETING OF THE WATERS. — THE BÉNUWÉ AND FÁRO.


[Sidenote: Wednesday, June 18th.]

At an early hour we left the inhospitable place of Sulléri. It was a
beautiful fresh morning, all nature being revived and enlivened by the
last night’s storm. My companions, sullen and irritated, quarrelled
among themselves on account of the selfish behaviour of Ibrahíma. As
for me, I was cheerful in the extreme, and borne away by an
enthusiastic and triumphant feeling; for to-day I was to see the river.

The neighbourhood of the water was first indicated by numbers of high
ant-hills, which, as I shall have occasion to observe more fully in the
course of my narrative, abound chiefly in the neighbourhood of rivers:
they were here ranged in almost parallel lines, and afforded a very
curious spectacle. We had just passed a small village or rúmde, where
not a living soul was to be seen, the people having all gone forth to
the labours of the field, when the lively Mohámmedu came running up to
me, and exclaimed, “Gashí, gashí, dútsi-n-Alantíka ké nan” (“Look! look!
that is Mount Alantíka”). I strained my eyes and saw, at a great
distance to the S.W., a large but insulated mountain mass, rising
abruptly on the east side, and forming a more gradual slope towards the
west, while it exhibited a rather smooth and broad top, which certainly
must be spacious, as it contains the estates of seven independent pagan
chiefs. Judging from the distance, which was pretty well known to me, I
estimated the height of the mountain at about eight thousand feet above
the plain, or about nine thousand feet of absolute elevation; but it may
be somewhat less.

Here there was still cultivated ground, exhibiting at present the finest
crop of masr, called “bútalí” by the Fúlbe of Ádamáwa; but a little
further on we entered upon a swampy plain (the savannas of Ádamáwa),
overgrown with tall rank grass, and broken by many large hollows full of
water, so that we were obliged to proceed with great caution. This whole
plain is annually (two months later) entirely under water. However, in
the middle of it, on a little rising ground which looks as if it were an
artificial mound, lies a small village, the abode of the ferrymen of the
Bénuwé, from whence the boys came running after us—slender well-built
lads, accustomed to fatigue and strengthened by daily bathing; the
younger ones quite naked, the elder having a leathern apron girt round
their loins. A quarter of an hour afterwards we stood on the bank of the
Bénuwé.[115]

It happens but rarely that a traveller does not feel disappointed when
he first actually beholds the principal features of a new country, of
which his imagination has composed a picture, from the description of
the natives; but although I must admit that the shape and size of the
Alantíka, as it rose in rounded lines from the flat level, did not
exactly correspond with the idea which I had formed of it, the
appearance of the river far exceeded my most lively expectations. None
of my informants had promised me that I should just come upon it at that
most interesting locality—the Tépe[116]—where the mightier river is
joined by another of very considerable size, and that in this place I
was to cross it. My arrival at this point, as I have stated before, was
a most fortunate circumstance. As I looked from the bank over the scene
before me, I was quite enchanted, although the whole country bore the
character of a desolate wilderness; but there could scarcely be any
great traces of human industry near the river, as, during its floods, it
inundates the whole country on both sides. This is the general character
of all the great rivers in these regions, except where they are
encompassed by very steep banks.

The principal river, the Bénuwé, flowed here from east to west, in a
broad and majestic course, through an entirely open country, from which
only here and there detached mountains started forth. The banks on our
side rose to twenty-five, and in some places to thirty feet, while just
opposite to my station, behind a pointed headland of sand, the Fáro
rushed forth, appearing from this point not much inferior to the
principal river, and coming in a fine sweep from the south-east, where
it disappeared in the plain, but was traced by me, in thought, upwards
to the steep eastern foot of the Alantíka. The river, below the
junction, keeping the direction of the principal branch, but making a
slight bend to the north, ran along the northern foot of Mount Bágelé,
and was there lost to the eye, but was followed in thought through the
mountainous region of the Báchama and Zína to Hamárruwa, and thence
along the industrious country of Korórofa, till it joined the great
western river the Kwára or Niger, and, conjointly with it, ran towards
the great ocean.

On the northern side of the river another detached mountain, Mount
Taife, rose, and behind it the Bengo, with which Mount Fúro seemed
connected, stretching out in a long line towards the north-west. The
bank upon which we stood was entirely bare of trees, with the exception
of a solitary and poor acacia, about one hundred paces further up the
river, while on the opposite shore, along the Fáro and below the
junction, some fine clusters of trees were faintly seen.

I looked long and silently upon the stream; it was one of the happiest
moments in my life. Born on the bank of a large navigable river, in a
commercial place of great energy and life, I had from my childhood, a
great predilection for river-scenery; and although plunged for many
years in the too exclusive study of antiquity, I never lost this native
instinct. As soon as I left home, and became the independent master of
my actions, I began to combine travel with study, and to study while
travelling, it being my greatest delight to trace running waters from
their sources, and to see them grow into brooks, to follow the brooks,
and see them become rivers, till they at last disappeared in the all-
devouring ocean. I had wandered all around the Mediterranean, with its
many gulfs, its beautiful peninsulas, its fertile islands—not hurried
along by steam, but slowly wandering from place to place, following the
traces of the settlements of the Greeks and Romans around this beautiful
basin, once their _terra incognita_. And thus, when entering upon the
adventurous career in which I subsequently engaged, it had been the
object of my most lively desire to throw light upon the natural arteries
and hydrographical network of the unknown regions of Central Africa. The
great eastern branch of the Niger was the foremost to occupy my
attention; and, although for some time uncertain as to the identity of
the river of Ádamáwa with that laid down in its lower course by Messrs.
W. Allen, Laird, and Oldfield, I had long made up my mind on this point,
thanks to the clear information received from my friend Ahmed bel Mejúb.
I had now with my own eyes clearly established the direction and nature
of this mighty river; and to an unprejudiced mind there could no longer
be any doubt that this river joins the majestic watercourse explored by
the gentlemen just mentioned.[117] Hence I cherish the well-founded
conviction, that along this natural highroad European influence and
commerce will penetrate into the very heart of the continent, and
abolish slavery, or rather those infamous slave-hunts and religious
wars, destroying the natural germs of human happiness, which are
spontaneously developed in the simple life of the pagans, and spreading
devastation and desolation all around.

We descended towards the place of embarkation, which at this season of
the year changes every week, or even more frequently. At present it was
at the mouth of a small, deeply-worn channel, or dry watercourse,
descending from the swampy meadow-grounds towards the river, and filled
with tall reed-grass and bushes. Here was the poor little naval arsenal
of the Tépe, consisting of three canoes, two in good repair, and a third
one in a state of decay, and unfit for service.

It was now that for the first time I saw these rude little shells,
hollowed out of a single trunk—for the boats of the Búdduma are more
artificial, being made of a number of boards joined together; and I soon
began to eye these frail canoes with rather an anxious feeling, as I was
about to trust myself and all my property to what seemed to offer very
inadequate means of crossing with safety a large and deep river. They
measured from twenty-five to thirty feet in length, and only from a foot
to a foot and a half in height, and sixteen inches in width; and one of
them was so crooked, that I could scarcely imagine how it could stem the
strong current of the river.

On the river itself two canoes were plying; but, notwithstanding our
repeated hallooing and firing, the canoemen would not come to our side
of the river; perhaps they were afraid. Roving about along the bushy
watercourse, I found an old canoe, which being made of two very large
trunks joined together, had been incomparably more comfortable and
spacious than the canoes now in use; although the joints being made with
cordage just like the stitching of a shirt, and without pitching the
holes, which were only stuffed with grass, necessarily allowed the water
to penetrate continually into the boat; it, however, had the great
advantage of not breaking if it ran upon a rock, being in a certain
degree pliable. It was about thirty-five feet long, and twenty-six
inches wide in the middle; but it was now out of repair, and was lying
upside down. It was from this point, standing upon the bottom of the
boat, that I made the sketch of this most interesting locality.

The canoemen still delaying to come, I could not resist the temptation
of taking a river bath, a luxury which I had not enjoyed since bathing
in the Eurymedon. The river is full of crocodiles; but there could be
little danger from these animals after all our firing and the constant
noise of so many people. I had not yet arrived at the conviction, that
river-bathing is not good for a European in a tropical climate, but this
was the first and last time that I bathed voluntarily, with a single
exception, for when navigating the river of Logón on a fine day in
March, 1852, I could not help jumping overboard, and on my return from
Bagírmi, in August 1853, I was obliged to do it.

The bed of the river, after the first foot and a half, sloped down very
gradually, so that at the distance of thirty yards from the shore I had
not more than three feet and a half of water, but then it suddenly
became deep. The current was so strong, that I was unable to stem it;
but my original strength, I must allow, was at the time already greatly
reduced. The only advantage which I derived from this feat was that of
learning that the river carries gold with it; for the people, as often
as I dipped under water, cried out that I was searching for this metal,
and when I came out of the water, were persuaded that I had obtained
plenty of it. However, the river was already too full for investigating
this matter further.

At length a canoe arrived, the largest of the two that were actually
employed, and a long bargaining commenced with the eldest of the
canoemen, a rather short and well set lad. Of course as the chief of the
caravan, I had to pay for all, and there being three camels and five
horses to be carried over, it was certainly a difficult business. It
cannot, therefore, be regarded as a proof of exorbitant demands, that I
had to pay five “dóras,” a sum which in Kúkawa would buy two oxen loads
of Indian corn. I allowed all the people to go before me, in order to
prevent the canoemen from exacting something more from them.

There was considerable difficulty with my large camel-bags, which were
far too large for the canoes, and which several times were in danger of
being upset; for they were so unsteady that the people were obliged to
kneel down on the bottom, and keep their equilibrium by holding with
both hands on the sides of the boat. Fortunately I had laid my tentpoles
at the bottom of the canoe, so that the water did not reach the luggage;
but owing to the carelessness of the Hajji’s companions all his books
were wetted, to his utmost distress; but I saw him afterwards shedding
tears, while he was drying his deteriorated treasures on the sandy beach
of the headland. The horses as they crossed, swimming by the sides of
the canoe, had to undergo great fatigue, but desperate was the struggle
of the camels, which were too obstinate to be guided by the frail
vessels, and had to be pushed through alone, and could only be moved by
the most severe beating; the camel of the Hajji was for a while given up
in despair by the whole party. At length they were induced to cross the
channel, the current carrying them down to a great distance, and our
whole party arrived safe on the sandy beach of the headland, where there
was not a bit of shade. This whole headland for two or three months
every year is covered with water, although its chief part, which was
overgrown with tall reed-grass, was at present about fifteen feet above
the surface.

The river, where we crossed it, was, at the very least, eight hundred
yards broad, and in its channel generally eleven feet deep, and was
liable to rise, under _ordinary_ circumstances, at least thirty, or even
at times fifty feet higher. Its upper course at that time was known to
me, as far as the town of Géwe on the road to Logón; but further on I
had only heard from the natives that it came from the south, or rather
from the S.S.E.

It was a quarter before one o’clock when we left the beach in order to
cross the second river, the Fáro[118], which is stated to come from
Mount Lábul, about seven days’ march to the south. It was at present
about six hundred yards broad, but generally not exceeding two feet in
depth, although almost all my informants had stated to me that the Fáro
was the principal river. The reason of this mistake was, I think, that
they had never seen the two rivers at this place, but observed the Fáro
near Gúrin, where, a little later in the season, it seems to be of an
immense breadth, particularly if they crossed from Bundang; or they were
swayed by the great length of the latter river, which they were
acquainted with in its whole course, while none of them had followed the
upper course of the Bénuwé.

Be this as it may, the current of the Fáro was extremely violent, far
more so than that of the Bénuwé, approaching, in my estimation, a rate
of about five miles, while I would rate the former at about three and a
half miles an hour; the current of the Fáro plainly indicating that the
mountainous region whence it issued was at no great distance. In order
to avoid the strongest part of the current, which swept along the
southern shore, we kept close to a small island, which, however, at
present could still be reached from this side with dry feet. We then
entered upon low meadow land, overgrown with tall reed grass, which a
month later is entirely inundated to such a depth that only the crowns
of the tallest trees are seen rising above the water, of which they bore
unmistakeable traces; the highest line thus marked being about fifty
feet above the present level of the river: for of course the inundation
does not always reach the same height, but varies according to the
greater or less abundance of the rains. The information of my
companions, as well as the evident marks on the ground, left not the
least doubt about the immense rise of these rivers.[119]

For a mile and a half from the present margin of the river, near a large
and beautiful tamarind-tree, we ascended its outer bank, rising to the
height of about thirty feet, the brink of which is not only generally
reached by the immense inundation, but even sometimes overflowed, so
that the people who cross it during the height of the inundation,
leaving the canoes here, have still to make their way through deep
water, covering this highest level.

My companions from Ádamáwa were almost unanimous in spontaneously
representing the waters as preserving their highest level for forty
days, which, according to their accounts, would extend from about the
20th of August till the end of September. This statement of mine, made
not from my own experience, but from the information of the natives, has
been slightly, but indeed very slightly, modified by the experience of
those eminent men who, upon the reports which I forwarded of my
discovery, were sent out by her Majesty’s Government in the “Pleiad,”
and who succeeded in reaching the point down to which I had been able to
delineate the course of the river with some degree of certainty. That
the fall of the river at this point of the junction begins at the very
end of September has been exactly confirmed by these gentlemen, while
with regard to the forty days they have not made any distinct
observation, although there is evidence enough that they experienced
something confirmatory of it.[120]

On leaving the outer bank of the river our way led through a fine park-
like plain, dotted with a few mimosas of middling size, and clear of
underwood. The sides of the path were strewn with skeletons of horses,
marking the line followed by the late expedition of the governor of
Yóla, on its return from Lére, or the Mbána country. Having then entered
upon cultivated ground, we reached the first cluster of huts of the
large straggling village Chabajáure, or Chabajáule, situated in a most
fertile and slightly undulating tract; and having kept along it for
little less than a mile and a half, we took up our quarters in a
solitary and secluded cluster of huts, including a very spacious
courtyard.

It was a sign of warm hospitality that, although the whole caravan had
fallen to the charge of a single household, sufficient quantities not
only of “nyíro,” the common dish of Indian corn, but even of meat, were
brought to us in the evening. While passing the village I had observed
that all the corn on the fields was “geróri,” or _Pennisetum_
(millet—dukhn), a kind of grain originally, it would seem, so strange to
the Fúlbe, that they have not even a word of their own for it, having
only modified a little the Háusa word “géro;” not a single blade of
“baíri,” or sorghum, was to be seen. The scarcity was less felt here
than in the northern districts of the country, and we bought some grain
for our horses as a supply for the next day.

[Sidenote: Thursday, June 19th.]

We started early in the morning, continuing along the straggling hamlets
and rich corn-fields of Chabajáule for a mile and a half, when we passed
two slave villages, or “rúmde,” belonging to a rich Púllo, of the name
of Hanúri. All the meadows were beautifully adorned with white violet-
striped lilies. We then entered a wooded tract, ascending at the same
time considerably on the hilly ground which juts out from the foot of
mount Bágelé, and which allowed us a clearer view of the geological
character of the mountain. Having again emerged from the forest upon an
open, cultivated, and populous district, we passed the large village of
Dulí, and having descended and reascended again we obtained a most
beautiful view near the village Gúroré, which lies on rising ground,
surrounded by a good many large monkey-bread trees, or bodóje (_sing._
bokki.) For from this elevated spot we enjoyed a prospect over the
beautiful meadow lands sloping gently down towards the river, which from
this spot is not much more than five miles distant, taking its course
between Mounts Bengo and Bágelé, and washing the foot of the latter, but
not visible to us. The country continued beautiful and pleasant, and was
here enlivened by numerous herds of cattle, while in the villages which
we had passed I had seen none, as the Fúlbe drive their cattle
frequently to very distant grazing grounds.

While marching along at a good pace, Mohámmedu walked up to me, and with
a certain feeling of pride showed me his fields, “gashí gonakína.”
Though a poor man, he was master of three slaves, a very small fortune
in a conquered and newly colonized country like Ádamáwa, based entirely
upon slavery, where many individuals have each more than a thousand
slaves. I was greatly surprised to see here a remarkable specimen of a
bokki or monkey-bread tree, branching off from the ground into three
separate trunks; at least, I never remember to have seen anything like
it, although the tree is the most common representative of the vegetable
kingdom through the whole breadth of Central Africa. All the ground to
the right of the path is inundated during the height of the flood.

We had now closely approached the Bágelé, the summit of which, though
not very high, is generally enveloped in clouds, a fact which, when
conveyed to me in the obscure language of the natives, had led me to the
misconception while writing in Kúkawa my report of the provisional
information I had obtained of the country whither I was about to
proceed, that this mountain was of volcanic character. It seems to
consist chiefly of granite, and has a very rugged surface, strewn with
great irregular blocks, from between which trees shoot up. Nevertheless,
stretching out to a length of several miles from S.S.E. to N.N.W., it
contains a good many spots of arable land, which support eighteen little
hamlets of independent pagans. These, protected by the inaccessible
character of their strongholds, and their formidable double spears, have
not only been able hitherto to repulse all the attacks which the proud
Mohammedans, the centre of whose government is only a few miles distant,
have made against them, but, descending from their haunts, commit almost
daily depredations upon the cattle of their enemies.[121] One of their
little hamlets, perched on the top of steep cliffs, we could plainly
distinguish by the recently thatched roofs of the huts, the snow-white
colour of which very conspicuously shone forth from the dark masses of
the rock. The country was always gaining in interest as we advanced, the
meadow-lands being covered with living creatures of every description,
such as cattle, horses, asses, goats, and sheep, and we reached the
easternmost cluster of huts of the large straggling village or district
of Ribáwo or Ribágo[122], stretching out on our left on a little rising
ground. The district is not only rich in corn and pasturage, but also in
fish, which are most plentiful in a large inlet or backwater, “illágul,”
as it is called by the Fúlbe, branching off from the river along the
north-east foot of the Bágelé, and closely approaching the village. In
this shallow water the fish are easily caught.

Numbers of inquisitive people of every age and sex, gathered round us
from the neighbouring hamlets; but while hovering round me and the
camels with great delight, they behaved very decently and quietly. They
followed us till we took up our quarters a little before ten o’clock,
with a friend of Bíllama’s, in a large group of huts lying close to the
path, and shaded by most luxuriant trees. Although there were several
clean huts, I preferred the cool and ventilated entrance hall of the
same description as I have mentioned above, and remained here even
during the night, although a most terrible storm, which broke out at six
o’clock in the evening, and lasted full four hours, flooded the whole
ground, and rendered my resting-place rather too cool. I would advise
other travellers not to follow my example during the rainy season, but
rather to make themselves comfortable in the warm interior of a well
protected hut.

In our last march through these rich low grounds, which are every year
flooded by the river, I had not observed the least traces of the
cultivation of rice, for which they seem to be so marvellously adapted,
the cultivation round Ribágo being almost exclusively limited to maiwa
or maiwári, a peculiar species of sorghum called “matëa” in Kanúri. On
inquiring why these people did not grow rice, I learnt that the Fúlbe
hereabouts had all migrated from Bórnu after the downfall of their
jemmára and dominion in that country, when not only were the new
political intruders repulsed, but even the old settlers, who had been
established in that country from very ancient times, were obliged to
emigrate. In Bórnu, however, as I have had occasion to mention before,
no rice is cultivated, so that these people, although at present
established in regions where rice would probably succeed much better
than millet and Indian corn, abstain entirely from its cultivation. On
the other hand, in the western parts of Ádamáwa and in Hamárruwa,
whither the Fúlbe have migrated from Háusa, rice is cultivated to a
considerable extent. On a former occasion I have already touched on the
question, whether rice be indigenous in Negroland or not. It has
evidently been cultivated from time immemorial in the countries along
the middle course of the Ísa, or Kwára, from Kébbi up to Gágho, or Gógó;
but this might seem to be in consequence of a very ancient intercourse
between those regions and Egypt, which I hope to be able to establish in
the course of my narrative. It grows, however, wild in many parts, from
the southern provinces of Bórnu, Bagírmi, and Wadáy, as far north as el
Haúdh and Bághena, on the border of the western desert.

Another important point of which I here became aware was, that the Bátta
language, which, among the numerous languages of Ádamáwa, or rather
Fúmbiná, is the most extensively spoken, has two very different
dialects; for, being anxious to finish my small vocabulary of this
language, which I had commenced in Kúkawa with the assistance of
Mohámmedu, I soon found that the dialect spoken here differed
considerably from that of which I had previously written specimens. The
Bátta language, as I have stated above, is intimately related to the
Marghí and Záni idiom, and bears several points of resemblance to the
Músgu language, which is itself related to the various dialects of
Kótoko. All these languages have some general points of affinity to the
South African languages.

At present, however, the indigenous population is almost totally extinct
in this district, which is exclusively inhabited by the conquerors, who
have here found an abode remarkably suited to their mode of living. The
whole place has not less than 6000 inhabitants.

[Sidenote: Friday, June 20th.]

We started early in order to reach the capital, if possible, before
noon, and passed through several hamlets, all belonging to the extensive
village or district of Ribágo, and interrupted here and there by
projecting masses of schistose rock, while the concavity between this
rising ground and Mount Bágelé was fast filling with the flood from the
river, and presented already a considerable sheet of water. The country,
after we had passed this populous district, became thickly wooded, which
I had not expected to find so near the capital; and, on account of some
ravines which intersect it, and of the neighbourhood of the inlet of the
river, it certainly cannot afford a very easy passage towards the end of
the rainy season. Here also the rock projects above the plain in many
places.

About eight o’clock, when we had travelled round the south-western foot
of Mount Bágelé, we passed through a number of small hamlets, which
however did not exhibit any traces of cultivation, and then again
entered upon a wild tract, while we obtained a glance at a
picturesquely-seated place before us, which I unhesitatingly took for
Yóla, but which proved to be a small village situated at a considerable
distance from the capital. Before we reached it, we had to cross a sheet
of water nearly five feet deep, and called by my companions “Máyo
Bínti,” which caused us a great deal of trouble and delay, and wetted
almost all my luggage. The water, which at present had no current,
skirts the foot of the rocky slope on which the village is situated, the
name of which is Yebbórewó. Here our camels created an extraordinary
interest, and a great many women, although we did not attend to their
wish to stop, managed to pass under the bellies of these tall creatures,
in the hope of obtaining their blessing, as they thought them sacred
animals.

Having kept along the rising ground, and passed several little hamlets
adorned with monkey-bread trees, we had to cross very difficult swampy
ground, which, a little later in the season, must be avoided by a long
circuit. Two months later Mount Bágelé must look almost like an island,
so surrounded is it on all sides by deep inlets and swamps. The detached
cone of Mount Takabéllo, rising to a height of about a thousand feet
above the plain, for some time formed a conspicuous object in front of
us on our winding path, till at length, a little before noon, we reached
the outskirts of the capital in a state of mind not exempt from anxious
feeling.


[Footnote 115: I heard the name pronounced in this way, but lower down
it may be pronounced Bí-nuwé. However, I have to remark that Mr.
Petermann changed the é into an í, from mere mistake; and I do not know
whether the members of the Chádda expedition had sufficient authority
for writing the name in this way. The word belongs to the Batta
language, where water is called “beé,” or “bé;” but in kindred dialects
it is called “bí.” “Nuwé” means the mother; and the whole name means
“mother of water.” The name, therefore, properly is of the feminine
gender.]

[Footnote 116: “Tépe” is a Púllo, or rather Fulfúlde word, meaning
“junction,” “confluence,” which by the Western Fúlbe would be called
“fottérde máje.” In Háusa the name is “magángamú.”]

[Footnote 117: That this river is anywhere really called Chádda, or even
Tsádda, I doubt very much; and I am surprised that the members of the
late expedition in the “Pleiad” do not say a word on this point. I think
the name Chádda was a mere mistake of Lander’s, confirmed by Allen,
owing to their fancying it an outlet of Lake Tsád.]

[Footnote 118: I did not even once hear this name pronounced Páro, but
lower down it may be so; for, as I have had several times occasion to
state, _p_ and _f_, or rather _ph_, are frequently confounded in
Negroland, just as _r_ and _l_, _dh_ and _l_ or _r_.]

[Footnote 119: This immense rise of the river agrees perfectly with the
experience of Messrs. Laird and Oldfield, who, from absolute
measurement, found the difference in the level of the water at Idda in
the course of the year nearly 60 feet. See their Journal, vol. ii. p.
276., and p. 420. note, “57 to 60 feet.”]

[Footnote 120: There was a very serious discrepancy amongst those
gentlemen with regard to the fall of the river. Dr. Baikie states, in
his journal which recently appeared, p. 230., that “the water first
showed _decided_ signs of falling about the 3rd of October, and by the
5th the decrease was very perceptible.” If, therefore, the river began
to fall at Zhibu on the 3rd of October, the fall would commence at the
Tépe, more than 200 miles higher up along the windings of the river, at
least three days before, if we take the current at three miles an hour.
My statement, therefore, that the river begins _decidedly_ to fall at
the confluence at the very end of September, has been singularly
confirmed. But that there is also some truth with regard to the long
continuance of the highest level, is evident from the _conflicting_
observations of the party. (See Baikie’s Journal, p. 217.) Indeed the
sailing-master insisted that the river had fallen long before; and all
the people were puzzled about it. From all this I must conclude that _my
statement_ with regard to the river, instead of having been considerably
modified by the expedition, _has been confirmed by their experience in
all its principal points_. We shall see the same difficulty recur with
regard to a maximum level preserved for forty days by the western river,
although the time when it begins to fall is entirely different; and as
to the latter river, not only I, but the natives also were mistaken with
respect to its presumed time of falling. The same is the case with the
(river) Shári, and is natural enough, considering the extensive
inundations with which the rise of these African rivers is attended.
This state of the rivers in the tropical climes is so irregular, that
Leo Africanus has made quite the same observation. L. i. c. 28.,
Descrizione dell’ Africa.]

[Footnote 121: I leave this passage as it stood in my journal, although
it describes a state of things which now, in 1857, belongs to the past.
This stronghold also has at length been taken by the intruders, and the
seat of happiness and independence converted into a region of
desolation. In 1853, two years after my journey to Ádamáwa, Mohammed
Lowel left his residence with a great host, having sworn not to return
before he had reduced Bágelé. After a siege of almost two months, with
the assistance of a few muskets, he succeeded in conquering the
mountaineers, and reducing them to slavery. The chief of the pagans of
the Bágelé, who belong to the Batta tribe, in the height of his power
exercised paramount authority over the neighbouring tribes, and is said
to have even had the “_jus primæ noctis_.”]

[Footnote 122: Ribágo, sometimes contracted to the form Ribáwo, means “a
governor’s country-seat.”]




                              CHAP. XXXVI.

            MY RECEPTION IN YÓLA. — SHORT STAY. — DISMISSAL.


At length I had reached the capital of Ádamáwa, having had altogether a
very lucky and successful journey; but now all depended upon the manner
in which I should be received in this place: for although it was quite
enough to have successfully penetrated so far, after having discovered
and crossed the upper course of that large river, about the identity of
which with the Chadda there could be little doubt, I entertained the
hope that I might be allowed to penetrate further south, and investigate
at least part of the basin of the river. I had heard so much about the
fertile character of those regions, that I was intensely desirous to see
something of them.

It was an unfavourable circumstance that we arrived on a Friday, and
just during the heat of the day. The streets were almost deserted; and
no person met us in order to impart to us, by a friendly welcome, a
feeling of cheerfulness and confidence.

Yóla is a large open place, consisting, with a few exceptions, of
conical huts surrounded by spacious courtyards, and even by corn-fields,
the houses of the governor and those of his brothers being alone built
of clay. Keeping along the principal street, we continued our march for
a mile and a quarter before we reached the house of the governor, which
lies on the west side of a small open area, opposite the mosque, a flat
oblong building, or rather hall, inclosed with clay walls, and covered
with a flat thatched roof a little inclined on one side. Having reached
this place, my companions fired a salute, which, considering the nature
of Bíllama’s mission, and the peculiar character of the governor, which
this officer ought to have known, and perhaps also since it happened to
be Friday, was not very judicious.

Be this as it may, the courtiers or attendants of the governor,
attracted by the firing, came out one after another, and informed us
that their master must go to the mosque and say his mid-day prayers[123]
before he could attend to us or assign us quarters. We therefore
dismounted and sat down in the scanty shade of a jéja or caoutchouc-
tree, which adorns the place between the palace and the mosque, while a
great number of people, amounting to several hundreds, gradually
collected, all eager to salute me and shake hands with me. Fortunately,
it was not long before Lowel came out from his palace and went into the
mosque; and then I obtained a few moments’ respite, the people all
following him, with the exception of the young ones, who very luckily
found the camels a worthier object of their curiosity than me. It had
been my intention to salute the governor when he was crossing the place,
but I was advised not to do so, as it might interfere with his
devotional feelings.

The prayer was short; and when it was over I was surrounded by much
larger numbers than before, and, being fatigued and hungry, I felt
greatly annoyed by the endless saluting and shaking of hands. At length
we were ordered to take up our quarters in the house of Ardo Ghámmawa, a
brother of our fellow-traveller Ibrahíma; but this being close to the
east end of the town, we were not much pleased with the arrangement, as
it not only obliged us for the moment to return the whole way we had
come, but also for the future deprived us of an unreserved and friendly
intercourse with the governor. This was not calculated to inspire us
with confidence as to the success of our proceedings.

It was past two o’clock in the afternoon when at length I reached my
quarters and took possession of a large, well-ventilated, and neat
“záure,” or hall, the walls of which were all painted. In the inner
courtyard there was also a very neat and snug little hut, but that was
all, and we had great trouble in obtaining quarters for Bú-Sʿad and the
mʿallem in some of the neighbouring courtyards. I felt rather fatigued
and not quite at my ease, and therefore could not much enjoy a dish of
an extremely good pudding of bairi or sorghum, with excellent clear
butter, and a large bowl of milk; but nevertheless, although a storm,
accompanied with much rain, broke out in the evening and rendered the
air rather humid, I remained the whole night where I was, instead of
retiring into the well-protected though rather sultry hut.

[Sidenote: Saturday, June 21st.]

In the morning I selected my presents for the governor, the principal
part of which consisted of a very handsome red cloth bernús, which we
had found among the things left by the late Mr. Richardson; but when we
were ready to go we received the information that Lowel was in his
fields, and that we could not see him. Meanwhile I received a visit from
an Arab from the far distant west, with whom I had made acquaintance in
Kúkawa, and who had given me some very valuable information. It was El
Mukhtár, of the tribe of the Idésan in Bághena, who had previously paid
a visit to Ádamáwa, and was well acquainted with the country. It is
always very pleasant for a traveller to meet another roving spirit
somewhere again, particularly in a country like Central Africa. Having
acknowledged his visit by the gift of a knife and a little frankincense,
I presented our host, the Ardo Ghámmawa, with a fine “ríga gíwa” (an
“elephant-shirt”)—that is to say, one of those enormous wide black
shirts made only in Núpe, and which was one of the few articles which I
had been able to provide in Kanó for the furtherance of my plans. The
family of the Ardo had formerly been settled in Ghámmawa, in the south-
western province of Bórnu, but, when the Fúlbe were driven back from
that country, emigrated and settled here. But this man still bears the
title “Ardo Ghámmawa”—“the mayor of (the Fúlbe community of) Ghámmawa.”

Having been told that the governor had returned to his palace, we
mounted on horseback about ten o’clock, and, preceded by the Ardo
Ghámmawa, returned the long way to the lamórde or palace; but after
waiting on the damp ground, exposed to the sun for more than an hour, we
were told that we could not see him, and were obliged to return with our
present. I was greatly vexed, and felt, in consequence, my fever
increasing, especially as another very heavy storm broke out in the
afternoon, when the air became quite chilly. However, I was somewhat
cheered by making acquaintance in the afternoon with an Arab from Mokha,
of the name of Mohammed ben Áhmed, who styled himself sheríf, most
probably rather pleonastically; but, apart from such pretension, he was
an amiable and most interesting man, who had travelled for many years
over the whole eastern coast of the continent between Mombása and
Sofála. He was the first to satisfy my curiosity with a description of
the celebrated Lake Nyassa as an eye-witness. He had even visited Bombay
and Madras.

[Sidenote: Sunday, June 22nd.]

In consequence of the information received from Ardo Ghámmawa that to-
day we were certainly to see the governor, we got ready at an early
hour, taking with us also a present for his brother Mansúr, who had made
himself expressly a candidate for a present, by sending me, the day
before, a small pot of honey. While we were passing his house, he was
coming out to pay his respects to his brother. We made a short halt and
exchanged compliments with him; and when, on reaching the area before
the governor’s house, we had dismounted and were sitting down in the
shade of the tree, he walked most benignly and frankly up, and sat down
in front of me. We then entered the palace; and having waited a short
time in the segífa or záure, which here was formed by a spacious flat-
roofed room supported by massive square pillars, we were called into the
presence of the governor.

[Illustration]

Mohammed Lowel[124], son of Mʿallem Ádama, was sitting in a separate
hall, built of clay, and forming, for this country, quite a noble
mansion. From without especially, it has a stately, castle-like
appearance, while inside, the hall was rather encroached upon by
quadrangular pillars two feet in diameter, which supported the roof,
about sixteen feet high, and consisting of a rather heavy entablature of
poles, in order to withstand the violence of the rains. The governor was
very simply dressed, and had nothing remarkable in his appearance, while
his face, which was half-covered by a somewhat dirty shawl, had an
indifferent expression. Besides him there were none present but Mansúr
and a mʿallem.

Having, as the first European that had ever visited his country with the
distinct purpose to enter into friendly relations with him, paid him my
respects on behalf of my countrymen, I delivered my letter of
introduction from Sheikh ʿOmár, who in a few but well-chosen lines
introduced me to him as a learned and pious Christian, who wandered
about to admire the works of the Almighty Creator, and on this account
cherished an ardent desire to visit also Ádamáwa, of the wonders of
which I had heard so much. Lowel read it, and evidently not quite
displeased with its contents, although he took umbrage at some of the
expressions, handed it silently over to the mʿallem and Mansúr. Hereupon
Bíllama delivered his letters, of which not only the contents, but even
the very existence had been totally unknown to me. They were three in
number, one from the sheikh himself, one from Malá Ibrám, the former
possessor of the southern province of Bórnu, and one from Kashélla ʿAli
Déndal, or Ladán, the officer who by his late predatory incursion had
given grounds for complaint.

As soon as these various letters were read, all of which laid claim, on
the side of Bórnu, to the territory of Kófa and Kóbchi, a storm arose,
and in a fit of wrath Lowel reproached my companion with daring to come
forward with such pretensions—he, who was himself well-acquainted with
the country and with the point in dispute. If Sheikh ʿOmár wished for
discord, well: he was ready; and they would harass each other’s
frontier-provinces by reciprocal incursions. Having given vent to his
feelings towards Bíllama, his anger turned upon me; and he told me to my
face that I had quite different reasons for coming into his country from
those stated in Sheikh ʿOmár’s letter; referring to some ambiguous words
in Malá Ibrám’s writing, in which that officer stated “that, with regard
to me, the objects of my journey to Ádamáwa were a perfect secret to
him.” Now I must confess, after all my acquaintance with the politics of
these people, and notwithstanding all Háj Beshír’s kindness and
benevolence towards me, that I think the Bórnu diplomatists quite
capable of a little double dealing; that is to say, I suspect that they
were willing to make use of me to frighten the governor of Ádamáwa.
Perhaps also they were afraid lest, if I should succeed in Ádamáwa, I
might not return to their country. I shall have to mention similar
circumstances on my journey to Bagírmi. Viewing matters in this light, I
wrote from Kúkawa, requesting Her Majesty’s government to inform the
sheikh of Bórnu that it was their distinct desire that we should
penetrate onwards, and that he would confer an obligation upon them by
facilitating the execution of our plans.

Be this as it may, after a long dispute with regard to the boundaries,
in which my friend from Mokha, and a learned native of Wadáy, Móde ʿAbd
Alláhi, who was employed by Lowel as a sort of secretary of state for
foreign affairs, took part, I, with my party, was ordered to withdraw
for a time. After sitting for full two hours on the damp ground outside,
we received an intimation that we might return home. Thus I had to
return with my presents a second time to my quarters; and of course I
was greatly vexed. However, several people who saw my emotion
endeavoured to console me; and Mansúr, who before we left came out of
his brother’s audience-hall, entered into conversation with me, and
assured me that this unkind treatment in no way related to me, but that
it was only intended for Bíllama, the officer of Bórnu. There was
present also the very amiable mʿallem whom I had met in Saráwu Fulfúlde,
and who had come after us; and I felt sorry that I was not disposed to
answer his well-meant discourse in the manner it deserved.

When we reached Mansúr’s house, he invited us to dismount, and entering
the interior of his wide and neat dwelling we had a long and animated
conversation, when I explained to him in a deliberate manner that such
treatment did not offend me on my own account, but on account of the
government—the very first and most powerful in the world—which had sent
me; that instead of coming with hostile intentions, as was imputed to
me, I had come with the friendly design of paying my respects to the
governor on behalf of the British sovereign, and to present him with a
few specimens of our products and manufactures; that I had, no doubt, at
the same time an intense desire to see their country, as it was the
avowed purpose of Europeans in general, and of the English in
particular, to become acquainted, and to open intercourse, with all
parts of God’s creation.

Mansúr explained to me, in return, that they well knew that I had not
come to make war upon them, although Lowel, in the first fit of his
anger, scarcely seemed to suspect anything less than that, “but that
they were vexed because I had come to them under the protection of the
Bórnu people, their enemies.” A letter from the sultan of Stambúl, or
even from my own sovereign, would have recommended me much more
advantageously. The sheikh had expressly designated me as one
recommended and protected by the Porte, and Bú-Sʿad had mentioned, with
a slight disregard of the real facts, that through inadvertence only I
had left both letters, as well that from the sultan of Stambúl, as from
the English sovereign, in Kúkawa. Now I certainly had with me a treaty
written in Arabic, such as it was desirable that the governor of Ádamáwa
should subscribe; but to produce this under existing circumstances would
have been absurd, especially as it did not emanate directly from the
Government, and was not authenticated, either by seal or in any other
way, and I thought it better not to mention it. It was no bad policy on
the part of Bú-Sʿad to represent me as sent on a special mission by the
British government to the Fúlbe princes, and as obliged only by the
death of my companion to deviate from my intended course, in order to
supply his place in Kúkawa.

Meanwhile it was past mid-day; and after a stormy night the sun shone
forth with overpowering force, while we sat all the while in an open
courtyard without the least protection. On reaching my quarters, I was
so exhausted and ill that I thought I could do nothing better than take
without delay a powerful emetic, after which I felt much better, but
rather weak. Having somewhat restored my spirits by a conversation with
Mohammed ben Áhmed, I retired into the close hut, and had a sound sleep.

Monday having passed quietly, with the exception of a great many people
calling for “laiya” or charms, and for medicines, Tuesday the 24th
arrived, when it was my destiny to leave this country, which I had but
just entered, and to retrace my steps over the long and infested road
which I had lately travelled.

I felt tolerably well in the morning, but afterwards became very ill,
and unfortunately took too weak a dose of medicine. In this state I had
a visit from two very handsome and amiable young Fúlbe, and in my rather
morose mood refused their urgent request, made in the most simple and
confidential way, to say the “fat-ha,” or the opening prayer of the
Kurán, with them. I have always regretted my refusal, as it estranged
from me a great many people; and although many Christians will object to
repeat the prayer of another creed, yet the use of a prayer of so
general an import as the introductory chapter to the Kurán ought to be
permitted to every solitary traveller in these regions, in order to form
a sort of conciliatory link between him and the natives.

After some other visitors had come and gone, I received, about ten
o’clock, a formal visit from Móde ʿAbd-Alláhi, the foreign secretary,
and my friend from Mokha, in the name of the governor. Having moistened
their organs with a cup of coffee, they acquitted themselves of their
message in the following terms, “The sultan”—all these provincial
governors bear the title of sultan—“had ordered them,” they said, “to
beg me to accept his most respectful regards, and to inform me that he
was nothing but a slave of the sultan of Sókoto, and that I was a far
greater man than himself. As such a man had never before come to his
country, he was afraid of his liege lord, and begged me to retrace my
steps whither I had come; but if in course of time I should return with
a letter from Sókoto, he would receive me with open arms, would converse
with me about all our science, and about our instruments, without
reserve, and would show me the whole country.”

To this message, which was certainly couched in very modest and
insinuating terms, I answered that Mohammed Lowel, so far from being a
slave of the sultan of Sókoto, was renowned far and wide as the almost
independent governor of a large province; that the fame of his father
Ádama, as a nobly-born, learned Púllo, extended far and wide throughout
Tekrúr, or Negroland, and had even reached our own country; that it was
absurd to argue that I was greater than himself, and that on this
account he could not receive me on his own responsibility, but was
obliged to refer my suit to his liege lord in Sókoto.[125] I brought
forward the examples of Kátsena and Kanó, especially the latter place,
in which, though it was the seat of a governor dependent on the Emír el
Múmenín, in the same way as the governor of Ádamáwa, I had long resided,
without any representations being made to the sovereign lord. “Oh! but
the relations of Kátsena and Kanó,” said the messengers of the governor,
“are entirely different from those of this province. These are large and
busy thoroughfares for all the world, while Ádamáwa is a distant
territory in the remotest corner of the earth, and still a fresh,
unconsolidated conquest.” There was certainly some truth in this last
remark; and whatever I might say to the contrary, the question was
decided, and all reasoning was in vain.

The two messengers having gone through their business in this way,
informed me that they were only the forerunners of the real messenger,
Mansúr, the brother of the governor. This was very pleasant news to me;
and although, after this shock of disappointment, I felt extremely ill
and weak, I rose from my couch, and went to receive Mansúr, when he
arrived at the door of the hut. He then officially, and in a very
feeling manner, confirmed all that Móde ʿAbd-Alláhi and the sheríf
Mohammed had said, and expressed his deep regret that I was not allowed
to stay. When he was going, I handed to his servants the little present
destined for him, which consisted of twenty-five drʿa of striped
Manchester, a pair of English razors, scissors, a looking-glass, a
parcel of cloves, a little jáwi, or benzoin, and a small piece of
camphor.

Mansúr had been gone a little while when I received information that the
governor had sent me a horse and two slaves as a present, with the
intimation that I might likewise let him have the present which I had
brought with me for him. But this I refused to do, declaring that I
could not, under the present circumstances, either accept from him or
give him anything, not having come as a merchant to barter with him, but
as the messenger of another powerful sovereign, to treat with him on
friendly terms. My servant, Bú-Sʿad, who, in the covetousness of his
heart, already fancied himself in the possession of the two slaves, whom
he knew well I myself could not accept, but whom he thought I would give
up to him, went so far as to declare that as the present had come from
my sovereign I had no alternative but to bestow it. But seeing that I
was firm, the messengers went away, and soon after a horseman arrived
with the order for me to leave the town instantly.

Meanwhile, during all this negotiation and dispute, I had become
extremely weak, and the excitement had brought on a very severe fit of
fever. Indeed I scarcely thought that I should be able to sit on
horseback, and to bear the sun, it being then just noon, and the sun
shining forth with great power. Nevertheless I got my things ready; but
having left my quarters a little too soon, and being obliged to wait
some time for the other people, I became so weak that I could no longer
keep on my feet, but lay down on the ground till my companions arrived.
Sitting then firmly in my large Arab stirrups, and holding on to the
pommel, I proceeded; and though I fainted twice, I soon regained some
strength, a slight breeze having arisen, which greatly mitigated the
burning heat.

Numbers of people accompanied me, expressing their grief and sorrow at
my abrupt departure. By my refusing to write laiya, or to say the fat-
ha, I had estranged many a friendly-disposed native, and by my obstinacy
I had incurred the displeasure of their master; yet many of the people
openly disapproved of his conduct towards me.

An immense quantity of rain having fallen during my stay here, the
country appeared to me much more beautiful now than when we came, and
full of fine cattle; and I felt so refreshed that I considered myself
able to go as far as Ribágo, a ride of six hours, at a slow rate.

Bíllama behaved exceedingly well; for when my treacherous servant
Bú-Sʿad, who was afraid lest Mohammed Lowel should wreak his anger upon
me on the road, intimated to him, that “if anything of that sort should
happen, they of course were Moslemín”—thus indicating that they could
not defend me against those of their own creed, but should leave me to
my fate,—he indignantly left his company and rode up to me. Thus,
without any accident, except that all my luggage was once more wetted
through while passing the deep water of the máyo Bínti, we reached the
friendly village, where without ceremony I took up my quarters in the
well-known courtyard of our former host. But, before proceeding further
on my journey back, I must try to make the reader better acquainted with
the country, though the abrupt way in which I was obliged to leave it
allows me only, in most cases, to speak from the information of the
natives.

Yóla is the capital of an extensive province, called by foreigners
generally, and by the conquering Fúlbe in diplomatic language, Ádamáwa,
but the real name of which is Fúmbiná. Indeed Ádamáwa is quite a new
name given to the country (exactly as I stated in my report sent to
Europe some years ago) in honour of Mʿallem Ádama, the father of the
present governor, who succeeded in founding here a new Mohammedan empire
on the ruins of several smaller pagan kingdoms, the most considerable of
which was that of Kókomi. Whether what the people used to say be true,
that the name of the wife of this officer was Ádama too, I am not able
positively to decide.[126]

Yóla is quite a new settlement, called by this name after the princely
quarter of the town of Kanó,—the former capital, of which Denham’s
expedition heard some faint report, being Gúrin. Yóla is situated in a
swampy plain, and is bordered on the north side by an inlet of the
river, the inundation of which reaches close to that quarter where I was
living. The town is certainly not less than three miles long from east
to west. It seems probable that there are different names for the
different quarters; but my stay was too short to allow me to learn them.
The courtyards are large and spacious, but often contain only a single
hut, the whole area being sown with grain during the rainy season. All
the huts are built with clay walls on account of the violence of the
rains, and are tolerably high. Only the governor and his elder brothers
possess large establishments with dwellings built entirely of clay.
Notwithstanding its size, the place can hardly contain more than twelve
thousand inhabitants.

It has no industry; and the market, at least during the time of my stay
there, was most insignificant and miserably supplied: but certainly
during the season of field labours, as I have already had occasion to
observe, all the markets in Negroland are less important than at other
times of the year. The most common objects in the market, which find
ready sale, are túrkedí, beads, and salt[127], while other articles,
such as striped Manchester, calico, cloth bernúses, are generally sold
privately to the wealthier people. The only articles of export at
present are slaves and ivory. Four good túrkedí, bought in Kanó for 1800
or 2000 kurdí each, will generally purchase a slave; and a túrkedí will
often buy an elephant’s tusk of tolerable size.

Slavery exists on an immense scale in this country; and there are many
private individuals who have more than a thousand slaves. In this
respect the governor of the whole province is not the most powerful man,
being outstripped by the governors of Chámba and Kóncha—for this reason,
that Mohammed Lowel has all his slaves settled in rúmde or slave-
villages, where they cultivate grain for his use or profit, while the
above-mentioned officers, who obtain all their provision in corn from
subjected pagan tribes, have their whole host of slaves constantly at
their disposal; and I have been assured that some of the head slaves of
these men have as many as a thousand slaves each under their command,
with whom they undertake occasional expeditions for their masters. I
have been assured also that Mohammed Lowel receives every year in
tribute, besides horses and cattle, about five thousand slaves, though
this seems a large number.

The country of Fúmbiná is about two hundred miles long in its greatest
extent, running from south-west to north-east, while its shortest
diameter seems to reach from north-west to south-east, and scarcely ever
exceeds seventy or eighty miles; but this territory is as yet far from
being entirely subjected to the Mohammedan conquerors, who in general
are only in possession of detached settlements, while the intermediate
country, particularly the more mountainous tracts, are still in the
hands of the pagans. The people in this part of the country are engaged
in constant warfare. While the country north from the Bénuwé, between
Yóla and Hamárruwa, is entirely independent, and inhabited by warlike
pagan tribes, the best-subjected tract seems to be that between the
Wándalá and the Músgu country, where the settlements of the conquering
tribe are very compact. I must observe, however, that I am not quite
clear as to the exact manner in which those distant settlements are
dependent on the governor of Ádamáwa. That part of the country seems to
deserve a great deal of interest, and to be destined to become a
province by itself. It is sometimes designated by the special name of
“Jemmára,” a name certainly of general import, and meaning nothing but
“the congregation”—a corruption, in short, of Jemmáʿa.

The country is certainly one of the finest of Central Africa, irrigated
as it is by numerous rivers, among which the Bénuwé and the Fáro are the
most important, and being diversified with hill and dale. In general,
however, it is flat, rising gradually towards the south, from an
elevation[128] of about eight hundred feet, along the middle course of
the Bénuwé, to fifteen hundred feet or more, and broken by separate
hills or more extensive groups of mountains; but, as far as I know,
there is not here a single example of large mountain masses. Mount
Alantíka, of which I had a fine view from several points, though at a
considerable distance, is considered as the most massive and elevated
mountain in the whole country; and this is an entirely detached
mountain, at the utmost fifty miles in circumference, and elevated
certainly not more than eight thousand five hundred or nine thousand
feet above the plain from which it rises. No doubt the Bénuwé may be
presumed to have its sources in a mountainous tract of country; but of
the uppermost course of this river I was not able to obtain the least
information, while have been able to lay down its lower course with
great approximative certainty.[129] Yet, although the elevation of the
country is in general the same, the nature of the different districts
varies greatly: thus in Chámba, apparently on account of the
neighbourhood of Mount Alantíka, which attracts the clouds, the rainy
season is said to set in as early as January, so that by the end of
April or beginning of May the first crop is ripe, while in Yóla, and in
the country in general, the rains rarely begin before March.

The grain most commonly grown in the country is _Holcus sorghum_; but in
this respect also there is a great difference between the districts.
Thus, the country of the Mbúm round Ngáundere scarcely produces anything
but rógo, or yams, which form the daily, and almost sole food of the
inhabitants. Meat is so dear there that a goat will often fetch the
price of a female slave. Ground-nuts (_Arachis hypogæa_) are plentiful
both in the eastern and the western districts. A tolerable quantity of
cotton, called “póttolo” in Ádamáwa, is cultivated; but indigo or
“chachári” is very rare, and is hardly cultivated anywhere but in Saráwu
and Máruwa; and this is very natural, as the Fúlbe do not value coloured
shirts.

With regard to exuberance of vegetation, Tibáti seems to be one of the
richest places; there both kinds of the banana, or ayabáje, the gonda,
or papaya, “dukúje,” several species of the gúro tree, the _Pandanus_,
the _Kajilia_, the monkey-bread tree, or _Adansonia_, the “rími,” or
_Bombax_, and numerous other kinds are found. Of the palm tribe, the
deléb-palm, or gigiña, and the _Elaïs Guineensis_, are frequent, but
strictly limited to certain localities, while the date-tree (called by
the Fúlbe of Ádamáwa by the beautiful name “tannedaráje[130]”) is very
rare, and, except a few specimens in Yóla and Búndang, scarcely to be
met with. Among the bushes, the _Palma Christi_, or _Ricinus_, is
extremely common. Altogether, the predominant tree in the southern
provinces of Ádamáwa seems to be the banana. There are hot springs in
the country of the Bakr Yemyem, about three days south from Kóncha,
which are said to issue from the west foot of a mountain stretching from
east to west, and to have a very high temperature; the water is reported
to be palatable.

Of animals, the elephant is exceedingly frequent, not only the black or
grey, but also a yellow species. The rhinoceros is often met with, but
only in the eastern part of the country. East from the Bénuwé the wild
bull is very common. The most singular animal seems to be the ayú, which
lives in the river, and in some respects resembles the seal[131]; it
comes out of the river in the night, and feeds on the fresh grass
growing on its banks.

With regard to domestic animals, cattle were evidently introduced by the
Fúlbe some two or three hundred years ago. There is an indigenous
variety of ox, but quite a distinct species, not three feet high, and of
dark-grey colour; this is called máturú. The native horse is small and
feeble; the best horses are brought from the northern districts, chiefly
from Úba.

I now proceed to mention the names of the most powerful Fúlbe governors
of the country, to which I shall subjoin a list of the native tribes,
over which the conquerors are gradually extending their sway, and which
they may even partially succeed in exterminating. Of those who are bound
to the governor of Ádamáwa in due allegiance—that is to say, who send
him a certain present and assist him in his warlike expeditions, the
governors of Chámba and Kóncha take the first rank. The present governor
of Chámba, Ámba (properly Mohammed) Sámbo, who is now a very old man,
has made himself extremely famous by his daring and distant expeditions,
and more especially that to the Íbo country and to Mbáfu, which he
undertook three years ago, and through which he has succeeded in
extending not only the influence, but even the dominion of the
conquerors, in a certain degree, as far as the Bight of Benín. I have
some reason to suspect that it was partly owing to this expedition,
which brought the Fúlbe into contact with tribes on the coast, who, on
account of their dress, furniture, and many of their customs, were
regarded by them as Christians, that Mohammed Lowel looked upon my
presence with distrust; for there were still some hundreds of slaves of
those so-called Christian tribes scattered over Ádamáwa. Mohammed dan
Jóbdi also, the governor of Kóncha, has made some very interesting
expeditions, the itineraries of some of which I shall give in the
Appendix.

More powerful certainly than these two, and in a state of quasi-
dependence on the governor of Yóla only, though at present in open
hostility with him, is Búba, the governor of Búbanjídda. The name of
this province also is entirely new, and is formed in a very remarkable
way, being compounded of the name of the conqueror himself (Búba) and of
that of his mother (Jídda). Búbanjídda is an extensive province,
including the districts on the upper course of the Bénuwé; and its
capital is called Ray-Búba. The governor is so powerful that, having in
vain solicited the Emír el Múmenín, his sovereign lord, to make him a
chief vassal, like the governor of Hamárruwa, so as to be independent of
the governor of Ádamáwa, he has placed himself in open opposition to
both. It is also very remarkable that Ray-Búba (that is to say, the town
which at present bears this name) was, with the exception of Tibáti, the
only walled town which the Fúlbe found in the country; and it took them
three months of continual fighting to get possession of it. I have
already mentioned, in another place, that this country produces the best
sort of iron; and it is not improbable that the more warlike spirit of
its inhabitants, the Dáma, is in some degree connected with this
circumstance.

Less powerful than the three governors just mentioned, but nevertheless
mighty vassals, and most of them valiant champions of the faith, are the
following chiefs: Bákari (properly Bú-Bakr), governor of Ribágo, north
from Búbanjídda; Ardo Badéshi, governor of the territories of the Falí;
Mʿallem Sudé, governor of Holma; Mʿallem Hámma, governor of Song; the
governor of Súmmo[132]; Mahmúd, governor of Kílba; Mʿallem Dáuraka,
governor of the large settlement of Máruwa or Marba; Mʿallem Yúsufa, the
pious old governor of Bínder; Mʿallem Ádama, the dashing governor of
Agúrma in the territory of the Dáma; Ardo ʿOmáro, seignior of Sabóngi,
near Búbanjídda; Mʿallem Mústafa, the pious old lord of Míndif; Ardo
Gári, the energetic and learned master of Bógo, whose people joined the
Bórnu army on the expedition to Músgu which I shall describe in the
succeeding volume; the lord of Kafta-Báudi; Húrsu, or Khúrsu, master of
Pédde or Fétte.

The dominion of the Fúlbe is generally centred in single settlements,
which are of various descriptions, comprising not only large towns,
where a numerous host of these intruders, and a powerful chief, reside,
but also more private settlements, such as country seats of governors,
“ribádo” or “ribágo;” seats of mere petty chiefs, or “jóro;” farm
villages, or “úro;” slave villages, or “rúmde.” But the Fúlbe are
continually advancing, as they have not to do with one strong enemy, but
with a number of small tribes without any bond of union. It remains to
be seen whether it be their destiny to colonize this fine country for
themselves, or in the course of time to be disturbed by the intrusion of
Europeans. It is difficult to decide how a Christian government is to
deal with these countries, where none but Mohammedans maintain any sort
of government. It cannot be denied that they alone here succeed in
giving to distant regions a certain bond of unity, and in making the
land more accessible to trade and intercourse.

The most numerous among the native tribes, as I have already stated
above, are the Bátta, whose prince, Kókomi, was previous to the conquest
of the Fúlbe the most powerful chief in the country. They are divided
into several great families, speaking also various dialects, which in
some cases differ from each other very widely, and are closely related
to the Marghí.[133] Many of the names of their districts serve to
designate the territories as well as the tribes settled in them, of
which several are still entirely independent of the Fúlbe.

The Bátta inhabit not only all the country on the middle course of the
Bénuwé and along the Fáro for some distance beyond Mount Alantíka, but
also the whole region north from these rivers as far as the southern
boundaries of Bórnu. It is in their language that the river has received
the name Bé-noë, or Bé-nuwé, meaning “the Mother of Waters.”

The tribe which ranks next in numbers and importance is the Falí,
settled between the upper course of the Bénuwé and the southern
provinces of Bagírmi, of whose families and territories (the same name
generally indicating both) I learnt the following names: Safaláwa,
Yamyam (probably not an original name), Gidér, Débba; Múndam, with the
chief place Lére, the residence of the powerful pagan prince (kówa)
Gónshomé; Mámbay, Dáma, Láme, Láka, Durú, Nánigí, not far east from
Chámba, and Bóka. Their idiom seems to be quite distinct from that of
the Bátta; but it shows some affinity with other neighbouring
tongues.[134] Among the few people belonging to this tribe with whom I
came into contact, I observed some of very light colour. Then follow the
Mbúm, living to the south from the Bátta and south-west from the Falí,
and partly subjected, the Fúlbe conquerors being principally established
in the place called Ngáundere. There is another large place, called
Bére. As separate divisions of the Mbúm, I learnt the names of the
Máiwa, Wúna, and Buté. South-east from the Mbúm live the Yángeré, and
still further on in that direction the Báya. In what relation the
Chámba, after whom the large place at the southern foot of Mount
Alantíka is called, stand to the above-named tribes, I cannot say. The
Chámba are said to have driven from these seats the Kóttofo, who dwell
at present further south. Then there are several other tribes, ranked by
my informants as separate nations, the independence or relation of which
to the rest I am not able to determine, as I have not obtained specimens
of their languages. These are the Holma, the Zummáwa, the Gudá, the
Kílba, Honá, Búza, the Bá, Múchelár, Hína, Búla, Múkubá[135], all of
whom live in the mountainous region to the south-west from Mount Míndif,
and no doubt are partially cognate with other tribes; but in order to
group them it is necessary to collect specimens of their languages.

Around Ádamáwa, partly within, partly beyond its boundaries, but in a
certain degree of subjection, are the following tribes: the Tikár (by
this name at least they are called by the Fúlbe, though they have,
probably, another name for themselves, as by this they do not seem to be
known near the coast[136]), the Yétem, the Dókaka, the Batí, a tribe of
rather light colour, the Dáka, the Wére, the Díngding (partly armed with
muskets, and regarded by the Fúlbe as Christians), the Mbáfu. Then the
Wága, the Yángur, and the Róba. With most of these tribes the reader
will be brought into nearer contact by the itineraries subjoined in the
Appendix, where I shall have occasion to add a few remarks with regard
to information obtained by Europeans near the coast. Here, however, it
will be not without interest to compare with this list of tribes the
following list of languages spoken in Ádamáwa which Mohámmedu gave me:
Battanchi[137]; Damanchi, the idiom spoken in the province of
Búbanjídda; Falanchi; Bumanchi, or perhaps more correctly Mbumanchi, the
language of the Mbúm and of the people of Báya; Butanchi; Tekarchi;
Mundanchi; Marghanchi[138]; Kilbanchi; Yangurchi; Gudanchi; Chambanchi;
Kotofanchi; Weranchi; Duranchi; Wokanchi; Toganchi; Lekamchi; Parparchi;
Kankamchi; Nyangeyárechi; Musganchi[138]; Mandaranchi[138], or rather
“Ára Wándalá”; Gizaganchi; Rumanchi; Giderchi; Dabanchi; Hinanchi;
Muturwanchi; Zinanchi; Zaninchi; Momoyëenchi; Faninchi, the idiom of
Fani, the dominion of Hajji Ghálebu; Nyaganchi; Dewanchi; Lallanchi;
Doganchi; Longodanchi.[139]


[Footnote 123: With regard to the Fúlbe, the prayers of dhohor
(“zúhura,” or “sallifánna”) may rightly be called mid-day prayers, as
they are accustomed to pray as soon as the zawál has been observed. But
in general it would be wrong to call dhohor noon, as is very often done;
for none of the other Mohammedans in this part of the world will say his
dhohor prayer before two o’clock P.M. at the very earliest, and
generally not before three o’clock.]

[Footnote 124: Lowel is most probably a name belonging to the Fulfúlde
language, although in writing with Arabic letters it is spelt الاول as
if it were of Arabic origin, and meant “the first.”]

[Footnote 125: Although ʿAlíyu, the present Emír el Múmenín, resides in
Wúrno, nevertheless Sókoto is still regarded as the official capital of
the empire.]

[Footnote 126: Ádamáwa is certainly not quite identical with Fúmbiná, as
it denotes only those regions of the latter which have been conquered by
the Fúlbe, while many parts are as yet unsubdued.]

[Footnote 127: With regard to salt, I will observe, that the greater
part of it is brought from Búmánda on the Bénuwé, near Hamárruwa, where
it seems to be obtained from the soil in the same way as I shall
describe the salt-boiling in Fóga in the fourth volume, although in
Búmánda there is no valley-formation, and Mr. Vogel, who lately visited
this place, may be right in stating that the salt is merely obtained
from ashes by burning the grass which grows in that locality.]

[Footnote 128: It is a great pity that the members of the Bénuwé
expedition were not able to measure the elevation of the river at the
furthest point reached. My thermometer for measuring the boiling-point
of water was so deranged, that my observation at the Tépe is without any
value. Till further observations have been made, I think it may be
assumed to be from 800 to 850 feet.]

[Footnote 129: It would be rather more appropriate to give the name of
Lower Bénuwé to that part of the river below, and that of Upper Bénuwé
to the part above the confluence, than to call Upper Bénuwé the part of
the river visited by Dr. Baikie.]

[Footnote 130: This name is evidently connected with that of the
_Balanites_, which they call “tanní;” and several Negro nations compare
the date with the fruit of that tree.]

[Footnote 131: Mr. Vogel, who has succeeded in obtaining a sight of this
animal, found that it is a Mammal like the Manatus Senegalensis. The
South African rivers also have these Mammals, and the ayú is not less
frequent in the Ísa near Timbúktu than it is in the Bénuwé.]

[Footnote 132: Súmmo, situated between Holma and Song.]

[Footnote 133: They are settled in the following places:—Song; Démsa,
comprising Démsa-Póha and Démsa-Mésu, which most picturesque places I
shall soon describe on my journey back to Kúkawa; Sulléri, Bundáng,
Gáruwa, Villáchi, Surkólchi[a], Kanáda, Áfong, Táwi, Sedíri, Boróngo,
Fáwe, Hólchi, Gírbu, Kárin, Béfate, Géllefo, Fúro, Béngo, Búlkuto,
Kóngchi, Yógo, Ganta, Bágelé, Bírgené, Yébbolewó, or Yébborewó, Dásin,
Réddo, Geré, Kéddemé, Ndóng, Lawáru, Bang, Báchama, Bulla, Záni, Boy,
Kirréngabó, Bólki, Murbáya, Ferma, Bólimbé, Alantíka, Komro, Malábu,
Mubákko, Kúrachi, Wóko.]

[Footnote a: These terminations in chi certainly do not seem to be
indigenous.]

[Footnote 134: The numbers “three” (tan) and “four” (nan) seem to point
to the Fulfúlde as well as to the Kaffir languages.]

[Footnote 135: It is probable that this tribe is indicated by the مكبا
of Makrízi (Hamaker, _Spec. Catal._ p. 206.), although there are several
other localities of the same name.]

[Footnote 136: Probably their real name is Tikʿa. See Appendix.]

[Footnote 137: The termination nchí, is nothing but the Songhay word ki,
which in several dialects is pronounced as chí, and means “language.” On
account of this termination being added to the original name, I have
purposely not marked the accents in this list.]

[Footnote 138: The languages thus marked are spoken only partly in
Ádamáwa, the tribes to whom they are peculiar being for the greatest
part independent.]

[Footnote 139: In the Appendix will be found a collection of
itineraries, which, written down with accuracy from the mouth of the
natives, will give a sufficient idea of the various districts of the
country.]




                             CHAP. XXXVII.

                     MY JOURNEY HOME FROM ÁDAMÁWA.


Having made these few remarks with regard to the interesting work of
conquest and colonization which is going on in Ádamáwa, I now return to
my quarters in Ribágo, in order to carry the reader with me on my
journey back from that country to Kúkawa.

[Sidenote: Wednesday, June 25th.]

Our luggage had been so wetted on the preceding afternoon, while
crossing the máyo Bínti, that we were obliged to stay in Ribágo the
whole morning, in order to dry it. The horseman who had escorted me out
of the town had returned; and in his stead Ibrahíma, with a companion on
foot, had made his appearance with orders from the governor to escort me
to the very frontiers of the country. In order to render him a more
sociable companion, I thought it well to make him a present of a
túrkedí. My mʿallem had not come along with us; and I could not be angry
with him for not desiring to return to Kúkawa, where he had been
detained against his will. The horse on which I had mounted him he had
well deserved for his trouble. Ibrahíma told me that Katúri had come
after me as far as Yébborewó, thinking that I would pass the night
there, but that the governor would not let him go further.

Before starting in the afternoon, I made our landlady, the wife of the
Ardo of Ribágo, very happy by a few presents, as an acknowledgment of
her hospitality in having twice entertained us in her house. After a
short march of a few miles, we took up our quarters for the night in
Duló, where the landlord, who a few days ago had been deprived of his
office of mayor, received us at first rather unkindly, but afterwards
assigned me a splendid hut, where the ganga or large drum, the ensign of
his former authority, was still hanging from the wall. I was greatly in
want of rest, and was obliged to keep my head always wet, and to abstain
entirely from food.

[Sidenote: Thursday, June 26th.]

I thought we should certainly cross the Bénuwé to-day; but, as if in
defiance of the governor of the country, Bíllama desired to move on as
slowly as possible, and took us to our well-known quarters in
Chabajáure. But this slow progress was certainly better for me, as I had
this day arrived at a crisis, and was dreadfully weak. Taking small
doses of quinine the whole of the afternoon, I strengthened myself for
the next day’s work, when after five miles’ march we reached the Tépe.

[Sidenote: Friday, June 27th.]

The Fáro had only risen a little more than twenty inches since the
18th—that is to say, two inches and a half per day; nevertheless we had
great difficulty in fording it. The Bénuwé had risen more rapidly; and
of course in July both rivers rise at a very different rate. When the
rainy season is at its height, the sandy beach of the headland at the
junction is almost completely under water; and this was the case with
our old place of embarkation on the northern bank of the Bénuwé, so that
I was obliged to creep up the steep bank.

In order to withstand the fatigue, I continued taking quinine the whole
day long, and was glad when in the evening we reached Sulléri, where, to
my astonishment, we were this time exceedingly well received. The mayor
of the place would not allow me to start the following day, although my
camels were already laden, and a beautiful fine morning invited us to
travel. After a good deal of resistance I at length gave way to his
entreaties, under the condition that he would construct for me a cool
shed wherein to spend the heat of the day; and in twenty minutes a lofty
hall had risen from the earth. Thus I spent the day very comfortably;
and although I was unable to alleviate the pains suffered by my host
from an arrow-wound in one of his eyes, or to give him a charm to
prevent the death of his cattle, I was so fortunate as to effect a
splendid cure on one of his sons, which procured me great fame.

[Sidenote: Saturday, June 29th.]

On leaving Sulléri in the morning, we took a different route from that
previously traversed, and which proved infinitely more interesting,
although in the morning, after we had passed a small farm-village where
all the field-labourers were at work, we had to cross a very extensive
forest, and I became greatly exhausted. Having passed about noon several
villages, which proved to be all slave-villages with the exception of
one, which contained a lord’s mansion of neat appearance, suddenly the
character of the country changed entirely, and we came to a wide
depression or hollow, from one hundred to one hundred and twenty feet
deep, which, winding round on our left, formed a fine green vale,
bordered on the other side by a picturesque cone[140] rising abruptly,
and forming on the east side a wooded terrace, while on the west it
displayed a steep bare rocky flank of horizontal strata, and on this
side, after a small interruption, a low ridge attached to it encircling
the hollow on all sides.

[Illustration]

Having reached the south-eastern foot of the cone by a gradual ascent,
we obtained a view over the varied and rich scenery before us, a
luxuriant mass of vegetation broken at intervals by comfortable-looking
little hamlets, and bounded in the distance by a cone stretching out to
a great length. Having crossed a small watercourse, and wound along
between erratic blocks of granite, scattered about in wild disorder, and
interrupted, wherever the ground offered a small level, by rich crops of
grain, we reached the first hamlet of this most picturesque locality. It
is one of the chief seats of the Démsa, or rather comprises two distinct
villages, namely, Démsa-Póha and Démsa-Mésu.

It was indeed a most charming sight when we made our way along a broad
well-trodden path, surrounded on both sides by neatly-fenced clusters of
large huts, encompassed by waving corn and picturesque clusters of
trees. Thus we reached the “lamórde,” the residence of the governor,
which is situated at a short distance from the southern foot of the
large granitic cone; but he was absent, having gone on an expedition
against the Fúri, an independent pagan tribe in the neighbourhood, and
we had to wait some time before his servants undertook to assign us
quarters, when we had to retrace our steps to the southern part of the
village. It was half-past four in the afternoon when, feverish and
extremely weak as I was, I at length found rest; but while reclining at
full length in a cool shade, I listened with delight to Ibrahíma’s chat,
who, in order to cheer my spirits, gave me an account of that famous
expedition to the far south which the Fúlbe of Ádamáwa undertook a few
years ago, and to which I have already alluded.

This memorable campaign having proceeded from Búbanjídda, none of the
people of Ádamáwa, whose acquaintance I was able to make during my short
stay in the country, had participated in it, so that all the accounts
which I received of it were extremely vague. The expedition, after a
march of almost two months, is said to have reached an unbounded expanse
of unbroken plain, and, having kept along it for a day or two, to have
arrived at an immense tree, in the shade of which the whole host found
sufficient room. Here they found two natives of the southern regions,
who informed them that they were the subjects of a powerful queen that
resided in a vast town of two days’ march in circumference. These
people, they say, were of short stature, and wore long beards.
Frightened by these reports, and by the waterless tract before them, the
expedition retraced their steps. Similar reports with regard to a very
powerful female sovereign towards the south are also current in Bagírmi
and all the adjacent country; but I am not able to determine whether
they originate in faint rumours, spread so far north, of the powerful
kingdom of Muata-ya-Nvo, or—of Queen Victoria.

To my great satisfaction, we were obliged to stay here the next day, in
order to await the arrival of the lámido, when, feeling greatly
recruited by a good night’s and half a day’s rest, I crept out of my
well-polished round little clay hut in the afternoon, and, crossing the
neatly-fenced promenade of the straggling village, ascended a
neighbouring eminence formed by an irregular mass of granite blocks, to
the north of our quarters. Here I spent two delicious hours in the
tranquil contemplation of the picturesque scenery, which I thought the
most interesting I had yet seen in this quarter of the world. The
accompanying view presents but a very faint idea of its peculiar
features; but I hope it will give the reader some conception of the
nature of this country in general, which enables the pagan natives
between this district and Hamárruwa to defend their liberty and
independence against the Mohammedan intruders. These tribes are, after
the Démsa, who seem to form a tolerably numerous body, first, the Mbulá,
probably the same who have given their name to the place situated at
some distance from Mount Míndif, and mentioned above; then, further
west, or north-west, the Báchama, and still further west the Tángalé,
with both of whom Mr. Vogel, on his recent journey from Yákuba to
Hamárruwa, has come in contact.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

DEMSA-PÓHA.

July 1st. 1851.]

[Sidenote: Tuesday, July 1st.]

We made a short but highly interesting march to the place of our old
friend the mʿallem Delíl. The scenery was rich and beautiful, the crops
of Guinea corn standing from four to five feet high, alternating with
fields where góza, a kind of yams, were grown, and adorned with fine
spreading trees, amongst which the tármu and the kúka or monkey-bread
tree predominated; even the rocky eminences were all overgrown with
fresh vegetation. We then passed a sort of shallow river, or sél, which
is called by the Kanúri “ngáljam,” and forms a characteristic feature of
Démsa, while on our right it expanded to a conspicuous sheet of water,
bordered by blocks and masses of rocks full of vegetation. It was
overgrown with rank reed at the spot where we crossed it.

Only a few minutes beyond this almost stagnant water on green meadow-
land, we crossed the broad and clear torrent of the máyo Tíyel, rushing
ahead over a gravelly bottom, and at times rolling along a considerable
quantity of water. According to my guides, it is formed by three
branches, one issuing from Báses towards the N.E., the other coming from
the neighbourhood of Bélem, and the third from the N.W., from Bíngel.
Only a few hundred yards further on, we passed on our left another broad
sheet of water, apparently of great depth, which is said to preserve the
same level at all times of the year. It is full of crocodiles, and
bordered by the richest vegetation, and, being apparently quite
isolated, has a very curious appearance. Perhaps it is fed by
subterranean sources. It is surrounded by beautiful pasture-grounds.

We then traversed a fine open country, passing some villages, while the
road was enlivened by a troop of travellers (colonists from Bórnu),
among whom there were some remarkably handsome women mounted on
bullocks, who bore sufficient testimony to the fact that the more
elevated districts of Ádamáwa are salubrious and favourable for man. We
reached Bélem at about two o’clock; but before we arrived there a
circumstance happened which I must not omit to mention, as it is rather
characteristic: for suddenly two of Mohammed Lowel’s servants appeared
with the horse which Bíllama had sold to the governor for the price of
twenty slaves, returning it under some pretext, but in reality for no
other reason than because he was afraid lest it might operate by way of
charm, and injure him. Bíllama was to have received the slaves in the
towns still before us.

We stayed in Bélem this day and the following; and I was pestered a
little by the family of old Mʿallem Delíl, but particularly by his
daughter, rather a handsome person, who had been divorced from her
former husband (I think Mansúr, the younger brother of Mohammed Lowel),
and wanted me by all means to write her a charm to get her another
husband after her heart’s desire. She was a very passionate sort of
woman, and when smelling, against my wish, from my phial of hartshorn,
was seized with such violent convulsions, that she was carried senseless
out of my tent, and remained in this state for nearly an hour. The stay
here was the more disagreeable to me as it was caused partly by the
trading propensities of my servant Bú-Sʿad; and not only did he buy
ivory, which he had the insolence to add to the loads of my weak camels,
but even three slaves, so that I was obliged to dismiss him instantly
from my service, although I had nothing wherewith to pay him off. It is
extremely difficult for a single European to proceed in these countries
with hired servants, as he loses all control over them. This man, who
had been the late Mr. Richardson’s servant as well as mine, turned out
like Mukni, Mr. Richardson’s interpreter, a great slave-dealer, and in
1855, when I was leaving Central Africa, collected a numerous gang of
slaves in this very country, which he had before visited as my servant.

[Sidenote: Thursday, July 3rd.]

We at length resumed our journey, but only to reach Saráwu Beréberé,
where we took up our quarters in the comfortable courtyard which I have
described on our outward journey. I will only record the pleasing fact,
that as soon as the news spread in the town of my having returned, a man
whom I had cured of disease during my former stay brought me a handsome
gazelle-skin as an acknowledgment.

The next day we followed our ancient road by Badaníjo, and reached
Segéro; but on Saturday, after having passed Mbutúdi without any other
delay than that of buying with beads a little milk from our Fúlbe
friends, we took a more easterly path, which brought us to Múglebú, a
village which exhibited to us an interesting picture of the exuberance
that reigns in these regions at this time of the year. The huts were
scarcely visible, on account of the rich crops of grain which surrounded
them on all sides, while _Palma Christi_ formed thick clusters of
bushes, and a few specimens of a remarkable tree which I had never
observed before, besides isolated bananas, rose above the rich mass of
vegetation, and gave to the whole the charm of novelty; but the weather
was so wet that I could make but a very slight sketch, and was wholly
prevented from rambling about, the rain continuing the whole of the
afternoon. Besides, all my energy was required to assist my three
servants, who were all severely ill; and while I administered to two of
them emetics, I had to soothe ʿAbd-Allah with a dose of laudanum. It was
very fortunate indeed that I myself felt a little better. In short, our
stay here was anything but agreeable, and I was worried by several
people with demands which exceeded my power—such as, to drive out
devils, relieve impotency, and so on; but the mayor sent me a goat,
fowls, milk, and a little butter. The village, which consisted of about
two hundred huts, seemed to be in good circumstances.

[Illustration: Drawn by J. M. Bernatz, from a Sketch by Dr. Barth.

M. & N. Hanhart, lith. et impt.

MÚGLEBU.

July 7th. 1851.]

[Sidenote: Sunday, July 6th.]

When we started, at a tolerably early hour in the morning, the weather
was clear and favourable; but after we had crossed the little mountain-
chain which surrounds the village of Múglebú at some distance to the
east and north, and reached a small hamlet presenting signs of very
careful cultivation, and numerous herds of cattle, we were drenched by a
heavy shower. It is generally supposed that storms in the tropical
climes break forth in the afternoon, or in the course of the night—and
this certainly is the general rule; but if there has been a storm the
day before, or during the night, and the weather has not cleared up,
there can be no certainty that it will not come on again in the course
of the morning. It is rather a rare phenomenon in these regions for a
storm to gather in the morning on a clear sky; but nevertheless the
reader will find several examples even of this in my meteorological
tables.[141] The natives are not at all insensible to rain; and while
the Kánembú[142] who had attached themselves to our caravan in Badaníjo
were protecting their persons with their light wooden shields, the
natives of the country collected thick bushes, and formed a sort of
natural umbrella over their heads. To protect the head at least from wet
is most essential in these climes. On another occasion, when I come to
speak about the prevailing kinds of disease, I shall have to mention how
dreadfully the Fúlbe sometimes suffer from the maladies of the rainy
season, when employed on their warlike expeditions.

Early in the morning we reached Múfi or Múbi, but were received so
inhospitably that we had great difficulty in obtaining quarters, for
which we were obliged to keep fighting the whole day, as a quarrelsome
mʿallem wished to dislodge me from the hut of which I had taken
possession. Fortunately his better half bore the inconvenience with more
equanimity; and I put up cheerfully with the little trouble which she
gave me from time to time by calling at the door and begging me to hand
to her some little articles of her simple household furniture. My three
people were so sick that they lay like so many corpses on the ground;
and their condition prevented us from setting out even the following
day, notwithstanding the inhospitable manner in which we were treated
here, so that I had ample leisure to study minutely the architecture of
my residence, of which I here subjoin a ground-plan.

[Illustration]

The hut, measuring about twelve feet in diameter, was built in the
manner most usual in these regions—namely, of clay walls, with a
thatched roof. The door, a little elevated above the floor, was three
feet high, and fifteen inches wide, and not at all adapted for very
stout persons. From the wall at the right of the door (_a_) ran another
wall, “gáruwel súdo,” of the same height, but unconnected with the roof,
right across the hut in an oblique line, to the length of about six
feet, separating one part of the dwelling, and securing to it more
privacy. In this compartment was the bed (_c_), consisting of a frame
made of branches, and spread over pilasters of clay about three feet
high. In the most sequestered part of the hut, in the corner formed by
the round inclosing wall and the oblique one, at the top of the
bed—“kéla kagá,” as the Kanúri say—stood the corn-urn (_d_), about six
feet high, and in its largest part two feet wide, destined to keep a
certain provision of corn always at hand; besides this, there was a
smaller one (_f e_) at the foot of the bed—“shí kagá.” At the side of
this smaller urn were two small pedestals of clay (_g_), serving the
purpose of a sideboard, in order to place upon them pots or other
articles. Then followed the kitchen, “defforíde” (_h_), still under
cover of the oblique wall, but exactly on a line with it, so that the
smoke might more easily find its way through the door, and consisting of
a narrow place inclosed on each side by a low wall, to protect the fire,
between which three stones, or rather small clay mounds like fire-
bricks, supported the cooking-pot, while a small wooden footstool (_i_)
accommodated the industrious landlady when busy with her most important
culinary employment. While to all this part of the hut a certain degree
of privacy was secured by the oblique wall, a considerable space to the
left of the door remained unprotected; and here stood the large water-
urn (_f_), which, always remaining in its place, is filled by means of
smaller portable urns or pitchers.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: Tuesday, July 8th.]

It seemed almost as if we were destined to stay another day in this
place; for just when we were about to start, a most violent shower came
down, and lasted full two hours. When at length we were able to set out
on our road to Úba, it was excessively wet, the streams greatly swollen,
and the weather still anything but bright and clear. At Úba, again, we
remained much longer than I wished. In the evening, after our arrival,
the governor went on an expedition against the Kílba-Gáya. Falling
suddenly upon the poor pagans at early dawn, he captured a good many
slaves; but the persecuted natives rallied, and, taking advantage of a
defile through which he had to pass on his return to his residence,
suddenly attacked him, and succeeded in rescuing all their countrymen
from the hands of their relentless enemies.

During my absence the corn had almost ripened; and the fields afforded a
spectacle of the utmost exuberance. Almost all the grain here is
sorghum, and mostly of the white kind; the average height of the stalks
was from nine to ten feet. The whole area of the town was clothed in the
richest vegetation, of great variety, where a botanist might have made a
numerous collection.

[Sidenote: Thursday, July 10th.]

Ibrahíma, the principal of the two men whom Mohammed Lowel had appointed
to escort me to the frontier of his province, accompanied me a short
distance when we left Úba. This man, who, perhaps because he was not
well treated in Kúkawa, behaved rather sullenly on our journey to
Ádamáwa, had become infinitely more amiable after the governor of that
country had sent me back. He not only manifested on every occasion his
heart-felt sorrow on account of my having been disappointed in the
expectation of travelling over that interesting country in every
direction, but he still more lamented that his countrymen had been
deprived, by the imprudence of their ruler, of the advantage of my
presence in the country. I have had occasion to observe repeatedly, that
there is a great deal of republican spirit in the Fúlbe, and that they
have in general the air and manners of freeborn men, though I shall have
to dwell upon the deterioration of this original character in the case
of the inhabitants of Sókoto.

The commencement of our march through the unsafe and infested boundary-
district from Úba northward was not very auspicious; and I was almost
afraid lest, after having been allowed to reach the frontier unmolested,
we were doomed to some insidious treachery in these lawless lands. The
original arrangement was, that some other people should succeed to
Ibrahíma, in order to see me safe to Íssege; but they never made their
appearance, and we had scarcely parted from Ibrahíma when all sorts of
alarms frightened and disturbed our little band. First a dreadful noise
was heard from above the rocks at the foot of which lay our road; but it
was found to proceed only from a countless multitude of birds of prey
enjoying their liberty in noisy mirth. Then, when we reached the fields
of corn within this rocky passage, which on our outward journey we had
seen under cultivation, we were prevented by armed men from passing
through them, and were obliged to make a long circuit. A little further
on, people came running after us, and attempted to take away by force
two of the slaves whom some of our companions were leading along; and
when resisted, they raised a dismal cry for help, which was heard
resounding to a great distance through the wild country. Serious
quarrels seemed imminent; but fortunately no one came to their
assistance.

About thirty travellers, all of them armed either with spears or with
bows and arrows, had attached themselves to our troop. I got ready all
my cartridges; and we were well on our guard. We had advanced about five
miles from Úba, and were in the middle of the forest, when a more
serious alarm arose, several people being seen lurking among the
trees,—an unmistakable proof that they meditated an attack, if we should
exhibit any signs of weakness. We therefore rallied a moment, and formed
in front, the most sturdy of our spearmen gathering round me, and
begging me to take steady aim when they should point out to me the chief
men. But the natives, belonging most probably to the tribe of the Báza,
who always infest this road, seeing that we were prepared to receive
them, did not dare to quit their ambush; and having continued awhile
along the path, we thought it wiser to leave it, and struck off to the
west into the thickest covert of the wood, where the camels with their
luggage had some difficulty in passing through, especially as the soil
was cracked and rent in all directions. Having trudged on in this way
for about two hours, and feeling sure that we were not pursued, we
returned to the path, but left it again about noon, and, pursuing
another track, reached Laháula, a village of unlucky memory, on the
western side. But this time we were well received, not only by ʿAisha,
but also by his wild and passionate son, who became a great friend of
mine, and, having received from me a present of a knife, brought me
three fowls in return, while his father sent túwo for all my people. I
sketched the danísko, or hand-bill, of my friend, which was of a
peculiarly regular shape.

[Illustration]

[Sidenote: Friday, July 11th.]

On leaving Laháula in the morning, we again preferred the covert to the
beaten path; but after we had gone round Kófa, which Bíllama thought it
better to avoid, we returned to our well-known road parallel to the
river and the mountain-chain beyond, and reached Íssege without any
accident, early in the afternoon. There, too, my reception was very
different from that which I had experienced on my going; and I was
received with the utmost kindness and hospitality into the house of a
wealthy family at the northern end of the village, and quartered in a
neat little hut, the walls of which consisted of thatch, like the roof,
but were plastered over with clay. The little hut, which scarcely
measured seven feet in diameter, contained two couches, one raised above
the ground to the right, and the other on the level of the ground on the
left of the entrance. Three spears, a common shield, and a large shield
called “chággo” by the Marghí, “kutufáni” by the Kanúri, consisting of a
thick texture of reed, and big enough to protect two or three persons, a
basket and a net, “úturu,” hanging from the roof, formed the furniture
of this little dwelling, which was the apartment of the youngest son of
the family, a fine, tall, and slender young man, with a very pleasant
expression of countenance. Except that he wore the “funó,” a small
leather apron, round his waist, he was quite naked, but loaded with
coquettish ornaments. Round his neck he wore a double string of red
beads, a little lower another set of three strings of corals, and still
lower again a set of two strings of iron beads; on his left shoulder he
wore four broad iron rings, or “kégelá;” on his elbow two other narrow
iron rings (barachággo) very neatly worked like beads; on his wrist six
narrow and one broad iron ring, or “únzo,” and above them an ivory ring,
or “yécho.” The right arm was not so richly endowed with ornaments,
having only four iron rings at the upper part, and two on the wrist.
Below his knee he wore a chain of cotton very neatly twisted—this is
called “shishídderi,”[143]—and on his foot-joint a narrow iron ring
called “míltedo.” However, I observed afterwards that this young man did
not wear all the national ornaments of his tribe; for I saw others who
wore in addition an iron chain round their loins, which is called
“shushú.” All these iron articles are very neatly made by the people of
Wándalá, Morá being only two days’ march from this; and I only regret
that I was not able to bring some of these articles home as specimens of
the industry of the natives, as well as of the excellent quality of iron
which they possess. This young man did not wear the “sér,” as they call
it, a small reed or feather in the left ear.

I delighted my youthful host by the present of a mirror; and I gave a
knife to his father, when he returned from the labour of the field. My
little hut was not without a crowd of visitors the whole of the
afternoon, all the friends of my host coming to see me. They were
admitted in a regular way, five at a time, and behaved very decently,
while they admired the few curious things which I had to show them. I
was greatly amused by the simplicity of my young host and one of his
brothers, who, when I presented them with small bits of sugar, gradually
nibbled them away, and at the same time compared their size continually,
till they were reduced to very diminutive morsels, when they agreed
between them to give the remnants to a sister.

The language of these people, which, as I have stated, is intimately
related to that of the Bátta, seems to show that they belong rather to
the family of South African tribes, than to the group of neighbouring
tribes of Central Negroland.

We had plenty of good fare in the evening, the Bórnu titular mayor of
the place sending me a sheep, besides corn for the horses, and our hosts
preparing a fowl for myself, and several dishes of hasty-pudding, with
fish-sauce, for my people. The evening being clear, and illuminated by
splendid moonlight, I sat a long time outside—perhaps too long, in my
precarious state of health—enjoying the sound of music and dancing which
came from the opposite quarter of the village; but I was not a little
astonished when I heard from my young friend, whom I asked why he did
not go to join in the merriment, that it was not an ordinary amusement,
but a religious dance to celebrate the death of an old man: for if a
person in old age dies, his death is deemed a cause of satisfaction and
mirth, while that of a young one is lamented with tears.

I have already noticed some peculiar customs of the Marghí; but I must
say a few words about their curious ordeal on the holy granite rock of
Kóbshi. When two are litigating about a matter, each of them takes a
cock which he thinks the best for fighting; and they go together to
Kóbshi. Having arrived at the holy rock, they set their birds
a-fighting, and he whose cock prevails in the combat is also the winner
in the point of litigation. But more than that, the master of the
defeated cock is punished by the divinity, whose anger he has thus
provoked; and on returning to his village he finds his hut in flames.

It is evident that this tribe, as well as many of the neighbouring ones,
venerate their forefathers, in which respect they closely resemble the
South African tribes, although the Berbers also seem originally to have
had this sort of worship as well as the Háusa people. The Marghí do not
practise circumcision; but, what seems very remarkable, they practise
inoculation for the small pox, at least to a considerable extent.

As I was sitting outside the courtyard, by degrees a great many natives
collected round me, when a young man took me aside and entreated me
earnestly to give him a remedy against the dislike of people. I,
however, soon succeeded in making him confess that he meant only the
dislike of one girl, who, he said, did not relish his haughty demeanour,
and that he was reduced to a state of desperation, and wished for
nothing but to die in battle. This example shows that even these simple
people have some sentiment of love.

[Sidenote: Saturday, July 12th.]

I had some difficulty in persuading Bíllama to leave this hospitable
place; but I was ashamed to cause these good people, who had been robbed
and despoiled a short time ago by Kashélla ʿAlí, any more trouble. We
took a more easterly path than that by which we had travelled before,
but nearly of the same character—full of holes and crevices, and covered
with thick forest, while the nutritive root “katakírri” employed the
several members of our caravan continually, particularly a Púllo pilgrim
from the far west near the coast, who was indefatigable in digging as
well as in eating. We had only proceeded a few miles when we met a troop
of Marghí, who were going to perform a sacrifice in the holy grove of
Íssege, one of them carrying a sheep and another a fowl. One of them had
ornamented his shield with red lines, which on the black ground of the
elephant’s hide were quite becoming; but I do not think that this custom
is general: perhaps it had some connection with the sacrifice.

[Illustration]

After a march of eight hours, we reached the first cluster of huts of
the Northern Molghoy, where we wished to find quarters; but the
unfortunate people, by the recent exactions and contributions levied on
them by the Kanúri, were driven to a state of despair, and obstinately
refused to receive us. There remained, therefore, no alternative but to
continue our march, and to try to reach Yerímarí; but the effort was too
much for me, and had the worst consequences in my reduced state of
health. I was for some time quite senseless when, after a ride of
thirteen hours, I succeeded in reaching the well-known place, and threw
myself flat upon the ground of my little hut. Scarcely had my luggage
arrived, when a storm, which the whole afternoon had been hanging over
our heads, broke forth, and continued till midnight with unabated
violence.

Man as well as beast was so exhausted that we remained here the
following day, when I felt strength enough to walk out a little into the
fields. There was an extraordinary difference between the advanced state
in which I had left the crops in Ádamáwa and that in which I found them
here. The reader will remember that the fields round this place were
just being sown on the day of my leaving it; and during the time of my
absence rain must have been rather scanty, so that the crops were
scarcely twenty inches above the ground. In the afternoon, Bíllama, who
was always obliging, gave me some information with regard to the
adjacent country, which I shall here insert in a note[144], though it is
not so clear as might be desired.

[Sidenote: Monday, July 14th.]

We continued our march, and, with a halt during the hot hours, reached
Ujé Kasúkulá in the evening. The aspect of the country offered
unmistakable proof of our advance northwards. Even the grass here was
barely an inch or two above the ground; the crops, where most advanced,
were ten or twelve inches high, while other fields were still covered
with the tunfáfia, or _Asclepias gigantea_,—a sure proof that they had
not yet been brought under cultivation. We passed a good many cotton-
fields. I reached the place in a state of the utmost exhaustion, and was
obliged to stay here three days to recruit my strength, taking hardly
any food but quinine, and placing a plaster of cantharides on my chest.
The governor of the place, Kashélla ʿAlí Aláwó, treated my party very
hospitably and kindly, and showed sincere compassion for my feeble
condition. I learnt from him, to my great satisfaction, that Mr. Overweg
had really embarked in the boat on the Tsád, and was gone to the
Búdduma.

[Sidenote: Friday, July 18th.]

At length we set out again; but though I felt a little better, I was
glad when, after a short march of three hours through a very pleasant
and populous country, we took up our quarters in a place called Gúlfo, a
great proportion of the inhabitants of which are Shúwa. Having passed
the hot hours in a spacious and cool hut, I enjoyed for a while the
freshness of the evening outside, in my courtyard, delighted at the same
time by the sight of the herds of cattle returning from their pastures.
Shortly before we reached Gúlfo we had passed a village entirely
inhabited by Shúwa, and even called Shúwarám.

Though we had now reached the monotonous alluvial plains of Bórnu
Proper, yet the following day’s march in the company of my friend
Bíllama, who, after we had become better acquainted, was anxious to
gratify my desire for information in every respect, was highly
interesting. Although the vegetation was very poor in comparison with
that of the more southern districts, yet there was plenty of underwood,
and we observed the small bush called “kúmkum,” the berries of which
taste very like coffee, and which in reality may be a kind of _Coffea_.
On our right we left a path leading by Yámaké, Tangállanda, and Kirbáje,
to Kabé-Ngáwa, a place famous on account of its neighbourhood affording
the “fógo”—wood from which the shields (ngáwa) of the Kánembú are made:
it lies on the road to Díkowa, passing by a place called Ájowa. The
spears of the natives (kasékka) are made from the root of the kindíl or
talha, but the javelin (béllam) from that of the kúrna; the shafts of
arrows are made from the “kabílla”-bush, which hereabouts grows in great
abundance. Cultivated and pasture-ground alternately succeeded each
other, and I was astonished to see that the produce of this district was
exclusively argúm móro, or _Pennisetum_, while ngáberi, or _Holcus
sorghum_, is a much more general grain in Bórnu, with the exception of
the country of the Koyám. A little before eleven o’clock we finished our
day’s march in a small village called Múnghono-Mabé, where I took
possession of a large hut constructed in the peculiar style of the
Shúwa, the roof being of an oval shape, without the characteristic top
or head the “kogí ngímbe,” and supported by a pole, “dúngulis,” in the
middle of the hut, while the thatch is made in a very irregular and
hasty manner, the compactness of wickerwork being insufficiently
supplied by a heap of reeds thrown upon the roof and fastened with
ropes.

[Sidenote: Sunday, July 20th.]

I felt much better; and after a beautiful moonlight night, we started
earlier than usual, “dúnia kéte.” The morning was very fine; but the sun
soon became rather powerful and troublesome. We passed a considerable
pool of stagnant water surrounded by fine trees, tamarinds and
sycamores, such as in this district, where stunted mimosas form the
predominant feature of the vegetation, are only seen in very favoured
spots; it is called “kulúgu Hámtigu.” On the path itself also, deeply
cut as it was in the sandy soil, there was a good deal of water. We
passed the site of a large town named Dóngo, which had been destroyed by
the Fúlbe or Felláta some forty years ago, but of which the
circumference of the wall was still visible, the gate being marked by a
colossal monkey-bread tree or _Adansonia_, the constant follower of
human society, spreading its gigantic branches out like an immense
candelabrum. Bíllama brought me the berries of a bush called “búlte,”
the taste of which was very much like currants; and further on he
presented me with a “fitó,” a red fruit looking exactly like red pepper,
with numbers of small kernels, and of a somewhat acidulous taste.

We rested a little more than three hours, during the heat of the day,
near a pond of stagnant water, in a district rich in pastures, where,
among numerous herds of the Shúwa, the cattle of Háj Beshír were also
grazing. But the ground hereabouts seemed to be nothing but one
continuous world of ants, which did not allow us a moment’s undisturbed
repose, and even during our short stay they made several successful
attacks not only upon part of our luggage, but even of my dress.

When we set out again, at an early hour in the afternoon, numerous pools
of water along the road testified to the presence of the rainy season;
and the village Máska, which we passed soon afterwards, was surrounded
with corn and cotton-fields as well as by rich green pasture-grounds.
The path was well frequented. We met first a horseman of the sheikh sent
as a messenger to Ujé, with the order to call in the numerous horse of
that district; and Bíllama was of opinion that his master had thoughts
of arranging the affairs of Khadéja. Further on we met a troop of Shúwa
women, who, in a mournful song, lamented the death of one of their
companions. They passed us too rapidly to allow the words of their song
to be distinctly heard.

The country on our left, and that on our right, showed a remarkable
contrast; for while, on our left, corn-fields, fine pasture-grounds, and
villages succeeded each other, on the right an immense ghadír, or fírki,
still dry, and only sparingly covered here and there with a little
coarse herbage, stretched out to an immeasurable distance. At an early
hour in the afternoon, deviating a little from the path, we turned into
the village of Káliluwá Grémarí, which belongs to ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, the
second brother of Sheikh ʿOmár, and found the male inhabitants of the
village sitting in the shade of a chédia or caoutchouc-tree, busily
employed in making wickerwork. However, they proved too clearly that we
had entered the inhospitable zone in the neighbourhood of the capital;
observing, with great coolness, that the sun was as yet high, and would
enable us still to make a good march to some other place, they would
hear nothing of our quartering in their village. But Bíllama was not the
man to be laughed at; and, riding through the midst of them, he took
possession for me of one of the best huts. I could not, in truth,
approve of this despotical mode of dealing; but I was too weak to run
the risk of spending a night in my tent on the damp ground. The
villagers seemed to be drained to the utmost by their gracious lord, and
did not possess a single cow; even fowls were scarcely to be seen.

In the evening I was greatly amused, at first, by the noisy hum of a
“mákaranchí,” or school, close to my hut, where, round a large fire,
some six or seven boys were repeating, at the highest pitch of their
voices, and with utter disregard of the sense, a few verses of the
Kurán, which in the daytime they had been taught to read by their
master, who, doubtless, understood them as little as the boys
themselves; but by degrees the noise became almost insupportable. It is
generally thought in Europe, that a schoolboy is too much tormented; but
these poor African boys, for the little they learn, are worried still
more—at least, I have often found them in the cold season, and with
scarcely a rag of a shirt on, sitting round a miserable fire as early as
four o’clock in the morning, learning their lessons. Besides, they have
to perform all sorts of menial service for the master, and are often
treated no better than slaves.

[Sidenote: Monday, July 21st.]

The country which we passed in the morning presented more pasture-
grounds than cultivated lands; and after a little while I turned, with
my companion, out of our path, to the left, towards a small encampment
or “berí Shúwabe” of the Kohálemí, a Shúwa or Arab tribe, where, for
three large beads, called “nejúm,” we bought a little fresh milk. On
this occasion I learned from Bíllama, that the Shúwa or native Arabs
settled in the district of Ujé belong to the tribe of the Sáraji, while
the Sugúla and the Sálamát have their camping-grounds further east.

The country became rather dreary, black “fírki”-ground and sandy soil
alternately succeeding each other; and traffic there was none. But when
we reached the well of Maira, a considerable place which we passed on
our left hand, the path became animated from an interesting cause, a
whole village or “berí” of wandering Arabs passing through in search of
fresh pasture-grounds to the west. Each mistress of a family was sitting
on the top of her best household furniture, which was carefully packed
on the backs of the cattle, and covered with hides, while a female slave
followed her, sitting astride on the less valuable gear and the poles
with pots and other such utensils; but, distinguished above all by the
harness of her bullock, the neat arrangement of her seat, a leather
tent-like covering over her head, and the stoutness of her own person,
sat the wife of the chief. Most of these women, however, were rather
slender than otherwise, testifying to the sound and well-preserved
national taste of these Arabs. They never veil the face, and their dress
is simple and decent; but they are not nearly so tidy as the Fulfúlde
ladies. Most of the men followed at a great distance with the flocks of
goats and sheep.

When this interesting procession had passed by, the monotony of the
country was more intensely felt. The proud Kanúri of the towns mock the
inhabitants of these districts, who have nothing but a few cattle and
goats, with the verse: “Sémma bíllani—berí kaní” (“This is the whole of
my town—cattle and goats;” or, in other words, “The town and moat, two
cows and a goat”). The poor stunted mimosas had been cut down in many
places, in order that the whole tract being changed into a quagmire or
swamp, it might be sown with the peculiar kind of holcus called
“másakwá” (_Holcus cernuus_); and then these black, dismal-looking
plains become one field of life and wealth. This remarkable change in
the aspect of the country, and this second harvest, which takes place in
the middle of the cold season, and by which the fírki, or fírgi, becomes
a fírgi mosogábe (másakwábe), I shall have to describe in another place.

We then entered a well-cultivated and thickly-inhabited district called
Yelé, where it was a novelty to be obliged to draw water from the well
or barrem Yelé; for since reaching Ujé on our journey out we had
constantly met waterpools or small rivulets, from which we took our
supply, and even the well at Maira was rendered quite superfluous by a
large tank close by. However, I have already had occasion to observe
that the water from these stagnant pools is anything but wholesome,
particularly after the rainy season, when they receive no further
supply; and I have no doubt that the drinking of such water is the
principal, if not the only cause of that dreadful and wide-spread
disease (the “fárantít” or “ʿarúg”—“ngíduwí” in Kanúri—“the misery”)
which disables the working man, and makes him a poor wretched being—the
guineaworm, which is sure to be met with in at least one out of three
persons who travel a great deal, through the whole of Central Africa. I
never met with an instance of this disease in a woman. It seemed to me,
too, as if the pagans, whose nakedness exposed all their limbs to view,
suffered less from it.

There seemed to be no superfluous supply of water in the district
through which our road then lay, which appeared as dry as I had left it,
only thinly scattered and lonely blades of grass shooting up here and
there; but yet there was a favoured spot where the road from Márte to
Alárge crossed our path, adorned with fine, wide-spreading tamarind-
trees, and rain-clouds were approaching from the east to fertilize the
soil, and make it capable of production. We therefore hurried on, and
took shelter in the village Mʿallem-Shíshi, in order to let the storm
pass over; our hut, however, was so incapable of resisting heavy rain,
that as soon as the storm broke out we were almost swamped. The
carelessness with which the houses of the natives are built in this
region is an unmistakable evidence of the difference of the climate; on
the other side, we have seen the neat huts of the people of Fúmbiná, and
we shall see those of the despised pagan natives of Músgu. The people
assured me that this was the first regular rain which they had had this
year, the first preparatory shower having fallen thirty days ago, and
the second two days ago.

The clouds having taken a southerly direction, we started forth in the
afternoon, after some hesitation, but had scarcely been an hour on the
march, and were just in the middle of a wide dismal-looking ghadír or
fírki, when the clouds, having gathered again over our heads, poured
down violent torrents of rain, so that in a few moments the whole
country looked like a lake, and our progress was excessively difficult.
At length, after an hour and a half, in the most uncomfortable state we
reached the village Kiryúmmuwa, where I was quartered in a rather
magnificent but as yet unfinished hut of clay, and endeavoured to dry my
wet clothes as well as I could.

We were now only one day’s march from Kúkawa; and we started early the
next morning, in order to reach home before night. The neighbourhood of
the capital had been sufficiently indicated already during the last
day’s march by the dúm-bushes, which, with the melancholy _Asclepias
gigantea_, might well decorate the scutcheon of Kúkawa—with more
justice, indeed, than the kúka, or monkey-bread tree, from which the
name was taken, but of which but a few poor stunted specimens are to be
seen in the courtyard of the palace in the eastern town.

We had scarcely gone a mile when we met the first body of Shúwa, men and
women, who were returning with their unloaded pack-oxen from the great
Monday market of the capital; and then the string of market-people on
their way to their respective homes was almost uninterrupted. While our
people followed the road, Bíllama and I turned off a little to the left,
in order to pay a visit to the mayor of Múnghono and obtain a cool
drink; for since I had had the fever I suffered greatly from thirst, and
the water from the wells in general, as preserving a mean temperature of
about 80 degrees, was quite tepid. The place lies in an elevated
position; and on its south side there is a hollow, where wheat and
onions are cultivated after the rainy season, while another cavity
surrounding it on the north and east sides, and where at present only
small separate water-pools are collecting, forms, later in the season,
one continuous lake. There is a great deal of iron-stone, “kau súwa,”
hereabouts; and it is used by the native blacksmiths, though it affords
but an inferior sort of metal—far inferior to the excellent iron, the
“sú-búltu,” of Búbanjídda. While passing through the place, I was
greatly struck with the variety which the roofs of the huts exhibited,
and made a slight sketch of them.

[Illustration]

Múnghono, which is likewise the name of the whole district, has been a
place of importance from early times, and is often mentioned in the
history of the Bórnu kings. After the richness of natural forms which I
had beheld in Ádamáwa, the country seemed extremely monotonous, there
being nothing whatever to cheer the eye except the blossom of the
mimosas, which spread a sweet scent all around. We encamped during the
hot hours of the day near the well of Káine, where we had great
difficulty in supplying ourselves with water from the well, while a
little later in the season a large lake is formed here: for Africa is
the region of contrasts as well in nature as in human life.

When we set out again from this place, people from the town, who had
been informed of our approach, came to meet us; and I heard, to my great
satisfaction, that the crafty Arab Mohammed el Mughárbi, whom I had
already met in Gúmmel, had at length arrived with the merchandise
confided to his care, the nominal value of which was 100_l._ sterling,
so that there was at least some hope of being able to carry on the
mission on a small scale.

But I could not but feel pleased with my reception on returning to head
quarters in this part of the world; for when we approached the southern
gate of the town, three horsemen, who were stationed there, came
galloping up to me, and having saluted me with their spears raised,
placed themselves in front, and in stately procession led me through the
town to my house, where I was soon regaled with a plentiful supper sent
by the vizier. I afterwards perceived that he had expected me to pay him
my respects the same evening; but, as I felt very weak, I deferred the
visit till the next morning, when, on his return from an early visit to
the sheikh, he gave me an audience in the presence of all the people.
Having expressed his sorrow at my reduced state, and having inquired how
I had been received in Ádamáwa, he entered, with apparent delight, into
a long conversation with me respecting the form of the earth and the
whole system of the world. On being asked what I now intended to do, I
replied that it was my design, after having made the tour of the lake,
to try to penetrate into the regions south of Bagírmi. He immediately
expressed his doubts as to the possibility of going round the lake as
far as the Bahar el Ghazál, but promised to further my plans as far as
possible, although he thought that I had done enough already, and should
rather think of returning home safely with the results of my labours;
for seeing me so weak during the first rainy season which I was spending
in these regions, he was afraid that something might happen to me.

Well satisfied with this audience, I returned to my quarters and wrote a
short report to H.M.’s government, of the results of my journey,
informing them that my most deeply-cherished hopes with regard to that
river in the south had been surpassed, and requesting them to send an
expedition in order to verify its identity with the so-called Chadda.
This report, which was sent off by a courier a day or two before Mr.
Overweg’s return from his navigation of the lake, and which was
overtaken by a messenger with a short account of his survey, created
general satisfaction in Europe, and procured for me the confidence of
H.M.’s government. Meanwhile I endeavoured to arrange the pecuniary
affairs of the mission as well as I could.


[Footnote 140: In this sketch, made just at the moment, I aimed only at
giving the outlines of the mount, without any pretension to represent
the country around. The foreground, therefore, is left quite level.]

[Footnote 141: In Bombay the greatest fall of rain has been observed a
little before and after morning.—_Magnetical and Meteorological
Observations_, Bombay, 1853, Meteorological Results, p. 73.]

[Footnote 142: In my collection of itineraries traversing the country of
Ádamáwa I shall have occasion to mention several places where, besides
Kanúri, Kánembú also are settled.]

[Footnote 143: Perhaps this was a sign of mourning.]

[Footnote 144: About eight miles S.W. from this is a place called Bála,
originally belonging to the Marghí, but at present inhabited by Kanúri
people. Towards the east, at no great distance, is the town of Úzo,
belonging to that division of the Gámerghú whose chief resides in
Degímba; E.N.E., at the distance of two days, is the walled town of
Gáwa, the residence of the greater chief. A little N. of E., about
fifteen miles, is Úrka, or Wúrka. Álaba, one short day’s march, about
ten miles, S.E. from Úrka, is the easternmost town of the Gámerghú,
whose territory, however, extends in this direction as far as Mount
Dísa. In the immediate neighbourhood of Álaba is the small town of
Segágiyu. Eastward from Dísa is Mount Kírya; and east from this is Mount
Úla, or Wúla; one day beyond Wúla is the conspicuous Mount Deládebá. One
short day to the N. of Deládebá is Mount Wélle, at the northern foot of
which lies the large walled place of the name of Karáwá, the former
capital of Wándalá, already mentioned, as we shall see, by the historian
of the Bórnu king, Edrís Alawóma,—with two gates. To the N. of Karáwá,
and about six miles S. of Delhé, is Ajémmaja, or, as it is called by
others, Háj Ámaka, a place inhabited by Shúwa, or native Arabs, who
occupy all the country as far as Díkowa.]




                               APPENDIX.


                               APPENDIX.

                               * * * * *


                 I. — QUARTERS OF THE TOWN OF KÁTSENA.


Ambutéy, or Mbutéy, the oldest quarter; Tódo-málle[145], Bar-hemáwa,
Suafáwa, Rími-n-Sámbari, Darma, Túdduwa-Anábara, Tokáwa, Chidefáwa,
Rími-n-Gúlladu, Uché-albába, Mógoba alhándu, Tawátínke[146], Sófo-káswa,
Mesállachi-n-Káura, Dúrrima-n-tákelme (the shoemakers’ quarter), Ungwa
Debbósa, Kameyáwa, Shibdáwa, Dábera, Tafí da ráwa (“clapping hands and
dancing”—a very merry quarter, as it seems), Ungwa-n-baráye, Ungwa Dóka,
Sábbera, Mehédi, Ungwa Kúka, Chefenáwa, Lóloki-n-da-n-al barka, Ungwa
Saká, Ungwa da-n-alló (probably the schoolmasters’[147] quarter), Ya-
áura, Yansabóni, Dambo, Súnkurá, Ungwa Beréberé (the quarter of the
Bórnu people), Gamberáwa, Lóloki-n-ákochi, Barasáki, Rími-n-áferga,
Týdde Líffeda, Ungwa Sherifáwa, Limáwa, Chédia[148] Akánzem, Kófa
Túluwí, Gogári, Réri-n-wuári, Jagabánchi, Addemunáwa, Dodáwa, Kachúmbe,
Yankéwuré, Masanáwa, Muskáni, Cheferáwa, Lóloki-n-Kabáwa, Gafay, Ungwa
Chédia, Kokoyáwa, Jangwáki, Jangozáwa, Mesállachi-n-Góberáwa (the mosque
of the Góber people), Fáskari, Zázagau, Dúrrimi-n-sháuru[149],
Kontaráwa, Sakáwa, Kófa-n-Yándaka, Ungwa Köani, or Kwáni (probably the
quarter of the Köana or Kwána people), Dorówa, Sabberáwa, Jambíra,
Mákera-n-owó, Mákera-chínki, Daugaumu, Yagabánchi, Yarángway, Mʿallemi-
n-dáwa, Bokudáwa, Kantamáwa, Békuráwa, Bindáwa, Mareá, Ungwa Turáwa (the
quarter of the Arabs), Ungwa Sirdi (the saddlers’ quarter), Ungwa
Yatáwa, Jambaráwa, Yangozáwa, Jembiráwa (different from Jamberáwa),
Machíka, Samrí, Arbabejéri; then the quarters lying close to the
different gates of the town, and called after them the Kófa-n-Gúga, K.
Samrí, K. Dyrbi, K. Marúsa, K. Káura, K. Gazúbi, K. Kóya, K. Yéndaka.
Further, the quarters Lóloki-n-karí, Jembísa, Kátukam, Yanguzáli, Kógo,
Gulbí, Jínu, Kéyiba, Kuserúwa fodú (the four corners), Ínchide yáki,
Duggul, Amorébbi, Danróri, Dandínki, Turkáwa, Haski-n-káura, Sába-n-
báuri, Ungóllo or Ngóllo, Adyrjáwa, Ombuwamáy, Ansága, Jínu, Mbánau,
Aúra, Dansagí, Dánkashí, Bágada, Bowáy, Shénteli káramá, Shénteli babá,
Grássemí, Mágaji-Edíris, Gági, Mejébbamá, Máriná-dan-Gámmu, Jírayí-baba-
n-Háusa, Kammasáwa, Dansakáwu, Sakayáwa, Máriná dan máriná, Tokkumáwa,
Dambókulum, Marrakáda, Kokóchikó, Propporokáya, Barazakaña, Tebki-n-
chémi, Fari-n-yáro, Kádam baki-n-gulbí, Yawal-khawári, Baskoráye,
Kautáwa, Rúkum, Góngom, Daggabáwa, Kasáwa, Bagauzamáwa, Ilsáwa,
Chiserakáwa, Komming, Hannuzeráwa, Gulbáwa, Hanníni-básará, Moichi,
Rímaye-algári, Zambadáwa, Baskoráwa, Mariyadáwa. These are the names of
the larger quarters of the town; but there are still a good many smaller
ones.


              II.—CHIEF PLACES IN THE PROVINCE OF KÁTSENA.


The names of the principal places belonging to the province of Kátsena
are as follows:—On the west side of the capital: Jengéfi, Yangéro,
Búggaji, Baráwa, Kangwa, Kangwáji, Záuri, Kurfi or Kúrrefi, Sháfo,
Ráwani, Kúsa, Kómi, Atagaráwa, Kabakáwa, Sóri, Tsáni, Úruma, Úmmadáwu,
Kógo, Fáskari, Tsaskia, Sakka, Gunki, Runka, Takabáwa, Dyrrú, Guzoráwa,
Automáki, Motázu, Sayáya, Karófi, Géza, Raweó, Ganwa, Farí-n-rúa,
Kadándaní, Dóka, Máji, Sabóngarí, Yatáwa, Kadakáwa, Shibdáwa, Bindáwa,
Kamrí, Táma, Kusáda, Káfardá, Yakofáwa, Ingáwa or Ngáwa, Dorú, Jáni,
Dawané, Yáme, Duwáng, Kógadó, Ajiyáwa, Danyeám, Rinúnguzá, Kúragó,
Kaita, Sábi, Kurfúndu, Yandáki, Shinkáfi, Kotyi, Berda, Mókordá, Tunáni,
Bai, Kófi, Kúrtufá, Tsúntsuwa, Túrajó, Másabó, Lagéru, Kóddu, Kotta,
Mámmarú, Máni, Túwarú, Jéndodó, Dúchi-n-rága, Tamalláwa, Sandáwa,
Tábaní, Baréruwa, Goranzám. On the east side there are: Káya, Yáme
(different from that above mentioned), Dagésamú, Debbáwa, Máshi, Ílel-
ágalú, Ílel-labúkará, Mále-yabáni, Yoyo, Gárwa, Búkurú, Chille, Dankar,
Túna, Yéndaká, Rúma, Merédabáy; Musáwa, Dangáli, Tafáshia, Kurkojángo,
Dáyay, Sabó-n-bírni, Gángara, Seéya, Mahúta, Dándamay, Kúrremi,
Dantýtturu, Danjá, Húriyá, Maska, Gózeki, Dúya, Dárwa, Túdu, Shenéli,
Yangéme, Babélkazá, Daháukadá, Kuchéri, Kórumáwa, Machíka, Kiyéra,
Báskari, Zágami, Sakafárda, Keffi-n-deñi, Keffi Pokkwa, Keffi Sille;
Tsá, Kúndurú, Yashé; Garú-n-Señína, Karadúwa, Táku, Luggul, Kánkara dan
Jémmaka, Tótali, Farú, Zágani, Ónaka, Rúwafí, Ájejá, Sábberé, Gúnki,
Birki, Múnir, Táura, Dabáwa, Shéni, Ádemú. Towards Dáura there are:
Dantótoní, Dandáre, Beñe, Karófi, Mákera, Yentomáki, Dákkaruwé, Sheléri,
Samrí, Lámbisa, Tuddu, another Shéni, Dánkada, Fáskali, Koyéllo, bírni-
n-Gwári, Madódo, Kurríga.


  III.—CHIEF PLACES IN THE PROVINCE OF KANÓ, AND ROUTES DIVERGING FROM
       KANÓ IN VARIOUS DIRECTIONS, PRINCIPALLY TOWARDS THE SOUTH.


As for the province of Kanó, it comprises a very fertile district of
considerable extent, with the following walled towns: Yeríma, Gérki,
Zánkara, Yáfen, Ríngim, Dúshi, Géa, Gérko, Dell, Udíl, Táura, Kúra (a
place particularly famous for the beauty of its dyed cloth), Sákwa,
Bebéji, Rímangadó, Dawáki, Gódia, Bíshi, Gezáwa, Zákeré, Killi, Méjia,
Méga, Merké, Tákay, Sangáya (the place touched at by Clapperton), and
the governor’s two pleasure towns Gógem and Fánisó.

Besides these walled towns, the most considerable places of the province
are as follows: Ungógo, Dáwano, Zabenáwa, Gezé, Wóttarí, Góra, Mádobí,
Salánta, Ammágwa, Dádi-n-dúnia, Gabezáwa, Dóko, Kwínke-alla, Dangayáme,
Gurjáwa, Zongonkilli, Abegáni, Sákwa-n-Kumbóto, Zango, Gezí, Ráfi
mʿallem, Rími-n-Asbenáwa, Dawáki, Gunó, Ranó (the town mentioned in p.
72., as having formerly been the seat of a kingdom or principality by
itself), Ténneger, Kiyáwa, Kadwáwa, Takaláfia, Katákatá, Gazóbi (a
village consisting of scattered groups), Danzóshia, Gulú, Ganí,
Tamberáwa, Dáhasa, Gorzo, Karáye, Káfi-n-Agúr, Rukadáwa, Bóda, Taríva,
Fáki, Kokí, Dawáki-n-Dambámbara (properly Da-n-Bámbara), Katángeráwe,
Katánga-babá, Katánga-káramá, Katkázubá, Mʿallem, Kwíwa, Bunkóri (a
considerable market-place, with much cultivation of rice), Ya-n-kásari,
Tuddum Bíllané, Bacheráwa, Yamáta, Demé, Demé-n-da-n-karfi, Tunfáfi,
Kuddadefáwa, Zango-n-da-n-Áudu, Pagínkayi, Jájira, Fofá, Dangúgwa, Zango
Mala Áudu, Jelli, Mádachí, Mákodé, Konshi-n-gwárta, Yákasé, Yóla, and
others.

I will here add some of the chief routes connecting Kanó with the
principal places around, and which will best show its central situation.
As for the routes to Kúkawa, of which I forwarded an account to Europe
in 1851, I shall omit them, as I had myself repeatedly sufficient
occasion to become acquainted with this tract from my own observations.
The route by Khadéja has been united with my own route.

I first give the route from Kanó to Zínder, the north-westernmost place
of the empire of Bórnu, by way of Kazáure:—

1st day. Makóda, a large open place, consisting of cottages with clay
walls and thatched roofs. The country level and densely inhabited.
Arrive about the ʿaser.

2nd. Kazáure, residence of the governor Dámbo, formerly in direct
dependence upon Sókoto, but at present in a certain degree of
subordination to Kanó. The town is surrounded with a clay wall, and but
thinly inhabited. A market is held every Monday. The neighbourhood of
the town is rocky, and the country intervening between Kazáure and
Makóda thickly covered with wood, without cultivation or an inhabited
spot.

3rd. Mazánnia, a large place surrounded with a “kéffi” or stockade, said
to be larger than Tasáwa; but the government of the town is generally
divided, half of it belonging to Dáura, and the other half to Bórnu.

4th. Magáriyá, a large place with a kéffi, only about fifteen miles from
the former. The surrounding country all covered with forest.

5th. Zínder, about ʿaser. There are no villages on the road except near
Zínder.

I now add the road from Kazáure to Dáura, and from Dáura to Zínder.
Keeping in a north-westerly direction from Kazáure, you reach on the
first day, about ʿaser, Sándamu, an ancient town of considerable size,
but with few inhabitants, and enter, on the following day, the town of
Dáura, about two o’clock in the afternoon. The town of Dáura, which, as
I have observed (p. 72.), is one of the oldest, if not the very
oldest[150] settlement of the Háusa people; and here too the Islám seems
to have been introduced at an earlier date, certainly not later than its
introduction into Kátsena by the grandson of Maghíli, the missionary, as
is stated, having been a man from Baghdád, of the name of Mohammed ʿAlí,
who killed the dodó, or the old fetish lion. I have already mentioned
the magic well; and there are many other interesting traditions current
with regard to the older history of the place. Dáura is a large town,
surrounded with a strong clay wall in good repair, but is only thinly
inhabited, and the Thursday market is of no importance. It is the
capital of a province, and the residence of a governor dependent only on
the Emír el Múmenín, and would certainly have been visited by me in one
of my wanderings, if the governor, whose name is the same as that of the
governor of Kátsena (Mohammed Béllo), and whose character is much worse,
had not been notorious as an energetic and warlike, but unjust and
rapacious fellow, with whom it would be more difficult to deal than with
the highway robbers in the wilderness of Dánkama. But I recommend this
place strongly to the notice of future travellers, as a great many
native stories relate to it. It was once conquered by a prince of Múniyó
named Sóriyó. All the country around is at present a wilderness; and
there is very little cultivation.

Going from Dáura to Zínder in a N.N.E. direction, you sleep the first
night in Kúrni, or Kúrreni, a small village surrounded with a stockade,
being the frontier-place of the province of Dáura in this direction. It
is situated in the midst of the forest, and is distant from the capital
about six hours.

2nd day. Arrive at an early hour in the forenoon at Máshi, a small place
surrounded with a stockade, and belonging to Zínder. Every Wednesday a
market is held here.

3rd. About ʿaser arrive at Bakí, a large place surrounded with a
“kéffi.”

4th. Before noon arrive in Zínder. There are no villages on this road.

I now proceed to give the routes from Kanó towards the Bénuwé, which has
been called Tshádda or Chádda in its lower course, merely from mistake,
I think, while it has several other names. Záriya, or Zózó, the capital
of the province of Zegzeg, was visited by Clapperton on his second
journey; and its latitude can be laid down with certainty, its longitude
with approximate correctness.[151] From this place some important
routes, very frequently taken by native traders, and even sometimes by
enterprising Arabs, branch off towards the places in the vicinity of the
above-mentioned river. On the other hand, we have now, by Mr. Vogel’s
observations, the exact position of Yákoba, the capital of the province
Bolóboló, or Báuchi, and therefore generally called “Garú-n-Báuchi;” so
that the most important places between Kanó and the river can be laid
down with tolerable exactness. I will here only remark, that the general
features of my hydrographical sketch of this district in 1852 have been
entirely confirmed by Mr. Vogel’s observations, from which, although
they are as yet very insufficiently known, it is clear that the central
part of Báuchi, in which Yákoba is situated, is a high rocky plateau,
the central ridge of which evidently forms the water-parting of the
various rivers in opposite directions—the head-waters of the komádugu of
Bórnu (generally called Yéou) towards the east, the Kadúna and Gurára
(the Rari of Richard Lander), which unite near Bírni-n-Gwári, towards
the west, and a branch of the Bénuwé, running first to the east and then
turning southwards. The two most important points with regard to the
connection of Kanó, Záriya, and Yákoba with the lower course of the
Bénuwé, are the towns of Kéffi-n-Abdezénga and Láfiya Beréberé, while
the latter of these places is also one of the chief centres whence
spreads the dominion of the Fúlbe, with misery and devastation, over the
neighbouring tribes.

I will here give the route from Kanó by way of Záriya to Kéffi-n-
Abdezénga, which goes from Záriya almost directly southward. The
stations are very short.

1st day. Mádobí, a place with a market. Pass in the morning the “kogí,”
or kogí-n-Kanó.

2nd. Reach Bebéji about ten o’clock A.M.[152]

3rd. About one o’clock P.M. arrive at Rími-n-Káura, a group of villages
with a rivulet running east.

4th. About nine o’clock A.M. reach Báki-n-Kamínda, a cluster of
scattered villages, called by this name from a rivulet Kamínda or
Kamánda, which skirts it.

5th. About eleven o’clock A.M. reach a walled town called Da-n-Sóshia,
rich in date-trees. Here is the frontier of the province of Kanó towards
that of Záriya, marked by a large “kúrremi” dry in summer.

6th. A little after noon reach a small river called Kubútutu, running
east, but afterwards turning south and joining the Kadúna, which drains
all this part of the country. On the bank of the rivulet is a village
called Anshó.

7th. About 11 o’clock A.M., after a journey through a woody country,
reach Rúma, a large place but thinly inhabited, and surrounded with
walls in decay.

8th. About the same hour you reach a walled place called Likóro, where a
market is held every other day. All the country is thickly wooded and
uncultivated.

9th. Between nine and ten o’clock in the morning, after having crossed a
rivulet which sometimes presents difficulty in the rainy season, you
arrive at Záriya.

10th. About noon arrive at a village called Ungwa Árendé. Small
waterpools on the road.

11th. About eleven o’clock A.M. reach Kaséllu, a walled place with the
wall in a state of decay, and with a market held every other day.

12th. About the same hour arrive at Gímba, a large walled place, but
thinly inhabited.

13th. Reach Mátarí, a large place. Between Gímba and Mátarí, nearer the
latter, is a kúrremi, which during the rainy season can be crossed only
in boats.

14th. Kábi, a considerable walled market-place.

15th. Reach a small village called Kásabó, situated on a mountain-range
running eastward. The whole country is mountainous; and a little before
you reach Kásabó you pass a high mountain with a village on its top.

16th. Encamp in the forest called “Dáwa-n-serkí-n-Fáwa,” where there is
a kúrremi, dry during the hot season.

17th. A small village of the district Kadára, ravaged by the Fúlbe.

18th. During the dry season you reach a place called Jére (not Tére),
while in the rainy season you encamp on the shore of the Gurára, the
chief branch of the Kadúna, which cannot be crossed but in boats. The
country mountainous.

19th. Reach a small village called Kámané; country mountainous.

20th. A small place called Káterí, situated on a kogí, with water at all
seasons of the year, and well wooded. It joins the Gurára.

21st. A straggling village called Góla-mínda, inhabited entirely by
Fúlbe or Féllani. The country level, with mountains in the distance.

22nd. Kogáro, a considerable market place; country mountainous,
irrigated by many streamlets.

23rd. Fajári, a small place with a wall in decay; country level, with
plenty of water.

24th. Bagáji, a considerable walled market-place.

25th. Kéffi-n-Abdezénga, a large place, where a market is held every
day. The country in general is flat, with a high mountain to the west.
Plenty of watercourses.

Láfiya Beréberé, originally a colony of the Bórnu people, called
Beréberé by the Háusáwa, is five days E.S.E. from Kéffi-n-Abdezénga, and
two days and a half from a place called Toní, between Darróro and Kéffi.
Darróro was visited by Richard Lander, who calls it Danroro; but this
place, as well as the important place Katab (called by him Kuttup), has
been laid down very erroneously from his indications. I therefore give
here the


  ROUTE FROM ZÁRIYA BY KATAB TO DARRÓRO; FIRST PART S.E., THEN S.S.E.


1st day. Egébbi (called Ejibi by Lander), a place surrounded with a
wall, but not of large size.

2nd. Dawáki, a middle-sized place, lying west from Káuru, a town which
we shall soon connect with Kanó. About one day south from Dawáki lies a
mountainous district, with the village Libélle, inhabited by pagans.

3rd. Sháffero, a place surrounded with a wall, and dependent on Káuru.
The inhabitants are said to eat dogs.

4th. Encamp on the bank of the river Kadúna (báki-n-Kadúna), with a
village N.E. from the river.

7th. Katab, a district consisting of a great number of hamlets, very
rich in honey, and with a good cultivation of sorghum, millet, cotton,
and sesamum. A small rivulet or torrent intersects the district, running
towards the north. Pass the two preceding nights in two small villages,
the names of which my informant had forgotten; most probably they are
identical with Gídan Bakáya (not G. Banaya) and Kála. One long day’s
march N.E. from Katab, is the pagan district Sháwe, wherein the Kadúna
is said to take its rise.

8th. Kajé, a village situated on the top of a hill, other villages being
scattered about in the plain.

9th. Dangóma, a small slave-village belonging to Darróro, situated on
the top of a mountain. About the middle of your day’s march you cross
the river Gurára, running through a deep valley, and forming a cascade
at some distance N.E. from Darróro. It runs westward, though in a very
winding course, and joins the Kadúna near the town of Gwári. This is
evidently the river which Lander calls Rári, and which, its course not
being accurately observed by him, as he had to cross it repeatedly, has
given rise to that unfortunate theory of Capt. William Allen, with
regard to the connection of the Chadda with Lake Chád, or rather Tsád.

10th. Darróro, a town in a strong position, surrounded with an
artificial wall only on the north side; still belonging to the province
of Zegzeg. At some distance from it, in the plain, there is a new
Féllani settlement called Jemáʿa-n-Darróro; the word jemmáʿa, or, as it
is generally pronounced, jemmára, “the congregation,” being the
characteristic word for the religious and political reformation of the
Fúlbe. There is a direct road from Katab to Jemmáʿa, passing by the
small open place called “Madáwaki-n-mútuwa,” where the mountainous
district commences. It was in Darróro that Richard Lander thought that
he was but a few miles distant from Yákoba, the capital of Báuchi, while
in reality he seems to have been, in a direct line, about one hundred
miles distant from it; and as this line, owing to the mountainous nature
of the country and the wild and unsubdued spirit of its pagan
inhabitants, is not passable, he was about a hundred and sixty miles
from it by the ordinary track.


 THE ROUTE FROM JEMMÁʿA-N-DARRÓRO TO KÉFFI-N-ABDEZÉNGA, WITH THE BRANCH
                        ROAD TO LÁFIYA BERÉBERÉ.


1st day. Kogóm, a small place on the slope of the mountain, and
inhabited by slaves. The neighbourhood is thickly covered with forest,
through which, on the west side of the village, the Gurára winds along,
being here navigable for boats, at least in the rainy season. Arrive at
noon.

2nd. Gwári-n-kúrremi, a large open place in the wilderness; no hills. A
small torrent runs N.W. in the direction of Káteri. About noon.

3rd. Toní, a large walled place with much cultivation and many hamlets
dotting the neighbourhood; about noon. From hence a road leads to Láfiya
Beréberé in three days, S.E.

4th. Likóro, a large town with a clay wall; the houses built half of
clay, half of shíbki; a good day’s march. There is another more
circuitous way from Toní to Likóro, passing by Tonúng-mádaki, a place
situated in a valley with much forest, and not far north from two places
surrounded with clay walls, one of which is called Tonúng-wámbay—and by
“Gulbí-n-túnka,” a small open place with much cultivation, which has
received this name from the Háusa travellers, on account of its being
situated on a small stream (gulbí) running northwards.

5th. Kéffi-n-Abdezénga, a large town surrounded with a clay wall, and
situated at the eastern foot of the mountains; the town partly yumbú,
partly shíbki. Arrive about dhohor.


         ROUTES UNITING KÉFFI-N-ABDEZÉNGA WITH TÓTO AND FÁNDA.


From Kéffi-n-Abdezénga to Tóto there are several roads, the stations of
which are at the following places:—

1st day. Gongóndara, a large place with a wall in decay. Plenty of
water; the mountains are at some distance.

2nd. Gwágwa, a middle-sized town surrounded with a clay wall; to the
east a considerable mountain-group.

3rd. Támma, a large walled place in a plain with much water.

4th. Dógeri, a place of middle size, the frontier-place (in 1851) of the
extensive province of Zegzeg, and of the independent kingdom of
Fánda.[153]

5th. Ógobe, a large walled market-place belonging to Tóto.[154] The
neighbourhood is a plain abounding in water.

6th. Ganó, a considerable open place; country flat; plenty of trees,
particularly of those called mája.

7th. Enter Tóto in the morning.

Another road, sometimes uniting with the former, at others diverging
from it, passes by the following places:

1st day. Yánkardé; short march.

2nd. Gwágwa; short march.

3rd. Bókoko.

4th. A large village of the Bása; about noon.

5th. A large town situated in a plain, and surrounded with a clay wall;
the inhabitants speak the Bása language, but pay tribute to Záriya. My
informant called this town Gorgóndara; but I think he must be mistaken.

6th. Wári, a large open place with much cultivation of corn; the whole
country is flat. Arrive about noon.

7th. Kargo, a village. The country level, and covered with forest.

8th. Gwári-n-Kargo, a village, the frontier-place of the territory of
Zegzeg (that is to say, in 1851; but since the end of the year 1853, it
appears, both from what Dr. Baikie and his companions learnt on their
interesting and successful expedition up the river Bénuwé, and from what
I myself heard on my return to Kanó from my journey to Timbúktu, that
the Fúlbe, partly by treachery, partly by warfare, have made great
progress in this direction, extending their depredations to the very
bank of the river). A small stream or torrent skirts the side of the
village, running towards the Kadúna; here is more cultivation. Arrive in
the forenoon.

9th. Another open village of the Bása, with a good deal of cultivation;
arrive about noon.

10th. Ungwa Limáng, a small village inhabited by the people of the
prince of Tóto; rocky ground, and a small rivulet or brook.

11th. About two o’clock in the afternoon arrive in Tóto, a large town
protected on the west side by a woody fáddama or valley, and on the
other sides surrounded with a clay wall. The town is said to be of about
the same enormous dimensions as Kanó (that is to say, about fifteen
miles in circuit), but more densely inhabited, and divided into two
distinct quarters, the western and the eastern, the former being
inhabited by the natives, or the Katáwa[155], as they are called by the
Háusa people, who have a distinct language (probably related to the Bása
and Núpe languages), and are pagans; while the eastern quarter is the
dwelling-place of the Moslemín, viz. people from Kátsena, Kanó, and
Bórnu, who have a chief for themselves, called el Imám, a name corrupted
by the Háusa people into that of Limáng. This Limáng is regarded in
general by the travellers as the prince; but, according to more accurate
information, the town and province of Tóto seems to be under the direct
government of the sultan of Tánda (not Fánda), whose name is Shémmage,
and who receives a great quantity of European goods, chiefly muskets,
which form his strength, from the inhabitants of Tágara or Kotú-n-karfi,
as the district is generally called by the Háusa people, near the
junction of the Bénuwé with the Kwára. This prince, by his energy and
watchfulness, had kept the conquering Fúlbe in awe; and he prohibited,
with the utmost diligence, suspicious people from being admitted into
his town. He may therefore, even after the fall of Fánda or Pánda, which
was in a wretched condition, and was taken by treachery in the beginning
of 1853, have preserved his independence; but I am not quite sure about
it. Be this as it may, surrounded on all sides by enemies, he will
scarcely be able to hold out long. Tóto, as far as I was able to make
out (although there does not appear to have ever been much intercourse
between the two towns), is distant from Fánda from thirty to thirty-five
miles E.N.E. It is, besides, three days from Kotú-n-karfi, a place the
position of which is well established, and four days from Sansan
Ederísu, a place likewise well known from the Niger expeditions, so that
we can place Tóto with tolerable exactness.

I here subjoin the itinerary from Tóto to Sansan Ederísu:—

1st day. Zángó-n-kará, a village inhabited by Núpe people, and situated
in a valley tolerably wooded.

2nd. Agáya, a large town surrounded with a clay wall, dependent on the
governor of Záriya, but inhabited by Núpe people. Soon after you leave
Zángó-n-kará in the morning, you cross a river called Gúrma by my
informant, who crossed it in a boat; it runs northward. The country is
well cultivated, and many villages are scattered about.

3rd. Kúrremi, a town surrounded with a stockade and a clay wall, but of
smaller size than Agáya. A small rivulet, not navigable, skirts the
town, running northwards; it is called Kúdduba.

4th. Sansan Ederísu, a large open village not far from the shore of the
Kwára, opposite Égga. The country well cultivated.

I will now join Katab with Kanó.


                       ROUTE FROM KANÓ TO KATAB.


1st day. Bebéji, the town mentioned above; in the morning you cross a
small watercourse, with a village on its south border, called Báki-n-
kogí, then pass Góra, and in the afternoon Mádobí, with a brook running
towards Bebéji; arrive here at sunset.

2nd. Báuda, a large town surrounded with a clay wall, and lying around a
rocky eminence. In the morning cross the rivulet Kamánda. A short march.
Báuda is the furthest town of Kanó in this direction.

3rd. Páke, an open place on a deep rivulet, which (often) is not
fordable; it runs westward, and seems to be identical with the kogí-n-
Kubútutu, which is crossed on the road from Bebéji to Záriya, near the
village Ánsho. There are several small hamlets on the roadside; but
cultivation is not very extensive. Arrive a little after noon.

4th. Kó-zintú, a walled place, the huts consisting of reeds; arrive at
noon. No village on the road, but a good deal of cultivation.

5th. Zintú, a large walled place with clay houses, on a considerable
rivulet passing by Záriya, and running westward. It is said not to be
fordable (probably only in the rainy season), two boats being constantly
employed for carrying over travellers. It has no fish. I think it is the
same river with the kogí-n-Gédia, which is crossed on the road from Kanó
to Sabóngarí. A short march.

6th. Káuru, a large town surrounded with a clay wall and lying on a
considerable and navigable rivulet running eastward (not westward);
arrive in the afternoon. The country is covered with dense forest.

7th. Sháffero, the village mentioned in p. 564.

8th. Gída-n-bakáya, an open village inhabited by pagans, but under the
dominion of the Fúlbe; arrive at noon, having crossed in the morning the
Kadúna running westward. The country very woody.

9th. Katab; pass in the morning the village Kalá.


                       ROUTE FROM KANÓ TO YÁKOBA.


1st day. You arrive early in the forenoon at Sákwa, a place situated on
a running stream called “kogí-n-Sákwa.” In the morning you pass the
village of Dawáki. Sákwa was visited by Clapperton.

2nd. About two o’clock P.M. arrive at Dell, a considerable town said to
be larger than Tasáwa, after having passed another populous place, not
much less than Dell, called Gérko. The whole country is well cultivated;
and there is but little jéji, or uncultivated land, on the road. In
Róro, S.W. about one day from Dell, there are mines.

3rd. A little after noon arrive at Párna, a place not so large as Dell,
and situated at the foot of a mountain, by the side of a small rivulet.
During the morning you pass a village named Gédia, between which and
Párna there is a little wilderness.

4th. At noon you arrive at a place called Tébki (probably so called from
a pond), situated at the foot of the mountains, and the frontier-place
between the province of Kanó and that of Báuchi. The whole march leads
through a wild mountainous country, covered with wood.

5th. Arrive in the morning at Sabó-n-garí, a place situated in the
plain, and important on account of the road from Záriya (the details of
which I shall directly subjoin) joining in this place the track which
leads from Kanó. The country is well cultivated; and the people during
the rainy season dwell in huts, scattered through the fields, while
during the dry season they retire to the tops of the mountains. Soon
after leaving Tébki in the morning, you cross a small brook, and then
pass a place called Shébshi.

6th. A place whose name I cannot make out at present.

7th. Zaránda, a considerable village situated in the plain, while
towards the east rises a very lofty mountain mass, said to be the
highest mountain in Bolóboló or Báuchi. The whole country is under
cultivation; and hamlets or small villages are met in every direction.
Close to Zaránda is a rivulet, said by my informant to run
eastward.[156] Arrive in the afternoon.

8th. Yákoba (thus the name is generally pronounced, although more
correctly the accent ought to be given to the second syllable, thus,
Yakóba, or rather Yakúba) the capital of the province of Bolóboló or
Báuchi, founded by Yakúb the father of the present governor Ibrahíma.
Selmán (properly ʿOthmán), the name given by this informant to the
governor, is, I think, the name of his brother, who during his long
absence has the government of the town. The town is large, and has
twelve gates; _there is no running water near the town_, and the
inhabitants supply themselves from ráfona, or hollows. All the country
is under cultivation, and the neighbourhood is rich in hamlets. The road
keeps along the plain, all laid out in fields, shaded with trees.

The character of this town, which I have thus laid down from
information, has, in opposition to the prevalent opinion that Yákoba is
situated on a river, been entirely confirmed by Mr. Vogel’s very
important journey. Coming from the east, he found Yákoba situated on a
stony elevated level, without any running stream, but well supplied with
water, which collects round the walls of the town. He has found its
position to be 10° 47′ 30″ N. lat., and 9° 28′ 0″ E. of Gr. In
consequence of the long absence of the governor Ibrahíma (who, having
sworn not to return to his capital until he shall have subdued a warlike
pagan tribe, has been living now seven years in his “sansánne,” or
encampment, about 65 miles N.N.W. from the capital), Mr. Vogel found
Yákoba rather thinly inhabited. He has not yet forwarded an account of
the elevation of this place; but I believe that it will not be much less
than two thousand feet.[157]


                      ROUTE FROM KATAB TO YÁKOBA.


1st day. About ʿaser reach Alhájji, a considerable village belonging to
the province of Zegzeg, and situated at the west foot of a mountain. The
whole road leads through forest.

2nd. About noon arrive at Sabó-n-bírni, a small village consisting of
shíbki. The road is partly covered with forest, and partly cultivated;
but there are no villages, the people, during the rainy season, coming
from a great distance to cultivate the country.

3rd. About noon reach Ríruwe, a considerable place surrounded by an
earthen wall, and having a well-attended market every Tuesday. Ríruwe is
at a short distance south from Sabó-n-garí; and many persons going from
Kanó to Yákoba, prefer joining this road and leaving the other at Sabó-
n-garí.

4th. About one o’clock P.M. reach Úmbutú, or Mbutú, a village situated
at the foot of a mountain, on the top of which there is another place of
the same name. The inhabitants, who are very fierce, wear a bone stuck
through the chin. They do not pay any tribute to the Féllani of Záriya
nor to those of Yákoba, and constantly intercept the communication—as
happened, indeed, in 1851, during my stay in Kanó. Near the first
village is a rivulet which joins the Gurára, one of the tributary
streams of the Kwára. The whole march leads through forest.

5th. About one o’clock P.M. reach Wárji, a village situated at the foot
of a large mountain extending far to the west, on the top of which there
are other villages of the same name, whose inhabitants wage war against
the Féllani. Informant states that the inhabitants of the valley pay
tribute to the governor of Kanó; but I think he means that of Báuchi.
Cattle of a particular kind called múturú are frequent here, much
smaller than the ox, with shorter legs, without the hump, and of a grey
colour. I saw a specimen of this kind afterwards in Kúkawa.

6th. About ʿaser reach Mélanláwel, a considerable place with a clay
wall, situated in the plain at the S.E. foot of the large mountain mass
already mentioned. The whole country is laid out in cultivated fields.

7th. After ʿaser arrive at Zaránda; the country partly wild and partly
cultivated.

8th. At noon reach Yákoba.

I now proceed to give the routes from different points, obtained by the
construction of the former itineraries, and corrected also by the recent
observations of European travellers, to Wukári, the capital of that very
interesting country Korórofa, which, unfortunately, was not reached by
the late expedition on the river Bénuwé.

Close to Láfiya Beréberé, begins the territory of the Dóma, the capital
of which, called likewise Dóma (at least by my informants), is only one
day from Láfiya, and five days from Kéffi-n-Abdezénga, the road from
this latter place to Dóma passing by Haríri, a large town still
dependent upon Záriya, and distant three days from the former, and two
from the latter town. This Dóma is a large walled town; but already in
the year 1851 its governor was obliged to pay a small tribute to the
governor of Záriya. A great number of Nyffáwa, or people from Núpe, are
said to live here.

From Dóma there seem to be two roads to Wukári, although I frankly
confess that the information which I obtained with regard to them, as
well as to other parts of Korórofa, was not so clear as I might have
wished. One of these routes crosses the river at a spot called Chínkay;
the other does not name the ferry. Chínkay is not among the places laid
down hereabouts in the survey of the Bénuwé expedition; but it is
evidently either identical with, or near to Anyíshi.

From Dóma my informant goes to Kúberé; thence to Kadérku (the Bridge), a
town belonging to Dóma; thence to Kiyána, or Keána, a considerable
market-place, which he calls “bírni-n-Korórofa, kása-n-Báuchi,” the
inhabitants paying tribute as well to the Púllo governor of Báuchi as to
the native king of Korórofa. From this place, which is often mentioned
in the proceedings of the Bénuwé expedition, my informant goes to Túnga,
which he calls “Garí-n-gisherí,” stating the memorable fact, not
mentioned in those proceedings, that salt is obtained there. Close to
Túnga is a kogí or rivulet joining the Bénuwé, or rather, I think, a
creek of the river. My informant then crosses the river and reaches
Chínkay, which lies at a little distance—as he states, in a southerly
direction—from a large place called Owí. From Chínkay he proceeds to
Ákkona, which is evidently identical with the Akkwana of Crowther, who,
however, does not mention the interesting fact that “kohol” or antimony
is obtained there; from Ákkona to Jíddu (a place not mentioned by
Crowther), in a locality with small rocky mounts starting up from the
plain; thence to Árfu, and thence again to Wukári.

The other shorter route (if, indeed, it be complete) goes from Dóma to
Mínchi, which is called “Bírni kása-n-Kiyána,” a walled town of the
territory of the Kiyána; thence to Agáya (evidently different from the
place of the same name between Tóto and Égga, and therefore by one of my
informants called “Mínchi-n-Agáya); from this directly to Árfu, crossing
the Bénuwé somewhere below Anyíshi; thence by Fíya to Wukári.

I now give an itinerary from Darróro to Wukári, unfortunately of the
same abridged and incomplete character. Proceeding at a slow rate with
short stations, my informant goes first to a large place called Zúngur;
thence crossing a small rivulet, which he calls by the very unscientific
name of “kogí-n-Mamúdu” (the river of Makhmúd), to Dull, a large but
dilapidated place dependent on Yákoba; thence to Gar, a small place in a
mountainous district: thence to Búrrum, the country continuing
mountainous; thence to Gémbat; thence to Wáze, a very large town, said
(probably with some exaggeration) to be as large as Kanó, and the
residence of a governor or chief named Hamma ben ʿAbdu. It stands upon a
mountain or hill; and a river or creek is said to skirt the town.

This important place can be reached in three good days’ marches from
Yákoba, sleeping the first night, after a very long and fatiguing day’s
journey through a mountainous country (granite, as it seems), in Gásge,
a town as large as Ngórnu, inhabited by Fúlbe and native pagans, and the
second in Yúnguru. Yúnguru is a town inhabited by the conquering tribe,
while the native pagans live in straggling villages along the valleys.
This is another long day’s march, and the country mountainous. The third
day’s journey is shorter; and Wáze is reached after about eight hours’
march. In the dry season at least, when the river may be easily crossed
either by swimming or even occasionally by fording it, a good tourist
will reach Wukári from Wáze in one day. My informant, proceeding at a
slow rate, and perhaps not in a direct line, went from this to Dámpar, a
place near the Bénuwé, where it has come under the notice of the Bénuwé
expedition; then, crossing several creeks which he calls “ráfi-n-
dórina,” and “kogí-n-Deñi,” and the river itself, passed the places
Mákera, Usé (a small village in the plain), then Aíkiri (with a kogí)
and a place which he calls Zangó Ladán (probably the station, “zangó,”
where a toll or tax, “ladán,” is paid, and thus at length reached the
capital Wukári.

I have also a _soi-disant_ itinerary from Láfiya Beréberé to Wukári; but
I will only name the places situated on this route without stating the
order in which they succeed each other. These are Oví, which seems to be
a large town distant one day from Ázzara, which is said to be west from
Aíkiri, the place mentioned above; then Kíbi, Dóya, Áboné, Aíro, Kanjé,
Agwatáshi, Dédderé.

I will now say a few words about Wukári, the capital of Korórofa, which
it is much to be regretted that the last expedition on the river was
unable to reach; but the next will, I hope, be more successful in this
respect[158], if they have the good fortune of finding the country still
in a flourishing state. Even the name of this important place was
scarcely known[159] before my researches in 1851, while the name of the
country, Korórofa, though well known to former geographers, had been
erased from recent maps. Wukári was placed in my map close to the river,
a few miles only too far north and east; but had I been able to correct
it according to my latest information, from which I learnt that it lay
not on the main river itself, but on a small branch[160], I should have
laid it down exactly in the right position.

Wukári lies on the west side of a small rivulet, called, by my Háusa
informants, “kogí-n-Kalám,” which is said to join the Bénuwé, or, as the
great river is called in at least one of the dialects of Korórofa, which
seems not to have come under the notice of the expedition, “Zánfir.” In
a straight line, Wukári is only a good morning’s walk (“tafíyan
hantsi”)—that is, about ten miles—from the shores of the Bénuwé. The
town is said to be very large, even larger than Kanó; not however, like
the latter, embracing a wide extent of fields, but densely inhabited to
the very walls. The people do not drink the water of the rivulet which
skirts their town, but supply their wants from ponds in its interior,
probably like those in Kanó. They are distinguished by their dark
complexion, and features not disfigured by shasháwa or tattooing, by
their long hair and their neat shirts, or rather plaids, “zénne,” which
they wrap round the body. Indeed the inhabitants of Korórofa are
celebrated all over this part of Africa for their cotton cloth, which is
said to be of very fine texture, but also very narrow, being only the
breadth of two fingers. They are said to have a peculiar kind of cotton
called “worzi” by the Arabs, and mentioned already by that accurate and
princely geographer Abú ʿObéd Allah el Bekri, in 1068, though without
naming the district of Negroland where the plant grew[161], and not
without some exaggeration. There seems to be a kind of coffee indigenous
to the country. A great deal of dóya, or yam, is cultivated; and áyaba
(_Musa paradisiaca_) seems to be the most common tree in the southern
provinces. The only essential defect under which this nation suffers,
besides their division into many separate tribes, seems to be the
despotism of the government, which evidently checks also the energy of
the people in defending their independence against the restless Fúlbe,
who are constantly gaining ground, and, if Her Britannic Majesty’s
government do not hasten to interfere, will in a very short time take
possession of this kingdom.

All the handicrafts, as those of blacksmiths, saddlers, &c., are under
the immediate control of the king, and can be exercised only by his own
people. He monopolizes the foreign trade, none of his subjects having a
right to buy. The name of the present king is said to be Ánju Zénki. His
authority, nevertheless, does not now seem to extend, in reality, far
beyond the walls of Wukári; and the Háusa traders, while they give him
the title of “serkí-n-gulbí” (lord of the river), call the governor of
Chónkoy, or Gónkoy, “serkí-n-géro” (lord of the corn, or rather millet),
intimating that the country-towns are rather in the hands of this latter
prince. The inhabitants of Wukári, as well as of the towns in the
interior, are expressly stated to be armed only with spears, none but
the people near the banks of the Bénuwé using bows. Small articles are
bought and sold for iron hoes, called “akíka,” of which forty will buy a
slave; more valuable objects are bartered for salt or clothes.[162]

East, about one day’s journey from Wukári, are said to be Júggum and
Gónkoy: Júggum is the name of a considerable place; but as for Gónkoy, I
was unable to ascertain whether it was the name of a district or a town.
Gónkoy is said to be three days and a half from Bú-mánda, the stations
on the road being at the villages or towns of Úriyó, Úrbo, then, near
the máyo, Mantáje (?), Bú-mánda being reached on the fourth day; and I
have another itinerary leading from Bú-mánda to Júggum in five days,
through a country desolated by those predatory wars by which the Fúlbe
are so distinguished. Only one day before reaching Júggum there is a
place inhabited by pagans, called Gánte. I will further mention here
some places around Wukári: though, from the imperfect character of my
information, I am not able to lay them down on the map, nevertheless I
hope a list of them will prove useful to the next expedition up the
river. Along the south side of the river are said to lie east from
Gónkoy the places Balli, Júbu, Tinto; one day south from Wukári the town
Kónte; then westward, and towards the north-west, the following places,
some of them on the north side of the Bénuwé: Kúrgoy (a walled town),
Úngosálla, Toríña, Ákata (near a rivulet, the residence of a chief
called Jímmi), Kondé, Bémbem, Mínchi-n-Agáya (on the north side of the
Bénuwé), Kátsena Alla (a name most probably corrupted by the Háusa
traders), a large town situated on the east side of a river or rivulet.
Between Kátsena Alla and Fánda there are said to be the following
places: Zangó kogí-n-Alla (a whimsical fatáki name—that is to say, used
by the native traders), with Mínchi or Múnchi (Mitsi) inhabitants,
Dúchi-n-Díkku (a place situated between two mountains), the town
Gedímmir, and the town Áyirkú-n-girké.

Korórofa does not appear to be the native name either of the country or
of the tribe; but I cannot exactly say whether it only originates with
the Háusa traders, and whether the name Djúku, or Júku, applies to the
whole nation or only to a portion of it. Bábai, or Báibai, I think is
not the original native name of the people, but only an appellation
given them by the Háusa traders. There are certainly several different
dialects prevailing in the country, since that of which I wrote down
some hundred words from the mouth of the Koána or Kwána Ábbade, a native
of the village Búmánda, appears to have very little, if any, relation to
the Tiwi of Koelle, or the Mitsi of Crowther, or to any other mentioned
by them; but it must be borne in mind that the gentlemen composing the
expedition seem not to have collected any specimens whatever of the
Djúku, which they themselves state to be the language of Korórofa, and I
feel satisfied that the dialect spoken by the Kwána differs but little
from that of the people of Wukári. The Kwána (called Konáwa by the Háusa
people), at least those of Júggum, have the curious and disgusting
custom of forming an artificial ulcer behind the ear, which in Wadáy is
the distinguishing mark of valour. They wear white and black shirts, and
have horses and cattle. They cultivate various species of Negro corn,
and have many large trees. This same informant of mine, Ábbade, named to
me the following divisions of the Korórofa, which I give here as an
imperfect notice, hoping that it may lead succeeding travellers to
further inquiries and to clearer information: the Agáwi, Jímmolo,
Churíbolo (the second syllable is not clear in my manuscript journal),
Bashikkári, Jemsáli, Bakawelíno, Kéwe, Ndau, Bínderi, Jáufeni.

Having given what little information I have been able to gather with
regard to that interesting region on the river Bénuwé, I now proceed to
subjoin a few details illustrating the geography of the provinces
between Yákoba and Katágum; for the country between the former place and
the Bénuwé will, I hope, soon be amply illustrated by Mr. Vogel’s
observations, who seems to have traversed the triangular tract of
country inclosed between Gómbe, Yákoba, and Hamárruwa in several
directions, and to have come into intimate, though at times hostile,
contact with the natives. The position of Gómbe, which he has fixed by
astronomical observations in lat. 10° 49′ N., and long. 10° 16′ E., is
an important check upon the construction of the materials obtained by me
with regard to this tract of country; and I openly confess that, with
regard to Gómbe, which I had no means of connecting with a southern
point, I have erred in laying it down much too far south, while with
respect to the latitude assigned by me to Hamárruwa, which I was able to
connect with Yóla, I have scarcely erred a single mile—a result which I
hope will inspire some confidence in my numerous geographical deductions
from native information.

I start from Katágum, a place twice visited by Captain Clapperton, and
laid down by him correctly, no doubt, with regard to latitude, while
with regard to longitude it has to be shifted, as I shall elsewhere
show, about forty geographical miles further west.


          ROUTE FROM KATÁGUM TO GÓMBE, THE CAPITAL OF BOBÉRU.


1st day. Early in the morning, between nine and ten o’clock, you reach
Sókkuwa, a large place surrounded by an earth wall on the western bank
of the “kogí-n-Katágum,” the water of which is used by the inhabitants
for drinking. In the dry season there is no stream of running water, but
merely stagnant pools. The houses of Sókkuwa are built partly of yumbú
(clay), partly of shíbki (reed). A market is held here every Saturday.
On the road many small villages are passed.

2nd. About eleven o’clock arrive at Kéffi, a large village surrounded by
a stockade, and belonging to the province of Katágum. Many small
villages on the road.

3rd. An hour after noon reach Hardáwa, a large place surrounded with a
clay wall, also under Katágum. On the road are many villages. The soil
consists of sand, and trees are scarce.

4th. Arrive at Mésau, a large place surrounded with a clay wall, capital
of the province of the same name, and residence of a governor whose
name, or rather title, at present is Yeríma. The houses consist of clay
walls with thatched conical roofs, the palace of the governor alone
being built entirely of earth. A considerable market is held here every
Friday. It seems very remarkable that the inhabitants of this town are
said to be all Fúlbe or Féllani. The soil all around consists of sand.

5th. About noon Dárasó, a large walled place belonging to the province
of Báuchi, to the capital of which leads a frequented route from hence,
which I shall subjoin immediately. In the morning you cross a rivulet in
the midst of the forest.

6th. About two or half-past two o’clock P.M. reach Tawíya, a large place
with an earthen wall now in decay; most of the inhabitants pagans; the
whole country covered with dense forest. N.B. The road from Dárasó turns
a little east from south.

7th. Early in the morning, about nine o’clock, arrive at Gómbe, a large
walled place and the capital of the province Bobéru, which is said to
have received its name from the late governor: the name of the present
one is Koriyénga; his house is the only good building in the town.


                      ROUTE FROM DÁRASÓ TO YÁKOBA.


1st day. About the ʿaser reach Sóro, a small open place situated at the
western foot of a rock. The road lies through a mountainous country, the
first half of it being thickly wooded.

2nd. About one o’clock P.M. arrive at Kírfi, a large open place at the
foot of the rocks, inhabited entirely by pagans. The whole road is
intersected by high mountains with perennial springs.

3rd. About eleven o’clock A.M. reach Týrrem, a large open place
surrounded by mountains towards the east and south. On the road you pass
several small villages situated on the tops of the mountains, and
inhabited by pagans.

4th. Early in the morning, about nine o’clock, arrive at Yákoba; all the
road mountainous, the tops of the mountains being inhabited.

N.B. The route from Gómbe to Yákoba I shall not give, as my imperfect
itinerary will, I hope, soon be superseded by the rich materials of Mr.
Vogel and his companion Corporal Macguire. I have, however, many
materials for the district hereabout, which may be laid down with great
approximative certainty as soon as an accurate basis is obtained by Mr.
Vogel’s route. For the same reason I will not give the itinerary from
Gómbe to Gújeba, but only connect one important point of this
route—Dúkku, which I hope will have been touched at by my friend, with
Yóla.

This route from Yóla to Dúkku is very dangerous, and is not now taken by
the Fúlbe; but such was the case in the times of their greatest youthful
vigour. I will only observe that Dúkku lies one day and a half E. by N.
from Gómbe. My informant, Mʿallem Katúri, starts from Yóla.

1st day. After crossing the Bénuwé, pass through the mountainous
district of the Zéna.

2nd. District of the Úrgeni, another pagan tribe living on the
mountains.

3rd. District of the Tángalé, a tribe with whom Mr. Vogel has, on his
more western route from Hamárruwa to Gómbe, come in contact.

4th. Fánda, another pagan tribe.

5th. Dembé.

6th. Chongóm. All these are independent pagan tribes, the country being
mountainous. Road very unsafe.

7th. Téra, a settlement of the Fúlbe of Bobéru; here security commences.

8th. Ína, a large town of pagans in a state of subjection. At the foot
of the mountains is a torrent running west, sometimes not fordable; it
probably joins the northern branch of the Bénuwé.

9th. Kámbo, a pagan village.

10th. Kom, a pagan village.

11th. Dúkku.

Dúkku is two days from Gómbe:—

1st. Wángelé.

2nd. Gómbe, the present residence of Kóriyénga, the son of Bobéru the
Púllo conqueror from whom the province has received its name, and the
brother of Suléy. It is situated on the south side of a large
watercourse called Náfada. This place was visited by Mr. Vogel in 1855,
and found from observation to be in lat. 10° 49′ N., long. 10° 16′ E.
from Gr.


                  ROUTE FROM KATÁGUM TO SHÉRA, S.S.W.


1st day. About ʿaser reach Gubú, a large open place belonging to the
province of Katágum. The country open, partly cultivated and inhabited,
and partly covered with forest.

2nd. About eleven o’clock reach Úzum, a small open village belonging to
the province of Katágum. The whole country well cultivated, with
numerous villages.

3rd. About noon arrive at Shéra, a considerable place, the capital of a
province of the Fulfúlde empire of Sókoto, and residence of a governor.
The place is fortified by nature, its position among the rocks, which
surround it on all sides, leaving only a narrow approach from N.W. and
S.; otherwise, there is no wall. Most of the houses are built partly of
clay, partly of reeds, while the house of the governor consists entirely
of clay. Most if not all of the inhabitants seem to belong to the race
of the conquerors; the consequence is, that there is neither industry
nor commerce, and the market is of no importance.

I here subjoin a list of the more important places of the province of
Shéra, or Shíra, from which it will appear that this territory, although
heretofore scarcely known by name, is not inconsiderable, though greatly
reduced from its ancient extent, when the whole district round Fágam
belonged to it. This comprises the following places:—Fágam, bírni-n-
Máshi, Hósobo-bérajá, Géllamáng, Rábadí, Gerétti, Dándang, Tóba,
Matsángo, Yélku, Zúmborúm-daffatúwo. At the present day there still
belong to the province of Shéra, besides the capital (likewise called
Shéra), Kúrba, Géade, Dóggo, Dógwa, Kádgo, Kárgo, Rími Táshirá, Ándobám,
Dógo-gawán, Dógo-kawé, Dógo-dekáwen, Dógo-dúchi, Dógo-bángaré, Dógo-
damwé, Dezína, Túngom, Gowála, Zábi, Sabáwa, Byllum, Béchimé (on a
rock), Danguzózo, Yellwá garí-n-da-n-Háwa, Gumár, Zákkuwa, Jerégo,
Chínnadé, Hardáwa (I cannot say whether identical with the place of the
same name mentioned above), Goráng (east from the latter), Ázeré (with
iron mines), Chínnadé madáshi, Daláren, Kúrke, Túmperé, Dúnkowy, Póngi,
Zagédebá, Mógonshí, Gadáber, Cherácherá, Gadáwu, Degá, Goré, Itésh,
Jóga, Wóliyá, Gósamé (“garí-n-dáffa kárfi,” place for smelting iron),
Tsáuni, Kolá (“úri-n-saráuta,” “the seat of [the old] government,” where
all the rulers of the country are buried), Sófo-n-garí, Gámbaná, Lájewá,
Zíbbek, Máshemá, Bangaráti, Sírko, Gámbakí, Káwada, Máchi-n-káya,
Dingáya, garí-n-Mallinzáki, Hírfi, Úngobá or Ngobá, Gádaráima, Kóndokó,
Rasáwu, Kórko, Bárring, Mánakó, Wódufá, Tsogú, Kúrnokay, Láfiya garí-n-
Berdagúngome (da-n-ghaladíma Shéra), Lanzedóguwa, Ajángara, Zámmaga,
Fógo, Sáwi shéli-n-jíka-n-Mallinzáki (the residence of the grandson of
Mallinzáki), Yáyu, Dagáro, Kúkokí, Bilkáchuwa, Farí-n-rúwa, Kósomé,
Árzamú, Yákasé, Áffotu, Uzum Zándan, Jegás, Chókkoti, Chafágo, Degágitó,
Galinámarí, Kádiya, Jándogo, Zagáña, Gorán, Nasaráwa, Kílla.

I now subjoin the short itinerary from Shéra to Yákoba, west a little
south.

1st day. Between one and two o’clock P.M. arrive at Fágam, a place
larger than Shéra, surrounded with a clay wall, being the frontier-town
of the province of Kanó towards the S.E. The country is flat.

2nd. About eleven o’clock A.M. arrive at Gánjuwa, a large open place
belonging to the province of Báuchi. All the houses, or rather huts, are
built of reed, only that of the governor consisting of clay. The country
mountainous, with many springs and pools of water; large numbers of
palm-trees.

3rd. About ʿaser arrive at Yákoba; the country mountainous.


 IV.—COLLECTION OF ITINERARIES PASSING THROUGH THE VARIOUS DISTRICTS OF
                                ÁDAMÁWA.


In endeavouring to describe the country by means of this net of routes,
traversing it in every direction and thus controlling each other, it
will be the best course first to connect Yóla, the furthest point which
I have been able to lay down from my own observation, with Hamárruwa,
the furthest point reached by Her Majesty’s steamer “Pleiad”[163] in
September, 1854.


                   1. ROUTES FROM HAMÁRRUWA TO YÓLA.



                  (_a._) _Direct route; very unsafe._


1st day. Having crossed the Bénuwé, encamp on the border of the máyo
Badóre.

2nd. A pagan village of the Zená; about four o’clock P.M.

3rd. A village of Hámidu (not the son of Ádama); a long day’s journey;
the whole country is mountainous.

4th. Líma, a settlement of the Fúlbe; about noon.

5th. Yóla; in the morning.


        (_b._) _Another direct route, a little more northerly._


1st day. The máyo Badóre.

2nd. Dútsi-n-máifulá (the Capped Mountain), obviously a travelling name
given by the Háusa people to a mountain with a peculiar cone; compare
the expression “shúsh el ʿabíd” (the Slave’s Cap). Before noon.

3rd. Bang, a settlement of pagans, on a mountain; turn round its
southern side. A long day’s journey.

4th. Passam; in the forenoon.

5th. About two o’clock P.M. encamp; leave Líma at some distance south.

6th. Yóla; in the morning.


        (_c._) _Route from Hamárruwa to Yóla, by way of Kóncha._


This route makes a sharp angle. Direction, as far as Kóncha, S.S.E.,
then N.E.

1st day. Reach the river Bénuwé about noon, and cross it in the boats of
the Kwána or Kwóna; sleep in Kwánárí, a village on the south bank of the
river.

2nd. Reach a pagan village under the protection of the Fúlbe, and
therefore called by travellers Amána Bárka, in a valley bordered by
mountains; it belongs to the dominion of Ámba Sámbo, the governor of
Chámba.

3rd. About sunset encamp in the wilderness.

4th. Zangó-n-gharáma (a name given to the locality by the Háusa traders,
meaning “the toll-station”), a village, the master of which, called by
the traders mai Chebchóma[164]; levies a considerable tax on the
caravans. “Masr,” or the Egyptian durra, forms the principal food of the
natives.

5th. Reach the residence of the chief Nyagáng. Formerly travellers used
to make a stage in the village of Ardo Kési, situated more to the north;
but this custom has lately ceased.

6th. Mount Chébchi, stretching out to a great length, and crossing the
path; encamp either on its summit or at its base, in the afternoon.

7th. Rúmde ʿOmáru, a slave-village in the plain; about noon.

8th. Kóncha (probably so called because it belonged originally to the
Kwóna or Kwána), the residence of the governor Mohammed Jóbdi (not
Gábdu), a Púllo, who is in a certain degree dependent on the sultan of
Ádamáwa. The place is large, being divided into three distinct
quarters—that of the Fúlbe, that of the Kanúri, and a third inhabited by
pagans; but the dwellings consist entirely of round conical huts, with
the exception of that of the governor himself, which is built of clay.
The eastern side of the town is skirted by the máyo Béli, which in the
dry season is fordable, but during the rains can be crossed only in a
boat. It is tributary to the Fáro, and runs from Kóncha to Láro, from
this to the town of Yáji about twelve miles west from Chámba, and having
been joined by the máyo Íli, which is said to come from Ímber five days
south from Kóncha, in the territory of the Tekʿa[165], joins the river
Fáro at Rúmde Bárka, a slave-village of Ardo Yáji. This river is
confounded by several informants with the Déve, which joins the Fáro at
Búbadáddi. The governor Mohammed Jóbdi is said to possess no less than
10,000 slaves. East of the river, between it and the town, a conspicuous
mount meets the view. Kóncha is a remarkable place, on account of the
wild sugar-cane (not the sweet sort of Indian corn called sébbade in
Kanúri), which is said to grow here in great abundance.

9th. Láro, or more properly “Tírgade Lároma,” a large settlement of the
conquerors, governed by an officer of the seignior of Chámba, and
situated on the west side of the máyo Béli. When you leave Kóncha you
cross the river, and then keep along its south-eastern bank; but before
entering Láro you cross it again.

10th. Dírdiyú, a village inhabited conjointly by pagan natives and by
Mohammedan Fúlbe; the country level. About noon.

11th. Zángi, a place formerly belonging to the pagans Faráng, but at
present inhabited and ruled by the Fúlbe. Numerous elephants and
_mouflons_; at least so says my informant, who nevertheless may have
mistaken buffaloes or other animals for those peculiar to the desert.

12th. Reach Yóla, having traversed a well-inhabited country, and crossed
a small tributary of the Fáro.


          2. ROUTE FROM MORÁ, THE CAPITAL OF MÁNDARÁ, TO YÓLA.


Morá was found by Mr. Vogel, by observation, to be in lat. 10° 58′ 38″
N.[166], and in long. 12° 22′ E. Gr.

1st day. Mógashe, a village of Mándará, of middling size, lying on the
eastern side of a range of mountains. Route, S.E.; arrive about noon.

2nd. Fétte[167], a large Púllo settlement, and residence of a powerful
chief called Khúrsu.

3rd. Malám, a large Púllo place, governed by a cousin of Khúrsu’s, from
whence a shallow watercourse runs eastward to join the ngáljam of Démmo
(see Vol. III.). The country is level; arrive before noon. From Fétte
you turn S.W. Malám is a short day’s journey N.W. from Bógo, another
large Púllo settlement.

4th. Kóngala, a Púllo settlement, situated on the upper part of the same
watercourse.

5th. Márruwa (pronounced by many people as if it were Marba), a large
place, the residence of Mʿallem Dámraka, situated on the north side of a
watercourse which joins the river of Lógone. On the north side a
mountain strikes the eye. Arrive before the heat of the day.

6th. Mískin, a large place, residence of Ardo Búba, situated on the same
watercourse. An isolated mountain (Mount Míndif?) rises towards the
east, the country in general being level.

7th. Gázaba, a large place, and residence of Ardo Gazáwa, an old man. It
is a market-place of some importance. Direction, west. Arrive before the
heat of the day. Both places, Gázaba and Mískin, seem to lie in a line
west from Mount Míndif.

8th. Mbóla, a Púllo settlement, and residence of a son of Ardo Jídda,
situated on the same watercourse. The country level; direction, west.
Arrive about noon.

I here subjoin a short itinerary from Múbi (see p. 420.) to Mbóla, in
order to connect this route with the track of my own journey to Ádamáwa.
This road is mountainous and dangerous.

  1st day. Úmshi, a pagan village. Arrive about two o’clock P.M.,
  having passed Bá, in the mountain-group which I noticed on my
  journey to Ádamáwa, and left Jímmi to the south. After having
  cleared the mountains of Fíngting, you turn E.N.E.

  2nd. Sínna, a village inhabited by Fúlbe and native pagans; about
  noon.

  3rd. Mbóla, a Púllo settlement; about noon.

9th. Lúlu, a pagan village, the inhabitants of which do not disfigure
their features by tattooing, and wear no barbarous sort of ornament,
except a small reed in the left ear, like the Marghí. Country
mountainous; no watercourses. Direction, south. Arrive between ten and
eleven o’clock.

10th. Mátabá, a place situated in a mountainous district, inhabited by
pagans and Fúlbe conjointly. The deléb-palm or dúgbi, a species of
_Hyphæna_, grows here in great quantity, but only few dúm-palms. The
inhabitants drink only from wells. Direction, south a little west.
Arrival, about four o’clock P.M. Mátabá lies on the road between Dába
and Lam, a little nearer the former.

11th. Gidér, a place situated on the great pilgrim-road from Yóla
eastward, and inhabited by Fúlbe and pagans conjointly. The whole
country is mountainous, and only partly subjected. A watercourse runs
along the east side of the village towards the máyo Kébbi. Arrive about
noon.

12th. Héri, a village inhabited by pagans of the tribe of the Falí. At
some distance east, a watercourse. The country mountainous. Direction,
south. Arrive in the morning.

13th. Báila, a Púllo settlement, residence of Ardo Badéshi, with a small
watercourse. Country mountainous. Short march south, very little west. A
few miles west from Báila is Badéshi, situated in a mountainous region,
and on the east side of the máyo Saréndi, which is said to come from the
south. In the distance, south, a place called Kacháwu is seen lying on a
high mountain with a watercourse at its northern foot, which joins, or
rather is identical with, the máyo Kébbi; this place possessing very
rich pasture-grounds, the cattle of Báila are driven there in time of
peace. Between Báila and Soráyi lies Bizér, about fifteen miles from the
former. Direction, E.N.E.

14th. Nyáwu, a village inhabited by the slaves of Janfúra. Towards the
west, a mountain-range; towards the east, country open. Short march S.W.

15th. Bátema, or Bázuma, the principal and central place of the tribe of
the Falí, at least in former times; at present, residence of Janfúra,
who has about 200 horse under his command. The place is skirted by the
waters of the máyo Dundé, which joins the máyo Kébbi. Towards the east
is a mountain. Short march a little south from west.

16th. Géwe, a large settlement of the Fúlbe, situated on the N.E. bank
of the Bénuwé, a few miles below its junction with the máyo Kébbi. It is
the residence of the chief Sámbo-Géwe, who commands about 100 horse. A
large mountain called Banáwa, inhabited by pagans of the tribe of Falí,
overtowers the Bénuwé. At a short distance from Géwe, a little east from
south, lies Ribágo—not to be confounded with the more important place of
the same name to be mentioned further down, this Ribágo being the estate
of Mʿallem Músa, the governor of Chébowa. In the angle formed by the
junction of the two rivers lies the village Dúli, and east from it
another village called Lángi, the three places lying so near each other,
that one may be seen from the other. A short day’s march west.

17th. Géweke, a small Púllo settlement, under the same chief as Géwe. On
starting from Géwe, cross the river Bénuwé, and traverse a mountainous
country. Short journey, west.

18th. Bilónde, a place principally, but not exclusively, inhabited by
Fúlbe, and situated on the southern bank of the river Bénuwé. Short
march, west.

19th. Gáruwa, a place inhabited by pagans of the Bátta tribe. Arrive at
noon, having passed in the morning the village Badóde, situated likewise
on the south side of the Bénuwé. North, or perhaps a little west from
north, of Gáruwa lies Bángeli, at the foot of a mountain which is
skirted by the river, from which Gáruwa itself lies about five miles
distant. There is another road from Géwe to Gáruwa, which, though making
a circuit, is sometimes taken. Keeping first south, and leaving, after
about four hours’ march, Dúli on your left on the bank of the river,
then turning S.W., you reach Dúkka in the evening, situated on the west
bank of a small rivulet and at the east foot of a large mountain; from
hence, a day along the mountain N.W. brings you to Gáruwa.

20th. Kókomi, a considerable place, inhabited by pagans of the Bátta. At
a short distance west rises a large mount, the western foot of which is
skirted by a watercourse running north towards the Bénuwé. A short
march, west. Kókomi, before the conquest of the Fúlbe, was the chief and
central place of the Bátta, as Bázuma was that of the Falí. A Bórnu
prince is said to have once found refuge here, and to have governed
Gáruwa also. About ten miles south from Kókomi lies Chébowa, a
considerable Púllo settlement, inhabited chiefly by ʿulama of the tribe
of Ulérba, and the residence of Mʿallem Músa. Some people, in going from
Gáruwa to Búndang, take this road by Chébowa, which seems not to be
longer. One day’s march W.S.W. from Chébowa, about twenty miles, is
Mount Kárin, which is rich in iron, and supplies the independent pagan
inhabitants of Mount Alantíka with this necessary article.

21st. Búndam, or rather Búndang[168], a considerable place, the
inhabitants of which are Fúlbe and Kanúri, not far from the eastern bank
of the Fáro, on a shallow branch, backwater, or “chókel” of the river,
while the Bénuwé is a good day’s journey northward. The country is flat,
with sandy soil, and with small eminences of rock projecting here and
there. Arrive at noon; direction west. In going from Búndang to Lamórde,
a good day’s journey S.S.W., keeping along the “chókel” on which the
place lies, you pass first by Úro Búggel, the former residence of Sámbo
Jíkera, then by Turáwa (“the white people”), the residence of Mohammed
Jóbdi, then by Báyaga, and then by Yáske, a Bátta village, where the
road from Gúrin to Lamórde joins our road, and where the Fáro, from a
sweep westward, once more approaches the track.

22nd. Gúrin, formerly the capital of Ádamáwa, but which was not
regularly walled. It lies on the western bank of the Fáro, which here,
from a more southerly direction, turns eastward, running towards
Búndang, from whence again it makes a sweep towards the north: in the
dry season Gúrin does not lie directly on the river, but on a backwater
called “Gúddi.” People crossing from Búndang to Gúrin therefore, a
distance in a straight line of perhaps only five or six miles, as they
drift a great deal with the current, report the river to be of an
immense breadth, and more important than the Bénuwé. A little lower down
from Gúrin, the Fáro is joined by the máyo Béti.

23rd. If you take the northern road from Gúrin to Yóla, you pass by
Fárda; if the southern one, you stay a night in Béti (Binti?), a Púllo
settlement lying on the eastern side of a rivulet (called after it the
máyo Binti?). Arrive in Béti about three o’clock P.M.

24th. By the north road Yebbólewó, on the west bank of Máyo Binti; by
the southern road Gáwo-Nyíbbi, a Púllo settlement, with a considerable
market every Wednesday. The village has received its name from the
circumstance that the Fúlbe, on their coming to this place, found in it
a large troop of elephants, “nyíbbi.” A short day’s journey; and, if you
choose, you can easily go on to Yóla the same day.

25th. Yóla; early in the morning.


         3. ROUTE FROM SARÁWU, BY GIDÉR, TO FÁTAWEL AND BÍNDER.


1st day. Bútu, a Púllo settlement in a mountainous district, and a small
watercourse towards N.W. at the foot of a mountain; the inhabitants,
however, provide themselves only from wells. A short march, east.

2nd. Doérnom or rather Doérnomi, a Púllo settlement in an open, well-
cultivated district; a short march, east.

3rd. Búllemi, a place inhabited by pagans in its inner circle, and by
Fúlbe all around, skirted by a watercourse on the east side, and
bordered by a mountain at some distance towards the north. Pass another
watercourse on the road, which runs towards Hína. About eight or ten
miles N.W. from Búllemi, and about sixteen or eighteen miles E. or
E.N.E. from Saráwu, is Ngómna, a large pagan village of the Falí.

4th. Méso, a considerable Púllo settlement, which is said to possess as
many as 200 horses; it is situated in an entirely open country, and is
near a watercourse, which is said to run N. (?) and to join that of
Doérnum. On the road the village of Hámma Gári is passed, which was
formerly the residence of Ísubu (Yusuf) Derbé, the father of Ardo
Badéshi. If a man walk well, he can reach Méso in one day from Saráwu.

5th. Péske, a Púllo settlement and residence of ʿAbdú, a brother of the
governor of Méso and Badéshi, in an open valley plain, and with a small
watercourse on the west side.

6th. Gidér, the place above mentioned, inhabited by pagans and Fúlbe,
and skirted by a watercourse, which is said to be joined by three others
near a place called Kólla, and to run towards Máyo Kébbi. Gidér is
properly a district comprising four villages situated on the tops of
mountains. There are two roads from Péske to Gidér, one more direct,
leading straight through the mountainous wilderness in an easterly
direction, while another, passing by a place called Yáji, forms an
angle. Gidér is about eight miles north from Báinga or Báila; you may
easily reach Gidér in one day from Méso.

7th. Soráyi, a place inhabited chiefly by pagans, and having but a few
Fúlbe, with a small watercourse on its south side; arrive about noon,
direction east.

8th. Bínder, a large town, inhabited by Fúlbe, arrive in the morning.

From Bínder to Káfta-Báudi, the place mentioned above, is one day and a
half N.N.E., spending the night in Gajám, where you arrive late in the
afternoon, having passed on your road the village of Torók, then Goy,
Kosére, and, further on, Búsu; arrive the next day, before the heat, in
Káfta-Báudi.


                        _From Gidér to Fátawel._


1st day. Encamp in the wilderness between two and three o’clock, P.M.;
country mountainous.

2nd. Gázabá, the place mentioned above; arrive early in the morning. The
road, as far as this place E.N.E., now turns a little south from east.

3rd. Mískin, a Púllo settlement in the plain; arrive in the morning.

4th. Míndif, a considerable Púllo place at the east and N.E. foot of
Mount Míndif, or Méndefi. There is another road from Gázabá to Míndif,
turning round the south side of the mountain, and passing first by Kadé,
the residence of Ardo Béle, then by Salág.

5th. Máudi, a large place, residence of the Lawán Sʿaíd, who is said to
have a good many horsemen under his command; the country intersected by
several small watercourses. Direction a little north of east.

6th. Fátawel, an important place, residence of the chief Mʿallem Hámma
Yegúdu, and the principal ivory-market in this part of Africa. Indeed it
is so celebrated that people in Bórnu generally suppose its name to be
that of a large region. About ten miles east of Fátawel is Darám or
rather Darám-sulú, a large place inhabited by many Kanúri, as well as by
Fúlbe, and the residence of the chief Ardo Kalíbi, and south from it
another place called Gájia. I here subjoin the road from Bága, on my
Músgu route, to Fátawel.

  1st day. Kadé, not the village before mentioned, nor the place where
  the Músgu chief Ádishén at present resides, but originally a part of
  the same district, which at present forms a Púllo settlement and
  residence of the chief Ardo Júlde (“chief of the Moslemín”).

  2nd. Káya, a Púllo settlement, residence of Ardo Ísa (or ʿAísa, that
  is, Jesus), a short march. East from Káya, at no great distance, are
  the Púllo settlements Bágané and Gúmbulé, and south of the former the
  sister towns Káfta-Báudi, Káfta lying on the north, and Báudi on
  the south side of a shallow watercourse, “fáddama,” or ngáljam, and
  being ruled by one chief, Ardo Béllo.

  3rd. Fátawel, early in the morning.


     4. ROAD FROM MÉSO TO ÍSSEGE, BY WAY OF HÍNA. DIRECTION NORTH.


1st day. Dabá, a pagan village, with but a small number of Fúlbe, in a
very mountainous district; about noon.

2nd. Hína, a pagan village of the Mózogoy, a tribe nearly related to the
Marghí, and probably, therefore, another branch of the Bátta. Their
chief has a house at the foot, and another on the top, of the rocky
mount round which the place is situated.

3rd. Udábunú, a village situated at the foot of a rocky mount, and
inhabited by pagans. Arrive about two o’clock P.M.

4th. Madágalí, a pagan village; a long march ascending and descending in
a mountainous country with many small watercourses.

5th. Íssege, the Marghí place on my own route; a long day’s march.
Before reaching the place, cross a river running northwards.


               _From Múbi to Hína_, E.S.E., _is one day._


Keep along the rivulet of Múbi as far as Bá, where you leave it; reach
Jímmi at noon, and Hína between three and four o’clock P.M., marching at
an expeditious rate.


                  5. ROUTE FROM GÉWE TO KÁRNAK LÓGONE.


Not a direct road, but, such as it is, often taken by pilgrims.
Corrected from the statements of several informants.

1st day. Bázuma, the Púllo settlement mentioned above, residence of
Yamhúra, in a plain without watercourses, but having generally stagnant
pools; a short march, east.

2nd. Badéshi, the Púllo settlement mentioned above, situated at the
northern foot of a mountain; a long march; arrive between three and four
o’clock P.M.; direction N.E.

3rd. Báinga or Báila, a Púllo settlement in a mountainous district,
residence of ʿOmáro Mbílla; a very short march, of about six miles.

4th. Bínder, the Púllo place mentioned above, in a plain; in the dry
season stagnant pools, in the rainy season running water. A very long
march, from early in the morning till sunset; direction N.E. Road
unsafe, the country not being entirely subjected by the conquering
Fúlbe. A little after noon pass close by Bizér, one of the strongholds
of the Mbána.

5th. Lára, a Púllo settlement, with a mountain towards the west; arrive
in the forenoon; direction north.

6th. Míndif, the Púllo settlement mentioned above, at the foot of the
high mountain of the same name. Among the Fúlbe live a few pagans of the
tribe of the Zummáya. A short march a little north from west. There is
another more western and more frequented road between Bínder and Míndif,
leading by Bobóyo, which is about half-way; between Bobóyo and Lára are
the places Ghadás and Kílgim, and between Bobóyo and Gidér the villages
of Múmmur, Tóde, and Lam, at about equal distances in succession, Múmmur
lying a few miles south from Bobóyo, and Lam about ten miles north or
N.N.W. from Gidér. This whole district seems to be very mountainous; and
it is therefore difficult to lay down the roads with any certainty.

7th. Máudi, a Púllo settlement in a mountainous district without
rivulets; a short march N.E. There is another place of the same name at
no great distance, but inhabited by pagans of the tribe of the Zummáya.

8th. Yúlguf, a Púllo village near a small mountain; the country in
general level; short journey; direction, N.-E.S.E., at a short distance
from Yúlguf, is a small place called Yólde, or Yúlde.

9th. Bálazá, a Púllo settlement in a level country; a short march east.

10th. Bógo, the considerable Púllo place, mentioned above, residence of
Lawán Gári; arrive about noon; direction east.

11th. Bálda, a pagan village on the top of a small mount. Short march,
east.

12th. Malám, the border settlement of the Fúlbe, towards the Músgu
country, and formerly the residence of Khúrsu, who now resides in Bógo.
At a short distance south from Malám is another smaller place of the
same name, with the surname Jébjeb. The informant from whom I first
wrote this itinerary, Abú Bakr ben Nʿam, before continuing his direct
road eastward, entirely retraced his steps westward from this place,
after he had already changed his direction in Bógo, which is S.E. from
Malám, visiting Márruwa, which is about thirty miles west from Malám,
and thence returning S.E. towards Fátawel, which is about the same
distance, or a little more, from Márruwa. Malám is about thirty miles
S.S.W. from Wolóje, on my Músgu route.

15th. Wáza, a small village, consisting of two hamlets, and belonging to
Lógone; a few Fúlbe families are settled here. The country level, with
the exception of a few detached rocky hills. This is the place where we
encamped on our return from the Músgu expedition. Abú Bakr passed two
nights in the wilderness between Malám and Wáza, which is full of
elephants and wild oxen (“mbánna”); but an expeditious traveller will
make this journey in one day, from early morning till about five o’clock
in the afternoon. Direction, N.E.

16th. Jínna, a considerable walled town of the territory of Lógone, in a
plain richly clothed with trees, an important market for ivory, and
distinguished by its fine matting and lattice-work. A man who wishes to
travel direct in going from Malám to Jínna does not touch at Wáza, but
leaves it at some distance north.

18th. Logón Bírni, or Kárnak Lógone, the capital of the small kingdom of
the latter name. On this march a bare wilderness, called by Abú Bakr,
“Fíli Obája,” stretches out towards the south. On the road are three
villages.


       6. ROUTES TO AND IN THE PROVINCE OF BÚBANJÍDDA AND MBÁNA.


 i. _From Gúrin to Ray-Búba, the capital of the province of Búbanjídda.
                   Rate expeditious. Direction east._


1st day. Chébowa, the Púllo settlement mentioned above.

2nd. Kauyen, called by other informants Wóyene, a small Púllo
settlement.

3rd. Bóngi, another Púllo place, situated on the Bénuwé.

4th. Bidéng, another large place, inhabited by Fúlbe and Dáma, residence
of a son of Búba, and occasionally also of many wealthy inhabitants of
the walled town Ray Búba, situated on the máyo Dóro, which, near the
place Bóngi just mentioned, joins the Bénuwé, the place Dóro, from which
it takes its name, lying between Bidéng and Bóngi. Another more
southerly and more direct road leads in one day from Wóyene to Bidéng,
passing in the morning by Agúrma, a large Púllo settlement upon which
Wóyene is dependent, and crossing at noon the Bénuwé.

5th. Ray Búba, the capital of the country of the Dáma, a family of the
Falí, called at present Búbanjídda, from the Púllo conqueror Búba, a man
of the tribe of the Hillegáwa, and his mother Jídda. The town, being
strongly fortified and surrounded by a wall, with four gates, lies on
the máyo Chubí, which joins the Bénuwé.


 ii. _Three different roads from Ray-Búba to Ribágo. Direction north._



                       (_a._) _The westernmost._


1st day. Bidéng or Bidáng, the place just before mentioned.

2nd. Bóngi, residence of the Púllo chief ʿOmár Gári; cross the Bénuwé.

3rd. Sáini, a Púllo settlement, residence of a chief called by my Kanúri
informant, Mʿallem Fébe, probably from his rich possessions of cattle,
“fé.” Before entering the place, cross the river Bénuwé, which skirts
its southern side. On the north side of the place is a high mountain. In
this place the road from Ray to Ribágo is joined by the general road
from Géwe to Ribágo, from Géwe to Dýllemi, about ten miles south along
the eastern bank of the Bénuwé, from Dýllemi to Bóngi, passing by Dóka,
about eighteen miles, and from here Sáini, at a short distance.

4th. Gámfargó, a Púllo settlement; short march.

5th. Ribágo, or perhaps more correctly, Ribádo (“the prince’s
residence”)[169], a large and important Púllo settlement, the residence
of the powerful chief Bágeri (Bú Bakr), and situated on a watercourse of
some size, called by the Fúlbe “Máyo Gelangéro,” which joins the river
Bénuwé at a hamlet called “Rúmde Hámma Salátu,” distant from Ribádo two
days’ journey, sleeping the first night in a village of the Dáma, called
Úro Kanáwachi[170], which is reached about two o’clock P.M., and
arriving in Rúmde the next morning.


                       (_b._) _The middle road._


1st day. Lifóro, or Livóro, a cluster of two villages, one inhabited by
pagans of the Dáma tribe, and the other by Fúlbe; arrive at noon.
Wilderness the whole way.

2nd. Bárgirám[171], a Púllo settlement, and residence of a chief of the
name of ʿOmáro; about noon. Dense forest the whole way.

3rd. Ribágo; a long day; arrive between four and five o’clock P.M.


                       (_c._) _The eastern road._


1st day. Bágalá, a Púllo settlement. About twelve miles S.E. from this
place lies Bére, which will be mentioned further on.

2nd. “Bári hosére” (Bári the rocky hill), called so to distinguish it
from another Bári, a Púllo settlement; before noon. Bári hosére is ten
or twelve miles east from Bárgirám, and about fifteen miles N.E. from
Bére.

3rd. Nákiri, a Púllo settlement; before noon.

4th. Ribágo. Expeditious travellers often make the journey from Ray to
Ribágo in two days, passing the night in the farming-village Úro Íbbe.


                     iii. _From Ribágo to Saráwu._


1st day. Lapáre-, or Lafáre-Fulfúlde, in order to distinguish it from
the pagan village of the same name, Lafáre Héferbe (plural of “keféro,”
“the infidel”); arrive before noon. N.N.W.

2nd. Wógoló, Fúlbe; forenoon.

3rd. Láyade, Fúlbe; arrive about noon, having passed on the road a place
called Bay.

4th. Saurogúmji, Fúlbe; arrive about noon, having some time before left
on the right the place Méso.

5th. Saráwu; arrive about four o’clock P.M. Soon after starting in the
morning, the road is joined by the path coming from Méso; and then you
pass the villages Dýllemi and Doernum.

From Ribágo to Báila is one day’s journey from early morning till about
three o’clock P.M.; direction north. Pass in the morning a village
called ʿOmáruwá, or more correctly Manjáula ʿOmáruwá (“the village of
ʿOmár”), and about noon Búsa, both of them situated on the north side of
the máyo Kébbi. In time of peace between the Mohammedan intruders and
the pagan natives, the cattle of Báila are driven into the rich pasture-
grounds of this valley. This valley, as forming almost a natural
communication between the Bénuwé and the Shári, and in this way between
the Gulf of Benín and the Tsád, is of the highest importance, and will
receive more illustration further on.


            iv. _From Géwe to Lére. Rate very expeditious._


1st day. Óblo, a Púllo settlement in a mountainous country. A long day’s
journey, direction N.E. Óblo is about ten miles north, or a little west
from north, from Ribágo, passing by Lafáre.

2nd. Bifára, an independent pagan place, in a large green valley or
fáddama, “chókel,” with a perennial rivulet, the máyo Kébbi, an eastern
branch of the Bénuwé. The place itself lies on the north side of the
valley, while on its south side there is a mountain.

3rd. Lére, a large pagan place of the Mbána, and residence of the
powerful chief Gónshomé, who is greatly feared, as well by the Fúlbe as
by the Kanúri. In the beginning of 1851, shortly before my journey to
Yóla, in consequence of an expedition on a large scale being undertaken
against him, he had been obliged to acknowledge, in a certain degree,
the supremacy of the Fúlbe; but soon after, he again shook off all sort
of allegiance. The situation of the place seems very strong, by reason
of its position in the swampy wooded valley, which, according to all
information, must have an immense extent. The larger valley, which comes
from the east, is here joined by a small watercourse, which is said to
descend from Bínder, and is identical, I think, with the máyo Saréndi.
The Mbána form a numerous tribe, extending as far as Gidér, in which
direction Bizér, Jabéri, and Lam are three of their chief frontier-
places.

In going from Géwe to Lére, a person can also make stages in the
following places: first night in Lafáre, the village mentioned before,
situated on the N.W. side of the máyo Kébbi, where he arrives between
two and three o’clock P.M.; second night Búsa, a Púllo village on the
north side of the máyo Kébbi, where he arrives about noon, having left
in the morning the village of Óblo towards the north; on the third,
between two and three o’clock P.M., he arrives at Lére.


                           v. _Ray to Lére._


1st day. Livóro, the pagan settlement of this name, in subjection to
Búbanjídda; the country level. Arrive about noon.

2nd. Bére, a large Púllo place, with Mʿallem Ádama Agúrmama, who is said
to be able to bring about a thousand horse into the field. Agúrma, his
native place, from which he has received his surname, lies one day and a
half from this place beyond the Bénuwé. A person going thither from
Bére, passes the night in Gúmbolí, lying on the east bank of the river,
and in the morning reaches Agúrma. About twelve miles north from this
Bére lies another smaller Púllo place of the same name, surnamed
Gárgabe, from a relation of Ádama’s; and east of Bére Gárgabe lies Bére
Malómaró; and further eastward Jóro Súki, while to the north of this
latter is situated the place of Mʿallem Hámma Duwé.

3rd. Duwé, the Púllo settlement just mentioned; a long march through a
plain country, there being only an isolated mountain on the east side of
the road.

4th. Lére. The watercourse of the máyo Kébbi, or Íbbi as it is also
called, has so little inclination that the informant from whom I wrote
this itinerary thought it joined the Shári.


vi. _The valley of the máyo Kébbi, from Óblo to Démmo, my furthest point
   on the Músgu expedition, which will be described in the following
                                volume._


Going from Óblo to Lére, along the wide and luxuriant fáddama of the
máyo Kébbi (direction east), you first pass Búsa (see above), then
turning southward along the sweep of the valley leave Manjáula, the
village of ʿOmár, also on the north side of the valley, about eight
miles S.E. from Óblo; then you leave Kacháwu, situated at the foot of a
mountain which is visible even from Báila, on the south side of the
valley; then Bifára, a considerable place, on the north side of the
valley, and distant from Bínder three short days, arriving on the first
day, before the heat, in Zábeli, the second about the same time in
Míndang, a place of the Mbána which has been ransacked by Mohammed
Lowel, and on the third day reaching Bínder about noon. Having passed
the night in Bifára, the following day you leave Gégo on the south side
of the valley, and further on Góngudúk, the birth-place of the father of
the famous pagan chief Gónshomé, on a small island in a lake or large
pond formed by a stemming of the shallow waters of the river; about noon
you reach Lére. S.W. from Lére, and S.E. from Góngudúk, is another place
called Filléngtenáne. Going from Lére to Démmo, you pass the first night
in Máyo Lédde, a Púllo settlement governed by Ardo Chídda, and situated
on a watercourse of the same name, which a little further north joins
the máyo Kébbi; arrive here between two and three o’clock P.M. On the
second day arrive before noon in Dóre, a Púllo settlement, still
proceeding along the fáddama of the máyo Kébbi; and about ten miles
further on you come to the Túburi or Túfuri, from whence Démmo is half a
day N.E. But between Démmo and Túburi the fáddama is apparently
interrupted, this rising ground of very little elevation forming the
water-parting between the Niger and the Tsád.[172]


                      vii. _From Chébowa to Láme._


1st day. Ngóng, a district consisting of two large villages inhabited by
Fúlbe and pagans, and the residence of a chief called Njébbo. The
country level; arrive between two and three o’clock P.M., having crossed
the máyo Dúkka, which further on joins the Bénuwé.

2nd. Báme, a place inhabited conjointly by Fúlbe and Kanúri, the former,
however, predominating. The population of Dýllemi, which is at some
distance to the north, on a creek or inlet (ngáljam) of the river, also
unites these two different elements. A short march, direction east.

3rd. Dóga, on the west bank of the Bénuwé, which is crossed here; the
country flat.

4th. Gámsargú (identical, I think, with Gámforgó, p. 604.), a place
inhabited by Kanúri and Fúlbe. Short march.

6th. Nákeri (see above). An expeditious traveller, starting from Báme in
the dry season, may reach Nákeri early in the afternoon, crossing the
Bénuwé at a place called Lágeri, and leaving Dóka to the south, then
passing Gámsargú, and leaving Séni to the north.

7th. Bári hosére, a large place inhabited by Fúlbe, and the residence of
the chief Hámed, who is dependent on Bágeri, the governor of Ribágo. The
place is skirted on the east side by the máyo Hílle, being joined by
another stream, called Máyo Dóro (not the same as that mentioned above),
and which is said to join the máyo Kébbi.

8th. Bére Gárgabe, the place mentioned above, which may also be easily
reached in one day from Nákeri, leaving Bári hosére a little southward.
This place is also skirted by a stream called máyo Súk.

9th. Láme, a large village inhabited by pagans of the tribe of the Mbána
and by a few Fúlbe, in a flat country with a river which is stated
(although the fact seems improbable), by all informants unanimously, to
join the Shári, or rather Serbéwel (the river “Arre” or “Éré” of the
Músgu), and which seems to be the same with the máyo Súk near Bére
Gárgabe, called so after a place named Súk, which you pass early in the
morning. From Láme to Lére is a very long day’s march of about thirty-
five miles, direction N.N.W.


                   viii. _From Ray to Láme and Lága._


                        (_a._) _Northern Road._

1st day. Lifóro héferbe, the pagan village of that name lying about
eight miles east from the Púllo village of the same name (Lifóro
Fulfúlde); arrive at noon. North.

2nd. Bére, early in the forenoon. N.N.E.

3rd. Láme; east.


                        (_b._) _Southern Road._

1st day. Dámtogó, a Púllo settlement; the country level, broken only by
detached hills.

2nd. Dáli, a pagan village.

3rd. Láme.

4th. Duwé, a pagan village; the country well cultivated. Short march,
east.

5th. Máfalá, a pagan village. None of these pagans are tattooed. About
noon; direction E.S.E.

6th. Lága, or Láka, a large place inhabited exclusively by pagans (of
the tribe of Mbána) who tattoo the left cheek and cheekbone; or rather,
according to more accurate information, the men make a scar on the
forehead and above the nose, while the women tattoo the right arm and
shoulder.


   ix. _From Démmo, my furthest point in the Músgu country_ (see Vol.
             III.), _to Lága, at a most expeditious rate._


1st day. Dáwa, a district with two rocky mountains inhabited by the
Túfuri or Túburi, a tribe of the Falí, and with a large shallow stream,
which forms the beginning of the máyo Kébbi, and which, according to
this informant (Mʿallem Jýmma, a very intelligent Shúwa chief, of whom I
shall speak in the following volume), receives the waters of the ngáljam
of Démmo.

2nd. Kéra, a village inhabited by pagans, who perforate their lips; a
long day’s journey.

3rd. Láka, a large pagan place, in some degree dependent on the lord of
Búbanjídda, who extends his ghazzias, or rather “kónno,” as far as this
place. The country is level, with the exception of a small rocky
eminence. A rivulet which skirts Láka has, according to Mʿallem Jýmma,
its inclination towards the river Serbéuwel, a statement which wants
confirmation. The inhabitants, according to this informant, tattoo the
breast.


Having traced, along the thread of these itineraries, the conquests of
the Fúlbe towards the east and north-east over the regions inclosed
between the Bénuwé and the Shári—a country which is sometimes pre-
eminently called Jemmára, or rather Jemmáʿa, because the revolutionary
and reformatory principle of the Fúlbe has here developed itself with
eminent success,—I now return in the opposite direction, in order to
follow the progress of these enterprising and restless people in their
advance towards the Bight of Benín. The first effect of their advance is
assuredly most calamitous, their road being marked by the ashes of burnt
villages and the blood of thousands of unfortunate creatures; but, on
the other hand, they have laid open these regions to inquiries which may
be followed up by more efficacious proceedings; and it may be reasonably
questioned whether these countries would ever have been opened to
extensive commerce if they had remained in the hands of a motley
multitude of petty pagan chiefs.


                           1. ROUTES TO BÁYA.


      i. _Route from Ray Búba to Báya, a little west from south._


1st day. Hosére Chólle (the “Bird Rock”), a village lying round an
isolated rocky hill where many of the wealthy inhabitants of Ray have
second establishments; about noon.

2nd. Bumgórgo (Mbúm Górgo), a village inhabited by the slaves of the
conquerors, and named after an influential overseer of that name, in a
mountainous district; arrive between four and five o’clock P.M.

3rd. Saláng, a village inhabited by pagans of dark black colour, in a
mountainous district. Cross, about noon, the Bénuwé, which is here
already a considerable river, although I have been unable to learn any
thing more accurate about its upper course, excepting that it is
supposed to issue, at some day’s distance towards the south or S.S.E.,
from a great mountain with a large volume of water. Arrive between four
and five o’clock P.M.

4th. Sleep in the wilderness.

5th. Báya, the principal place of the district or country of the same
name. It lies in the midst between a forest and the mountains, and is
said to be of the same size as Ngáundere (see further on). It is the
residence of a chief named Báushi (a nickname?), who is under the
supremacy of the governor of Búndang. The dwellings are all huts. The
place has no market. The inhabitants go naked, with no covering but a
leaf. They tattoo their bodies in undulating lines, and make a small
hole in the left nostril; they have asses, sheep, and poultry in
abundance, but neither horses nor neat-cattle; they catch elephants,
which are very numerous, in pits, and feed on their flesh. Plenty of
parrots. Much dukhn or _Pennisetum_ is cultivated, while the banana is
the principal fruit. The sexes observe a distinction with regard to
food, the women abstaining from fowls—perhaps on the same principle as
the women, in some parts of India, are prohibited to eat things which
are regarded as delicacies. They have no cotton, but use shells as
money. The only weapons of the people are wooden spears, which they do
not poison. The Báya are evidently identical with Koelle’s and Dr.
Baikie’s Bayong. The former of these two gentlemen has placed these
people at far too great a distance into the interior.


                ii. _From Yóla to Báya by way of Gúrin._


1st day. Gúrin (see above), the former residence of the Púllo ruler of
Ádamáwa.

2nd. Lamórde, a considerable place, inhabited by pagans[173]; arrive
between one and two o’clock P.M. The road lies along the east bank of
the river Fáro, which is crossed, on first setting out from Gúrin, by a
ford in the dry season, but in a boat during the rains. The country
plain; mountains in the distance. You then turn a little west from
south. On the west side of the river is Chámba, a large place situated
at the foot of Mount Alantíka, and inhabited by Fúlbe, the residence of
Ámba Sámbo.

3rd. A village of the pagan Búte, between one and two o’clock P.M. The
country is mountainous on both sides of the road, the Fáro being some
distance off towards the west. As is the case throughout Ádamáwa, there
is here abundance of honey.

4th. A Púllo village situated on a river running N.W. into the Fáro, and
called máyo Koléjo. Here resides a petty governor called Ardo Mohammed;
the whole country is mountainous. The inhabitants maintain that the soil
contains gold, but that they do not know how to collect it. Arrive
between one and two o’clock P.M.

5th. A pagan village, situated in the midst of separate groups of
mountains, and governed by a chief called Njaréndi. The whole country is
under cultivation, the crops consisting in dukhn, durra, ground-nuts,
and cotton. Arrive between four and five o’clock P.M.

6th. A Púllo village, the residence (jóro) of the chief Kábdu, and
therefore called “Jóro Kábdu.” The country through which the road lies
is mountainous; and its inhabitants are pagans, but of very handsome
figure.

7th. Pass the night among the pagan slaves of the Fúlbe (Rúmde
Ngáundere); arrive towards sunset.

8th. Ngáundere, a place of considerable size for this country, said to
be about as large as Gúmmel in Bórnu, and surrounded with a low rampart;
the dwellings are built entirely of reeds, with the exception of the
house of the governor and the mosque, the former being built of clay,
and the latter of clay and reeds. A daily market is held. Arrive a
little before noon.

9th. A slave village (rúmde) of the slaves of the Ardo, in a mountainous
country, with watercourses in the valley. Arrive between one and two
o’clock P.M.

10th. Another pagan village; many small hamlets scattered about.

11th. A village of the Mbúm, a large tribe of pagans, well-proportioned,
who tattoo their bodies, make cuts in the chin, and file the teeth to a
point. They live partly in the valley and partly on the top of the
mountains.

12th. Báya.


iii. _From Chámba to Báya, preceded by an itinerary from Yóla and Kóncha
                              to Chámba._


1st day. Máibatí (Máyo Béti), a Pullo village situated on a small
rivulet called máyo Béti, and joining the Fáro.

2nd. Lamórde, the place mentioned in the preceding itinerary, situated
on the river Fáro.

N.B. It seems almost as if Gúrin had been accidentally omitted in this
itinerary; at least, the place where the river is crossed cannot be far
distant from that town. The road keeps awhile along the bank of the
river; fine country; mountains only at some distance from the road.

3rd. Chámba, a considerable place, in a fine position, bordered by the
river Fáro towards the east, and by the offshoots of Mount Alantíka
towards the west, from which however it seems to be separated by a
smaller stream. Mount Alantíka, which forms a gigantic mountain mass, is
densely inhabited by pagans of the tribe of the Bátta, who are governed
by seven different chiefs, and supply themselves with iron from Mount
Kárin, lying on the east side of the river, half a day’s journey from
Lamórde; mountains are seen all around. Chámba is almost exclusively
inhabited by Fúlbe, and is the residence of the powerful governor Ámba
Sámbo, a very warlike man, but now rather old. Chámba is three days’
journey from Kóncha, in starting from which place you pass the first
night in Láro, the second in the town of Yáji (the mighty ancestor of
Ámba Sámbo), and on the third reach Chámba. This road keeps along a
river, which you have to cross twice, but with regard to the identity of
which with the Déve I am not quite certain.


              iv. _From Chámba to Báya by a western road._


1st day. Lamórde, the place mentioned above, having crossed the river
Fáro immediately on setting out.

2nd. Gabdómana, a pagan village, with a rúmde; the name probably has
some connection with that of the chief Kábdo or Gábdo.

3rd. Encamp in the wilderness.

4th. Bére, a pagan village on the top of a hill, and at a short distance
northward a village inhabited by Kánembú and Kanúri. The country is
intersected by small rivulets.

5th. Rúmde Ngáundere, a small slave-village.

6th. Ngáundere, the principal place in the country of the Mbúm,
surrounded by a low wall, and containing a few houses of clay, and the
residence or jóro of Hámed, who governs the country as far as Búndang,
and is said to be able to bring 500 horse into the field. It is situated
at the western foot of a hill, while towards the west there rises
another hill. The people unanimously state that the place is situated
exactly south from Chámba. The country produces _Sorghum vulgare_, a
peculiar sort of sorghum called mathá, rice, and cotton.

7th. Katíl, in a mountainous district. During the first part of this
day’s march, the direction being S.E., the river, which runs here from
east to west, is close on the right of the traveller; it is called Máyo
Nélbi, and joined by another smaller one, called Njárang. During the
latter part of the rainy season even here it can be crossed only in
boats. However, this is not the direct road, but a great circuit; a
traveller who follows the direct road from Bére arrives in one day at
Katíl, after a march of about nine hours, direction south.

8th. Yángaré, a pagan village in a mountainous country, near a rivulet
which joins the Fáro; a very long day’s journey.

9th. Yére, a pagan village of another tribe, in a wide plain destitute
of trees and intersected with rivulets; arrive about noon.

10th. Principal place of Báya, which the informant of this route,
Mʿallem Katúri, represents as a country mountainous towards the east,
but entirely level towards the west. This last day’s march from Yére is
a very long one; and people generally pass the night on the road, and
enter Báya the following morning.


       v. _From Kóncha to Jóro Fángel, and from thence to Báya._


                         (_a._) _Middle road._


1st day. A “rúmde” of the slaves of Mohammed dan Jóbdi the governor of
Kóncha, on the banks of the mayo Béli, along the eastern bank of which
the traveller continues his march, in a wide valley inclosed on both
sides by mountain-chains.

2nd. Rúmde Fángel; that is to say, the rúmde or slave-village of Jóro
Fángel, on a hill of considerable elevation. The slaves are of the tribe
of the Tekʿa.

3rd. Jóro Fángel, the “lord’s seat” of Fángel, the chief who has
established in these quarters the dominion of the Fúlbe; a place of
middling size, in a valley inclosed by mountains.


         (_b._) _Westernmost road._ [_N.B. Rate rather slow._]


1st day. Rúmde Kaighámman, a slave-village belonging to Kóncha, in a
level country; arrive a little after noon. The name Kaighámman
originally belonged to the Kanúri.

2nd. Encamp on the bank of the máyo Tafári, which, running from west to
east, but further on turning northward, receives the máyo Léggel, which
is crossed in the morning soon after leaving the rúmde, and the máyo
Bénglarí, which is crossed further on; both these watercourses are dry
in summer. Arrive about four o’clock P.M.

3rd. Úro Bákari Yémyem, the residence of the Púllo chief of the Bákari,
overtowered towards the west by a large mountain; arrive early in the
forenoon.

4th. Rúmde Bákari Yémyem, with a mountain-chain rising to a considerable
elevation towards the south; arrive early in the forenoon.

5th. Jóro Fángel; the east side of the place is skirted, according to
the Púllo Ádama, an intelligent native of Ádamáwa, by the máyo Bána or
Mbána, which, at a short distance from Tíngeren, joins the Fáro. Arrive
before noon. This well-known place, Jóro Fángel, is not to be confounded
with a smaller place of the same name.

An expeditious traveller, keeping along the most direct eastern road,
and sleeping in Lámtam, is able to reach Jóro Fángel on the second day.


                    vi. _From Jóro Fángel to Báya._


1st day. Tínger, a Púllo settlement, the residence of Ádama Jíkera, a
powerful Púllo chief, who commands the tribe of the Bákari, or Bákari
Yémyem, who are said to be cannibals. Ádama Jíkera, who is the brother
of Sámbo Jíkera, has about one hundred horse under his command. This
place is not to be confounded with a place of a similar name, Téngeren,
the residence of another chief of the name of Ádama Jíkera, which I
shall mention further on.

2nd. A village inhabited by pagans of the tribe of the Jétem, as they
are called by the Fúlbe, who most probably have been transplanted
hither: the village is skirted by the river Fáro, which is here small,
although during part of the year it becomes navigable for boats; towards
the east rises a considerable hill. Arrive between two and three o’clock
P.M.

3rd. Rúmde Ngáundere, the slave-village mentioned above, with a large
mountain towards the east; arrive between two and three o’clock P.M.

4th. Ngáundere.

The following is a more direct road from Kóncha to Ngáundere:—

  1st day. Encamp on the máyo Béli, in a very level country with several
  small slave-hamlets lying round about; arrive at noon; direction
  S.S.E.

  2nd. Púllo settlement of Ámba Sámbo Jíkera, or Zíkera (Jíkera being
  the name of his grandfather), with a large mountain on the north
  side; arrive about noon; S.S.E.

  3rd. Fílla-Ngáwu, a village of the Mbúm, in a mountainous district,
  with very small watercourses. Hence half a day’s march N.E., and a
  day and a half from Ámba Sámbo Jíkera, is the Téngeren which I
  mentioned above, consisting of two separate villages—a Púllo
  settlement towards the west, and, about six miles east, a pagan
  village of the Mbúm, in a mountainous district. Téngeren is also a
  day and a half’s march from Rúmde Ngáundere, the traveller who comes
  from the former place passing the night in a rúmde of Ámba Sámbo, on
  the north bank of the Fáro.

  4th. Ngáundere, between three and four o’clock P.M.

5th. A village of the Mbúm, situated on the bank of the máyo Nélbi,
which joins the máyo Gelangéro. This stream is perennial, and during
part of the year even navigable; on the south side of the village is a
mountain. Arrive in the forenoon.

6th. Mambúm (properly Ma-Mbúm), a considerable place, and residence of
Arnádo, a chief of the tribe of the Mbúm, skirted on its east side by
the máyo Nélbi, in a level country; arrive about noon. Mambúm is distant
from Katíl one day’s march, S.W.

7th. Rískobáya, a village of the pagan Mbúm, thus denominated from a man
named Rísko, a slave of Mohammed Jóbdi. The southern side of the village
is bordered by a watercourse, dry in summer, called by the Fúlbe “máyo
balléwo;” on the east side there is a mountain, and the whole road is
mountainous. Arrive between four and five o’clock P.M.

8th. Encamp in the wilderness about two o’clock P.M.

9th. Dóka, or rather the residence of Dóka, the principal chief of the
Báya country. I cannot say with certainty whether this place be the same
as that where the other itinerary terminates. The country level, and
covered with dense forest.


                     vii. _From Chámba to Tibáti._


                         (_a._) _Eastern road._


1st day. Búbadáddi, the village mentioned above, situated in the
southern angle formed by the junction of the river of Kóncha (called by
some Máyo Íbbi, by others M. Déve) with the Fáro; about noon.

2nd. Rúmde Dírrim, a hamlet of the slaves of Ámba Sámbo, who originally
belong to the tribe of the Mbúm. The country level; much forest. Arrive
about noon.

3rd. Rúmde Fáro, another slave-village of Ámba Sámbo (which, however,
has a name in the native language also), situated on the north side of
the Fáro, which here makes a sweep from west to east. Arrive between two
and three o’clock P.M., having crossed in the morning several small
streams, and further on a mountain-chain, which seems to border the
valley of the river on the north side.

4th. Rúmde Dúbbel, another slave-village; arrive about noon, having
crossed the river Fáro in the morning, and then traversed a dense
forest, full of elephants, in a level country.

5th. Tibáti, a large walled town, being the only town of this
description in Ádamáwa besides Ray Búba—Ngáundere being merely fortified
with a low rampart,—but inhabited for the most part by slaves, and not
by Fúlbe. It is the residence of a governor. The town is situated on a
small river skirting its north-eastern side, and then running N.W.
towards the Fáro, which it is said to join one day’s journey west from
Rúmde Fáro. It is generally called Kogí-n-Tibáti. On the north side of
the town there seems to be a large swamp, perhaps an inlet of the river.
Tibáti boasts, according to all my informants, of the richest vegetation
in all Ádamáwa. About ten miles west from the town is a more
considerable river, not fordable during some months, which, according to
my best informants, is the máyo Béli, coming from a considerable
distance S.W.


             (_b._) _Western road, according to Mohammed._


1st day. Bómbaké, a Púllo village; before noon.

2nd. Encamp on the bank of a rivulet (the máyo Kotégo?) running
westward, between two and three o’clock P.M.

3rd. Gábdi Mbána, a village of the pagan Mbúm (Mbána?), in a level
country; about noon.

4th. Kóro-Mbána, another pagan village; before noon.

5th. The residence of Ádama Jíkera (see above); at the same time.

6th. Varvándu, a place situated on the south side of a river which
informant calls the Fáro, and which is crossed on branches of trees.
Towards S.E. a mountain is seen.

7th. Another place of Ádama Jíkera, in a level country; about noon.

8th. Tibáti.


                 (_c._) _According to Mʿallem Katúri._


1st day. Gungúti, a considerable Púllo place in a level country, the
southern horizon alone being bordered by mountains. Early in the morning
the broad river Fáro is crossed, during the latter part of the rainy
season and shortly afterwards, in boats, at other times of the year by
fording. Arrive between two and three o’clock P.M.

2nd. Pass the night out in a hilly country full of elephants and
buffaloes, while the deléb-palm or gigiña, and the gónda or _Papaya_
predominate in the forest[174]; arrive at two or three o’clock P.M.

3rd. A village of the pagan Mbána, in a woody country, with mountains
towards west and south. Road mostly keeps along the bank of a rivulet,
which is said to join the Fáro. Arrive between two and three o’clock
P.M.

4th. Hamlets of the pagan Múmbere (?), who live on the summits of the
mountains, the whole country being mountainous, and the road leading
over the heights.

5th. Encamp near a large lake or swamp, which informant calls by the
Háusa appellation “rúwa-n-dórina” (“Hippopotamus water”), in a hollow
between the mountains; arrive between four and five o’clock P.M.

6th. The large settlement of Ámba Sámbo Jíkera, surrounded by hills.

7th. The Púllo settlement of Ádama Jíkera, in a valley-plain surrounded
by mountains on all sides, and intersected by a small rivulet.

8th. A pagan village, Varvándu, in a plain, through which the Fáro runs
from south to north.

9th. Encamp in an uninhabited woody country perfectly level.

10th. Tibáti, about noon.

I shall here add two short itineraries from Tibáti to Ngáundere.
Direction, E.N.E.

  1st day. A slave-village called Rúmde Tibáti, about noon.

  2nd. Village of the Mbúm, in a mountainous district.

  3rd. Rúmde Dúbi, before noon.

  4th. Ngáundere, between two and three o’clock P.M.

  Or a nearer road in three days, passing the first night in Rúmde
  Mbúm, and the second in a slave-village of ʿAbd-Alláhi, and
  travelling each day from early in the morning till about noon.


            viii. _From Tibáti to the Íbo or Ígbo Country._


1st day. A village of the Búte, called, by my Háusa informant the
mʿallem Katúri, “garí-n-Kachélla Búte;” arrive between two and three
o’clock P.M.

2nd. A village of the Tikár (Tikʿa), called by him “garí-n-Kachélla
Tikár,” situated in a dense forest; about noon.

3rd. Another pagan village, called by him “garí-n-Kachélla-n-Yémyem;”
about noon.

4th. A village inhabited by the Monchéran, a tribe of the Búte. Country
level and woody.

5th. A pagan village or “úngwa,” consisting of two hamlets, one of which
lies at the foot and the other on the summit of a hill; between two and
three o’clock P.M.

6th. Another pagan village, the residence of a powerful native chief,
and therefore called by the Háusa people “garí-n-serkí-n-Yémyem.”

7th. A village of the great chief of the Fándu, in a level country. All
these pagan tribes, whose principal weapon is the bow and arrow, are in
the imána of Ámba Sámbo.

8th. Residence of the principal chief of the Tikár, or rather Tikʿa, a
tribe marked by four scars or cuts under the eyes. Each of these pagan
tribes has its peculiar language or dialect.

9th. Another pagan village, called “garí-n-Kachélla-n-Bum,” in a plain
woody country, with a considerable river passable only in boats, and
called by the Háusa people “rúwa-n-kádo” (the crocodile river).

10th. Encamp on the northern bank of the same river, called here “báki-
n-kogí Jétem,” after the Jétem, the pagan inhabitants of the country. It
winds along through a mountainous district.

11th. A village of the Mó, a large tribe of pagans, who live on the
summits of the mountains situated on the same river. This whole tribe is
armed with muskets. A long day’s journey, till about four or five
o’clock P.M.

12th. Village of the Abó, in a mountainous district watered by a river.
Towards the south a town called Úmbe is situated, being conspicuous by a
large mountain.

13th. Dingding, another pagan tribe, who feed chiefly on a particular
kind of clay, which they prepare with butter. The people of the slave-
expedition themselves lived upon it while in this district, and
represent it as not unpleasant. The Dingding are also armed with guns.
The name Dingding, however, most probably is not the indigenous name of
this tribe.

14th. Yúruwa, another pagan tribe, armed with guns, and living in a
mountainous district.

15th. Pó, another tribe, living chiefly on sugar-cane (not, as it seems,
the _Holcus saccharatus_), which they boil, and eat like honey. Country
mountainous.

16th. Íbo, dwelling in nine villages on the “black water” (báki-n-rúwa),
as many of the Háusa people call the Kwára, although the Ígbo and other
tribes in that district give the name “black water” in general to the
Bénuwé, while they distinguish the Kwára as the “white water.”

The Íbo, whom, as well as the Dingding, the Fúlbe believe to be
Christians, have neither cattle, horses, nor asses, but plenty of large
sheep, goats, swine, and poultry. The expedition which my informant
accompanied in 1848-9 spent two months in this country, plundering it
and carrying away a great many slaves. Since that time the Fúlbe can in
some respects truly say that their empire extends as far as the sea; for
now every year the Íbo, at least part of them, and their neighbours are
said to bring slaves, salt, and cowries as a kind of tribute to the
governor of Chámba. The same expedition after having retraced its steps
as far as the garí-n-Kachélla Bum, again returned towards the Great
River, and fell upon and plundered Mbáfu, said to be three days’ journey
north from the Íbo country.[175]


          ix. _From Jóro Fángel to the Country of the Jétem._


1st day. Lúmta, a Púllo settlement in a level country, the N.E. side of
which is skirted by the máyo Nélbi; arrive about noon. Road crosses
several small water-courses; direction a little west from south.

2nd. Máyo Béli, a place chiefly inhabited by pagans, with the addition
of but a few Fúlbe, skirted by a river of the same name, turning from
west to north. The country mountainous, but the mountains not rising to
a great elevation. Arrive between two and three o’clock P.M.

3rd. Hosére Lábul, a large mountain, inhabited by Tikʿa, and extending a
considerable distance west. This mountain is generally regarded in
Ádamáwa as the feeder of the sources of the river Fáro; but according to
this informant (the Háj Ádama, an intelligent man who speaks as an eye-
witness), only a small rivulet, the máyo Tolóre, skirts its east foot,
and joins the máyo Béli. Arrive about noon. Hosére Lábul is one day’s
journey S.W. from Tibáti.

4th. Yáwa, a village of the pagan Tikár (Tikʿa), in a plain woody
country with a small river, which skirts the east side of the village
(perhaps the upper course of máyo Béli). Arrive between two and three
o’clock P.M. From Hosére Lábul you take a more westerly direction.

5th. Bomfónga, a village of another division of the Tikár (Tikʿa), in a
plain with small rivulets. Fárfar, the great capital of the Tikár, is
distant from this a long day W.N.W. The country of the Tikár (Tikʿa) in
general is well inhabited, the cultivated ground alternating with dense
forest, wherein the gonda and the banana prevail; in the more south-
westerly districts the góro-tree (_Sterculea acuminata_) and the hóno-
ruwá, or máji-n-góro (_St. macrocarpos_). That species of grain called
masr (_Zea maïs_), and dóga or yams, constitute the principal
produce,—very little millet, no cotton; the country almost all level,
with plenty of small rivulets. The inhabitants have, besides huts of
clay built overground, also caves underground.

6th. Encamp in the wilderness, the country inhabited by the Déri. A long
day.

7th. Encamp in the wilderness at a spot where natron is found. The
country inhabited by the Bóre, another division of the Tikár (Tikʿa).

8th. Lengwájí, a great mountain inhabited by Tikár, who are in the imána
of Ámba Sámbo, the governor of Chámba; before noon.

9th. Bómbom, one of the chief places of the Tikár; about noon.

10th. Fándu, another division of the Tikár; before noon. Direction a
little south from west.

11th. Mbónga, a large place of the Tikár in a level country, with but a
few mountains; before noon.

12th. Jolonjúnga, a straggling hamlet in a level country, with a rivulet
running north; between two and three o’clock P.M.

13th. Máyo Kim, a considerable river running from east to west (S.E. to
N.W.?), to join the Njéreng, and forming the boundary between the
territory of the Jétem and that of the Tikár; about noon.

14th. Lamórde—that is to say, the residence of a chief of the Jétem,—in
a level country; between four and five o’clock P.M.

15th. The rocky mountain (hosére) Gelangéro (not the original, but a
Fulfúlde name), in an uncultivated country intersected only by small
watercourses; between two and three o’clock P.M.

16th. Kosél Danél, a small hill belonging to the territory of the Jétem,
west of which live the Dingding. The Jétem, as well as the Tikár, have
no guns (but according to some the Jétem have). The Mó dwell to the
north of the Jétem.

17th. Reach a river called by the Fúlbe “máyo balléwo” (the black
river), which, like the Kim, is said to join the Njéreng, a considerable
river, navigable for boats at all seasons of the year, and running
southward. Mbáfu is said to be three days west, and Tóto five days N.W.
from this place.


                      x. _From Ray-Búba to Mbáfu._


1st day. Hosére chólle. See above, p. 613.

2nd. Dánfa, a village inhabited by pagans, who do not tattoo, and whose
weapons are spears and arrows.

4th. Jáfa, a pagan village inhabited by a division of the Dúru, who make
long gashes on the left side of the body. This place lies round a rocky
hill, the south side of which is free from huts, while the dwelling of
the chief is on the north side. You cross the river Bénuwé in the
morning of the first day after leaving Dánfa, and, having passed the
night in the wilderness, arrive early the next morning.

6th. Bére, a village (see p. 617.) inhabited by pagans who make
incisions in the under lip; the country is mountainous, but the
mountains are detached. Direction S.W. Another longer road leads from
Jáfa, a little east from south, to Ságje, a large Púllo place situated a
day’s journey S.W. from the above-mentioned place, Saláng, and from
thence west to Bére.

7th. A village of the Mbum.

8th. Gankaini (see p. 626.), a village of the Mbum; the country level,
covered with dense forests, the large spreading “lainde” and the “kímba”
being the prevailing trees.

9th. Jerang, in the forenoon.

10th. A village of the Mbum, in the forenoon.

11th. A rivulet, called by the Háusa people “kogí-n-góra,” in the
wilderness.

12th. Soló, a village of the Búna, who make three small cuts over the
cheekbone, and possess neither horned cattle nor sheep, but only goats
and poultry; the country level, and covered with a dense forest.

13th. Bóngoré, a village of the Búte, who live in light huts constructed
of branches. The Búte, upon whom the Kótofó, driven from their ancient
seats about Chámba, have thrown themselves, wear no clothing except a
narrow rope, made of bark, round the loins; they have long arrows and
spears, and large shields of a very peculiar shape. They are said to
have red copper in their country, and to work it themselves.

14th. Yénda, a place of the Kótofó. The whole country is flat, with much
sandy soil, masr and sorghum being cultivated, besides a great deal of
vegetables; the country abounds in water, but has no running streams,
all the watercourses being of a shallow, wide-spreading character, such
as are called “ngáljam” in Kanúri, and “fáddama” in Háusa. The rainy
season is said to have here only three months’ duration, the heat, even
in the dry season, not being immoderate. The predominant trees are the
góro, kímba, mosóro, jittagúllo, and the passakóre. S.E., half a day’s
march from Yénda, is another large place of the Kótofó, called Koróngo.

15th. Bónchobé, W.S.W.

16th. Bérberó.

24th. Bambúm. Having passed during eight days, first through the country
of the Búte, then through that of the Tikár, or rather Tikʿa, you reach
this place, belonging to another tribe.

27th. Mbáfu. Mohámmedu my intelligent informant, says that there are
large and wealthy towns in this country, with well-frequented market-
places, and that the people have a great deal of property, and mostly
European furniture; all the houses are made of clay. He represents the
inhabitants of Mbáfu, as well as the Tikár and Dingding, as being of a
copper colour. They wear their hair dressed to a great height like all
the pagans hereabouts, let the beard grow, and practise circumcision.
The tree “tármo,” with a fine fruit, is predominant. Of the identity of
Mbáfu with Mr. Koelle’s Mfút, and of its situation, a few days’ journey
N.E. from Kálabá, I have already spoken.


                   xi. _From Ngaúndere to the Batí._


1st day. Mambúm.

2nd. Soló.

3rd. Bóngoré.

4th. Búbadáddi Kachellél (the name not original, but introduced
altogether by the conquerors), a village of the Kótofó; the whole
country, as all the country south of that of the Mbum in general, is
said to be perfectly level.

5th. Bíttik, another village of the Kótofó; arrive about noon. The
direction, which, as far as Búbadáddi, has been almost south, now turns
south by west. A day and a half S.W. from Búbadáddi lies Géniyon, and
further on in the same direction Búbabóntong.

6th. Bórmoná, a place of the Búte; a long day’s march.

7th. Mángchirin, a woody district, governed by a woman, with a great
mountain towards the west.

10th. Bébe, a pagan village consisting of huts built of clay.

11th. Mére, another pagan village; country woody.

14th. Batí, a tribe of pagans of peculiarly light colour[176], well
made, and not marked by any incisions; they wear an apron round the
loins made of cotton, and dwell in huts built of clay; they have only
sheep, no horned cattle; they have shells for currency, and live at no
great distance from the sea, in the direction of which is seen a very
large mountain. They have no firearms, but only spears, and their
country abounds in elephants and wild pigs.

I am happy to add that Thomas J. Hutchison, Esq., H.M.’s consul at
Fernando Po, with whom I am engaged in active correspondence, is making
diligent inquiries with regard to the tribes of whom I obtained
information in the interior, through the missionary Mr. Anderson. These
inquiries tend always more and more to corroborate my information.


[Footnote 145: This name seems to have evident relation to Mélle, or
Málle, the foreigners from that country probably living in this part of
the town.]

[Footnote 146: The form of the name seems to be Mandingo, while the root
calls to mind Tawát. “Nke” in Mandingo means “inhabitants.” It is not
impossible that the quarter of the Tawáti in Kátsena was honoured with
the same name which in former times it had in Mélle.]

[Footnote 147: Or more properly “the schoolboys’.” “Da-n-alló” means
“the son of the writing-board.”]

[Footnote 148: “Chédia,” in Kanúri “jéja,” is the caoutchouc-tree.]

[Footnote 149: “Dúrrimi” is a kind of tree; and durrimi-n-sháuru means a
tree of this sort under which councils were held.]

[Footnote 150: It is a difficult question, as I have said already,
whether Dáura be identical with the Dáur mentioned by El Bekri; but I
think it is not. It was in former times a chief place of the Díggera.]

[Footnote 151: Záriya has been recently (end of 1855) visited by Mr.
Vogel; but his astronomical observations have not yet been received.
However, it appears from what he says, that all the water here-around is
drained toward the Kwára, and not towards the komádugu of Bórnu.]

[Footnote 152: Bebéji has been visited, and probably astronomically
fixed, by Mr. Vogel.]

[Footnote 153: Fánda, conquered in 1853 by the Fúlbe of Záriya by
treachery.]

[Footnote 154: Is this town identical with the place called by the
Háusa-fatáki “garí-n-serkí-n-Fáwa”?]

[Footnote 155: Katáwa is the Háusa name for the people of Ígbira, the
country itself being called Katú or Kotú, as in Kotú-n-karfi = iron
district, Rúgga-n-Kotú.]

[Footnote 156: This is entirely confirmed by Mr. Vogel’s recent
exploration.]

[Footnote 157: From Mr. Vogel’s last letters it appears that the
elevation is 2,500 feet.]

[Footnote 158: Mr. Vogel also, though some time at Zibu, which he calls
Chubum, has not been able to reach that important place, (the name of
which he writes Okale), on account of the flooded state of the country.]

[Footnote 159: There is some faint indication of such a place in Dupuis’
Researches; and its name, as Okare, is mentioned by William Allen.]

[Footnote 160: This information, received after I had laid down the map,
was, however, indicated by Mr. Petermann in the notes accompanying his
Atlas, p. 11.]

[Footnote 161: Notices et Extraits, tom. xii. p. 650.]

[Footnote 162: A large piece of native cloth of Kwána manufacture, very
interesting to those who feel real concern for the state of industry
among the native Africans, was forwarded to England by the vizier of
Bórnu at my urgent request.]

[Footnote 163: I have already observed with what accuracy I have laid
down Hamárruwa with regard to latitude, while the error of longitude is
attributable to the false position of Kúkawa, as established by
Clapperton. With regard to the name of the town, I observe that I
formerly wrote Hamárrua; and although for English readers it is
certainly better to write it Hamárruwa, nevertheless I never heard it
pronounced with a long ú, but the accent was always laid upon the second
syllable.]

[Footnote 164: Mai Chebchóma being the title of the chief, the original
name of the place is probably Chebchó.]

[Footnote 165: According to another very intelligent informant, of the
name of Ádama, a Púllo native of Ádamáwa, the river of Láro is joined by
the máyo Chánega, which flows two days S.S.W. from Chámba.]

[Footnote 166: This place also furnishes another proof of the care with
which I constructed my routes from information, having changed the
latitude of this place from 10° 15′, in which Denham had placed it, to
11° 1′,—an error of less than three miles. In the number of Mr. Vogel
representing the longitude, there seems to be an error.]

[Footnote 167: The situation of this place is controlled by its relation
to my route to Músgu, and by the distance from Wolóje as well as by that
from Wúliya. See Vol. III.]

[Footnote 168: The termination _ng_, is a nasal sound, and is often not
clearly distinguished.]

[Footnote 169: Respecting this name, see what I have said above, p.
480.]

[Footnote 170: This name seems to be a nickname given to the place by
the Kanúri people, on account of the misery or dearth prevailing there,
although “úro” is a Púllo name meaning “farming-village.”]

[Footnote 171: The form of the name, terminating in “ram,” seems to be
Kanúri.]

[Footnote 172: Mr. Vogel, who visited the Músgu country in the rainy
season, 1854, and who was so fortunate as to reach the district of the
Túfuri, found there a considerable sheet of water, which, very
erroneously, he seems to regard as the feeder of the Bénuwé, while in
reality it was nothing but an expansion of the fáddama. How can it be
possible that such a district, quite close to another large river,
should feed such a stream as the Bénuwé?]

[Footnote 173: This is rather curious, as the name is evidently a Púllo
name meaning “the chief’s residence.”]

[Footnote 174: The prevalence of the _Carica Papaya_ in this district,
in the midst of the forest, is of very great interest.]

[Footnote 175: This last statement is perplexing, as there can be but
little doubt about the situation of Mbáfu a few days’ journey N.E. from
Kalabá, and its identity with Mr. Koelle’s Mfút and with Ndó; for if the
direction were correctly given, we ought to look for these Íbo rather
about Duke’s Town. Nevertheless I have no doubt that the Ígbo are meant,
although no account of an expedition being made by the Fúlbe into that
country has become known on the coast.]

[Footnote 176: Dr. Baikie (Appendix, p. 425.) says that the man from
this tribe whom he met had a very black skin; but nevertheless the
greater part of the tribe may have a far lighter colour, although it is
most probable that Dr. Baikie’s informant would not acknowledge that.
The specimens of the Batí language, which Dr. B. gives, seem to
characterize a tribe entirely distinct from the Báya, or Bayong; but
nevertheless it is likely that there exists an original bond of affinity
between these two people, and that they belong to one and the same
stock, which we may call the Bá stock. It is very characteristic, that
all the numerals given by Baikie commence with a “bá.”]




                          CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE
                               CONTAINING
                A LIST OF THE SÉFUWA, OR KINGS OF BÓRNU
                           DESCENDED FROM SÉF.
         WITH THE FEW HISTORICAL FACTS AND EVENTS UNDER THEIR
          RESPECTIVE REIGNS, THAT HAVE COME TO OUR KNOWLEDGE.

                               * * * * *


  +------------+--------------------------------+-------------+----------+
  |Name of the |  Principal Events during the   |Place where  |Length of |
  |   King.    |      Reign of each King.       |  he died.   |the Reign |
  |            |                                |             | in Lunar |
  |            |                                |             |  Years.  |
  +------------+--------------------------------+-------------+----------+
  |    SÉF.    |Is said to have come to Kánem,  |Sámina.      |   20.    |
  |            |where he founded a new dynasty, |             |          |
  |(Said to be)|and reigned over several tribes;|A place in   |          |
  | Son of Dhu |viz. the Berbers (Begháma?),    |the territory|          |
  |Yazan and of|Tebu, or Tedá, Kánembú, and     |of the Dájó? |          |
  | a woman of |others. Imám Áhmed states       |[177]        |          |
  |   Mekka.   |expressly that he came to       |             |          |
  |            |Njímiye.                        |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |IBRAHÍM, or |“Father of the Sultan.”—_Imám   |      ?      |   16.    |
  |   BÍRAM.   |Áhmed._                         |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | Son of Séf |                                |             |          |
  |and ʿAáisha.|                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  DÚKU, or  |Seems to be generally recognized|Yéri Árfasá. | [250] ?  |
  |   DÚGU.    |as the first king of this       |             |          |
  |            |dynasty; and for this reason,   |A place said | Probably |
  |   Son of   |his father Íbrahím is called    |by the Bórnu |  second  |
  |Íbrahím and |“father of the Sultan.” There is|people (I    | half of  |
  | Ghafalúwa, |still in Bórnu a numerous family|have no doubt| the 9th  |
  |of the tribe|called Dúguwa, who refer their  |erroneously) | century, |
  |of the Kaye.|origin to Dúgu; and it would    |to lie S.    |   A.D.   |
  |            |seem that Dúguwa is the name    |from Túburi, |          |
  |            |which really belongs to the     |in the Músgu |          |
  |            |dynasty, as is intimated by the |country. We  |          |
  |            |chronicle itself further on.    |shall find a |          |
  |            |                                |place Yira in|          |
  |            |                                |Kánem.       |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   FUNÉ.    |A powerful and successful       |Malána.      |   60.    |
  |            |prince.                         |             |          |
  |Son of Dúgu.|                                |A place in   |          |
  |            |                                |Kánem.       |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  ARITSÓ.   |                                |      ?      |   50.    |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |Son of Funé |                                |             |          |
  |    and     |                                |             |          |
  | Fukálshi.  |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  KATÚRI.   |                                |Kaluwána.    |[250](?). |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   Son of   |                                |             |          |
  | Aritsó ben |                                |             |          |
  |   Funé.    |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  ADYÓMA,   |His reign evidently falls in the|Tatnúri.     |   20.    |
  | AYÓMA, or  |last years of the 4th and the   |             |          |
  |  WAYÁMA.   |first of the 5th century of the |With an      |          |
  |            |Hejra; most probably in 390-410,|uncertain    |          |
  |   Son of   |or A.D. 1000-1019.              |Bereríya.    |          |
  | Katúri and |                                |(Berberíya?) |          |
  | Tumáyu, of |                                |             |          |
  |the tribe of|                                |             |          |
  |  the Bení  |                                |             |          |
  |  Ghalgha.  |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   BULÚ.    |                                |Dheghjabadmi,|   16.    |
  |            |                                |or           |          |
  |   Son of   |                                |Meghjibadmi. |          |
  | Adyóma and |                                |             |          |
  |Ghanjáya, of|                                |             |          |
  |the tribe of|                                |             |          |
  | the Kaye.  |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   ÁRKI.    |Had plenty of slaves, of whom he|Rílana, or   |   44.    |
  |            |settled 300 in Dirká (probably  |Zílana.      |          |
  |Son of Bulú |Dirki), 300 in Síggedim, both in|             |          |
  |    and     |Kawár; and 300 in Rílana, or    |             |          |
  |Azisenna, of|Zílana, the place where he died.|             |          |
  |the tribe of|From this it is evident that he |             |          |
  |    the     |was master of the Tebu country. |             |          |
  | Temágheri. |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  SHÚ, or   |Distinguished by his fine       |Ghanta Kamna.|    4.    |
  |HÚWA. [178] |figure. If we knew that he      |             |          |
  |            |“reigned by a viceroy or        |             |          |
  |Son of Árki |khalífa,” we should conclude    |             |          |
  | and Tefsú, |that he was an effeminate man;  |             |          |
  |of the tribe|but that is only M. Blau’s      |             |          |
  |   of the   |misapprehension.[179]           |             |          |
  | Temágheri. |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | SELMA, or  |Was the last king of the dynasty|Ghumzú,      |    4.    |
  |  ʿABD EL   |of the Dúguwa, or Bení Dúgu, if |             |          |
  |   JELÍL.   |we understand this name as      |With the     |          |
  |            |coincident with idolatry. For   |surname      |          |
  | Son of Shú |although the chronicle          |Ridha. (?)   |          |
  |  and of a  |distinguishes plainly between   |             |          |
  |woman of the|the Bení Dúgu and the Bení Humé,|             |          |
  |tribe of the|nevertheless it is evident that |             |          |
  | Ghemarma.  |Humé, the successor of ʿAbd el  |             |          |
  |(Maghárma?) |Jelíl, and the first Mohammedan |             |          |
  |            |king of Kánem, was his son. It  |             |          |
  |            |is therefore clear that Bení    |             |          |
  |            |Humé means nothing else than the|             |          |
  |            |Mohammedan kings, as            |             |          |
  |            |contradistinguished from the    |             |          |
  |            |Dúguwa, the pagans.[180]        |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  HUMÉ, or  |Founded a new dynasty by the    |Masr (Egypt).|   12.    |
  |    UMÉ.    |profession of Islám. Makrízi’s  |             |          |
  |            |(_Hamaker_, p. 206.) statement, |             |   A.H.   |
  |Son of ʿAbd |that the first Mohammedan king  |             | 479-490. |
  |el Jelíl and|of Kánem was Mohammed Ben Jebel |             |   A.D.   |
  |Tikramma, of|(or rather Jíl) refers most     |             |1086-1097.|
  |the tribe of|probably to the later dynasty of|             |          |
  | the Kaye.  |Kánem, namely, the Bulála, while|             |          |
  |            |he counted all the members of   |             |          |
  |            |this and the older Bórnu dynasty|             |          |
  |            |together, and made up the number|             |          |
  |            |of forty kings who had preceded |             |          |
  |            |him. (See what I have said above|             |          |
  |            |on this point, p. 263.) The     |             |          |
  |            |missionary who introduced Islám |             |          |
  |            |into Kánem, according to the    |             |          |
  |            |same Makrízi, was Hádí el       |             |          |
  |            |ʿOthmání. From the place where  |             |          |
  |            |Humé died, it may be inferred   |             |          |
  |            |that he intended, or even       |             |          |
  |            |accomplished, a pilgrimage.     |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  DÚNAMA.   |A very powerful king, according |Egypt, or    |   55.    |
  |            |to the chronicle the most       |rather the   |          |
  |Son of Humé |powerful of the Bení Humé, who  |Gulf of Suez.|   A.H.   |
  | and Kintá, |had a strong and very numerous  |             | 491-545. |
  |of the tribe|army, horse and foot, and made  |             |   A.D.   |
  |of the Tebu,|thrice the pilgrimage to Mekka  |             |1098-1150.|
  |or Tedá (not|with a numerous retinue. Having |             |          |
  |   Tíh).    |excited the suspicions of the   |             |          |
  |            |inhabitants of Egypt, he is said|             |          |
  |            |to have been drowned by them    |             |          |
  |            |when embarking at Suez for      |             |          |
  |            |Mekka, and in the very turbulent|             |          |
  |            |state in which Egypt was at that|             |          |
  |            |time, under the reign of e’     |             |          |
  |            |Dháfer be ámr-Illah, this is by |             |          |
  |            |no means so improbable as it    |             |          |
  |            |might otherwise appear to be.   |             |          |
  |            |The capital Njímiye,            |             |          |
  |            |notwithstanding the strength of |             |          |
  |            |the empire, seems to have been  |             |          |
  |            |at that time still a very small |             |          |
  |            |place.[181]                     |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   BÍRI.    |Seems to have been at first     |Ghamtilú?    |   27.    |
  |            |entirely under the influence of |Bela Ghanna. |          |
  |   Son of   |his mother, who even imprisoned |(billa       |   A.H.   |
  | Dúnama and |him. If he had not much energy, |ghaná?)      | 546-572. |
  | Fasáme, of |he must have been at least a    |             |   A.D.   |
  |the tribe of|very learned man, for Imám Áhmed|             |1151-1176.|
  | the Kaye.  |calls him “el fáki e’ táki,” p. |             |          |
  |            |31.; and it would seem from the |             |          |
  |            |report of the chronicle, that   |             |          |
  |            |part of the ceremonial of the   |             |          |
  |            |court dates from his time, even |             |          |
  |            |if through the influence of his |             |          |
  |            |mother.                         |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |ʿABD ALLAH, |                                |Fafsa.       |   17.    |
  |  or DÁLA.  |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |   A.H.   |
  |   Son of   |                                |             | 573-589. |
  | Bíkoru ben |                                |             |   A.D.   |
  |Bíri and of |                                |             |1177-1193.|
  | Zíneb, of  |                                |             |          |
  |the tribe of|                                |             |          |
  |the Tebu, or|                                |             |          |
  | Tubu (not  |                                |             |          |
  |   Túba.)   |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | SELMA, or  |As he lived in the most         |Jejéska      |   28.    |
  |  ʿABD EL   |flourishing period of the Bení  |Ghazrwána.   |          |
  |   JELÍL.   |Háfis, the Tunisian princes,    |             |   A.H.   |
  |            |who, by their friendship, are   |             | 590-617. |
  |   Son of   |said to have occasioned the     |             |   A.D.   |
  | Bíkoru and |ascendancy of the Bórnu kings   |             |1194-1220.|
  |Húwa, of the|over the whole desert[182], he  |             |          |
  |tribe of the|must have been one of the most  |             |          |
  |  Débirí.   |powerful of the latter. He is   |             |          |
  |            |said to have been the first     |             |          |
  |            |_black_ king of this dynasty,   |             |          |
  |            |all the Bórnu kings before him  |             |          |
  |            |having had a light complexion   |             |          |
  |            |like the Arabs. But this latter |             |          |
  |            |assertion seems to be           |             |          |
  |            |contradicted by the fact, that a|             |          |
  |            |preceding king had borne the    |             |          |
  |            |name of Selma, or Tselma, which |             |          |
  |            |means “the black” (properly     |             |          |
  |            |tsélima), from tsélim, or       |             |          |
  |            |tsílim, “black.”                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | DÚNAMA, or |A very warlike prince, who waged|Zamtam.      |   40.    |
  |   ÁHMED.   |many wars, which were generally |             |          |
  |            |conducted by his sons, who in   |A little W.  |   A.H.   |
  |Son of Selma|consequence formed themselves   |from         | 618-657. |
  | and Díbalá |into parties and factions. His  |Ghambarú.    |   A.D.   |
  | (therefore |strength, like that of his      |             |1221-1259.|
  |  his full  |ancestor Dúnama, seems to have  |             |          |
  |    name    |consisted chiefly in cavalry, of|             |          |
  |  Díbalámi  |which he is said in the         |             |          |
  |   Dúnama   |chronicle to have possessed     |             |          |
  |Selmámi), of|41,000; but, according to the   |             |          |
  |the tribe of|more credible testimony of      |             |          |
  |    the     |Wanúma Mohammed Ghaná, cited by |             |          |
  | Maghárma.  |Imám Áhmed (pp. 77, 78.), he had|             |          |
  |            |30,000; and that ought not to   |             |          |
  |            |appear so exaggerated, although |             |          |
  |            |the king in Leo’s time had only |             |          |
  |            |3000, for that was a very       |             |          |
  |            |different period, when the      |             |          |
  |            |empire was almost ruined.       |             |          |
  |            |Dúnama’s most celebrated deed—of|             |          |
  |            |which we are informed—is the war|             |          |
  |            |he waged against the Tebu for   |             |          |
  |            |more than seven years; according|             |          |
  |            |to tradition, 7 years, 7 months,|             |          |
  |            |and 7 days. And it is most      |             |          |
  |            |probable that it was this       |             |          |
  |            |enterprising and restless king  |             |          |
  |            |who extended the empire of Kánem|             |          |
  |            |over the whole of Fezzán,—a     |             |          |
  |            |state of things which lasted    |             |          |
  |            |till about the middle of the    |             |          |
  |            |14th century.[183] He likewise  |             |          |
  |            |is the king who, in the time of |             |          |
  |            |Ébn Sʿaíd, A.H. 650 (A.D.       |             |          |
  |            |1252-3), invaded the well-      |             |          |
  |            |watered populous country of     |             |          |
  |            |Mabiná[184], which it is        |             |          |
  |            |difficult to identify, although |             |          |
  |            |the name bears some resemblance |             |          |
  |            |to Fúmbiná, the indigenous name |             |          |
  |            |of Ádamáwa, while the           |             |          |
  |            |geographer’s account of the     |             |          |
  |            |situation of that country agrees|             |          |
  |            |well with Fúmbiná; but we shall |             |          |
  |            |find another name closely       |             |          |
  |            |related to it. It is also Ebn   |             |          |
  |            |Sʿaíd who first calls Bórnu—that|             |          |
  |            |is, the country on the south-   |             |          |
  |            |western side of the Tsád as far |             |          |
  |            |as Díkowa—part of Kánem. The    |             |          |
  |            |empire of Kánem at that time    |             |          |
  |            |extended, according to Imám     |             |          |
  |            |Áhmed, from the Nile, near      |             |          |
  |            |Dhúwi, as far as the rivulet    |             |          |
  |            |Baramuwása, in the west, which  |             |          |
  |            |most probably is identical with |             |          |
  |            |what Clapperton (Second Journey,|             |          |
  |            |p. 63.) calls the river Moussa  |             |          |
  |            |(bahr Músa), the river which    |             |          |
  |            |divides the territories of      |             |          |
  |            |Yóruba and Bórgu, and we may    |             |          |
  |            |add, from Mábiná in the south to|             |          |
  |            |Wadán in the north. (See what I |             |          |
  |            |have said, p. 263.; also, with  |             |          |
  |            |regard to the present sent by   |             |          |
  |            |the king of Bórnu to the ruler  |             |          |
  |            |of Tunis in A.H. 665.) But      |             |          |
  |            |Dúnama laid the foundation for  |             |          |
  |            |the ensuing disasters of the    |             |          |
  |            |empire, by opening, as the Bórnu|             |          |
  |            |people say, the “munni,” or     |             |          |
  |            |“talisman of Bórnu.” What it was|             |          |
  |            |it is difficult to say[185]; but|             |          |
  |            |what it meant may be more easily|             |          |
  |            |conjectured, chiefly from the   |             |          |
  |            |words of the imám Áhmed, who    |             |          |
  |            |expresses himself thus (pp. 123,|             |          |
  |            |124.): “When the thing which was|             |          |
  |            |in it (the talisman) escaped, it|             |          |
  |            |called forth and provoked every |             |          |
  |            |powerful man to ambition and    |             |          |
  |            |intrigues, in the government and|             |          |
  |            |in high charges.” Indeed, from  |             |          |
  |            |this time, civil wars, murders  |             |          |
  |            |of kings, and changes in the    |             |          |
  |            |dynasty, succeeded each other   |             |          |
  |            |without interruption.           |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |“The true faith, in his time,”  |             |          |
  |            |according to Ebn Sʿaíd, “was    |             |          |
  |            |largely disseminated in         |             |          |
  |            |Kánem,”—a remarkable change     |             |          |
  |            |effected since the time when El |             |          |
  |            |Bekri wrote his account. It was |             |          |
  |            |under his reign (A.H. 640) that |             |          |
  |            |the inhabitants of Kánem built  |             |          |
  |            |the Médreset Ébn Rashik at      |             |          |
  |            |Cairo, where their travellers   |             |          |
  |            |might alight.[186]              |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  KADÉ, or  |Murdered by a man of the name of|Dhurríya     |   29.    |
  |  ʿABD EL   |ʿAndákama Dúnama. We know       |Ghimútú.     |          |
  |   KADÍM.   |nothing further of his reign.   |             |   A.H.   |
  |            |                                |             | 658-686. |
  |   Son of   |                                |             |   A.D.   |
  | Dúnama (?) |                                |             |1259-1285.|
  |and Máthala,|                                |             |          |
  |of the tribe|                                |             |          |
  |   of the   |                                |             |          |
  | Meghárma.  |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |    BÍRI    |“A Conqueror,” but unfortunately|Njímiye.     |   20.    |
  | (ÍBRAHÍM). |it is not known in what quarter |             |          |
  |            |he made his conquests. It is an |             |   A.H.   |
  |   Son of   |important fact, gleaned from the|             | 687-706. |
  | Dúnama and |chronicle, that two religious   |             |   A.D.   |
  | Zíneb, of  |chiefs of the Fúlbe or Felláta  |             |1288-1306.|
  |the tribe of|of Mélle came to him.[187] Known|             |          |
  |    the     |to Makrízí.                     |             |          |
  | Lekmamma.  |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | (ÍBRAHÍM)  |Killed one of his sons, who most|Dískama.     |   20.    |
  |  NIKÁLE.   |probably had revolted against   |             |          |
  |            |him; was murdered himself and   |A place on   |   A.H.   |
  |   Son of   |thrown into the river Wáú, the  |the Bórnu    | 707-726. |
  |   (Bíri)   |so-called Yeou, by Yeráma       |river,       |   A.D.   |
  |Íbrahím and |Mohammed. From the title “Háj”  |one day’s    |1307-1326.|
  | of Kakúdi, |given to him by Makrízí, we see |march from   |          |
  |of the tribe|that he made a pilgrimage to    |the later    |          |
  |   of the   |Mekka.                          |capital, or  |          |
  |  Kúnkuna.  |                                |Bírni.       |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |ʿABD ALLAH. |A just prince, who, having      |Njímiye.     |   20.    |
  |            |punished the murderers of the   |             |          |
  |Son of Kadé |former king, and after having   |             |   A.H.   |
  |and Fátima. |successfully vanquished his     |             | 727-746. |
  |            |rival the Bagharíma (see further|             |   A.D.   |
  |            |down,—and not as Blau, p. 326.  |             |1326-1345.|
  |            |n. 18., translates, “Prince of  |             |          |
  |            |Bagharmi,” a state not existing |             |          |
  |            |at that time), seems to have    |             |          |
  |            |established his power with a    |             |          |
  |            |strong hand.                    |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   SELMA.   |Fell in a war with the Só, or   |Yúsub.       |    4.    |
  |            |Soy[188], the original          |             |          |
  |Son of ʿAbd |inhabitants of the greater part |             |   A.H.   |
  |Allah and of|of the country between the Wáú  |             | 747-750. |
  |   Kamma.   |(Yeou) and the Shárí. This      |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |powerful nation, whom the former|             |1346-1349.|
  |            |kings seem to have greatly      |             |          |
  |            |reduced, but without taking and |             |          |
  |            |destroying their strongholds,   |             |          |
  |            |appears to have risen at that   |             |          |
  |            |period, in a successful war,    |             |          |
  |            |against their aggressors,       |             |          |
  |            |vanquishing and killing four    |             |          |
  |            |successive Bórnu kings, all sons|             |          |
  |            |of the unfortunate ʿAbd Allah,  |             |          |
  |            |whom an afflicted mother is said|             |          |
  |            |to have cursed.                 |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |KURÉ GHANÁ. |Vanquished and killed by the Só.|Ghaliwá (?). |    1.    |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |Son of ʿAbd |                                |             |A.H. 751. |
  |   Allah.   |                                |             |A.D. 1350.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | KURÉ KURÁ. |Vanquished and killed by the Só,|Ghaliwá.     |    1.    |
  |            |at the same place as his brother|             |          |
  |Son of ʿAbd |and predecessor.                |             |A.H. 752. |
  |   Allah.   |                                |             |A.D. 1351.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | MOHAMMED.  |Vanquished and killed by the Só.|Nánigham.    |    1.    |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |Son of ʿAbd |                                |             |A.H. 753. |
  |   Allah.   |                                |             |A.D. 1352.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   EDRÍS.   |Reigned in the middle of A.D.   |Njímiye.     |   25.    |
  |            |1353 (A.H. 754), when Ébn       |             |          |
  |   Son of   |Batúta, who calls him king of   |This is the  |   A.H.   |
  |   Nikále   |Bórnu, returned from his visit  |current      | 754-778. |
  | (Íbrahím)  |to Mélle and Songhay by way of  |tradition;   |   A.D.   |
  | and Hafsa. |Tekádda. It is evident that the |but some     |1353-1376.|
  |            |sons of ʿAbd Allah having all   |maintained   |          |
  |            |died, the royal dignity reverted|that he died |          |
  |            |to the family of Nikále         |at Dámmasak. |          |
  |            |(Ibrahím). Whether Edrís was    |[189]        |          |
  |            |more successful than his        |             |          |
  |            |predecessors against the Só we  |             |          |
  |            |are not informed, nor do we know|             |          |
  |            |anything of his reign; and      |             |          |
  |            |indeed the great uncertainty    |             |          |
  |            |which prevails as to the place  |             |          |
  |            |where he died, seems to intimate|             |          |
  |            |rather a quiet reign, at least  |             |          |
  |            |as regards its latter period,   |             |          |
  |            |though, as Dámmasak was one of  |             |          |
  |            |the chief strongholds of the Só,|             |          |
  |            |it would have been of some      |             |          |
  |            |importance for us to know       |             |          |
  |            |positively whether he died      |             |          |
  |            |there.                          |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |He made a pilgrimage to Mekka,  |             |          |
  |            |and is therefore called “Háj    |             |          |
  |            |Edrís” by Makrízí.              |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   DÁÚD.    |A very important, but rather    |Mélfala.     |   10.    |
  |            |unfortunate reign, bearing the  |             |          |
  |   Son of   |germs of the expulsion of the   |             |   A.H.   |
  |   Nikále   |Bórnu dynasty from Kánem, their |             | 779-788. |
  | (Íbrahím)  |original seat, and of the       |             |   A.D.   |
  |and Fátima, |transference of their residence |             |1377-1386.|
  |a sister of |to Bórnu. The successful        |             |          |
  | Hafsa the  |aggressors were the Búlala (as  |             |          |
  | mother of  |the name is written in the      |             |          |
  |his brother |chronicle), or rather Bulála (as|             |          |
  |    and     |Imám Áhmed constantly writes it,|             |          |
  |predecessor |and as the name is pronounced   |             |          |
  |   Edrís.   |generally), who, originating    |             |          |
  |            |from a branch line of the royal |             |          |
  |            |family of Kánem, by their       |             |          |
  |            |forefather Jíl Shikomémi (a son |             |          |
  |            |of Dúnama Díbalámi?), had       |             |          |
  |            |founded a powerful principality |             |          |
  |            |in the territory of Fittrí (“the|             |          |
  |            |lake”), over the numerous tribes|             |          |
  |            |of the Kúka (Leo’s Gaoga). As to|             |          |
  |            |the period of the rise of this  |             |          |
  |            |dynasty, we have the distinct   |             |          |
  |            |testimony of Imám Áhmed, that it|             |          |
  |            |was after the time of Dúnama    |             |          |
  |            |Díbalámi.[190]                  |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |Weakened by a civil war with one|             |          |
  |            |or more of his sons, who, having|             |          |
  |            |been beaten, seem to have taken |             |          |
  |            |refuge with the pagans of the   |             |          |
  |            |tribe of Ghammúwa, where Edrís  |             |          |
  |            |Alawóma found their progeny,    |             |          |
  |            |Dáúd ben Nikále was driven out  |             |          |
  |            |of Njímiye, the old capital, and|             |          |
  |            |finally killed by ʿAbd el Jelíl,|             |          |
  |            |the Bulála king.                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  ʿOTHMAN.  |Seems to have waged the war with|Njímiye.     |    4.    |
  |            |the Bulála at first with some   |             |          |
  |Son of Dáud.|success, and even to have       |             |   A.H.   |
  |            |retaken Njímiye, when he        |             | 789-792. |
  |            |likewise succumbed. He, as well |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |as his successor, became known  |             |1387-1390.|
  |            |to Makrízí.                     |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  ʿOTHMÁN.  |Sustained the struggle for two  |             |    2.    |
  |            |years, when he met the same fate|             |          |
  |Son of Edrís|as his uncle and his cousin.    |             |   A.H.   |
  |and Famáfa. |During this time there was a    |             | 793-794. |
  |            |prince in Háusa, or Afunú,      |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |called Mastúr, in a certain     |             |1391-1392.|
  |            |degree of dependency on Kánem.  |             |          |
  |            |(Makrízí.)                      |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  ÁBÚ BAKR  |Was killed by the Bulála, after |Shefiyári, in|  9 mo.   |
  |  LIYÁTU.   |a reign of a few months.        |Kánem.       |          |
  |            |                                |             |A.H. 795. |
  |Son of Dáúd.|                                |             |A.D. 1392.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   ʿOMÁR.   |This prince was at length so    |Demaghíya.   |    5.    |
  |            |hardly pressed by the Bulála    |             |          |
  |   Son of   |that he finally, with the       |(Not, as it  |   A.H.   |
  |   Edrís.   |consent of his ʿulama, gave up  |seems,       | 796-800. |
  |            |Kánem entirely, transferring his|Maghíya.)    |   A.D.   |
  |            |residence to Kaghá, a district  |             |1394-1398.|
  |            |of some forty miles in extent,  |             |          |
  |            |between Ujé and Gújeba,         |             |          |
  |            |notorious in Bórnu as the refuge|             |          |
  |            |of every defeated party during  |             |          |
  |            |the civil wars, where they went |             |          |
  |            |to recruit their strength. And  |             |          |
  |            |though, in the course of time,  |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu recovered from intestine  |             |          |
  |            |troubles, and flourished once   |             |          |
  |            |more under mighty princes, who  |             |          |
  |            |even vanquished the Bulála, none|             |          |
  |            |of them ever returned to Kánem  |             |          |
  |            |in order to fix his residence   |             |          |
  |            |there.                          |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   SʿAÍD.   |A usurper, as it would seem; for|Dekakíya.    |    1.    |
  |            |the chronicle does not give him |             |          |
  |            |the usual title of sultan, but  |             |A.H. 801. |
  |            |calls him merely “melek,” and   |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |does not name his father.       |             | 1398-9.  |
  |            |Nevertheless he must be reckoned|             |          |
  |            |in the list of the Bórnu kings. |             |          |
  |            |The Bulála, not content with    |             |          |
  |            |having wrested Kánem from the   |             |          |
  |            |hands of their enemies, followed|             |          |
  |            |them into their new retreat, and|             |          |
  |            |vanquished and killed Sʿaíd near|             |          |
  |            |Dekakíya.                       |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |KADÉ ÁFUNÚ. |Fell likewise in the war with   |Ghadhurú (?).|    1.    |
  |            |the Bulála in the course of a   |             |          |
  |   Son of   |year, having, as it would seem, |(Not         |A.H. 802. |
  |   Edrís.   |resumed the offensive. Why the  |Ghumuzú.)    |   A.D.   |
  |            |surname “Áfnó,” or “Áfunú,” was |             |1399-1400.|
  |            |given to him is not clear;      |             |          |
  |            |perhaps from his mother being of|             |          |
  |            |Áfno (Háusa) origin.            |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   BÍRI.    |A long reign, after several     |Kanántú.     |   33.    |
  |            |short and unfortunate ones; but |             |          |
  |   Son of   |the only fact with regard to it |(In          |   A.H.   |
  |   Edrís.   |of which we are informed,       |Bagharmi?)   | 803-835. |
  |            |namely, a civil war between the |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |king and the keghámma or        |             |1400-1432.|
  |            |seraskier, Mohammed ben Diltu,  |             |          |
  |            |is not of a kind to give an idea|             |          |
  |            |of repose and happiness. The    |             |          |
  |            |ensuing period of the history of|             |          |
  |            |Bórnu may be called a period of |             |          |
  |            |civil war and of the greatest   |             |          |
  |            |distress.                       |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  ʿOTHMÁN   |Succumbed, after a short reign  |Áfunú, Kano. |  9 mo.   |
  |  KALNAMA.  |of a few months, to the party of|[191]        |          |
  |            |the keghámma Nikále ben Ibrahím |             |A.H. 836. |
  |Son of Dáúd.|and the yeríma Kadé; and        |             |A.D. 1432.|
  |            |deprived of his throne, he      |             |          |
  |            |appears to have been obliged to |             |          |
  |            |seek refuge in the Áfnó (Háusa) |             |          |
  |            |province of Kanó, where he died,|             |          |
  |            |or more probably was killed.    |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  DÚNAMA.   |Was murdered after a short      |Nánigham.    |    2.    |
  |            |reign.                          |             |          |
  |   Son of   |                                |             |   A.H.   |
  |   ʿOmár.   |                                |             | 836-838. |
  |            |                                |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |                                |             | 1433-4.  |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |ʿABD ALLAH, |Was embroiled in a civil war    |Famelfa.     |    8.    |
  |  or DÁLA.  |with the keghámma ʿAbd Allah    |             |          |
  |            |Dighelma, who even dethroned    |             |   A.H.   |
  |   Son of   |him, and made Íbrahím the son of|             | 838-846. |
  |ʿOmar, with |ʿOthmán king, but, on the death |             |   A.D.   |
  |the surname |of the latter, restored him to  |             |1435-1442.|
  | Dakumúni.  |the throne. The eight years     |             |          |
  |            |attributed to his reign by the  |             |          |
  |            |negligently-written chronicle   |             |          |
  |            |seem to comprise the two periods|             |          |
  |            |of his reign, before and after  |             |          |
  |            |Íbrahím; or it must be          |             |          |
  |            |understood that Íbrahím placed  |             |          |
  |            |ʿAbd Allah again upon the       |             |          |
  |            |throne, after the death of      |             |          |
  |            |keghámma.                       |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  ÍBRAHÍM.  |Seems to have excited the       |Zamtam.      |    8.    |
  |            |discontent of his subjects by   |             |          |
  |   Son of   |neither keeping a regular court |One day N.   |   A.H.   |
  |  ʿOthmán.  |nor showing himself to his      |from         | 846-854. |
  |            |people. After a reign of eight  |Ghámbarú.    |   A.D.   |
  |            |years he was murdered by Kadé   |             |1442-1450.|
  |            |(his brother?). Though this is  |             |          |
  |            |the only king of the name of    |             |          |
  |            |Íbrahím in the list of Bórnu    |             |          |
  |            |kings of the end of the 15th, or|             |          |
  |            |the beginning of the 16th       |             |          |
  |            |century, it is evident that he  |             |          |
  |            |could not have been a           |             |          |
  |            |contemporary of Leo Africanus,  |             |          |
  |            |and that the latter erred, from |             |          |
  |            |lapse of memory, in the account |             |          |
  |            |of Africa which he composed     |             |          |
  |            |several years after his visit to|             |          |
  |            |those countries, in calling the |             |          |
  |            |king who reigned over Bórnu     |             |          |
  |            |during the time of his visit    |             |          |
  |            |Íbrahím.                        |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   KADÉ.    |Succumbed, after a short reign, |Amará, or    |    1.    |
  |            |to a rival, Dúnama son of Bíri. |Amazá.       |          |
  |   Son of   |                                |             |   A.H.   |
  |  ʿOthmán.  |                                |             |  854-5.  |
  |            |                                |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |                                |             | 1450-1.  |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  DÚNAMA.   |                                |Aghakúwah.   |    4.    |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |Son of Bíri.|                                |             |   A.H.   |
  |            |                                |             | 855-859. |
  |            |                                |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |                                |             |1451-1455.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | MOHAMMED.  |                                |Mazá.        |  5 mo.   |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   Son of   |                                |             |A.H. 859. |
  |  Mátala.   |                                |             |A.D. 1455.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  MER, or   |                                |Tármata.     |    1.    |
  |   AMER.    |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |A.H. 860. |
  |   Son of   |                                |             |A.D. 1456.|
  |  ʿAáisha   |                                |             |          |
  |daughter of |                                |             |          |
  |  ʿOthmán.  |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | MOHAMMED.  |A very cruel and sanguinary     |Meghjibád-   |   (?)    |
  |            |prince; probably reigned but a  |Nerí- Kerbúri|          |
  |Son of Kadé.|very short time, only a few     |(?).         |          |
  |            |days.                           |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   GHAJÍ.   |Defeated in battle, and killed  |Matakla      |    5.    |
  |            |by Mohammed son of ʿAbd Allah,  |Ghamer.      |          |
  |   Son of   |the king of Kánem.              |             |   A.H.   |
  | Amála, or  |                                |             | 861-865. |
  |   Imáta.   |                                |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |                                |             |1456-1461.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  ʿOTHMAN.  |Notwithstanding his excellent   |Mikidhá.     |    5.    |
  |            |qualities as a prince, he was   |             |          |
  |Son of Kadé.|dethroned in consequence of a   |             |   A.H.   |
  |            |civil war with ʿAlí Ghajidéni,  |             | 866-870. |
  |            |who, though he apparently had   |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |the upper hand, by some unknown |             |1461-1466.|
  |            |circumstances, or from some     |             |          |
  |            |unknown reasons of his own, to  |             |          |
  |            |which we have no key, allowed   |             |          |
  |            |another person to occupy the    |             |          |
  |            |throne that had thus become     |             |          |
  |            |vacant.                         |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   ʿOMÁR.   |A despotical reign, spent in    |Ghomtalú.    |    1.    |
  |            |dispute with a more powerful and|(Reká?)      |          |
  |Son of ʿAbd |successful rival, Mohammed ben  |             |A.H. 871. |
  |   Allah.   |Mohammed, who, in the course of |             |A.D. 1466.|
  |            |a year, gained the upper hand,  |             |          |
  |            |and probably killed ʿOmár.      |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | MOHAMMED.  |A courageous and powerful       |Breda. [192] |    5.    |
  |            |prince.                         |             |          |
  |   Son of   |                                |             |   A.H.   |
  | Mohammed.  |                                |             | 872-876. |
  |            |                                |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |                                |             |1467-1471.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   ʿALÍ.    |A glorious reign, beginning a   |Ghasréggomo. |   33.    |
  |            |new epoch in the history of     |             |          |
  |   Son of   |Bórnu. First of all, ʿAlí       |             |   A.H.   |
  |  Dúnama,   |Ghajidéni made an end of the    |             | 877-909. |
  |   known    |civil wars, which had torn and  |             |   A.D.   |
  |generally in|wasted the kingdom for so long a|             |1472-1504.|
  |Bórnu under |period, having vanquished and   |             |          |
  |the name of |killed his old rival ʿOthmán ben|             |          |
  |  Mai ʿAlí  |Kadé, whom he had formerly      |             |          |
  | Ghajidéni. |dethroned, and who began the    |             |          |
  |            |struggle once more. He then     |             |          |
  |            |restored the equilibrium between|             |          |
  |            |the different officers of high  |             |          |
  |            |rank, the excessive power of    |             |          |
  |            |some of these officers,         |             |          |
  |            |particularly that of the        |             |          |
  |            |keghámma[193], having been the  |             |          |
  |            |principal cause of all those    |             |          |
  |            |disturbances; and in order to   |             |          |
  |            |concentrate the government, he  |             |          |
  |            |built a large capital,          |             |          |
  |            |Ghasréggomo, generally called   |             |          |
  |            |Birni, the future residence of  |             |          |
  |            |the kings of Bórnu, on the river|             |          |
  |            |Wáú, three days west from the   |             |          |
  |            |modern town Kúkawa. For until   |             |          |
  |            |this period the Bórnu people    |             |          |
  |            |lived only in temporary         |             |          |
  |            |encampments in the conquered    |             |          |
  |            |country, although Nánigham had  |             |          |
  |            |been the ordinary residence of  |             |          |
  |            |the kings. It was in this king’s|             |          |
  |            |reign, doubtless, that Leo      |             |          |
  |            |visited Bórnu; and it is by this|             |          |
  |            |author that we are informed of  |             |          |
  |            |one of the many wars which the  |             |          |
  |            |prince carried on, who, on this |             |          |
  |            |account alone, of all the kings |             |          |
  |            |of Bórnu, seems to have obtained|             |          |
  |            |the surname “el Gházi”—“the     |             |          |
  |            |warrior,” or rather “the        |             |          |
  |            |conqueror.” Wángara—that is, the|             |          |
  |            |country of the Eastern          |             |          |
  |            |Mandingoes, about the name and  |             |          |
  |            |extent of which we shall not    |             |          |
  |            |leave any doubt in our further  |             |          |
  |            |inquiries—seems, indeed, to be  |             |          |
  |            |rather distant from Bórnu,      |             |          |
  |            |particularly if it be taken into|             |          |
  |            |consideration that the nearest  |             |          |
  |            |provinces were ill subjected;   |             |          |
  |            |but if the Baramuwása be        |             |          |
  |            |identical, as can scarcely be   |             |          |
  |            |doubted, with the frontier-river|             |          |
  |            |between Bórgu and Yóruba,       |             |          |
  |            |Wángara was close to the western|             |          |
  |            |frontier of the tributary       |             |          |
  |            |provinces of Bórnu, and it is   |             |          |
  |            |only to be attributed to the    |             |          |
  |            |miserable character of the      |             |          |
  |            |chronicle, and to the general   |             |          |
  |            |scantiness of our sources, that |             |          |
  |            |we hear nothing of the several  |             |          |
  |            |expeditions which the Bórnu     |             |          |
  |            |kings made into the provinces of|             |          |
  |            |the Kwára, and of the           |             |          |
  |            |interesting relation which      |             |          |
  |            |appears to have existed between |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu and some of the Bórgu     |             |          |
  |            |places, particularly Brúsa. It  |             |          |
  |            |is moreover to be taken into    |             |          |
  |            |account, that Wángara probably  |             |          |
  |            |extended, at that time, more to |             |          |
  |            |the east, and almost reached the|             |          |
  |            |Kwára.                          |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |But the Bulála, the old and     |             |          |
  |            |inveterate enemies of Bórnu,    |             |          |
  |            |were not yet humiliated; and it |             |          |
  |            |was an inroad of the king of    |             |          |
  |            |that empire into Bórnu which    |             |          |
  |            |obliged ʿAlí Ghajidéni (assuming|             |          |
  |            |him to be identical, as he      |             |          |
  |            |certainly is, with Leo’s        |             |          |
  |            |Íbrahím) to give up the conquest|             |          |
  |            |of Wángara. That the name of    |             |          |
  |            |this king of the Bulála was     |             |          |
  |            |ʿOmár, as Leo says, we have     |             |          |
  |            |strong reasons to doubt, and    |             |          |
  |            |think it another lapse of       |             |          |
  |            |memory. It was probably Selma,  |             |          |
  |            |or ʿAbd el Jelíl, the father of |             |          |
  |            |the prince whom Edrís, ʿAlí’s   |             |          |
  |            |son and successor, vanquished.  |             |          |
  |            |The name ʿOmár seems not to     |             |          |
  |            |occur at all in the dynasty of  |             |          |
  |            |the Bulála.                     |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |But we have another account,    |             |          |
  |            |which gives us a glance into the|             |          |
  |            |warlike career of ʿAlí          |             |          |
  |            |Ghajidéni, and informs us of one|             |          |
  |            |of his expeditions into the far |             |          |
  |            |west. For this account we are   |             |          |
  |            |indebted to Sultan Béllo, who   |             |          |
  |            |relates in his “Enfák el misúri |             |          |
  |            |fi fat-ha belád el              |             |          |
  |            |Tekrúri”[194], that Kantá, whose|             |          |
  |            |age as a contemporary of ʿAlí   |             |          |
  |            |ben Dúnama, is fixed by the fact|             |          |
  |            |that he lived in the time of Háj|             |          |
  |            |Mohammed Áskiá, “having         |             |          |
  |            |oppressed the inhabitants of the|             |          |
  |            |provinces conquered by him,”    |             |          |
  |            |Sultan “ʿAlí Alij,” as he is    |             |          |
  |            |called in the translation,      |             |          |
  |            |marched from Bórnu against him, |             |          |
  |            |and beat him near Suráme, his   |             |          |
  |            |capital (see Vol. IV.), on the  |             |          |
  |            |ʿAíd el kebír; but not being    |             |          |
  |            |able to reduce this strong      |             |          |
  |            |place, ʿAlí was obliged to      |             |          |
  |            |retire, when Kantá, having      |             |          |
  |            |collected a large army, followed|             |          |
  |            |him till he reached Onghoor     |             |          |
  |            |(most probably Ngarú), “where   |             |          |
  |            |they met and fought together,   |             |          |
  |            |and Kantá won the battle,”      |             |          |
  |            |without, however, being able to |             |          |
  |            |follow up his victory. This war |             |          |
  |            |must fall about the very end of |             |          |
  |            |the reign of ʿAlí Ghajidéni.    |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |The glory of this reign makes it|             |          |
  |            |intelligible how Bórnu, or      |             |          |
  |            |Bernu, appears in Portuguese    |             |          |
  |            |maps as early as the year 1489. |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   EDRÍS.   |The worthy son and successor of |Waláma.      |   23.    |
  |            |ʿAlí, who accomplished what     |             |          |
  |Son of ʿAlí |remained necessary for the      |             |   A.H.   |
  |and ʿAáisha,|greatness and the peace of the  |             | 910-932. |
  |  with the  |Bórnu empire, viz. the          |             |   A.D.   |
  | surname of |humiliation and subjection of   |             |1504-1526.|
  |Katarkamábi.|the Bulála. A short time,       |             |          |
  |            |therefore, after he had ascended|             |          |
  |            |the throne, he went with a      |             |          |
  |            |strong army to Kánem, beat the  |             |          |
  |            |Bulála prince Dúnama son of ʿAbd|             |          |
  |            |el Jelíl, or Selma, at Gharni   |             |          |
  |            |Kiyála, and entered Njímiye, the|             |          |
  |            |old capital of the empire of    |             |          |
  |            |Kánem and Bórnu, 122 years after|             |          |
  |            |King Dáúd had abandoned it (see |             |          |
  |            |above, p. 259.). Having then    |             |          |
  |            |heard, on his return to Bórnu,  |             |          |
  |            |that Ádim, another son of ʿAbd  |             |          |
  |            |el Jelíl, had usurped the throne|             |          |
  |            |after his brother’s death, he   |             |          |
  |            |returned once more, vanquished  |             |          |
  |            |Ádim, and established for a long|             |          |
  |            |period the dependency of Kánem  |             |          |
  |            |upon Bórnu. (Imám Áhmed.) It    |             |          |
  |            |could only have been Edrís, and |             |          |
  |            |not Músa—a name which does not  |             |          |
  |            |at all occur in the list of the |             |          |
  |            |kings of Bórnu—who sent an      |             |          |
  |            |embassy to Tripoli in the year  |             |          |
  |            |1512[195], a circumstance which |             |          |
  |            |clearly shows the elevated      |             |          |
  |            |political views of that king. Of|             |          |
  |            |the other achievements of his   |             |          |
  |            |brilliant career, we are        |             |          |
  |            |unfortunately deprived by the   |             |          |
  |            |loss or concealment of the      |             |          |
  |            |contemporaneous account of his  |             |          |
  |            |reign by the fákih Masfárma     |             |          |
  |            |ʿOmár ben ʿOthmán, though I     |             |          |
  |            |still entertain hopes that the  |             |          |
  |            |work may some day or other come |             |          |
  |            |to light.                       |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | MOHAMMED.  |A very powerful and mighty king,|Ghasréggomo. |   19.    |
  |            |successful in all directions. He|             |          |
  |Son of Edrís|vanquished and killed Kadé the  |             |   A.H.   |
  | and Zíneb. |son of ʿAbd el Jelíl and Lifya, |             | 933-951. |
  |            |who, only forty days after      |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |Mohammed had ascended the       |             |1526-1545.|
  |            |throne, came to attack him at   |             |          |
  |            |Nathá; and in consequence of    |             |          |
  |            |this victory kept Kánem in a    |             |          |
  |            |state of strict obedience. His  |             |          |
  |            |reign is very important to us,  |             |          |
  |            |because he is one of the kings  |             |          |
  |            |of Bórnu of whose conquests and |             |          |
  |            |activity towards the west we    |             |          |
  |            |have obtained some positive     |             |          |
  |            |account. For, as we learn from  |             |          |
  |            |the Christian captive in        |             |          |
  |            |Tripoli[196], Mohammed fought a |             |          |
  |            |great and celebrated battle with|             |          |
  |            |the king of Kébbi—probably Tómo,|             |          |
  |            |of the dynasty of the Kantá, who|             |          |
  |            |founded Birni-n-Kebbi. The      |             |          |
  |            |“captive,” unfortunately, does  |             |          |
  |            |not state what was the issue of |             |          |
  |            |the battle; but although we     |             |          |
  |            |cannot agree with Mr. Blau, who |             |          |
  |            |interprets the words of our     |             |          |
  |            |chronicle, “gareb hú ila hedúd  |             |          |
  |            |el Kabará bememlekettihi,”[197] |             |          |
  |            |as if Mohammed had extended his |             |          |
  |            |empire as far as Kabara, the    |             |          |
  |            |harbour of Timbúktu, we must    |             |          |
  |            |conclude that he was victorious.|             |          |
  |            |Finally, to speak of the little |             |          |
  |            |we know, it must have been he   |             |          |
  |            |who sent the embassy to Tripoli |             |          |
  |            |in the year 1534, if the date be|             |          |
  |            |correct.                        |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |There is certainly, in the      |             |          |
  |            |passage of our chronicle which  |             |          |
  |            |relates to the reign of this    |             |          |
  |            |king, some degree of confusion; |             |          |
  |            |and it is very unfortunate that,|             |          |
  |            |after having aspired to a little|             |          |
  |            |more completeness, it just      |             |          |
  |            |becomes exceedingly brief and   |             |          |
  |            |dry in the most interesting part|             |          |
  |            |of the history of the Bórnu     |             |          |
  |            |kingdom. The confused passage   |             |          |
  |            |has been taken into account in a|             |          |
  |            |preceding comment; and we are   |             |          |
  |            |not able at present to explain  |             |          |
  |            |why this energetic prince, who  |             |          |
  |            |waged war on the opposite       |             |          |
  |            |borders of his extensive empire,|             |          |
  |            |at immense distances from each  |             |          |
  |            |other, can be said to have      |             |          |
  |            |resided “nineteen [years] in    |             |          |
  |            |Ladé.” But the fact may simply  |             |          |
  |            |have been that he did not like  |             |          |
  |            |to reside in the large capital  |             |          |
  |            |or birni, Ghasréggomo, but      |             |          |
  |            |preferred dwelling in a small   |             |          |
  |            |neighbouring town; or perhaps it|             |          |
  |            |was one of the objects of his   |             |          |
  |            |ambition to transfer the seat of|             |          |
  |            |government, from the place      |             |          |
  |            |chosen by his predecessors, to  |             |          |
  |            |some new place of his own       |             |          |
  |            |choice. Even at the present day |             |          |
  |            |there is a place of the name of |             |          |
  |            |Ladé in the neighbourhood of    |             |          |
  |            |Ghambarú; and another one is    |             |          |
  |            |mentioned by Imám Áhmed, at four|             |          |
  |            |short days’ journey on the road |             |          |
  |            |to Kánem.                       |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |Be this as it may, “the kingdom |             |          |
  |            |of Bórnu reached under Mohammed |             |          |
  |            |the highest pitch of its        |             |          |
  |            |greatness.” I here, therefore,  |             |          |
  |            |add a list of the twelve great  |             |          |
  |            |offices, or ʿalám, which        |             |          |
  |            |constituted the chief machinery |             |          |
  |            |of the empire, and which are    |             |          |
  |            |already indicated by            |             |          |
  |            |Makrízí[198] in the words, “and |             |          |
  |            |they have twelve princes.” Imám |             |          |
  |            |Áhmed calls these high officers |             |          |
  |            |generally “el akáber el áʿalám,”|             |          |
  |            |or “erbáb e’ dúleh,” or “el     |             |          |
  |            |omrá.” They are all mentioned by|             |          |
  |            |him, except the gháladíma, the  |             |          |
  |            |fugúma, and the kaghustémma:—   |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |_Kayghámma_, or _Keghámma_,     |             |          |
  |            |corresponding to the seraskier  |             |          |
  |            |(or commander-in-chief) of the  |             |          |
  |            |Turkish empire, and possessing  |             |          |
  |            |very great power.               |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |_Yeríma_, or _Híríma_ (both     |             |          |
  |            |forms occur indiscriminately in |             |          |
  |            |Imám Áhmed’s history), the      |             |          |
  |            |governor of Yerí, or “tsidí     |             |          |
  |            |Yeríbe,” the district between   |             |          |
  |            |Birni Ghasréggomo and           |             |          |
  |            |Múniyó[199], the inhabitants of |             |          |
  |            |which are called by Imám Áhmed  |             |          |
  |            |“áhel e’ shemál.”               |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |_Gháladíma_, the governor of the|             |          |
  |            |Gháladí, a province comprising  |             |          |
  |            |the western countries, from     |             |          |
  |            |Ngarú as far as the Kwára       |             |          |
  |            |(called, by the Kanúri, Kwalla).|             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |_Chiróma_ (generally written by |             |          |
  |            |Imám Áhmed Thiróma, or Shiróma),|             |          |
  |            |the heir apparent, son or       |             |          |
  |            |brother of the king.            |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |_Fugúma_, the governor in the   |             |          |
  |            |interior of Ghasréggomo, with   |             |          |
  |            |power over life and death.      |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |_Bágharíma_, sometimes mentioned|             |          |
  |            |as an officer of great          |             |          |
  |            |importance, who, in the time of |             |          |
  |            |the civil wars, often raised his|             |          |
  |            |ambition even to the throne; but|             |          |
  |            |I have not been able to make out|             |          |
  |            |what the department, or         |             |          |
  |            |province, called bágharí, really|             |          |
  |            |was. It has nothing whatever to |             |          |
  |            |do with Bagírmi.                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |_Síntelma_. This title seems to |             |          |
  |            |belong originally to some       |             |          |
  |            |department connected with the   |             |          |
  |            |government of Kánem, but what   |             |          |
  |            |were the duties of its office I |             |          |
  |            |cannot say. The title is still  |             |          |
  |            |common in Bórnu, and will       |             |          |
  |            |frequently occur in my          |             |          |
  |            |narrative, though at present it |             |          |
  |            |is of little importance.        |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |_Kásalma_, or _Kájelma_,        |             |          |
  |            |governor of the eastern         |             |          |
  |            |provinces of Kánem.             |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |_Kaghustémma_, governor of      |             |          |
  |            |Kaghústi, one of the western    |             |          |
  |            |districts of Kánem. (See Vol.   |             |          |
  |            |III. App. II.)                  |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |_Arjinóma_. His province is not |             |          |
  |            |exactly known to me, except that|             |          |
  |            |it appears from Imám Áhmed, that|             |          |
  |            |he belonged to the governors of |             |          |
  |            |the northern provinces of the   |             |          |
  |            |empire, “el omrá e’ shemalíyín.”|             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |_Mestréma_, or _Metréma_, chief |             |          |
  |            |eunuch of the harím.            |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |_Yíroma_ (not to be confounded  |             |          |
  |            |with the Yeríma), under the     |             |          |
  |            |mestréma, but nevertheless, at  |             |          |
  |            |least in the time of Edrís      |             |          |
  |            |Alawóma, an office of           |             |          |
  |            |importance.                     |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |The other governors of large    |             |          |
  |            |towns, such as Wúdi, Díkowa,    |             |          |
  |            |&c., had the title “mainta;” and|             |          |
  |            |there were many smaller charges,|             |          |
  |            |such as “búma,” probably        |             |          |
  |            |signifying a “judge of life and |             |          |
  |            |death,” from “bú,” the blood.   |             |          |
  |            |The king had forty lifeguards,  |             |          |
  |            |in a narrower sense, men of     |             |          |
  |            |great authority, called “góma,” |             |          |
  |            |twenty at his left hand, and    |             |          |
  |            |twenty at his right.            |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |I now proceed with the list of  |             |          |
  |            |the succeeding kings.           |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   ʿALÍ.    |A just prince, who kept Kánem in|Zamtam.      |    1.    |
  |            |strict subjection, but whose    |             |          |
  |Son of Edrís|reign was too short to be of any|             |A.H. 952. |
  | and Zíneb. |importance.                     |             |A.D. 1545.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  DÚNAMA,   |Vanquished ʿAbd el Jelíl the son|Ghasréggomo. |   19.    |
  |  surnamed  |of Kadé the king of Kánem, who, |             |          |
  | GHAMARÁMI. |once more assuming the          |             |   A.H.   |
  |            |offensive, had come to attack   |             | 953-971. |
  |   Son of   |him in his own kingdom at       |             |   A.D.   |
  | Mohammed.  |Berberuwá, where Dúnama defeated|             |1546-1563.|
  |            |him, followed him thence to     |             |          |
  |            |Kánem, and beat him in another  |             |          |
  |            |battle, in which fell the heir  |             |          |
  |            |apparent of the throne of Kánem,|             |          |
  |            |and several other great men of  |             |          |
  |            |the Bulála. After this, Kánem   |             |          |
  |            |once more remained quiet and in |             |          |
  |            |a state of subjection; but the  |             |          |
  |            |people of that country,         |             |          |
  |            |nevertheless, continued to make |             |          |
  |            |predatory incursions into Bórnu.|             |          |
  |            |The only other fact which we    |             |          |
  |            |know of his reign, is that he   |             |          |
  |            |fortified Ghasréggomo, the      |             |          |
  |            |capital or birni, built by ʿAlí |             |          |
  |            |ben Dúnama. The chronicle,      |             |          |
  |            |moreover, states that in his    |             |          |
  |            |reign there was a great famine  |             |          |
  |            |in Bórnu. It must have been he  |             |          |
  |            |also who concluded a treaty with|             |          |
  |            |Dragút, the famous renegade, in |             |          |
  |            |1555.                           |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |ʿABD ALLAH, |Under him nothing very          |Kítaba.      |    7.    |
  |  or DÁLA.  |remarkable seems to have        |             |          |
  |            |happened. After some time, ʿAbd |             |   A.H.   |
  |   Son of   |el Jelíl, king of Kánem, whose  |             | 972-978. |
  |  Dúnama.   |officers never ceased to make   |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |predatory incursions into Bórnu,|             |1564-1570.|
  |            |died, and was succeeded by his  |             |          |
  |            |son ʿAbd Allah. It is, however, |             |          |
  |            |a fact of the highest importance|             |          |
  |            |that, under the reign of this   |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu king, we get the first    |             |          |
  |            |intimation of the settlements of|             |          |
  |            |the Fúlbe, or, as they are      |             |          |
  |            |called by the Kanúri, the       |             |          |
  |            |Fellátah (“kabílet el           |             |          |
  |            |Felatíye”), in Bórnu.[200] In   |             |          |
  |            |ʿAbd Allah’s reign, also, there |             |          |
  |            |is said to have been a great    |             |          |
  |            |famine in the land.             |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   EDRÍS    |This is certainly the most      |Aláwo.       |   33.    |
  |  AMSÁMI,   |important reign for us, as this |             |(not 53.) |
  |            |excellent and energetic prince  |             |          |
  |Or as he is |found in his imám, Áhmed ben    |             |   A.H.   |
  |    more    |Fúrtua (or ben Sofíya), a       |             |979-1011. |
  | generally  |trustworthy and able historian, |             |   A.D.   |
  |called, from|whose work has outlived the     |             |1571-1603.|
  | Aláwo, his |dynasty of the Séfuwa, and      |             |          |
  |  place of  |fallen into my hands. But,      |             |          |
  |  burial,   |unfortunately, it comprises only|             |          |
  |Alawóma, son|the first twelve years of his   |             |          |
  |of ʿAlí ben |reign, so that of the remaining |             |          |
  | Edrís ben  |twenty-one years, equally rich  |             |          |
  |  ʿAlí ben  |in events, we know nothing at   |             |          |
  |Ahmed Dúnama|all. The imám Áhmed wrote one   |             |          |
  |ben ʿOthmán |part of his work evidently in   |             |          |
  | ben el Háj |the year of the Hejra 990 or    |             |          |
  |   Edrís.   |991, at the end of Rejeb, in the|             |          |
  |            |capital Ghasréggomo; the other  |             |          |
  |            |part, which contains an account |             |          |
  |            |of the expeditions to Kánem,    |             |          |
  |            |which likewise belong to the    |             |          |
  |            |first years of the long reign of|             |          |
  |            |Edrís, a little later.          |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |Edrís Alawóma seems to have     |             |          |
  |            |ascended the throne after a     |             |          |
  |            |short interregnum, during which |             |          |
  |            |the reins of government were    |             |          |
  |            |held by the queen mother, or    |             |          |
  |            |mágira, ʿAáisha Kel-            |             |          |
  |            |eghrármarám[201], who appears to|             |          |
  |            |have been a very distinguished  |             |          |
  |            |woman, probably of Berber       |             |          |
  |            |origin, realizing to the Kanúri |             |          |
  |            |the ideal perfection of a       |             |          |
  |            |female, and therefore called    |             |          |
  |            |“mai kámobe.” Probably it was   |             |          |
  |            |she who instilled into her son  |             |          |
  |            |that harmonious union of warlike|             |          |
  |            |courage and vigour on the one   |             |          |
  |            |hand, with mildness and justice |             |          |
  |            |on the other, which were the    |             |          |
  |            |characteristic qualities of this|             |          |
  |            |excellent prince. Not long after|             |          |
  |            |his accession to the throne, he |             |          |
  |            |appears to have sent, probably  |             |          |
  |            |under the influence of his      |             |          |
  |            |mother, an embassy to Tripoli,  |             |          |
  |            |the secure intercourse with     |             |          |
  |            |which place was very important  |             |          |
  |            |for any enterprising prince of  |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu; and to this intercourse  |             |          |
  |            |we evidently have to ascribe the|             |          |
  |            |very remarkable fact, that this |             |          |
  |            |king possessed already a good   |             |          |
  |            |many musketeers, who decided the|             |          |
  |            |issue of the most serious       |             |          |
  |            |battles. We find also in the    |             |          |
  |            |imám’s history an interesting   |             |          |
  |            |account of a numerous caravan   |             |          |
  |            |arriving from the north with a  |             |          |
  |            |great many Arab horses for sale.|             |          |
  |            |I have no doubt that the French |             |          |
  |            |Prisoner in Tripoli was mistaken|             |          |
  |            |in ascribing the embassy, which |             |          |
  |            |in the year 1578 arrived in that|             |          |
  |            |place to ʿAbd Allah instead of  |             |          |
  |            |to the new prince, who had only |             |          |
  |            |a few years previously ascended |             |          |
  |            |the throne, and was not yet     |             |          |
  |            |known on the coast.             |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |With regard to the interior     |             |          |
  |            |affairs of the kingdom, the     |             |          |
  |            |principal object of Edrís       |             |          |
  |            |Alawóma seems to have been to   |             |          |
  |            |subdue entirely, or even to     |             |          |
  |            |exterminate, if possible, those |             |          |
  |            |heterogeneous elements of which |             |          |
  |            |the kingdom had been formed, and|             |          |
  |            |which had been allowed by his   |             |          |
  |            |predecessors (intent on the     |             |          |
  |            |superficial advantages of       |             |          |
  |            |distant conquests) to undermine |             |          |
  |            |the very strength of the empire.|             |          |
  |            |He therefore seems to have      |             |          |
  |            |turned his attention immediately|             |          |
  |            |to the Só, or Soy, who, though  |             |          |
  |            |evidently greatly reduced from  |             |          |
  |            |their former predominance and   |             |          |
  |            |power, yet still possessed many |             |          |
  |            |extensive districts and numerous|             |          |
  |            |strongholds in the immediate    |             |          |
  |            |neighbourhood of the principal  |             |          |
  |            |settlements of the Bórnu people,|             |          |
  |            |against whom they not only      |             |          |
  |            |successfully vindicated their   |             |          |
  |            |independence, but even          |             |          |
  |            |continually harassed them by    |             |          |
  |            |inroads. He therefore first     |             |          |
  |            |attacked that division of this  |             |          |
  |            |great tribe which inhabited the |             |          |
  |            |fertile districts on the river  |             |          |
  |            |(Komádugu Wáúbe), and was called|             |          |
  |            |Gháffate (Ngaufate?), with      |             |          |
  |            |several subdivisions, among     |             |          |
  |            |which we find the names of the  |             |          |
  |            |Ghidáma and the Dughúti. In     |             |          |
  |            |order to conquer their extensive|             |          |
  |            |and strong capital, Dámasak, he |             |          |
  |            |built at some distance from it a|             |          |
  |            |large and fortified camp, where |             |          |
  |            |he placed a great part of his   |             |          |
  |            |army, and further north another |             |          |
  |            |smaller one. Having harassed the|             |          |
  |            |enemy for some time by daily    |             |          |
  |            |attacks from these places,      |             |          |
  |            |cutting down their corn and     |             |          |
  |            |their trees, he at length       |             |          |
  |            |undertook to besiege the place; |             |          |
  |            |and having succeeded in taking  |             |          |
  |            |it, he killed or carried away   |             |          |
  |            |its inhabitants, after which the|             |          |
  |            |smaller places around shared the|             |          |
  |            |same fate. The rest of the      |             |          |
  |            |people of Dughúti fled to Kánem.|             |          |
  |            |He then attacked another large  |             |          |
  |            |and strong pagan fortress called|             |          |
  |            |Ámsaka, or Ámasak, situated     |             |          |
  |            |between Gamerghú and Mándará,   |             |          |
  |            |and succeeded in taking it      |             |          |
  |            |chiefly by means of his muskets.|             |          |
  |            |He then proceeded against the   |             |          |
  |            |tribe of the Gamerghú, who had  |             |          |
  |            |been left undisturbed by all the|             |          |
  |            |preceding kings, and took       |             |          |
  |            |several of their towns.         |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |Having in this way strengthened |             |          |
  |            |the loose structure of his      |             |          |
  |            |empire towards the east, he     |             |          |
  |            |turned westward against         |             |          |
  |            |Kanó[202], a name which by the  |             |          |
  |            |historian is evidently used only|             |          |
  |            |to denote the whole province,   |             |          |
  |            |and not a single town. Indeed,  |             |          |
  |            |from what he says about Dalá, it|             |          |
  |            |is evident that there was no    |             |          |
  |            |large _town_ named Kanó at that |             |          |
  |            |time. The king succeeded in     |             |          |
  |            |destroying all the strongholds  |             |          |
  |            |of the province, which our      |             |          |
  |            |author expressly states the     |             |          |
  |            |Kanáwa had then first built,    |             |          |
  |            |viz. Kazrá, Kelmásana (this     |             |          |
  |            |seems a Berber name), Majíya,   |             |          |
  |            |Ukluya, Dulúwo, Auzáki,         |             |          |
  |            |Ajíyajíya, Saʿayá, Ghálaki,     |             |          |
  |            |Kayí, and others; but as for    |             |          |
  |            |Dalá[203], the strongest of     |             |          |
  |            |these “shokíya” or stockades, he|             |          |
  |            |was unable to take it. This Dalá|             |          |
  |            |was evidently the village built |             |          |
  |            |at the foot of the rocky mount  |             |          |
  |            |of the same name, which at      |             |          |
  |            |present forms, for the most     |             |          |
  |            |part, the quarter of the Arabs  |             |          |
  |            |in the town of Kanó. After Edrís|             |          |
  |            |had humiliated and weakened, in |             |          |
  |            |this way, the inhabitants of    |             |          |
  |            |Kanó, the people of Bórnu       |             |          |
  |            |continually made predatory      |             |          |
  |            |expeditions against them.       |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |From this circumstance we are   |             |          |
  |            |enabled to judge of the state of|             |          |
  |            |affairs in these loosely        |             |          |
  |            |aggregated empires; for Kanó had|             |          |
  |            |certainly been long before this |             |          |
  |            |period a province of Bórnu.     |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |Edrís Alawóma then directed his |             |          |
  |            |efforts towards the north-west, |             |          |
  |            |and undertook three expeditions |             |          |
  |            |against the Tawárek (Imóshagh)  |             |          |
  |            |or Berbers, whom he reduced to  |             |          |
  |            |obedience. The first of these   |             |          |
  |            |expeditions was called the      |             |          |
  |            |kerígu or ghazzia of Síktala, or|             |          |
  |            |Bútírsa; the second was named   |             |          |
  |            |after the tribe Dinkir (the     |             |          |
  |            |Díggera?), settled only two     |             |          |
  |            |days’ march from Kulíya, against|             |          |
  |            |whom it was directed, or after  |             |          |
  |            |the place Targhígha. These two  |             |          |
  |            |expeditions seem to have been of|             |          |
  |            |secondary importance; the third,|             |          |
  |            |however, was directed against   |             |          |
  |            |the Berbers of Aïr, on which    |             |          |
  |            |occasion, starting from Át-     |             |          |
  |            |rébisa[204], and passing the    |             |          |
  |            |town Ghamarama, he overtook a   |             |          |
  |            |numerous host of the inhabitants|             |          |
  |            |of Ahír, or Aïr, in the open    |             |          |
  |            |desert, between the town Tádsa  |             |          |
  |            |and Aïr, and having, as the imám|             |          |
  |            |says, made a great slaughter of |             |          |
  |            |them, returned to Zibdúwa,      |             |          |
  |            |thence to the town Susubáki,    |             |          |
  |            |and, having remained there      |             |          |
  |            |awhile, retired to Muniyó.[205] |             |          |
  |            |Already, at an earlier date than|             |          |
  |            |these three expeditions led by  |             |          |
  |            |him in person, his vizier,      |             |          |
  |            |Kúrsuwa ben Harún, had fought a |             |          |
  |            |battle with the Tawárek, who had|             |          |
  |            |come with a numerous host of    |             |          |
  |            |Tildhin (?)[206], and other     |             |          |
  |            |people, to attack him at        |             |          |
  |            |Aghalwen. Having thus broken the|             |          |
  |            |strength of those Berber tribes,|             |          |
  |            |he ordered the Kil-yíti, or     |             |          |
  |            |rather Kélwáti[207], who were   |             |          |
  |            |living in his dominions, to make|             |          |
  |            |continual inroads into their    |             |          |
  |            |territory, till they were       |             |          |
  |            |obliged to sue for peace, when  |             |          |
  |            |they were allowed to return to  |             |          |
  |            |their former seats, vowing a    |             |          |
  |            |qualified allegiance to the king|             |          |
  |            |of Bórnu, while they ceased to  |             |          |
  |            |yield obedience to the ruler of |             |          |
  |            |Aïr.[208] It is to be lamented  |             |          |
  |            |that the imám Áhmed does not    |             |          |
  |            |call the inhabitants of Aïr by  |             |          |
  |            |the name of their tribe, as it  |             |          |
  |            |would have been a matter of the |             |          |
  |            |greatest interest for us to know|             |          |
  |            |what tribe of Berbers had       |             |          |
  |            |possession of the country at the|             |          |
  |            |time. It seems that the Kilyíti,|             |          |
  |            |or Kelwáti, are identical with  |             |          |
  |            |the Keléti, or Jotko, who,      |             |          |
  |            |intermixed with Tebu, are living|             |          |
  |            |on the north side of the        |             |          |
  |            |komádugu, between Dúchi and Yó. |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |I will here also mention the    |             |          |
  |            |interesting expedition which    |             |          |
  |            |Edrís Alawóma undertook some    |             |          |
  |            |time previously, as it seems,   |             |          |
  |            |against the Tebu, or Tedá, of   |             |          |
  |            |the province of Durku, or Dirki,|             |          |
  |            |and of Ághram[209] (or Táshi),  |             |          |
  |            |when, after subjugating the     |             |          |
  |            |whole country—a measure so      |             |          |
  |            |important for the communications|             |          |
  |            |with the coast—he made a long   |             |          |
  |            |stay in Bilma, or Bulma. Here we|             |          |
  |            |have an example of a similar    |             |          |
  |            |state of things to those in     |             |          |
  |            |Kanó; for all this country had  |             |          |
  |            |long before been tributary to   |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu. In order to secure       |             |          |
  |            |facility of access to these     |             |          |
  |            |distant and inhospitable        |             |          |
  |            |regions, he built large boats on|             |          |
  |            |the komádugu, and collected     |             |          |
  |            |great herds of camels.          |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |Having thus secured his         |             |          |
  |            |influence in the far distant    |             |          |
  |            |northern provinces, Edrís again |             |          |
  |            |turned southward against the    |             |          |
  |            |rebellious Marghí prince        |             |          |
  |            |Maghaya, and having made an     |             |          |
  |            |inroad into Kufshi, or          |             |          |
  |            |Kubshi[210], Mitku, and Humdi   |             |          |
  |            |(these two last places being    |             |          |
  |            |situated on or at the foot of a |             |          |
  |            |rock), and having made captive a|             |          |
  |            |part of the prince’s family, the|             |          |
  |            |latter came to Birni and threw  |             |          |
  |            |dust upon his head. After this  |             |          |
  |            |the ex-ruler of Mándará         |             |          |
  |            |(Wándalá), having come to ask   |             |          |
  |            |his assistance against an uncle |             |          |
  |            |who had deprived him of his     |             |          |
  |            |throne, Edrís marched against   |             |          |
  |            |Karáwa[211], then the capital of|             |          |
  |            |Mándará; but the inhabitants    |             |          |
  |            |having retreated to the summit  |             |          |
  |            |of the high mountain which is to|             |          |
  |            |the west of the town, he was    |             |          |
  |            |obliged to retrace his steps    |             |          |
  |            |without effecting his purpose.  |             |          |
  |            |However, the next year he       |             |          |
  |            |returned better prepared, and,  |             |          |
  |            |sitting down at the foot of the |             |          |
  |            |rock, compelled the people of   |             |          |
  |            |Mándará and their chief to quit |             |          |
  |            |their retreat and make their    |             |          |
  |            |submission; and he then         |             |          |
  |            |reinstated the rightful prince. |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |After this King Edrís led his   |             |          |
  |            |victorious army against the     |             |          |
  |            |Eastern Nghizim, who had first  |             |          |
  |            |directed their predatory forays |             |          |
  |            |against the Felláta settled in  |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu[212], but had soon ceased |             |          |
  |            |to make any distinction between |             |          |
  |            |foreigners and natives, and     |             |          |
  |            |attacked all who fell in their  |             |          |
  |            |way. For two years he laid waste|             |          |
  |            |their fields, destroying even   |             |          |
  |            |the plantations of cotton and   |             |          |
  |            |sesamum, while his vizier       |             |          |
  |            |Kúrsuwa ransacked the town      |             |          |
  |            |Meghúluma till he reduced the   |             |          |
  |            |inhabitants to obedience. He    |             |          |
  |            |then without delay proceeded    |             |          |
  |            |against the western Nghizim,    |             |          |
  |            |called Bináwa by Imám Áhmed.    |             |          |
  |            |These Bináwa infested all the   |             |          |
  |            |neighbouring provinces of the   |             |          |
  |            |empire, and wholly interrupted  |             |          |
  |            |the communication between Bórnu |             |          |
  |            |and an important trading-place  |             |          |
  |            |in the west, called by our      |             |          |
  |            |historian Fágha, and probably   |             |          |
  |            |identical with the Rágha, or    |             |          |
  |            |Ragháy, mentioned by Ébn Batúta,|             |          |
  |            |just in the same quarter, lying |             |          |
  |            |between Góber—that is, the      |             |          |
  |            |original country of that name,  |             |          |
  |            |with the capital Tínshamán—and  |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu. Having conquered all     |             |          |
  |            |their strongholds,—viz. Máwa,   |             |          |
  |            |Ágham, Báni, and                |             |          |
  |            |Ghujémbiná[213],—he so terrified|             |          |
  |            |the people around, that all,    |             |          |
  |            |even those of Katágum[214]      |             |          |
  |            |included, made their submission.|             |          |
  |            |The Nghizim are identical with  |             |          |
  |            |the tribe now generally called  |             |          |
  |            |Nkizám, which is at present     |             |          |
  |            |greatly reduced, living in the  |             |          |
  |            |following places, all lying     |             |          |
  |            |between Auyók and               |             |          |
  |            |Katágum:—Táshiná, Únik, Shágató,|             |          |
  |            |Chibiay, Belángu, Badda, Rómeri,|             |          |
  |            |Zóngolom, Melebétiye, Úmarí, and|             |          |
  |            |a few more.                     |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |After all these warlike         |             |          |
  |            |undertakings, this active       |             |          |
  |            |prince, having rested for a     |             |          |
  |            |little more than a year,        |             |          |
  |            |undertook a pilgrimage to Mekka,|             |          |
  |            |probably in the ninth year of   |             |          |
  |            |his reign. Having returned from |             |          |
  |            |thence, “Háj Edrís,” as he is   |             |          |
  |            |now to be styled, led his army  |             |          |
  |            |against the Tetála, or          |             |          |
  |            |Telála[215], a warlike and high-|             |          |
  |            |spirited pagan tribe settled in |             |          |
  |            |the neighbourhood and on the    |             |          |
  |            |islands of the Tsád (probably   |             |          |
  |            |identical with the Yediná or, as|             |          |
  |            |they are generally named,       |             |          |
  |            |Búdduma), and whose hatred      |             |          |
  |            |against their oppressors was so |             |          |
  |            |intense that they refused       |             |          |
  |            |fellowship at meals to those    |             |          |
  |            |among themselves who had not    |             |          |
  |            |killed a Mohammedan. They prided|             |          |
  |            |themselves chiefly on their     |             |          |
  |            |white spears. This is exactly in|             |          |
  |            |harmony with the custom of the  |             |          |
  |            |Búdduma. Edrís, in order to     |             |          |
  |            |subdue them, made use of the    |             |          |
  |            |Katakú, or Kótokó[216], whom he |             |          |
  |            |ordered to harass the enemy by  |             |          |
  |            |continual incursions with their |             |          |
  |            |boats, exactly in the same      |             |          |
  |            |manner as the sheikh of Bórnu at|             |          |
  |            |the present day, when he wants  |             |          |
  |            |to trouble the Búdduma, orders  |             |          |
  |            |the people of Máfaté to make an |             |          |
  |            |inroad against them. The Tetála |             |          |
  |            |retreated into the swampy       |             |          |
  |            |grounds of the Tsád.[217] Edrís |             |          |
  |            |then beat the governor of       |             |          |
  |            |Mafaté[218], who came to attack |             |          |
  |            |him with a number of boats,     |             |          |
  |            |destroyed the town of Kansa-    |             |          |
  |            |Kusku, as he had also destroyed |             |          |
  |            |Saya[219] and Taghálaghá,       |             |          |
  |            |belonging to the tribe of the   |             |          |
  |            |Ghamá, or Ngamá, and other      |             |          |
  |            |places, and built several       |             |          |
  |            |fortified encampments, or       |             |          |
  |            |“sansanne,” in the              |             |          |
  |            |neighbourhood. The Mákari[220], |             |          |
  |            |who seem to be identical with   |             |          |
  |            |the Kótokó, appear to have      |             |          |
  |            |offered him friendship or       |             |          |
  |            |submission, with the exception  |             |          |
  |            |of the people of Kúsuri[221],   |             |          |
  |            |whose governor he succeeded in  |             |          |
  |            |taking prisoner, and of         |             |          |
  |            |Sabálghutu. He then proceeded   |             |          |
  |            |once more against Mándará, and  |             |          |
  |            |vanquished that rebellious and  |             |          |
  |            |stubborn nation.                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |We shall now notice, but        |             |          |
  |            |briefly, the expeditions of     |             |          |
  |            |Edrís to Kánem, which likewise  |             |          |
  |            |fall within the first twelve    |             |          |
  |            |years of his reign, but have    |             |          |
  |            |been described separately by the|             |          |
  |            |imám. I can dismiss this subject|             |          |
  |            |here in a few words, as I have  |             |          |
  |            |had occasion to make use of the |             |          |
  |            |rich geographical materials     |             |          |
  |            |contained in this account in the|             |          |
  |            |course of my narrative. Edrís,  |             |          |
  |            |during the first twelve years of|             |          |
  |            |his reign, went five times to   |             |          |
  |            |Kánem; and he may have gone     |             |          |
  |            |there frequently again in the   |             |          |
  |            |following years. We have seen   |             |          |
  |            |above that Kánem, after having  |             |          |
  |            |been for more than a century    |             |          |
  |            |entirely torn off from the      |             |          |
  |            |empire, had been again subdued  |             |          |
  |            |by preceding Bórnu kings. Edrís |             |          |
  |            |Alawóma, on ascending the throne|             |          |
  |            |of Bórnu, concluded a treaty of |             |          |
  |            |peace with ʿAbd Allah the ruling|             |          |
  |            |prince of Kánem; and, what is   |             |          |
  |            |very remarkable as a commentary |             |          |
  |            |on the state of civilization in |             |          |
  |            |these countries, the conditions |             |          |
  |            |of this treaty were             |             |          |
  |            |diplomatically exhibited in two |             |          |
  |            |written copies, nothing         |             |          |
  |            |remaining to be settled but a   |             |          |
  |            |dispute about three places, viz.|             |          |
  |            |Kálliya, ʿAkúta, and Belúji,    |             |          |
  |            |which the people of Bórnu wished|             |          |
  |            |to obtain. But ʿAbd Allah died; |             |          |
  |            |and his son Mohammed, who       |             |          |
  |            |succeeded him, was, after a     |             |          |
  |            |short time, dethroned by his    |             |          |
  |            |uncle ʿAbd el Jelíl ben ʿAbd el |             |          |
  |            |Jelíl, who broke off the        |             |          |
  |            |negotiation and refused         |             |          |
  |            |allegiance. In the struggle     |             |          |
  |            |which ensued, Edrís was, on the |             |          |
  |            |whole, victorious, although the |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu army apparently sustained |             |          |
  |            |some heavy losses; Njímiye, and |             |          |
  |            |all the country even further    |             |          |
  |            |east, was taken from Kánem; but |             |          |
  |            |as soon as Edrís turned his     |             |          |
  |            |back, ʿAbd el Jelíl, with his   |             |          |
  |            |light troops, was again there,  |             |          |
  |            |till the Bórnu king at last     |             |          |
  |            |conferred the crown of Kánem    |             |          |
  |            |again upon Mohammed, attaching  |             |          |
  |            |to him a strong party of native |             |          |
  |            |chiefs, chiefly Arabs. However, |             |          |
  |            |he was obliged to return once   |             |          |
  |            |more to that country so         |             |          |
  |            |difficult to manage, Mohammed   |             |          |
  |            |having been beaten by his       |             |          |
  |            |restless adversary. Subsequently|             |          |
  |            |he was more successful, and by a|             |          |
  |            |stipulation the whole of Kánem  |             |          |
  |            |as far as Babáliyá was attached |             |          |
  |            |to Bórnu. Of subsequent events  |             |          |
  |            |we are wholly ignorant, and hear|             |          |
  |            |no more of Kánem till a recent  |             |          |
  |            |period. During these expeditions|             |          |
  |            |Edrís inflicted severe blows    |             |          |
  |            |upon the Tebu population of     |             |          |
  |            |Kánem; and we have already seen |             |          |
  |            |that, in consequence, a great   |             |          |
  |            |number of them migrated to      |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu.                          |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |Of the events of the one-and-   |             |          |
  |            |twenty years which followed     |             |          |
  |            |these first twelve years of this|             |          |
  |            |excellent prince, we at present |             |          |
  |            |know nothing. But I do not doubt|             |          |
  |            |that zealous research may       |             |          |
  |            |hereafter bring some more       |             |          |
  |            |documents to light. From the    |             |          |
  |            |manner of Edrís’s death it may  |             |          |
  |            |be concluded that he waged war  |             |          |
  |            |till his last moment; for he    |             |          |
  |            |died, according to tradition, on|             |          |
  |            |the battlefield, being wounded  |             |          |
  |            |in his breast by a hand-bill or |             |          |
  |            |góliyó, thrown at him by a pagan|             |          |
  |            |concealed in a tree, while      |             |          |
  |            |waging war with a tribe on the  |             |          |
  |            |borders of Bagírmi, perhaps the |             |          |
  |            |Ghamergú. We only know for      |             |          |
  |            |certain that he was buried in   |             |          |
  |            |Aláwo, a place in the district  |             |          |
  |            |of Ujé, which I have touched    |             |          |
  |            |upon on my journey to Ádamáwa.  |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |But notwithstanding these       |             |          |
  |            |continual wars in which the     |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu hero was engaged, “he     |             |          |
  |            |promoted the prosperity of the  |             |          |
  |            |country, and the wealth of the  |             |          |
  |            |towns.” Indeed this is the only |             |          |
  |            |particular which the meagre     |             |          |
  |            |chronicle relates of him besides|             |          |
  |            |mentioning the war with ʿAbd el |             |          |
  |            |Jelíl; and we know from Imám    |             |          |
  |            |Áhmed that he built the mosques |             |          |
  |            |of clay in Birni Ghasréggomo,   |             |          |
  |            |superseding those of reeds; and |             |          |
  |            |it is to him probably that we   |             |          |
  |            |must refer the brick ruins in   |             |          |
  |            |that town as well as in         |             |          |
  |            |Ghambarú.                       |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |Altogether Edrís Alawóma appears|             |          |
  |            |to have been an excellent       |             |          |
  |            |prince, uniting in himself the  |             |          |
  |            |most opposite qualities: warlike|             |          |
  |            |energy combined with mildness   |             |          |
  |            |and intelligence; courage, with |             |          |
  |            |circumspection and patience;    |             |          |
  |            |severity, with pious feelings.  |             |          |
  |            |And I hope my readers will draw |             |          |
  |            |more favourable conclusions from|             |          |
  |            |this example as to the general  |             |          |
  |            |character of the Bórnu kings    |             |          |
  |            |than Denham did from the        |             |          |
  |            |degenerate shadow of his time,  |             |          |
  |            |when he says[222] that “a sultan|             |          |
  |            |of Bórnu carries no arms, and it|             |          |
  |            |is beneath his dignity to defend|             |          |
  |            |himself.” Certainly such a man  |             |          |
  |            |as Edrís rarely stands alone;   |             |          |
  |            |and we cannot refuse to join    |             |          |
  |            |with his name that of his first |             |          |
  |            |minister, the warlike and       |             |          |
  |            |intelligent Edrís ben Harún, who|             |          |
  |            |succeeded in that office his    |             |          |
  |            |elder brother Kúrsuwa, and who  |             |          |
  |            |by his excellent arrangements,  |             |          |
  |            |as well as by his courage,      |             |          |
  |            |guaranteed the success of many  |             |          |
  |            |of his master’s undertakings.   |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | MOHAMMED,  |An excellent prince, but less   |Dekána (?).  |16 y. 7 m.|
  |            |warlike and enterprising, as it |[223]        |          |
  |  With the  |would seem, than his father,    |             |   A.H.   |
  |  surname   |whose vigour was no longer      |(Perhaps in  |1011-1027.|
  |Bukalmarámi.|necessary, the empire being well|the territory|   A.D.   |
  |Son of Edrís|established.                    |of the       |1602-1618.|
  | and Fanna. |                                |Duggana.)    |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  ÍBRAHÍM.  |Sent an embassy to Tripoli in   |Ghasréggomo. |7 y. 7 m. |
  |            |the year 1627.                  |             |          |
  |Son of Edrís|                                |             |   A.H.   |
  |and Ghumsu. |                                |             |1027-1035.|
  |            |                                |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |                                |             |1618-1625.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | HÁJ ʿOMÁR. |Made the pilgrimage to Mekka in |Ghasréggomo. |19 y. 9 m.|
  |            |the year 1642, having ascended  |             |          |
  |Son of Edrís|the throne, according to the    |             |   A.H.   |
  |and Fisháma.|French document, in the year    |             |1036-1055.|
  |            |1634 (1624?).                   |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |                                |             |1625-1645.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |    ʿALÍ    |A valiant and intelligent man,  |Ghasréggomo. |   40.    |
  |            |who thrice made the pilgrimage  |             |          |
  | Ben el Háj |to Mekka, viz. in the years     |             |   A.H.   |
  |   ʿOmár.   |1648, 1656, and 1667; when      |             |1055-1095.|
  |            |returning on the last occasion  |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |from his distant journey, he had|             |1645-1684.|
  |            |to extinguish a revolution. He  |             |          |
  |            |waged several wars with the     |             |          |
  |            |sultan of Aïr residing in       |             |          |
  |            |Ágades, and was once besieged in|             |          |
  |            |his capital at the same time by |             |          |
  |            |the Tawárek and by the Köana, or|             |          |
  |            |Kwona, a division of the        |             |          |
  |            |Korórofa, who had long been     |             |          |
  |            |subjected to Bórnu, when he     |             |          |
  |            |managed to set the latter       |             |          |
  |            |against the former, and then    |             |          |
  |            |destroyed them also. It seems   |             |          |
  |            |that in his reign the country   |             |          |
  |            |was afflicted by several long   |             |          |
  |            |famines, which distressed the   |             |          |
  |            |inhabitants greatly, and which  |             |          |
  |            |can scarcely be explained but by|             |          |
  |            |supposing an unsettled state of |             |          |
  |            |the country, which did not allow|             |          |
  |            |the people to cultivate the     |             |          |
  |            |ground.                         |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   EDRÍS    |This is the king who has been   |     (?)     |   20.    |
  |            |omitted by mistake in the       |             |          |
  | Ben ʿAlí.  |chronicle.                      |             |   A.H.   |
  |            |                                |             |1096-1115.|
  |            |                                |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |                                |             |1685-1704.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   DÚNAMA   |Another long famine of seven    |Ghasréggomo. |   19.    |
  |            |years is mentioned by the       |             |          |
  | Ben ʿAlí.  |chronicle.                      |             |   A.H.   |
  |            |                                |             |1115-1134.|
  |            |                                |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |                                |             |1704-1722.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | HÁJ HAMDÚN |A pious and indolent king, who  |Ghasréggomo. |   14.    |
  |            |appears to have made a          |             |          |
  |Ben Dúnama. |pilgrimage.                     |             |   A.H.   |
  |            |                                |             |1135-1148.|
  |            |                                |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |                                |             |1723-1736.|
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  | MOHAMMED,  |Of his reign likewise we know   |Ghasréggomo. |   16.    |
  |            |nothing but of a famine which   |             |          |
  |  With the  |lasted two years. These princes,|             |   A.H.   |
  |  surname   |indeed, seem in general to have |             |1149-1164.|
  | Erghámma.  |seldom left their favourite     |             |   A.D.   |
  | Son of El  |residence, where they indulged  |             |1737-1751.|
  |Háj Hamdún. |in luxury and ostentation, while|             |          |
  |            |the kingdom was falling to      |             |          |
  |            |pieces and became unable to     |             |          |
  |            |resist any shock which might    |             |          |
  |            |come from without.              |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  DÚNAMA,   |The chronicle mentions, under   |Ghasréggomo. |2 y. 7 m. |
  |            |his short reign, a very severe  |             |          |
  |  With the  |famine.                         |             |   A.H.   |
  |  surname   |                                |             |1165-1168.|
  |Ghaná, “the |                                |             |   A.D.   |
  |little.” The|                                |             |1752-1755.|
  |young son of|                                |             |          |
  | Mohammed.  |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |    ʿALÍ    |Is greatly praised by the       |             |   40.    |
  |            |chronicle as a most excellent   |             |          |
  | Ben el Háj |prince; but it is evident that  |             |   A.H.   |
  |  Dúnama.   |he was such only from a monkish |             |1168-1207.|
  |            |point of view. He seems,        |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |however, to have excelled in a  |             |1755-1793.|
  |            |peculiar kind of energy, being  |             |          |
  |            |mentioned by Lucas as the father|             |          |
  |            |of three hundred male           |             |          |
  |            |children.[224] I cannot say with|             |          |
  |            |absolute certainty whether it   |             |          |
  |            |was he who made a most          |             |          |
  |            |unfortunate expedition against  |             |          |
  |            |Mándará, to the ill success of  |             |          |
  |            |which most of the intelligent   |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu people attribute the      |             |          |
  |            |weakness of the empire under the|             |          |
  |            |following reign, when it was    |             |          |
  |            |attacked by the fanatic troops  |             |          |
  |            |of the Felláta, the best part of|             |          |
  |            |the army having been slain by   |             |          |
  |            |the inhabitants of Mándará. ʿAlí|             |          |
  |            |seems also to have made several |             |          |
  |            |expeditions against the Bedde.  |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   ÁHMED    |“A learned prince, liberal      |Ghasréggomo. |   17.    |
  |            |towards the ʿulama; a prodigal  |             |          |
  | Ben ʿAlí.  |dispenser of alms, a friend of  |             |   A.H.   |
  |            |science and religion, gracious  |             |1208-1225.|
  |            |and compassionate towards the   |             |   A.D.   |
  |            |poor.” So says the chronicle.   |             |1793-1810.|
  |            |However well deserved this      |             |          |
  |            |praise may be, certainly Áhmed  |             |          |
  |            |was not the man to save the     |             |          |
  |            |kingdom from the dangers which  |             |          |
  |            |surrounded it.                  |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |But although the empire was     |             |          |
  |            |already prepared for ruin, there|             |          |
  |            |supervened a powerful cause of  |             |          |
  |            |weakness; for under Áhmed a very|             |          |
  |            |severe pestilence visited Bórnu,|             |          |
  |            |carrying off a great number of  |             |          |
  |            |people. This plague is said to  |             |          |
  |            |have been announced by an       |             |          |
  |            |eclipse of the sun, which       |             |          |
  |            |preceded it by two years.       |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |About 1808 began the inroads of |             |          |
  |            |the Fúlbe or Felláta, who had   |             |          |
  |            |conquered successfully the      |             |          |
  |            |ancient Háusa kingdoms, which   |             |          |
  |            |till then had been in a sort of |             |          |
  |            |tributary dependence upon Bórnu.|             |          |
  |            |The consequence was that their  |             |          |
  |            |countrymen, settled in Bórnu    |             |          |
  |            |from ancient times, as we have  |             |          |
  |            |seen, being harassed by         |             |          |
  |            |persecution, collected together |             |          |
  |            |in Gújebá, and from that point  |             |          |
  |            |began their conquests,          |             |          |
  |            |vanquishing all the officers    |             |          |
  |            |whom Áhmed sent against them;   |             |          |
  |            |they then marched against       |             |          |
  |            |Ghasréggomo, led on by Malá     |             |          |
  |            |Rída, Mukhtár, and Hanníma,     |             |          |
  |            |defeated the army of the sultan,|             |          |
  |            |who escaped by the eastern gate |             |          |
  |            |while they entered the town from|             |          |
  |            |the west side. Áhmed then went  |             |          |
  |            |to reside in Kurnáwa. This      |             |          |
  |            |happened in the year of the     |             |          |
  |            |Hejra 1224, or 1809 of our era, |             |          |
  |            |on a Sunday; but I cannot say in|             |          |
  |            |what month. From that place the |             |          |
  |            |distressed king sent a message  |             |          |
  |            |to the fáki Mohammed el Amín el |             |          |
  |            |Kánemí, who, on account of his  |             |          |
  |            |marriage with the daughter of   |             |          |
  |            |the governor of Ngála, had begun|             |          |
  |            |to oppose himself to the        |             |          |
  |            |progress of the conquerors; for,|             |          |
  |            |having begged his father-in-law |             |          |
  |            |to allow him to take his wife   |             |          |
  |            |and daughter with him to Fezzán,|             |          |
  |            |the latter refused, so that the |             |          |
  |            |fáki, together with his friends |             |          |
  |            |Mohammed Tiráb, and Ibrahím     |             |          |
  |            |Wádáy collected in Bínder, on   |             |          |
  |            |the west border of the Tsád, a  |             |          |
  |            |small force, said to have       |             |          |
  |            |consisted of five horsemen and  |             |          |
  |            |two hundred spearmen, with whom |             |          |
  |            |he successfully attacked the    |             |          |
  |            |Fúlbe, who were disposed to     |             |          |
  |            |laugh at his threats. Having    |             |          |
  |            |collected more adventurers and  |             |          |
  |            |patriotic men round him, he then|             |          |
  |            |vanquished the whole force of   |             |          |
  |            |the conquerors in a battle near |             |          |
  |            |Ngórnu, when he is said to have |             |          |
  |            |had under his command two       |             |          |
  |            |hundred men on horseback, and   |             |          |
  |            |two thousand on foot. Having    |             |          |
  |            |thus liberated the whole eastern|             |          |
  |            |part of Bórnu, he sat down      |             |          |
  |            |quietly, when Áhmed sent for    |             |          |
  |            |him. Assisted by the inspiring  |             |          |
  |            |fanaticism of the fáki, and by  |             |          |
  |            |the courage and valour of his   |             |          |
  |            |Kánembú spearmen, Áhmed was     |             |          |
  |            |enabled to re-enter his capital,|             |          |
  |            |but soon after died[225], in the|             |          |
  |            |beginning, as it seems, of A.H. |             |          |
  |            |1225.                           |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  DÚNAMA,   |Dúnama followed his father, who |Ngála.       |    8.    |
  |            |had already, in his lifetime,   |             |          |
  |   Son of   |chosen him for his successor,   |             |   A.H.   |
  | Áhmed, and |and for a short time waged      |             |1225-1233.|
  |MOHAMMED EL |successful war against the      |             |   A.D.   |
  |  AMÍN EL   |enemy, till he too was driven   |             |1810-1817,|
  |  KÁNEMÍ.   |out of his capital by the Fúlbe |             |  1818.   |
  |            |of Katágum, as it seems, in the |             |          |
  |            |end of 1226, or beginning of    |             |          |
  |            |1227. He then went wandering    |             |          |
  |            |about in his own kingdom,       |             |          |
  |            |changing his residence every few|             |          |
  |            |months, first residing in Majé, |             |          |
  |            |near Fátóghaná (the ancient     |             |          |
  |            |Dámasak), then in a place called|             |          |
  |            |Aségga, then near Múngonó, then |             |          |
  |            |in Bérberuwá, till he placed    |             |          |
  |            |himself under the protection of |             |          |
  |            |the powerful fáki, who alone had|             |          |
  |            |proved himself capable of       |             |          |
  |            |resisting the victorious impulse|             |          |
  |            |which attended the march of the |             |          |
  |            |Felláta. Indeed a covenant was  |             |          |
  |            |then made, assigning half of the|             |          |
  |            |revenue of the liberated        |             |          |
  |            |provinces to Mohammed el Amín.  |             |          |
  |            |The fáki now resided in the     |             |          |
  |            |large town of Ngórnu (“the      |             |          |
  |            |blessing”), where he seems to   |             |          |
  |            |have found zealous support from |             |          |
  |            |the many Tebu residing there,   |             |          |
  |            |while the sultan held his court |             |          |
  |            |in some other place. But matters|             |          |
  |            |could not long remain in this   |             |          |
  |            |state; the population were not  |             |          |
  |            |able to serve two masters, but  |             |          |
  |            |they were obliged to decide for |             |          |
  |            |the one or the other. When,     |             |          |
  |            |therefore, the people all       |             |          |
  |            |flocked to the man who had      |             |          |
  |            |liberated them from a foreign   |             |          |
  |            |yoke, the old party excited the |             |          |
  |            |sultan’s jealousy, and          |             |          |
  |            |instigated him to rid himself of|             |          |
  |            |his troublesome rival. Mohammed |             |          |
  |            |el Amín’s authority, however,   |             |          |
  |            |was so well established in the  |             |          |
  |            |goodwill of the people, that on |             |          |
  |            |being cited before the sultan he|             |          |
  |            |was able to appear before him   |             |          |
  |            |unattended, while the latter    |             |          |
  |            |dared not hurt him. The         |             |          |
  |            |consequence was that the fáki’s,|             |          |
  |            |or rather the sheikh’s          |             |          |
  |            |(shékho—for this title he now   |             |          |
  |            |began to adopt) influence       |             |          |
  |            |increased every day, and Dúnama,|             |          |
  |            |with his party, made a last     |             |          |
  |            |effort to release himself from  |             |          |
  |            |that influence, and to preserve |             |          |
  |            |the royal dignity. Indeed he    |             |          |
  |            |might hope that if he succeeded |             |          |
  |            |in establishing his court at a  |             |          |
  |            |certain distance, he might rally|             |          |
  |            |around himself the old partisans|             |          |
  |            |of royalty; but before he       |             |          |
  |            |reached Wúdí, the place he had  |             |          |
  |            |selected for his residence, one |             |          |
  |            |of the principal settlements of |             |          |
  |            |the Temághera, and which had    |             |          |
  |            |been the abode of several of the|             |          |
  |            |old Bórnu kings, Mohammed el    |             |          |
  |            |Amín, who perceived that the    |             |          |
  |            |time was now come when he must  |             |          |
  |            |decide whether he was to be     |             |          |
  |            |subject or ruler, even though he|             |          |
  |            |did not aspire to the title of  |             |          |
  |            |king, had him arrested on the   |             |          |
  |            |road, and brought back to       |             |          |
  |            |Bérberuwá. But finding him still|             |          |
  |            |obstinate, he deposed him       |             |          |
  |            |altogether, reproaching him with|             |          |
  |            |a wish to betray his country;   |             |          |
  |            |and then he transferred the     |             |          |
  |            |title and pomp of a sultan to   |             |          |
  |            |Mohammed, a brother of Áhmed,   |             |          |
  |            |and uncle of Dúnama. Mohammed   |             |          |
  |            |then began to build himself a   |             |          |
  |            |new residence, which is called  |             |          |
  |            |by the Arabs Birni jedíd, two   |             |          |
  |            |miles and a half north-west from|             |          |
  |            |Ngórnu. But when Mohammed el    |             |          |
  |            |Amín saw that this man was no   |             |          |
  |            |less obstinate than Dúnama, he  |             |          |
  |            |reinstated the latter again. So |             |          |
  |            |that Mohammed, having reigned   |             |          |
  |            |but a short time, and that only |             |          |
  |            |by the will of the usurper, is  |             |          |
  |            |not mentioned at all by the     |             |          |
  |            |chronicle.                      |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |We may therefore reckon the     |             |          |
  |            |commencement of the present     |             |          |
  |            |dynasty of the Kánemíyín from   |             |          |
  |            |the year 1814 of our era. It is |             |          |
  |            |a very remarkable fact, that an |             |          |
  |            |utter stranger to the country   |             |          |
  |            |should become its ruler; but the|             |          |
  |            |struggle was not yet at an end, |             |          |
  |            |and could not well be ended     |             |          |
  |            |without much bloodshed as soon  |             |          |
  |            |as the fascinating personal     |             |          |
  |            |influence of the liberator was  |             |          |
  |            |gone by. The sheikh then, having|             |          |
  |            |gone so far, in order to        |             |          |
  |            |separate his position as far as |             |          |
  |            |possible from the memory of the |             |          |
  |            |ancient times, founded likewise |             |          |
  |            |a new residence, which, from the|             |          |
  |            |name of the _Adansonia          |             |          |
  |            |digitata_, a specimen of which  |             |          |
  |            |stood on the spot where he      |             |          |
  |            |wished to build his house,      |             |          |
  |            |received the name of Kúka, or   |             |          |
  |            |rather Kúkawa.[226] Being now   |             |          |
  |            |fairly installed in the         |             |          |
  |            |government of a vast but very   |             |          |
  |            |distracted country, while he    |             |          |
  |            |allowed the pomp of royalty to  |             |          |
  |            |be borne by the descendant of   |             |          |
  |            |the Séfuwa, and perhaps         |             |          |
  |            |purposely exaggerated it, in    |             |          |
  |            |order to make it ridiculous, he |             |          |
  |            |was anxious at the same time to |             |          |
  |            |recover the lost provinces, and |             |          |
  |            |to defend the country against   |             |          |
  |            |its south-eastern neighbour,    |             |          |
  |            |who, from having been a vassal, |             |          |
  |            |had become a dangerous enemy.   |             |          |
  |            |Indeed he had to sustain a long |             |          |
  |            |and sanguinary struggle with    |             |          |
  |            |Bagírmi, in which he was not    |             |          |
  |            |always successful. He undertook |             |          |
  |            |at first to reduce the          |             |          |
  |            |overbearing and lawless         |             |          |
  |            |Burgománda, the ruler of that   |             |          |
  |            |province, to obedience, with the|             |          |
  |            |assistance of ʿAbd el Kerím     |             |          |
  |            |Sabún, the powerful and         |             |          |
  |            |intelligent prince of Wádáy; but|             |          |
  |            |the latter chose rather to      |             |          |
  |            |consult his own interests, and  |             |          |
  |            |after carrying away all the     |             |          |
  |            |treasures, and even many of the |             |          |
  |            |inhabitants of Bagírmi, he even |             |          |
  |            |granted to Burgománda some sort |             |          |
  |            |of protection in return for an  |             |          |
  |            |annual tribute to be paid to    |             |          |
  |            |Wádáy, as we shall see in the   |             |          |
  |            |following volume. At the same   |             |          |
  |            |time the intelligent Sabún,     |             |          |
  |            |whose predecessor Mohammed      |             |          |
  |            |Sáleh, by the conquest of the   |             |          |
  |            |province of Fittri, had stept   |             |          |
  |            |into the place of the           |             |          |
  |            |pretensions raised by the       |             |          |
  |            |Bulála, endeavoured to gain more|             |          |
  |            |ground in Kánem. Meanwhile the  |             |          |
  |            |powerful king of Wádáy died     |             |          |
  |            |(A.D. 1815), but even this event|             |          |
  |            |did not relieve the situation of|             |          |
  |            |El Kánemí; for, in a sudden and |             |          |
  |            |unexpected encounter of the two |             |          |
  |            |armies in Kótokó, the eldest and|             |          |
  |            |most beloved son of the sheikh  |             |          |
  |            |was slain in 1816, and in 1817 a|             |          |
  |            |bloody battle was lost by him at|             |          |
  |            |Ngála, on which occasion the    |             |          |
  |            |titular sultan Dúnama was slain.|             |          |
  |            |Mohammed el Kánemí being        |             |          |
  |            |frustrated in this way, then    |             |          |
  |            |entered into a covenant with the|             |          |
  |            |ruler of Fezzán; and a combined |             |          |
  |            |expedition was organized in the |             |          |
  |            |year 1818, which was altogether |             |          |
  |            |very successful. The whole of   |             |          |
  |            |the northern part of Bagírmi was|             |          |
  |            |overrun, the large towns of     |             |          |
  |            |Babáliyá and Gáwi were          |             |          |
  |            |destroyed, and the sheikh spent |             |          |
  |            |a day or two in Más-eñá, the    |             |          |
  |            |capital of the country; but no  |             |          |
  |            |decisive blow could be struck,  |             |          |
  |            |the king with his whole army    |             |          |
  |            |having retired to Mankhfa and   |             |          |
  |            |taken up a very strong position |             |          |
  |            |defended by the river and a     |             |          |
  |            |great number of boats.          |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |  IBRAHÍM.  |Installing in the deceased      |             |          |
  |            |sultan’s place Ibrám, or        |             |          |
  |    A.H.    |Ibrahím, Dúnama’s brother, the  |             |          |
  | 1233-1263. |sheikh continued the struggle   |             |          |
  |    A.D.    |with Bagírmi, and on the 24th of|             |          |
  | 1818-1846. |March of the year 1824, as we   |             |          |
  |            |know from the report of Denham’s|             |          |
  |            |expedition, was so fortunate as |             |          |
  |            |to gain, on the same battle-    |             |          |
  |            |field of Ngála, a decided       |             |          |
  |            |victory over his valiant south- |             |          |
  |            |eastern neighbour, which seems  |             |          |
  |            |to have set him at once at rest.|             |          |
  |            |Having thus obtained leisure on |             |          |
  |            |this side, and having           |             |          |
  |            |extinguished a revolt of the    |             |          |
  |            |Manga, Mohammed el Kánemí seems |             |          |
  |            |to have turned his attention    |             |          |
  |            |westward, in order to recover,  |             |          |
  |            |if possible, some of the        |             |          |
  |            |provinces of the old empire of  |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu. At first he was very     |             |          |
  |            |successful, and penetrated far  |             |          |
  |            |into the interior of the        |             |          |
  |            |province of Bauchi; but in the  |             |          |
  |            |year 1826 the officers of Sultan|             |          |
  |            |Béllo beat his army, and he     |             |          |
  |            |himself had a narrow escape. He |             |          |
  |            |seems to have then concluded a  |             |          |
  |            |peace. He made also several     |             |          |
  |            |attempts to reduce Kánem to a   |             |          |
  |            |state of obedience, and here had|             |          |
  |            |to contend with Wádáy. Mohammed |             |          |
  |            |el Kánemí died in 1835[227],    |             |          |
  |            |leaving forty-three sons, and   |             |          |
  |            |having named for his successor  |             |          |
  |            |his eldest son ʿOmár, who was to|             |          |
  |            |be succeeded, if he should die  |             |          |
  |            |early, by ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, and   |             |          |
  |            |then by Yusuf.                  |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |   SHEIKH   |ʿOmár’s reign is remarkable on  |             |          |
  |   ʿOMÁR.   |account of his having made an   |             |          |
  |            |end of the Séfuwa altogether. He|             |          |
  |   Son of   |seemed from the first desirous  |             |          |
  |Mohammed el |of peace in every direction, and|             |          |
  |  Kánemí.   |had the great advantage, in     |             |          |
  |            |endeavouring to obtain this     |             |          |
  | A.H. 1251. |object from Bagírmi, that his   |             |          |
  | A.D. 1835. |mother belonged to that country.|             |          |
  |            |Having also made peace with the |             |          |
  |            |Fúlbe after an unsuccessful     |             |          |
  |            |expedition against them, he had |             |          |
  |            |some difficulty in restraining  |             |          |
  |            |the governors of the western    |             |          |
  |            |provinces, who are almost       |             |          |
  |            |independent vassals, from making|             |          |
  |            |incursions into their territory.|             |          |
  |            |It was on this account that he  |             |          |
  |            |was obliged, in the beginning of|             |          |
  |            |1846, to send a strong army,    |             |          |
  |            |commanded by his brother ʿAbd e’|             |          |
  |            |Rahmán, against Ibrám, the      |             |          |
  |            |restless governor of Zínder,    |             |          |
  |            |whose obstinate disregard of the|             |          |
  |            |peace with the Fúlbe proceeded  |             |          |
  |            |to open rebellion.              |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |This opportunity, when all the  |             |          |
  |            |best troops were about to march |             |          |
  |            |to the distant west, was seized |             |          |
  |            |on by the numerous partisans of |             |          |
  |            |the old dynasty, to aim a mortal|             |          |
  |            |blow at the house of the sheikh |             |          |
  |            |by secretly inviting the King of|             |          |
  |            |Wádáy, Mohammed e’ Sheríf, to   |             |          |
  |            |re-establish the Séfuwa on the  |             |          |
  |            |throne of Bórnu. Mohammed       |             |          |
  |            |listening to this invitation,   |             |          |
  |            |collected his army, and in Mulúd|             |          |
  |            |or Rebí el awel, 1262, that is, |             |          |
  |            |in March 1846, reached Kúsuri.  |             |          |
  |            |The sheikh never heard of his   |             |          |
  |            |approach till he was very near. |             |          |
  |            |He at once summoned the sultan  |             |          |
  |            |Ibrám from Birni, and,          |             |          |
  |            |denouncing him as a traitor,    |             |          |
  |            |placed him in irons; he then    |             |          |
  |            |hastily collected what troops   |             |          |
  |            |remained behind, having no one  |             |          |
  |            |with him upon whom he could     |             |          |
  |            |rely, except Tiráb his faithful |             |          |
  |            |minister (the intimate friend of|             |          |
  |            |his father), his brother the    |             |          |
  |            |valorous ʿAlí, together with    |             |          |
  |            |from five to six hundred Arabs  |             |          |
  |            |and Tebu. With this little band,|             |          |
  |            |swelled by a crowd of faithless |             |          |
  |            |Shúwa, he encamped on the       |             |          |
  |            |western bank of the river of    |             |          |
  |            |Logón, not far from the town of |             |          |
  |            |Kúsuri, while Wádáy was encamped|             |          |
  |            |on the eastern bank of the      |             |          |
  |            |Shárí. The inhabitants of Kúsuri|             |          |
  |            |locked the gates of their town  |             |          |
  |            |against both armies, but        |             |          |
  |            |secretly communicated with      |             |          |
  |            |Wádáy; and when Mohammed e’     |             |          |
  |            |Sheríf was unable to force the  |             |          |
  |            |passage of the river in the face|             |          |
  |            |of the enemy, who did great     |             |          |
  |            |execution with two cannons, the |             |          |
  |            |Wádáy having none, they sent to |             |          |
  |            |him offering to lead part of his|             |          |
  |            |army round by a ford which was  |             |          |
  |            |protected only by Shúwa. This   |             |          |
  |            |was the ford of Síña Fácha, at  |             |          |
  |            |the headland a little below     |             |          |
  |            |Kúsuri, where the Shárí and the |             |          |
  |            |river of Logón unite to form one|             |          |
  |            |stream, which joins the Tsád.   |             |          |
  |            |When the corps sent by the      |             |          |
  |            |people of Wádáy tried to cross  |             |          |
  |            |the river here, the Shúwa, who  |             |          |
  |            |had been ordered to defend the  |             |          |
  |            |ford, gave way, and, thinking   |             |          |
  |            |this a favourable opportunity to|             |          |
  |            |pilfer, joined the enemy,       |             |          |
  |            |killing many of the sheikh’s    |             |          |
  |            |people in the flank, till       |             |          |
  |            |Kashélla Belál brought their    |             |          |
  |            |chief to the ground. In the     |             |          |
  |            |slaughter which ensued, Tiráb   |             |          |
  |            |fell, and a great many of the   |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu people. The valorous ʿAlí |             |          |
  |            |penetrated into the town of     |             |          |
  |            |Kúsuri, but was delivered by the|             |          |
  |            |townspeople into the hands of   |             |          |
  |            |the king of Wádáy; the rest took|             |          |
  |            |to flight, except the Tebu and  |             |          |
  |            |Arabs, who maintained their     |             |          |
  |            |position, so that Sheikh ʿOmár  |             |          |
  |            |was able to say his prayers of  |             |          |
  |            |the dhohor and the ʿaser before |             |          |
  |            |he left the battle-field. But   |             |          |
  |            |the encampment fell into the    |             |          |
  |            |hands of the enemy, as well as  |             |          |
  |            |the two cannons. However, in    |             |          |
  |            |crossing the river, the Wádáy   |             |          |
  |            |army sustained severe losses.   |             |          |
  |            |All this happened on Tuesday the|             |          |
  |            |11th of Rebí el awel, or March  |             |          |
  |            |8. 1846. On Thursday, Sheikh    |             |          |
  |            |ʿOmár put to death Ibrahím the  |             |          |
  |            |titular sultan of Bórnu, whom he|             |          |
  |            |had laid in chains before going |             |          |
  |            |to battle. He then hastily left |             |          |
  |            |Kúkawa, and retreated into the  |             |          |
  |            |western provinces; the host of  |             |          |
  |            |Wádáy followed him as far as    |             |          |
  |            |Ngórnu, where they encamped and |             |          |
  |            |remained about forty days, while|             |          |
  |            |their skirmishers plundered all |             |          |
  |            |the neighbouring places, and    |             |          |
  |            |particularly Kúkawa, from whence|             |          |
  |            |they carried away a considerable|             |          |
  |            |booty, and then set fire to the |             |          |
  |            |town. Indeed the capital for    |             |          |
  |            |about two months remained a     |             |          |
  |            |desert.                         |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |But this was not all. The King  |             |          |
  |            |of Wádáy took ʿAlí, the son of  |             |          |
  |            |the late Sultan Ibrám, and      |             |          |
  |            |enthroned him in Birni as sultan|             |          |
  |            |of Bórnu, summoning all the     |             |          |
  |            |partisans of the old dynasty to |             |          |
  |            |defend their new king. However, |             |          |
  |            |he soon found that he was not   |             |          |
  |            |strong enough to carry his      |             |          |
  |            |point, and hearing that ʿAbd e’ |             |          |
  |            |Rahmán, the sheikh’s brother,   |             |          |
  |            |was approaching from the west   |             |          |
  |            |with a numerous host, and being |             |          |
  |            |afraid lest, if he stayed       |             |          |
  |            |longer, his retreat might be cut|             |          |
  |            |off by the river, he sent       |             |          |
  |            |Ibrahím Wádáy as a messenger of |             |          |
  |            |peace to the sheikh, declaring  |             |          |
  |            |that he had not undertaken this |             |          |
  |            |expedition from any desire of   |             |          |
  |            |conquest, but at the instigation|             |          |
  |            |of a great many of the noblest  |             |          |
  |            |kokanáwa or grandees of Bórnu,  |             |          |
  |            |whose letters he forwarded to   |             |          |
  |            |the sheikh. He then, in the last|             |          |
  |            |days of April, or the first days|             |          |
  |            |of May, 1846, left Ngórnu,      |             |          |
  |            |commencing his retreat to his   |             |          |
  |            |far-distant residence, and      |             |          |
  |            |leaving the recently-elevated   |             |          |
  |            |sultan to his fate.             |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |But it appears that ʿAlí the son|             |          |
  |            |of Ibrám was a courageous young |             |          |
  |            |prince; for he thought himself  |             |          |
  |            |strong enough to march against  |             |          |
  |            |the sheikh, whom he encountered |             |          |
  |            |at Minárem, but was quickly     |             |          |
  |            |vanquished and slain. Thus the  |             |          |
  |            |last of the Séfuwa died an      |             |          |
  |            |honourable death on the         |             |          |
  |            |battlefield. It was now evident |             |          |
  |            |that the family of Mohammed el  |             |          |
  |            |Kánemí, who had liberated the   |             |          |
  |            |country from a warlike and      |             |          |
  |            |successful enemy, was well      |             |          |
  |            |established in the place of the |             |          |
  |            |ancient rulers, who had         |             |          |
  |            |degenerated into mere puppets,  |             |          |
  |            |and were totally unable to      |             |          |
  |            |defend themselves and their     |             |          |
  |            |subjects. A great slaughter of  |             |          |
  |            |all the partisans of the old    |             |          |
  |            |dynasty followed, and           |             |          |
  |            |principally of the Sugúrti, who |             |          |
  |            |had risen as their especial     |             |          |
  |            |upholders; and a little later,  |             |          |
  |            |in order to efface as far as    |             |          |
  |            |possible all recollection of    |             |          |
  |            |those times, the destruction of |             |          |
  |            |New Birni was decided on, and   |             |          |
  |            |fell to the lot of Háj Beshír,  |             |          |
  |            |the son of Tiráb, who had       |             |          |
  |            |succeeded his father as the     |             |          |
  |            |first minister and most         |             |          |
  |            |confidential servant of the     |             |          |
  |            |sheikh. From this time, people  |             |          |
  |            |say, dated the great wealth of  |             |          |
  |            |the vizier. Meanwhile Sheikh    |             |          |
  |            |ʿOmár went in person to         |             |          |
  |            |castigate Serkí Ibrám, the      |             |          |
  |            |governor of Zínder, who had     |             |          |
  |            |risen in open revolt, and took  |             |          |
  |            |and plundered the town, though  |             |          |
  |            |he pardoned and reinstated the  |             |          |
  |            |governor, while ʿAbd e’ Rahmán  |             |          |
  |            |quelled the rebellion of the    |             |          |
  |            |Manga, who, ever restless and   |             |          |
  |            |inclined to insurrection, had   |             |          |
  |            |thought this an excellent       |             |          |
  |            |opportunity of asserting their  |             |          |
  |            |independence. ʿOmár himself     |             |          |
  |            |brought the then large town of  |             |          |
  |            |Surríkulo to obedience[228]; and|             |          |
  |            |the country soon became quieter |             |          |
  |            |than before. Scarcely any       |             |          |
  |            |vestige of the old dynasty was  |             |          |
  |            |left; even the records of it    |             |          |
  |            |were purposely destroyed—a most |             |          |
  |            |unfortunate circumstance, which |             |          |
  |            |made it very difficult for me to|             |          |
  |            |obtain what little information I|             |          |
  |            |have been able to collect.      |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |The Kúka, built by Mohammed el  |             |          |
  |            |Kánemí, having been destroyed by|             |          |
  |            |the people of Wádáy, ʿOmár and  |             |          |
  |            |his vizier built two towns in   |             |          |
  |            |its place, one the eastern town,|             |          |
  |            |“bílla gedíbe,” as the especial |             |          |
  |            |residence of the court, the     |             |          |
  |            |other, the western town, “bílla |             |          |
  |            |futébe.” Thus Kúka has become   |             |          |
  |            |Kúkawa.[229]                    |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |Sheikh ʿOmár was now in a much  |             |          |
  |            |more favourable position than   |             |          |
  |            |his father, being sole and      |             |          |
  |            |indisputable master of the      |             |          |
  |            |country and really the king,    |             |          |
  |            |though he disdained the title.  |             |          |
  |            |He might have given it a new    |             |          |
  |            |organization, ruling it with a  |             |          |
  |            |strong and impartial hand; but  |             |          |
  |            |while he is an upright and      |             |          |
  |            |straightforward man, who        |             |          |
  |            |certainly would like to see the |             |          |
  |            |country well administered, he   |             |          |
  |            |lacks that far-sighted vigour   |             |          |
  |            |which is necessary for ruling an|             |          |
  |            |extensive kingdom based on a    |             |          |
  |            |loose state of things, with     |             |          |
  |            |arbitrary power above and       |             |          |
  |            |turbulent habits beneath. Indeed|             |          |
  |            |it is most deplorable that he   |             |          |
  |            |has allowed the Tawárek, or     |             |          |
  |            |rather Imóshagh, those          |             |          |
  |            |inveterate enemies of well-     |             |          |
  |            |governed communities, to persist|             |          |
  |            |in their desolating and         |             |          |
  |            |predatory habits. In the time of|             |          |
  |            |his father there were Tebu      |             |          |
  |            |settlements near all the wells  |             |          |
  |            |on the Fezzán road as far as    |             |          |
  |            |Beduwáram; all these have been  |             |          |
  |            |deserted successively since the |             |          |
  |            |beginning of the reign of ʿOmár,|             |          |
  |            |the towns of Lárí and Wúdí have |             |          |
  |            |been ransacked by the Tawárek,  |             |          |
  |            |and not a living soul left, and |             |          |
  |            |the whole of Kánem has become   |             |          |
  |            |the desolate abode of a few     |             |          |
  |            |unfortunate communities, and the|             |          |
  |            |wild hunting-ground of continual|             |          |
  |            |adventurous ghazzias from every |             |          |
  |            |quarter; indeed, not only the   |             |          |
  |            |considerable town of Bárruwa,   |             |          |
  |            |one day’s march north of the    |             |          |
  |            |komádugu, on the road to Kánem, |             |          |
  |            |but even other places in the    |             |          |
  |            |middle of Bórnu, as will be seen|             |          |
  |            |in the course of my narrative,  |             |          |
  |            |have to buy their peace by a    |             |          |
  |            |sort of tribute to be paid to   |             |          |
  |            |the Tawárek freebooters.        |             |          |
  |            |                                |             |          |
  |            |But besides his own personal    |             |          |
  |            |weakness, and inclination to    |             |          |
  |            |ascetic piety, there was a      |             |          |
  |            |dangerous cancer undermining the|             |          |
  |            |health of the new dynasty: this |             |          |
  |            |was the rivalry which soon arose|             |          |
  |            |between him and his brother ʿAbd|             |          |
  |            |e’ Rahmán, on account of the    |             |          |
  |            |vizier el Háj Beshír, who       |             |          |
  |            |enjoyed the whole confidence of |             |          |
  |            |the sheikh, and employed his    |             |          |
  |            |authority too exclusively. The  |             |          |
  |            |results of this unfortunate     |             |          |
  |            |quarrel I will here report to   |             |          |
  |            |their end, although they fall   |             |          |
  |            |after the time of my arrival in |             |          |
  |            |Bórnu. I have already observed  |             |          |
  |            |above, that on leaving Múrzuk we|             |          |
  |            |were informed that a quarrel was|             |          |
  |            |about to break out between ʿOmár|             |          |
  |            |and ʿAbd e’ Rahmán; but happily |             |          |
  |            |matters were then adjusted, and |             |          |
  |            |the rivalry did not proceed to a|             |          |
  |            |civil war before the winter of  |             |          |
  |            |1853, when ʿAbd e’ Rahmán, with |             |          |
  |            |his partisans, left Kúkawa and  |             |          |
  |            |went to Gújebá. The sheikh and  |             |          |
  |            |his vizier followed him, but    |             |          |
  |            |being betrayed by many of the   |             |          |
  |            |courtiers, who were badly       |             |          |
  |            |disposed against the vizier,    |             |          |
  |            |they were defeated in an        |             |          |
  |            |irregular skirmish; and Háj     |             |          |
  |            |Beshír, certainly with very     |             |          |
  |            |little show of courage, was the |             |          |
  |            |first who turned his back, and  |             |          |
  |            |collecting his most valuable    |             |          |
  |            |treasures, started for Wádáy.   |             |          |
  |            |Being detained by the Shúwa, who|             |          |
  |            |would not allow him to cross the|             |          |
  |            |Shárí, he was induced to return |             |          |
  |            |to Kúkawa, on safe-conduct being|             |          |
  |            |promised to him by ʿAbd e’      |             |          |
  |            |Rahmán, but having been found   |             |          |
  |            |guilty of treason was strangled.|             |          |
  |            |ʿOmár meanwhile was allowed to  |             |          |
  |            |reside as a private man in the  |             |          |
  |            |house of his former vizier till,|             |          |
  |            |in the summer of 1854, ʿAbd e’  |             |          |
  |            |Rahmán ordered him to go to     |             |          |
  |            |reside in Díkowa. He then       |             |          |
  |            |collected the malcontents, and  |             |          |
  |            |on the ʿAíd el kebír vanquished |             |          |
  |            |his brother in the open place   |             |          |
  |            |between the two towns, and made |             |          |
  |            |him prisoner, and in the first  |             |          |
  |            |days of December killed him.    |             |          |
  |            |Thus he is once more sole ruler |             |          |
  |            |of the country; but having lost |             |          |
  |            |his vizier, upon whose advice he|             |          |
  |            |was formerly wont to rely       |             |          |
  |            |entirely, he has nobody to      |             |          |
  |            |supply his want of energy. Time |             |          |
  |            |will show whether Bórnu is again|             |          |
  |            |to flourish under this dynasty, |             |          |
  |            |or whether it has to undergo    |             |          |
  |            |another revolution. From the    |             |          |
  |            |sequel of my narrative it will  |             |          |
  |            |sufficiently appear that it is  |             |          |
  |            |not in such a state as it ought |             |          |
  |            |to be; but it has the advantage |             |          |
  |            |that all over Negroland there is|             |          |
  |            |no warlike and energetic king at|             |          |
  |            |the present time.               |             |          |
  +------------+--------------------------------+-------------+----------+


[Footnote 177: See Edrisi, translated by Jaubert, vol. i. pp. 25. 119.
Jaubert reads Semnah; but the name Sámina is of frequent occurrence on
the border of Negroland.]

[Footnote 178: The name of Húwa, as the name of a man, appears also in
Imám Áhmed’s history.]

[Footnote 179: ولى بالخليفة means only he ascended the throne, the Bórnu
people regarding the dignity of the ruler of Kánem as a khalifate.]

[Footnote 180: It is very remarkable, and confirms the dates of the
chronicle marvellously, that El Bekri, who wrote towards the end of the
dynasty of the Dúguwa, in the reign of Árki, A.D. 1067, says expressly
(p. 456.), that the inhabitants of Kánem were at that time idolaters.]

[Footnote 181: Edrísí, translated by Jaubert, vol. i. p. 24., where
انجمي is to be read instead of الحمي.]

[Footnote 182: Ébn Khaldún, _l.c._]

[Footnote 183: Ábú ’l Fedá, texte Arabe, p. 245., compared with p. 127.,
where, in speaking of Wadán, he says distinctly, والجميع الان في طاعة
ملك الكانم “And the whole of the country is at present under the
dominion of the king of Kánem.” In the time of Makrízí the empire of
Kánem extended from Zála, the well-known place eight days’ march from
Aújila, and the same distance from the syrtis (Edrísí, p. 288.; Ábú ’l
Fedá, p. 128.), as far as Kaká (Gógo), on the meridian of Maghreb el
aúsat.—_Quatremère, Mémoires sur l’Egypte_, vol. ii. p. 28.]

[Footnote 184: Ébn Sʿaíd, cited by Makrízí. Hamaker, Spec. Cat. p. 206.
It is to be remarked that in both instances where the name is mentioned,
a و precedes, which might have taken away the ف.]

[Footnote 185: Mr. Blau (p. 311.), in translating this passage of the
chronicle, which he did not understand, has made a most ridiculous
mistake.]

[Footnote 186: Makrízí, in Burckhardt’s Travels in Nubia, Appendix III.
p. 450.; Quatremère, Mémoires sur l’Egypte, vol. ii. p. 28.]

[Footnote 187: Mr. Blau has also misunderstood this passage. ببلدهم ملي
means nothing else but that their native country was Melle.]

[Footnote 188: Mr. Blau, of course, who had no knowledge of the Soy,
must be excused for having read in all these passages سوق, although the
second و belongs to the following sentence, the dots in his copy being
added by negligence.]

[Footnote 189: The place Dámmasak may still be identified from a basin
of the komádugu which has been called after it. It is at present
generally called Fátoghaná (see above, p. 233.)—_Denham_ (who writes
Dúmmasak), vol. i. p. 160.; but in the map the name is accurately spelt
from Clapperton’s account.]

[Footnote 190: P. 77. of my MS. copy.]

[Footnote 191: The name is clearly written in my MS.; and there is not
the least doubt that Kanó is meant. Blau, _l.c._, reads Kuttu.]

[Footnote 192: Thus the name is clearly written in my copy; but in
another copy it seems to be Bérberá.]

[Footnote 193: What an immense power this officer must at one time have
enjoyed is amply and clearly illustrated by the fact that his sons were
entitled princes (“mai-na”), and his daughters princesses (“mai-ram”),
like the children of the sultan, the difference of rank being only
expressed by adding the word “keghámma-ram.”]

[Footnote 194: Denham and Clapperton’s Narrative, Appendix, vol. ii. p.
164.]

[Footnote 195: Bulletin de la Soc. Géogr. Paris, 1849, p. 252.]

[Footnote 196: Ibid.]

[Footnote 197: The words mean evidently nothing else than that under him
the empire of Bórnu reached its highest pitch of _greatness_. The name
of the town of Kabara is written كابرة, and was never a town of great
importance; indeed it is absurd to suppose that the name of a small
harbour should have been mentioned here in preference to that of the
capital, Gágho or Gógó, or at least Timbuktu.]

[Footnote 198: Hamaker, p. 206.]

[Footnote 199: After this country, also, the wool-bearing sheep of Bórnu
are called “dimí yerirám.”]

[Footnote 200: Imám Áhmed.]

[Footnote 201: The name Kel-eghrármar seems to indicate Berber origin.]

[Footnote 202: The name is written in three different ways: sometimes
كُنهُ, at others كون or كنو.]

[Footnote 203: دلا. In Bórnu also there was a large town of this name;
or it seems rather that Ghasréggomo was sometimes called by this name,
as will appear from the following passage:—

وتوجه تلغا برنوا الى ان بلغ المدينه الكبيره بُرنِي دلــــــا]

[Footnote 204: اتْربِسْه من كُتُسِه]

[Footnote 205: مُنيوه.]

[Footnote 206: مع جمعهم من تلظٍ وغيرها.]

[Footnote 207: جميع من في الارض من قبيله كَليِتِه. They are mentioned
also in another passage as قومه من قبيله كِلوَتِه; and this latter form
of the word is probably the right one.]

[Footnote 208: صاحب اهير.]

[Footnote 209: اغْرَمْ-والى بلد اقاليم دُرْكُه كلها.]

[Footnote 210: كُبْسِه.]

[Footnote 211: كَراوا.]

[Footnote 212: It is remarkable how closely this picture of the great
highroad of Negroland, and its troubled state, resembles that drawn by
Leo, l. vii. c. ix.: “E ciascuno de’ mercatanti tiene gran quantità di
schiavi per valersi dell’ ajuto loro ne’ passi da Cano a Borno; come da
Zingani poverissima e ladra gente.” Whether, under the general name of
Zingani, Leo understood the Nghizim I cannot say; but that may be the
case.]

[Footnote 213: غُجَمْبِنا. It is remarkable that this name, in its
latter part, closely resembles that of Mábiná, the country mentioned by
Makrízí as invaded by a Bórnu king (Dúnama Selmámi) in the year 1250.
See above, p. 262.]

[Footnote 214: كتاكُم.]

[Footnote 215: The name in my MS. is sometimes written تتاله, at others
تلاله.]

[Footnote 216: القبيله كَتكُوا.]

[Footnote 217: The name is sometimes written الخر سَادْ, sometimes البجر
ثادْ.]

[Footnote 218: صاحب مَفَتي.]

[Footnote 219: A town of the same name on the Tsád is mentioned,
together with Kúri, by Denham, i. p. 192.]

[Footnote 220: مَكَرِ. Mákari and Kótokó are but different names of the
same country, just as Áfno and Háusa, Mákari being the name used by the
Kanúri.]

[Footnote 221: كُسُرِ.]

[Footnote 222: Denham, vol. i. p. 327.]

[Footnote 223: دكانا.]

[Footnote 224: Lucas, Proceedings of the African Association, vol. i. p.
227.]

[Footnote 225: From the report given to Mr. Koelle by the Bórnu slave
ʿAlí Eisámi (_African Native Literature_, 1854, p. 93.), it would seem
that Áhmed died before entering Ghasréggomo; but although these
narratives teem with interest, they have no historical authority for the
time which succeeded ʿAlí’s capture in the year 1814-15, and even no
paramount authority for the preceding period. And the other story, as
told in p. 99. _et seqq._, agrees entirely with our statement. The
account of the inroad of Wádáy and the death of Ibrám (both which events
happened in the time of Sheikh ʿOmár), as given by that Negro, is quite
absurd and full of confusion.]

[Footnote 226: It seems almost incredible that, although the members of
the late mission have distinctly stated that Kuka is a new town, yet
even at the present day this place is identified by learned men with
some ancient places having similar names.]

[Footnote 227: The exact date of his death I cannot find at present.]

[Footnote 228: ʿOmár, however, made several other expeditions; one
against Gújeba, which is very famous amongst the inhabitants.]

[Footnote 229: It might be that even before this time the people who
spoke more correctly would call the town Kúkawa; that is, properly,
“bílla kúkawa,” the “town filled with kuka-trees,” and not Kúka, which
is in truth only the name of the tree after which the place was called.]




                                  VI.

                FRAGMENTS OF A METEOROLOGICAL REGISTER.

                               * * * * *


[Deg. F.: Degrees in scale of Fahrenheit.]

 +-----+-------+-------+----------------------------------------------+
 |Date.|Hour of|Deg. F.|                 Remarks.                     |
 |     | Day.  |       |                                              |
 +-----+-------+-------+----------------------------------------------+
 |1851.|       |       |                                              |
 | Jan.|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |sunrise|  53·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  73·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |sunrise|  48·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |sunset |  71·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|  57·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  73·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |sunrise|  57·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  71·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |sunset |  73·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |sunrise|   59  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |sunrise|   50  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  71·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |sunrise|  44·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |22 to|No observation.|                                              |
 |  26 |               |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |sunrise|  66·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |sunrise|   59  |Cold wind in the afternoon.                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |sunrise|   66  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  31 |sunset |  69·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | Feb.|No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |March|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |First|No observation.|                                              |
 | half|               |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |Sky cloudy (Kanó).                            |
 |  3  |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |sunrise|  64·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.0    |  109  |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |sunrise|  70·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |sunrise|   68  |Thick fog in the morning, the sun not coming  |
 |     |       |       |forth till past noon.                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  91·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |       |       |Morning foggy.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |noon   |   95  |Morning clear, northerly wind arose.          |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  25 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |noon   | 100·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |noon   |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |No observation.|Sky turbid and dull, easterly wind.           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |noon   |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |April|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |noon   |  96·8 |Same sky, overcast with thick clouds; wind, as|
 |     |       |       |in general, easterly.                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |sunrise|  69·8 |                (Kúkawa.)                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|  78·8 |Sky a little overcast.                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 105·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  93·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |sunrise|   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |  100  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |sunrise|  69·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  104· |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |sunrise|  69·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  91·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |sunrise|   68  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 100·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |sunrise|   74  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  89·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |sunrise|  73·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |   95  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |sunrise|  71·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |sunrise|   68  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |24 to|No observation.|                                              |
 |  28 |               |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |sunset |  89·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |sunrise|  69·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |   99  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  89·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | May |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |sunrise|  70·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 100·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |1 p.m. |  104  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |sunrise|   74  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. |  104  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  91·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |sunrise|  73·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. | 105·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   95  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |sunrise|  84·2 |Sky dull and cloudy, gradually becoming more  |
 |     |       |       |overcast.                                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1 p.m. | 105·8 |Three o’clock p.m. a few claps of thunder     |
 |     |       |       |without lightning, and with only a little     |
 |     |       |       |rain.                                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |sunrise|  80·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 105·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  91·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |sunrise|   76  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |sunrise|   95  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 106·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |noon   | 107·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |noon   | 106·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |sunrise|   78  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 106·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |sunrise|  80·6 |Very strong wind; in the afternoon a thunder- |
 |     |       |       |storm, with some rain at four o’clock p.m.    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 105·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |sunrise|  80·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 100·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  90·5 |In the evening thick clouds.                  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|  80·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  104  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset | 100·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |sunrise|   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  105  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |sunrise|  79·7 |Atmosphere very oppressive.                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  104  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   95  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |sunrise|  81·5 |Heavy gale from N.W. in the forenoon.         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  104  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  92·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |sunrise|  82·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 105·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |sunrise|  78·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  104  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  93·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |sunrise|   78  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 107·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  92·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |sunrise|   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  104  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |1.30   | 107·6 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |sunrise|   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  104  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   95  |Lightning in the evening.                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |sunrise|   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  104  |At three o’clock p.m. a tornado and a little  |
 |     |       |       |rain.                                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  90·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |sunrise|   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  97·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  25 |sunrise|  79·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  96·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |noon   |  97·7 |Sky thickly overcast; a few drops of rain.    |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  93·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  27 |sunrise|  78·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  104  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  93·2 |In the evening lightning.                     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  28 |sunrise|  84·2 |              Sky not clear.                  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  29 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  30 |noon   |  99·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  31 |sunrise|  75·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  99·5 |In the afternoon the sky became thickly       |
 |     |       |       |overcast, and a little rain fell.             |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  90·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | June|       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  1  |sunrise|  78·8 |In the evening a thunder-storm, towards the   |
 |     |       |       |south and the north, came down upon us,       |
 |     |noon   |  98·6 |accompanied with heavy rain.                  |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  99·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  2  |sunrise|  79·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  98·6 |Tornado near us.                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  3  |sunrise|  74·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   | 104·9 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  4  |sunrise|  74·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  98·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  5  |sunrise|  75·2 |Weather extremely sultry; at 2 p.m. a heavy   |
 |     |       |       |thunder-storm, with much rain.                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. | 111·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset | 101·3 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  6  |sunrise|  73·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  93·2 |At 10 p.m. frightful tempest, with much rain. |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |No observation.|In the evening thunder-storm in the distance. |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |sunrise|  73·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |sunrise|  75·2 |At four o’clock in the afternoon a tornado,   |
 |     |       |       |with a short but heavy shower. In the night   |
 |     |       |       |another storm, but no rain near us.           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  82·4 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |sunrise|  71·6 |In the afternoon a storm, with but little     |
 |     |       |       |rain.                                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |       |       |Sky cloudy.                                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |2 p.m. |  82·4 |Atmosphere humid and rainy, felt quite chilly,|
 |     |       |       |sun did not come forth till after noon.       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |sunrise|  69·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  89·6 |In the afternoon thunder-storm towards the    |
 |     |       |       |south.                                        |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  75·1 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|  79·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  91·4 |About 2 p.m. a tornado, with a little rain    |
 |     |       |       |later in the afternoon.                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  77·0 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |noon   |  95·1 |8 p.m. a tornado, but not much rain.          |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |sunrise|   77  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  90·5 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |  80·6 |During the night tornado with rain.           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |sunrise|  75·2 |Fine clear morning.                           |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  91·4 |7 p.m. heavy thunder-storm.                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |sunset |   86  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |sunrise|  78·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |noon   |  87·8 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  20 |       |       |In the evening a tornado with heavy rain.     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  21 |sunrise|  70·7 |                (Yóla.)                       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |2 p.m. |  65·3 |1 o’clock p.m. a storm broke forth with great |
 |     |       |       |violence, in consequence of which it became   |
 |     |       |       |quite cool.                                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunset |   67  |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  22 |No observation.|In the morning, sun lurid and atmosphere      |
 |     |       |       |moist, afterwards very hot.                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  23 |sunrise|  71·6 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |               |                                              |
 |     |No observation.|                                              |
 |  25 |               |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  26 |sunrise|   76  |In the evening a heavy tornado, accompanied   |
 |     |       |       |with rain, lasting from 9 p.m. to 6 a.m. 27th.|
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 | June|       |       |                                              |
 |27 to|No observation.|                                              |
 | July|       |       |                                              |
 |  7  |       |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  8  |noon   |   77  |Rain in the evening and during the night.     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  9  |1 p.m. |  80·6 |Sky thickly overcast.                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  10 |5.30   |       |Heavy rain lasting till 7½ a.m.               |
 |     |a.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  11 |1.30   |  82·4 |                                              |
 |     |p.m.   |       |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |     |sunrise|  79·7 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  12 |       |       |In the afternoon heavy thunder-storm with     |
 |     |       |       |rain.                                         |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  13 |No observation.|                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  14 |sunrise|   77  |Sky cloudy; 7 p.m. storm accompanied by very  |
 |     |       |       |heavy rain, lasting till midnight.            |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  15 |       |       |Sky cloudy in the morning; sun came forth at 8|
 |     |       |       |a.m.; a little rain the following night.      |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  16 |       |       |Sky thickly overcast; storm in the night.     |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  17 |       |       |A little before sunset a storm, accompanied by|
 |     |       |       |heavy rain.                                   |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  18 |       |       |Weather clear.                                |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  19 |       |       |Soon after sunrise a storm broke forth        |
 |     |       |       |accompanied by rain, lasting till noon.       |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |20 to|               |                                              |
 |     |No observation.|                                              |
 |  23 |       |  93·2 |                                              |
 |     |       |       |                                              |
 |  24 |noon   |       |                 (Kúkawa.)                    |
 +-----+-------+-------+----------------------------------------------+


                       END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.


                                LONDON:
                     Printed by SPOTTISWOODE & CO.
                          New-street Square.




Transcriber's note:


  Dotless _yā’_ ى has been transcribed as _yā’_ ي.

  Changes in the ERRATA have been done, as well as the following:

  pg xi, Changed: "Douple Peak of Mount Míndif" to: "Double"

  pg 5, Changed: "where the “kálbo,” with its large" to: "“kálgo,”"

  pg 7, Changed: "great many kálbo-trees here" to: "kálgo-trees"

  pg 17, Changed: "the neighbouring village of Kálbo" to: "Kálgo"

  caption of plate 2, Changed: "Feby. 10th. 1850." to: "1851."

  pg 122, Added ” after: "“mádaki-n-Kanó."

  pg 254, Changed: "such as Ebn Sáid" to: "Sʿaid"

  pg 262, Changed: "would seem, of Eb´n Sʿaíd" to: "Ébn"

  pg 263, Changed: "mentioned by Eb´n Khaldún" to: "Ébn"

  pg 290, Changed: "interesting pagan intructors" to: "instructors"

  pg 299, Caption, Added ” after: "clay bench, “dágali,"

  pg 314, Changed: "the contrary, was evidenty" to: "evidently"

  pg 479, footnote 121, Changed: "reduced Bágelé, After" to: "reduced
  Bágelé. After"

  pg 492, Changed: "frontier-provinces by recripocal incursions" to:
  "reciprocal"

  pg 494, Changed: "that from the the sultan of Stambúl" to: "that
  from the sultan of Stambúl"

  pg 643, Added ” after: "“keghámma-ram."

  pg 653, footnote 207, Changed: "قبيله كَِليتِه" to: "كَليِتِه"

  Minor changes in punctuation have been done silently.

  Other spelling inconsistencies have been left unchanged.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRAVELS AND DISCOVERIES IN NORTH AND CENTRAL AFRICA, VOL. 2 (OF 5) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


