The Project Gutenberg eBook of Hand made furniture and how to make it
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Hand made furniture and how to make it

Author: Albert G. Glidden

Release date: June 9, 2025 [eBook #76260]

Language: English

Original publication: Spokane: Hand Made Furniture Shop, 1910

Credits: Charlene Taylor, A Marshall, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAND MADE FURNITURE AND HOW TO MAKE IT ***

  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.

  Original book did not include a table of contents, one has been
  created for convenience of the reader.

                           Table of Contents

                 General.
                 Chapter I.
                     Tools.
                     The Saw.
                     The Use of the Saw.
                     The Plane.
                     To Sharpen Planes.
                     To Use the Plane.
                     Chisels.
                     To Sharpen Chisels.
                     To Use the Chisel.
                     The Marking Gauge.
                     The Screw Driver.
                     The Bit Brace.
                     Bits.
                     To Sharpen Bits.
                     The Nail Set.
                     The Hammer.
                     Oil Stones.
                     The Mallet.
                     The Try Square.
                     The Steel Square.
                     The Sliding T Bevel.
                     The Dividers.
                     Two-foot Rule.
                 Chapter II.
                     Wood Working and Joining.
                     The Saw Horse.
                     Work Bench.
                     Bench Stop.
                 Chapter III.
                     Squaring and Jointing.
                     Half Tenon and Halving.
                     Halved Joint.
                     Mortise and Tenon.
                     Panelling.
                     Dowelling and Joining.
                     Mitring.
                     Dovetailing.
                 Chapter IV.
                     Fastenings.
                 Chapter V.
                     Dressing Off and Smoothing.
                 Chapter VI.
                     Staining, Dyeing, Filling, Polishing.
                 Designs
                     Piano Or Organ Bench.
                     Plant Stand.
                     Magazine Stand.
                     Music Cabinet.
                     Hall Seat.
                     Hat Tree.
                     Dining Table.
                     Chair.
                     Morris Chair.
                     Library Table.




                                HAND MADE
                                FURNITURE
                                   AND
                             HOW TO MAKE IT

  Designed for the use of those seeking either a pleasant and
  profitable occupation or such furniture for their homes as shall
  express their own artistic taste, and stand for sturdy honesty of
  purpose, simple beauty, comfort and durability.

                            Albert G. Glidden

                        HAND MADE FURNITURE SHOP,
                             Spokane, Wash.




                             Copywrited 1910
                                   by
                             A. G. Glidden.




                               GENERAL.


There is probably no home in which the comfort, convenience or artistic
appearance could not be improved by the addition or replacing of some
pieces of furniture. The reason is simple. They are furnished with
store furniture, and store furniture is made to sell; the designs
limited by the capabilities of the machines which make it; made of the
cheapest materials; put together in the quickest, rather than the best
way, and then finished up with the crudest varnish and stain to make
a fine appearance. It is a depressing sight to see this furniture on
moving day, piled on the sidewalk, scratched, broken, dingy, all its
fine pretense of beauty gone forever. On the other hand, the chairs,
tables, sideboards and other pieces that have come down to us through
generations were all made by hand, put together by hand and finished
by hand in the days when there was no machinery and the workman was an
artist. The result is that instead of finding its way to the scrap heap
this old furniture is as good today as ever, after two or three hundred
years of wear and tear and removal from place to place half round the
world. Hampered by no limitations of machinery these designers set the
standard for the world for all times. Such furniture is worth while,
and is an everlasting inspiration to the home-maker and worker.

Our new style, variously known as “Arts and Crafts,” “Mission,”
“Craftsman,” etc., is especially adapted to hand work, and while
differing from the rich old oak and mahogany of our fathers’ in form
and finish, is like them in all the qualities of beauty and durability
and is far more comfortable. A home furnished in this style not
only expresses the artistic taste of its inmates but also exerts an
influence of sturdy honesty of purpose, simplicity and absence of all
gaudy pretense, which both its frank, straight lines and freedom from
anything to hide or mar the natural beauty of the wood so forcibly
express. It is a style of which we can never tire and of which no
other can take the place. It will last for generations, for every part
is as strong as the wood of which it is made. You can make it and
make it better than you can buy in any store, for it is made in the
most natural way, after the most natural design, of the most natural
material.

Of course, it cannot be hoped that the mere reading of any book can
make an expert cabinet maker of an inexperienced workman, but the
instructions contained in this book will enable any one to make
furniture. Handsome, comfortable, durable furniture. The length of
time required on each of the exercises will, of course, vary with the
individual workman and his aptitude for the work. All that can be said
as to the number of times the exercises should be performed is simply
to keep at each one until you are satisfied with the results, you can
judge as well as any one when your work is good. Time spent in practice
is time well spent, for you are learning to make something which will
be with you for years to come.

[Illustration: Fig. I.]

Most people know more or less about the use of tools and to some it
will seem that we are unnecessarily explicit about things which to them
are matters of course, but as we are writing for those who have had no
experience whatever in the use of tools, as well as others, we have
begun with the rudiments and taken one after another in the order most
likely to assure rapid progress. For the same reason we have avoided,
in so far as possible, technical terms and trade names, though in some
cases it has been necessary to use the customary terms, as no others
will express the meaning. For instance, the use of the word “square,”
as applied to our work, does not always mean rectangular but oftener
means at right angles to adjoining surfaces. Thus, when we say “saw
square” or “plane square” we mean to make your surface straight and
true and at right angles with some other surface. The term “right
angles” will be easily understood by reference to Fig. 1. Whenever two
lines meet they form an angle, and having the direction of one line
and the degree of the angle we know the direction of the other line.
Thus in Fig. 1 all the lines meet at (a). Taking the line (a-b) as our
base and wishing to find any other line of which we have the degree
of angle we draw a circle around (a). The size of the circle does not
make any difference. A circle is divided into 360 degrees, therefore,
if we are given an angle of 90 degrees, we know that it is a quarter
of the circle and drawing a line from (a) to the outer rim of the
circle a quarter of the way around we have the line (a-c) which forms
an angle of 90 degrees with the line (a-b). In the same way an angle
of 30 degrees would be formed by a line drawn from (a) to the outer
rim of the circle ¹⁄₁₂th of the way round from (b) (a-d). Forty-five
degrees would be ⅛th of the way round (a-e), 60 degrees ⅙th of the
way round (a-f), 180 degrees half way round, and so on. The angle of
90 degrees is spoken of as a right angle and in our work one line of
the angle is said to be square to the other. We also use the term in
speaking of angles 1 in 6, or 2 in 6, etc. You will understand this if
you will take your steel square and place your rule diagonally across
it and when, for instance, we say 1 in 6 we would mean to place your
rule 6 in. from the corner of the square on one arm and 1 in. from the
corner on the other arm of the square; 2 in 6 would mean keep the rule
at 6 in. on one arm and move the other end of the rule 2 in. from the
corner on the other arm. In other words, an angle may be said to give
the degree of slant.

We have included in this book a few designs for pieces of furniture
in order to show the method of assembling the parts and the most
convenient way of laying out and beginning a piece of work. In this
connection we wish to impress upon you the importance of laying out the
whole of a piece of work before you begin to cut it at all. You will
appreciate this as you proceed.

In our cuts we have made no attempt at fine drawing but have used
the fewest possible lines for the sake of plainness and only so much
shading as is necessary. Single lines usually designate the outline of
solid parts. Dotted lines show the outlines of parts lying beneath the
surface, or in other words, as if seen through the object, and are used
merely to show the location of parts which would really be invisible.
Wavy lines are generally used where only a part of a piece is shown
and designate that the piece is really longer than drawn but the part
beyond the wavy line is not necessary in the illustration. We have used
shading to show end grain in some cases but more often to show where a
part is cut away, as in the side of a tenon, etc. Dimensions are shown
by arrow pointed lines. Where these lines point in opposite directions
with the figures between them, or point toward each other with the
figures at the end of one arrow, they give the distance in both cases
between the arrow points.

The choice of wood depends largely on the purpose for which it is to
be used and personal taste. You will probably have no occasion to use
other woods than fir, oak and mahogany, with possibly some pine. Fir
is soft and likely to splinter if not carefully handled, but is easy to
work, the grain is wavy and beautiful and it can be finished to equal
oak in beauty. Oak is harder but more durable and admits of a very high
polish. It is much stronger and therefore, except where proportion
requires size, the parts can be made much smaller than when using fir.
As, for instance, in chair and table legs, braces, etc. Oak also bends
better than fir but it is necessary to steam it for this purpose and
unless you have proper steam box and clamps to hold it until dry, we
do not advise attempting to bend the parts. Mahogany has been the most
highly prized of these three woods until recently, and is the most
expensive, but oak has largely taken its place in fine furniture of
this style, as it is more in keeping with the straight lines. Pine is
soft, light and not so likely to splinter as fir, but has little grain
and is not used extensively except in concealed parts where strength is
not essential. In most lumber, and especially that with much flake or
grain, you will find that the grain does not lay flat on the surface,
but comes up to the surface at an angle and in planing it is important
to cut in the direction of this grain, not against it, as in the latter
case it will chip up and leave nicks in the surface instead of cutting
smooth. In using the scraper on fir you have to be careful or it will
cut deeper in the soft grain of the wood than on the flake, and make a
wavy surface instead of a flat one. This, however, can be avoided with
a little care.

We trust that with these suggestions the following may be quite clear
to you, but if there is any point on which you are not quite clear, or
if there is any advice you would like we would be very glad to hear
from you and to assist you in any way that our experience will permit.




                              Chapter I.


TOOLS.

Right here and now we want to say, =keep your tools sharp=. Many
beginners are discouraged with the result of their work when the fault
is entirely with the dullness of their tools. A dull tool cannot do
good work no matter how skillful the workman may be. Therefore, we say
again, keep all tools sharp all the time. With this in mind, let us see
what tools are necessary for our purpose and how to sharpen, use and
care for them.


THE SAW.

The saw comes first in use and perhaps in importance. There are several
kinds, but you will need only one 24-inch rip saw, about 7 tooth (to an
inch) for sawing with the grain; one 20-inch cross-cut saw, 10 tooth,
for sawing across the grain; one 12-inch back saw, 12 tooth, for sawing
a perfectly straight, narrow smooth cut (kerf); one 12-inch compass
saw, 8 tooth, for sawing curves.

These saws are sharpened when you buy them and we do not advise you to
attempt to file your saws until you have learned by practice how to do
it properly. Have them sharpened by an expert, for while it is very
simple it requires skill, acquired only from experience. Do not neglect
it, however. A dull saw leaves a ragged edge and takes double effort.

If you desire to file your saws get an old one to practice on. It is
not a difficult thing to learn, and while opinions differ as to just
how the work should be done there are a few essentials which must be
observed. The following is the result of long experience and careful
study and will give satisfactory results:

You will need to purchase a saw vise (one with rubber in the jaws will
prevent noise), also a slim 7-inch taper file for 7 and 8 tooth saws,
5-inch slim taper file for 10 and 12 tooth, and a fairly long, flat
mill file for jointing; a saw set of any of the standard patterns, and
then proceed as follows: Fasten the saw vise to something steady, clamp
the saw in it, teeth up, take the steel square, or other straight edge
and hold it with the edge along the teeth of the saw. If the teeth do
not all just touch the edge of the square they are not of equal length
and require what is called “jointing.” To do this take the flat mill
file and lay it flat along the points of the teeth, filing as if to
dull them until they are all equal in length, which you test with the
square as before. The next step is to “set” the saw. This consists in
bending the points of alternate teeth to right and left. This is done
with the saw set. Have the salesman show you how to operate whatever
kind you buy. The teeth should be bent only just enough to clear, do
not set too deep, only the point should be bent, or half the tooth at
most; set the tooth toward the side on which the point is; this will
be every other tooth one way and alternate ones the other way; set one
side first, then the other side. Your saw is now ready for filing.
Select the size of file given above for the particular saw, commence
at the butt (handle end) with the first tooth set away from you and
file every alternate tooth. Keep the file level, that is, the handle
and point at the same height when the saw is straight up on edge. You
will notice that the teeth of your Cross-cut, Back and Compass saws
are filed on an angle. This angle is entirely at the discretion of the
owner. It is essential, however, that the bevel be filed on the front
of the tooth. It will give very satisfactory results if you make it
about 45 degrees. Keep the angle precisely the same on all the teeth.
When you have filed the teeth on one side turn the saw around and file
those on the other side. As to the shape of the teeth there is much
difference of opinion, but until you have some reason to change keep
it the same as when you bought the saw. Now take the saw out of the
vise, lay it on a flat board and rub the sides of the teeth with the
oil stone until they are perfectly even. To file the Rip saw proceed as
above, except file straight across, not at an angle. File every tooth
exactly the same size and shape and your saw will run true and easy.


THE USE OF THE SAW.

The use of the saw is constant and important. Saw true always, whether
the results make any difference or not. In this way you will train
your eye and hand. Do not saw without a mark. Use a hard pencil so as
to make a narrow line. In all cases when joining mark with a knife or
marking awl, remember that nearly always the sawed edge will have to
be smoothed with the plane, and allow for this in such cases. Start
your saw by a few short strokes, as it is likely to “jump” if you use
too long a stroke before the cut is started. As soon as it is started
use a full stroke. Do not saw in little jerks, but be careful not to
pull the saw all the way out of the cut, as this will mar your work
and may break the saw. Your Rip saw and your Cross-cut saw should be
held at an angle of about 45 degrees. With the Compass saw, you will
generally have to hold it straight through the board in order to follow
the curve. The Back saw is used flat down on the work, though you may
raise or lower the butt a little in starting. It will take practice to
learn to saw “square,” that is, so the cut is at right angles with the
surface of the plank. Most beginners are inclined to tip the butt of
the saw away from them as the cut gets nearer to them. Be careful about
this. It is necessary to bring the butt in as the cut gets nearer. Of
course, this does not apply to the Back saw, as that cuts straight
down. In this case be sure to start true to your mark and hold the saw
exactly at right angles to the surface of your work so as to cut square.

A saw properly set and filed does not require grease to make it run
smoothly but should be wiped off after using with an oily cloth to
prevent rust.


THE PLANE.

The plane may be of wood or iron or a combination of the two. We
recommend a No. 3 Bailey iron plane (block) for smoothing; a No. 5
Bailey iron plane (jack) for heavier cutting and jointing; a wooden
plow ¼ inch; a wooden plow ½ inch; a wooden rabbet plane ¼ to ⅝ inch.
If you care to spend the money a wood and iron jointer, not less than
24 inch long is also valuable, but with care you can do this work with
your No. 5 jack plane. The dealer will also show you Stanley Nos. 45
and 55 planes. These are expensive, but very convenient, as they will
take the place of the rabbet and plow, and will also cut mouldings,
reeding, etc. Have the dealer show you how to take apart and put
together whatever planes you buy.


TO SHARPEN PLANES.

To sharpen planes use the oil stone, and oil that will not gum. The
jack and jointer have a cap iron on the blade; remove this and rub the
bevelled side of the blade on the stone with either a spiral or figure
eight motion. Some workmen hold the bevel flat on the stone, others
prefer to raise the blade onto the edge a little so as to make a second
bevel just at the sharp edge. This gives a stronger cutting edge. We
prefer the latter method. Either way will turn up a feather edge on the
other side, and to remove this turn the blade over on the flat or long
side and rub it perfectly flat on the stone. Repeat the process until
the edge is very sharp and perfectly smooth. Do not scratch your stone
with the corner of the blade. Put your plane together again keeping the
cap iron ¹⁄₃₂ to ¹⁄₁₆ of an inch back from the cutting edge.


TO USE THE PLANE.

To use the plane sight along the bottom and set the blade so it just
shows. If you want to cut deeper you can set it deeper after trying it.
Stand back of your plane, rather than over it, so you push it away from
you instead of across in front of you. In this way you will cut truer
and with less effort. Avoid a rocking motion. Hold the heel firmly down
with the right hand and the front with the left hand. At the beginning
of the stroke hold the front down squarely and at the end of the stroke
ease up on the front and hold the heel down. When the plane runs off
the end of the work at the end of the stroke, as you reach the end lift
the front so that it does not drop over the end and make it low. Always
plane square, whether it makes any difference or not, for the sake of
habit.


CHISELS.

Chisels are of several kinds and lengths. For our use we prefer as most
convenient one each ⅛, ¼ and ½ inch butt chisels (short blade). You
will have little or no use for anything wider than ½ inch.


TO SHARPEN CHISELS.

To sharpen chisels proceed as with the plane blade, except hold the
bevel flat on the stone. Do not raise on the edge at all, as this
should be thin and very keen.


TO USE THE CHISEL.

To use the chisel keep the flat side towards the mark. For chisel work
always mark with a knife. Always leave a margin next the line until the
finishing cuts. If you cut right to the line in the beginning you are
likely to mar the edge of your cut, and also in soft wood the bevel
of the chisel forces it a little towards the flat side. When cutting
across the grain hold the chisel very flat on the work or it will “dig
in.”


THE MARKING GAUGE.

The marking gauge is made in several patterns. The simplest will do.
In its use you need little instruction. Always tip it a little in the
direction you are moving it. If held straight up it will try to follow
the grain. Hold the guide firmly and flat against the work.


THE SCREW DRIVER.

The screw driver should be of the very best. For our work we recommend
one each ⅛ and ¼ inch, fairly long.

Always bore holes for screws. The hole should be about two-thirds the
diameter of the screw. Put a little soap on the screw and it will drive
easier and be less likely to split your work. When it is nearly all the
way in and begins to go harder loosen the screw driver after each turn
by a little back twist and it will be less likely to slip out or mar
the screw head.


THE BIT BRACE.

The bit brace should be of the ratchet pattern and rather small. Oil
the working parts occasionally.


BITS.

Bits are of various patterns. For our work get one each ³⁄₃₂, ⅛ and
³⁄₁₆ inch gimlet bits; one each ¼, ⅜, ½, ⅝, ¾ and 1 inch auger bits and
one counter sink.

The gimlet bits you will use principally for screw holes. Be careful
not to bend them. The auger bits are for larger holes. When using them
it is a good plan, if you intend to bore all the way through, to stop
as soon as the worm is through and bore in from the other side. You are
less likely in this way to raise the grain around the hole.


TO SHARPEN BITS.

To sharpen bits use a slip stone (a thin oil stone). Rub the sharpened
edges on the inside keeping the angle the same as when new.


THE NAIL SET.

The nail set is a small steel punch, hollowed a little on the end. It
is for sinking nail heads below the surface of the work. Always incline
the nail set in the same direction as the nail so it will not slip off
and mar your work.


THE HAMMER.

The hammer should be fairly light. Get one ball pein (round face) claw
hammer, rather small; one riveting hammer (small). Use the claw hammer
for all ordinary work and the riveting hammer for small brads and
welding. Always hold a hammer by the end of the handle. It is balanced
to be held so. Make the stroke from the elbow rather than the wrist.
Never drive a nail with one or two single blows. It holds better when
driven in several blows.


OIL STONES.

Oil stones are made of composition and of natural stone. The former is
perhaps the better of the two. Clean off occasionally with kerosene to
remove the steel and dried oil. Be careful not to scratch it. To true
an oil stone when hollowed down in the middle fasten a piece of No. 1
sandpaper on a flat board, moisten it slightly and rub the face of the
stone on it until true.


THE MALLET.

The mallet is for driving your chisel. Never use it on metal. Use the
same stroke as with the hammer and always hold by the end of the handle.


THE TRY SQUARE.

The try square is extremely important. Have the dealer test it in a
steel square before you buy it. It is for marking at right angles and
for testing work. In use be sure to hold the thick end snugly against
the work that is squared.


THE STEEL SQUARE.

The steel square is for larger work than the try square. It also has
many uses which you will not require of it.


THE SLIDING T BEVEL.

The sliding T bevel is much like the try square except that it can be
set at any angle and clamped with a thumb screw. You will use it for
mitring, etc.


THE DIVIDERS.

The dividers are for marking circles or arcs and for dividing a given
space into equal parts. Be careful not to make deep holes with them.
Just enough to show is sufficient. Do not bend the points.


TWO-FOOT RULE.

Two-foot rule should be divided to sixteenths at least. Be careful not
to mar it or your accuracy will suffer in consequence.




                              Chapter II.


WOOD WORKING AND JOINING.

In your work-room you will need several appliances which you can either
buy, have made or make yourself. Among these are two saw horses; a
work bench with stop and vise; a tool chest or closet; a mitre box
and a bench hook. These may be more or less elaborate. We give below
the easiest and simplest that will do. You can improve on them if you
desire.


THE SAW HORSE.

The saw horse is merely a straight bar with four legs on which to rest
material while working it. You will want two. To make a saw horse get
two pieces of dry fir or pine 2 in. × 4 in. by 12 ft. long s4s common
lumber will do so long as it has no knots large enough to weaken it.
The s4s means sized on four sides and is the term used by the mills for
planing off the saw marks.

Using your try square, mark across one piece as near the end as the
wood is sound, with your cross-cut saw cut off the end square at this
mark. With your rule measure off four legs, each 24 inches long, and
one piece 3 feet long for the rail, mark and saw as before. The legs
must be bevelled at the tops just like the bevels on your chisels. This
will make them spread properly at the bottom. To cut this bevel lean
one of the legs against the wall with the flat side to the wall and the
bottom end about 9 inches out from the base board. Now place your rule,
folded up, with its edge against the wall and the flat side against
the upper end of the leg and with your pencil mark the side of the leg
along the rule. Be careful to cut square. Bevel one end of each leg.
Lay your rail on the floor on its flat side, set the bevel of the leg
against it about 3 inches from the end, with the top of the leg even
with the top of the rail. Drive in one nail and with your steel square
see that the leg is at right angles with the rail, then put in enough
more nails to make it solid. Do likewise on other end, then turn over
and put the other two legs on. Stand the horse up on its legs, if it
rocks a little put a small wedge under the short leg and with your rule
folded, its edge on the floor and flat side against the edge of the
leg, mark along the rule. With your try square mark across the flat
side of the leg from this line and saw the leg off here on the angle
given by the two lines. If this is done carefully on all four legs your
horse will set firmly on the floor.


WORK BENCH.

To make a simple work bench you will require one piece 2 in. × 12 in.
× 12 ft. long s4s; one piece 1 in. × 12 in. × 16 ft. s4s; one piece 2
in. × 4 in. × 10 ft. s4s; one piece 2 in. × 6 in. × 5 ft. s4s. Common
lumber will do if knots are not too large. You will also need a 1-inch
bench screw. Saw the 2 in. × 12 in. into two pieces for the top. Saw
the 2 in. × 4 in. into four pieces each 30 inches long for legs. From
the 1 in. × 12 in. saw off two pieces each 22 inches long and nail a
leg firmly on each end of both of them, with the 2-inch side of the leg
next the board and keeping the top of the leg even with the top edge
of the board, and the ends of the board even with the outside of the
leg. Saw the remainder 1 in. × 12 in. into two pieces 5½ feet long and
nail the ends to the flat side of the legs with the tops even with the
top of the leg and the ends even with the outside of the short board
previously nailed on the legs. This will make the frame of your bench.
Now stand it up and lay the top on it so that the top projects about 3
inches beyond the frame at each end and is flush with it in front. Nail
the front top piece on first, being careful to get the frame square at
the corners, then holding the back piece firmly against it nail that
also. Set your nail heads below the surface with the nail set. Now
stand the 2 in. × 6 in. on the floor against the bench and mark it just
the height on the top of the bench. Saw it square across at this mark
for the inside jaw of your vise. Cut the outside jaw 3 inches shorter
than this so it will not touch the floor. About 6 inches below the top
of both jaws, and exactly in the center, bore an inch hole for the
bench screw. Most bench screws have a bulge on the inner face of the
plate and you will probably have to cut around the hole on the outside
jaw as if for a big screw head so this plate will set down flat. Now
fasten the inside jaw to the bench near the left-hand end, one end on
the floor and the other flush with the top of the bench. Putting your
1-inch bit through the hole in the jaw bore through the apron, next
unscrew the threaded collar from the bench screw and set it in the
center of a piece of wood 2 in. × 4 in. × 8 in. To do this bore a hole
through the 2 in. × 4 in. and ream it out with your knife large enough
to take the collar, or else take it to a carpenter shop and have it
bored with a larger bit. Now, having fastened the bench screw to the
outside jaw, put it through the inside jaw and apron and then screw on
the 2 in. × 4 in. with the collar in it. Nail the 2 in. × 4 in. to the
inside of the apron. There only remains the slide in the bottom of the
vise. Three inches above the bottom end, in the center of the outside
jaw, bore an inch hole through both jaws. Get a piece of hard wood
(broom-stick) about 18 inches long that will run easily through this
hole. Put it through the hole till the end is flush with the outside
of the outside jaw. Then wedge it tight, or nail it from the side so
that it will run easily through the inside jaw, but hold the outside
one. Bore ¼ inch holes through this slide from side to side about 1
inch apart. Cut the head off a 20d nail and use this as a pin to hold
the bottom of the jaws as wide open when in use as the thickness of
the material you have in the vise, or as nearly so as the holes in the
slide will permit.


BENCH STOP.

The bench stop is used to brace your work against when planing, etc.
You can buy an adjustable iron one or make a simple one as follows: Six
inches from the left-hand end of the bench, and about 4 inches from the
front, bore a hole straight down through the top with a bit the size
of your broom-stick, before mentioned. Into this drive the broom-stick
tight and with the saw cut it off about ½ inch above the top of the
bench. This will answer temporarily.

You now have your bench and saw horses and can begin work. They may
appear a little crude but will answer every purpose and you can buy or
build finer ones when you have learned to use the tools easily.

We would advise postponing the tool chest until you have had some
experience in the use of tools.

The mitre box is described later in your work and you will not need it
for the present.




                             Chapter III.


SQUARING AND JOINTING.

For this and other exercises we recommend 2 in. × 4 in. kiln dried
No. 1 pine s4s. This is less than 2 in. × 4 in., as these are the
dimensions in the rough and some surface is taken off in dressing it.
In speaking of lumber we give dimensions in the rough, but in speaking
of parts of a piece of work actual measurements are always given.

[Illustration: Exercise No. I.]

Saw off a piece of 2 in. × 4 in. 18¼ inches long. The object of
this exercise is to learn to square this block, that is, make every
surface perfectly flat and straight and exactly at right angles to the
adjoining surfaces. This operation is necessary on almost every piece
of work you will do and its accuracy is of the utmost importance. Place
your piece on the bench with one of the wide sides up and the end
against the bench stop. Set your jack plane to cut a very thin shaving.
Plane the upper surface carefully, testing it from time to time with
the side of your plane to see that it is perfectly straight. This is
called jointing. It must also be flat. Test this with the side of your
plane laid across it and in all directions. Next turn it up on edge
and joint and square in the same manner. To test the angle use the try
square with the broad arm against the face of the side you have already
squared. Plane the other two sides in like manner until all four sides
are absolutely square with adjoining sides and perfectly straight from
end to end. Measure off ⅛ in. from one end and mark with try square and
knife across the top. Turn it up and mark from this line down the side
next you. With the back saw cut square to these marks. Now measure 18
in. from this and cut the other end off square in the same manner. Put
the piece in the vise end up and projecting about an inch above the
vise and with your smoothing plane plane the ends true, testing from
all four sides with the try square. It is well in this operation to
put a piece of waste material back of your work in the vise, with its
upper edge even with the upper edge of your work. This will prevent
chipping off the further edge as you plane across it. Square up other
end in like manner. You will probably have to try some little time
before you can get this exercise perfectly, but persist. Though simple
it is perhaps as important as any you will have and you will be called
upon to repeat this process constantly. Do not slight it, therefore,
and when you can square a block perfectly you have made a great stride
forward.


HALF TENON AND HALVING.

[Illustration: Exercise No. II.]

Saw off a piece of 2 in. × 4 in. 12 inches long. Square it up as in
Exercise I. Select the wide side with the best grain, etc., for your
working side and mark it “O.” Measure off 3½ in. from the left-hand end
as it lies on the bench before you and with your knife and try square
mark across the working face (a-a). Turn up on edge and mark across
from this line (b-b). Turn on other edge and do the same. Next measure
3 in. farther from the end and mark across the working face and down
the two edges in the same manner (c-c-c). Then 3½ inches farther from
the end mark across face and edges as before (d-d-d). Now take your
marking gauge and set it ⅝ in. deep. Turn work on its edge, with the
working face to your right and with the gauge make a line along the
edge from (e-e-e), that is, a line ⅝ of an inch below the working face
and parallel with it. Do likewise between (c) and (d) and (f-f). Turn
the work over and mark the other side in the same way and also carry
your gauge mark across the end (g-g). Place the work on the bench
working face up with the marked end to the right. With your back saw
cut down at (b) to the gauge mark (e), being careful that your saw
cuts just to the mark both on top and down the edge. Saw in the same
way at (c) to (f) and (d) to (f), being careful in all cases that your
saw cuts only to the middle of your mark, the cut being in the wood to
be removed, which in our case is between (b) and the end and (c) and
(d). Do not mar corners in starting your saw. Place the work in the
vise with the gauge mark just above the jaws. With your widest chisel
cut out the parts to be removed, cutting across the grain, flat side
of the chisel down. Do not try to take out too much at a time. Do not
cut all the way across as the wood is likely to chip off the far side
below your gauge line, so cut only half way across, then turn the piece
around and cut from the other side. When you reach the bottom (the
gauge line) be very careful to hold the chisel flat, that is, straight
across, or you will not have a flat, even bottom. Next turn the work up
on end in the vise and with your rip saw cut down the gauge line across
the end (g-g) and down the edge (e-e). Repeat this exercise until you
can get it absolutely accurate. All surfaces should be “square” and
smooth. These operations are constantly necessary and must be accurate
or your joints will show unsightly cracks. While, on the other hand,
when you have mastered this exercise, you have accomplished a great
deal, as you will appreciate a little later.


HALVED JOINT.

So far we have not required our material to be of any particular
dimensions when finished. We should now be able to square up to given
dimensions, which is, of course, necessary in most cases. It is in this
exercise. Therefore, remember to get your material out a trifle larger
than the dimensions given for the finished work in order to leave room
for squaring. The purpose of this exercise is to join two pieces of
equal thickness which cross each other at right angles, and have them
flush top and bottom; the pieces to be of the exact dimensions given,
fitted closely on both sides, each piece exactly in the center of the
other, both sides to be perfectly smooth and even when finished and
the ends planed square. To do this get out two pieces which square up
as in Ex. I to 3½ in. wide, 1¾ in. thick and 12 in. long each. Choose
and mark working face of each. Find the center (6 in. from each end).
Measure 1⅝ in. each way from the center and mark across the working
face of one piece and bottom of the other piece (a-a) and (a-a). Now
set your marking gauge to half the thickness of the piece (⅝ in.) and
mark the bottom of your cut as in Ex. II (b-b). Do not forget that the
working face of both pieces must be up. Therefore, the cut is made on
the working face of one piece and the bottom of the other. Proceed to
saw and chisel out as in Ex. II, when, if accurately done, the pieces
will fit together perfectly making a cross with all four arms exactly
the same length.

[Illustration: Exercise No. III.]

You will use this joint often in furniture and can make the pieces
cross at any angle by using the sliding T bevel set at the angle you
desire for marking across the tops and bottoms of the pieces and the
try square for the edges. Accuracy is essential both as to dimensions
and work.


MORTISE AND TENON.

[Illustration: Exercise No. IV.]

The mortise and tenon are used more than any other kind of joint in
furniture. Therefore great patience and care are justified in learning
to make them nicely. When the end of one piece is to be joined to
the side of another, the mortise and tenon are almost always used.
The mortise (No. 1) is an opening, square or oblong, to receive the
tenon and may go part way or all the way through. When part way it is
called a “blind” mortise; when all the way a “through” mortise. The
tenon (No. 2), is a projection on the end of the other piece, which
fits into the mortise. It generally has two shoulders, but may have
three or four, made by cutting away the sides. It should be about
one-third the thickness of the piece. In furniture it is fastened with
glue, and where advisable with a wooden pin also. The objects of this
exercise are that the pieces be straight and accurately squared to the
measurements; that the tenon be exactly in the center of the joint;
that the pieces be square to each other when joined; that the tenon fit
the mortise exactly without squeezing; that the shoulders fit up to the
cross pieces nicely and that when joined the two pieces be perfectly
flush at the joint. The method is as follows: Square up two pieces to
1½ in. × 3½ in. × 12 in. long each, take one piece for the mortise
piece, turn it on edge and find the middle. Measure 1¾ in. (a-a) each
way from the middle and mark across with knife and try square. As the
tenon is to be one-third the thickness of the piece set your marking
gauge ½ in. deep and mark a line parallel with the side between these
two lines (b-b) and (b-b), being careful not to run over the line.
Turn around and mark other side of the mortise in the same way. You
now have the mortise marked on one edge. To mark it exactly opposite
on the other side, mark across the flat side of the piece very lightly
at the end lines and across the other edge at these lines. This will
give you the end lines on the other side. Mark the side lines with the
gauge as before. Lay the piece aside and take the tenon piece. Now, as
your mortise piece is 3½ in. wide, your tenon will have to be 3½ in.
long and you will want a little extra to smooth off the end, so better
measure a trifle over 3½ in. from the end, the piece being on edge and
mark across (c-c). From this line mark square across top and bottom
sides. Also across the other edge. This gives the shoulder line for
the tenon. Take the gauge, which is set at ½ in., and mark parallel
with the flat sides from these shoulder lines to the end (d-d) (d-d),
and this will give the thickness of the tenon. Lay aside the piece and
put the mortise piece in the vise edge up. With your ¼ in. chisel and
mallet cut your mortise part way through, then turn the piece over and
cut from the other side. Remember to keep the flat side of the chisel
towards the edge of the hole and leave a slight margin all the way
round. When you have cut the mortise clear through in this way, take
your ½ in. chisel and true up to the lines, the sides first and then
the ends. See that all four sides of the mortise are straight through
from side to side or the tenon will jam. Lay aside the piece and take
tenon piece. Lay it flat side down and cut tenon exactly the same on
both sides as you did the half tenon in Ex. II. Insert tenon through
the mortise and plane off the end flush with the mortise piece. Now
look carefully over your work and see if it fulfills all the objects of
this exercise. Do it over until it does. Do not get discouraged. It is
a mighty nice operation and when you can make this joint properly you
may be proud for it is a step beyond simple carpentering and belongs to
the Joiners’ and Cabinet Makers’ art.


PANELLING.

[Illustration: Exercise No. V.]

Panelling is used in doors, the ends and backs of furniture, etc. It
may be more or less ornamented with beading, moulding and so on, but
in the best modern furniture all ornament is omitted and the panels
absolutely plain. The objects of this exercise are to make a frame 13
in. × 17½ in. × 1¾ in. thick with two sunken panels; that it shall lie
perfectly flat when put together; be smooth and true at all joints and
exact in dimensions. The method is as follows: Get out a piece which
will finish to 1¾ in. × 3½ in. × 60 in. Joint and square to required
thickness, also square up one edge only. Set in the vise with the
squared edge up. Set your gauge ½ in. deep and mark along the top edge
½ in. from and parallel with the side farthest from you. Then turn it
around and mark other side. This will give you the width of the rabbet
(see end view No. 4), in which the ¾ in. sunken panel will slide. To
cut this rabbet use your ½ in. rabbet plane and plow (cut) 1 in. deep.
If you have a Stanley No. 45 or No. 55 it has a fence to guide it, but
if you have only a wooden rabbet plane you must use a straight strip
of wood to guide the plane. There are several ways of fastening this
strip. The easiest way is to brad it on to your work along the gauge
line, but this leaves the brad holes. The best way is to take a strip
a little longer than your work and fasten a block on each end of it
which will drop down over the ends of your work, then wedge it tight
at each end. In this case the strip must be stout enough, of course,
not to bend as you plane against it. When you have plowed an inch
deep, turn your work around, move guide to other side, and with your
¼ in. rabbet plane plow the other ¼ in. to be taken out, making the
rabbet ¾ in. wide. Be sure to plane square or the panel will not lie
flat. When plowed cut this piece into two pieces 18 in. long for the
sides of the frame and three pieces 8 in. long for the top, bottom
and middle. Plow one of these 8 in. pieces, which you intend to use
for the middle bar, on the side opposite the one already plowed, as
it will have a panel on each side of it (see No. 6). Now cut a tenon
1 in. long by ¾ in. thick on each end of all three 8 in. pieces, just
as you did in Ex. III (see Nos. 2 and 3). For the panels saw from an
inch board two pieces 5½ in. × 8 in., dress them down to ¾ in. thick.
Put one of the 18 in. frame pieces in the vise with the rabbet up.
Insert the tenon of an 8 in. piece in the rabbet ¼ in. from the end,
with the rabbet in itself turned so as to receive the panel. With your
¼ in. auger bit bore a hole straight through the frame and tenon ½ in.
from the edge of the frame in the center of the tenon, as at (a) No.
1. Make a round plug to fit this hole, sand paper it smooth and drive
it in gently. This will hold the tenon in place. Slide a panel into
this rabbet and down into the rabbet in the frame piece. Next slide the
center piece in so the rabbet fits over the panel and the tenon in the
rabbet in the frame. Bore and pin like the first one, then insert the
other panel and end piece in like manner. Now take the remaining 18 in.
frame piece and fit it down snug over the tenons and panels, leaving
¼ in. margin at each end. Pin each of the three tenons, being careful
to hold the shoulders snugly against the frame and the piece tight down
on the panel. Cut the pins off flush and sand paper smooth. Now put the
whole frame in the vise and with your plane trim to exact size. When
you can do this exercise so that all joints are perfect, all surfaces
flat, smooth and even, and all dimensions correct and have mastered
the exercises before it you can pretty nearly make furniture. There is
one thing more, however, which is important, a little difficult and
frequently required, and that is dowelling and joining.


DOWELLING AND JOINING.

[Illustration: Exercise No. VI.]

For this exercise practice will do more for you than instruction. The
object of the exercise is to join two boards at their edges so as to
make a continuous surface with no crack or unevenness at the joint, as
in table tops, etc. You will be called upon for this operation whenever
you make any piece of furniture with a plain surface more than 8 to
10 inches wide. The method is as follows: Take two pieces ⅝ in. × 6
in. × 36 in., select working face of each. Find the center of each and
with knife and try square mark across the edge to be joined as at (a).
Measure 12 in. each way from center (b-b), and mark. Take your marking
gauge, set it half the thickness of the board (⁷⁄₁₆ in.) and mark a
fine point ⁷⁄₁₆ in. below the working face on the knife marks, as at
(c). With brace and ⅜ in. bit bore a hole 1½ in. deep exactly square
into edge of the board at each point, as at (d). Repeat the process
in the other board. These holes are for the dowels (e-e-e), which are
pins that keep the boards from wabbling at the joint and also hold
them together. You will appreciate, therefore, that if the holes are
not exactly straight in, the pins will lean and not fit into the holes
on the other piece, or else tip it one way or the other. To make the
dowels square up a piece ½ in. square and 9 in. long, then round it
with your smoothing plane and sand paper to exactly ⅜ in. diameter,
or, in other words, to fit the holes tight without jamming. Cut into 3
in. lengths with back saw. Before inserting the dowels the pieces must
be jointed. To do this turn one on edge in the vise and square up the
top edge (f-f) with your jack plane. Observe strictly directions given
in Chapter I for planing. When you have the edge precisely square and
straight lay aside and square one edge of the other piece. When this is
done, before taking it out of the vise, test it by standing the other
piece on it with the squared edges together and working faces turned
the same way. Test the surface of the two boards by holding the back
of your steel square across the two, seeing that it touches at the two
edges and at the joint and that no least crack shows on either side.
Now insert your dowels and the joint will be true.

This is a difficult exercise and requires much practice, but its
accomplishment brings the keen delight of work well done.


MITRING.

[Illustration: Exercise No. VII.]

The mitre is used to form a joint where two pieces come together at
right angles and make a corner. The end of each piece is cut at an
angle of 45 degrees (No. 1). To make this joint, you will want your
mitre box which you can now make with comparative ease. It must be
precise to be of use. It is a box without ends or lid (No. 2), and
made as follows: Get out three pieces ⅝ in. × 4 in. × 18 in. Joint and
square them. Select working face of each. Firmly nail sides to bottom,
all faces inward; 3 in. from end mark with knife and try square across
top of both sides (a-a). From this line mark in same way straight down
the outside of the side towards you (b-b). With back saw cut down this
line till you strike the bottom of the box, starting your saw in the
mark (a-a) on top of the two sides. Now measure 4 in. farther from
same end and mark across the tops of sides (c-c). Then 4 in. farther
and mark as before (d-d). Take your steel square or other perfectly
straight edge laid diagonally across the tops of the sides from (c) to
(d) and (d) to (c) just at the points where these marks run off the
insides of the edges and mark the tops of the sides at this angle (45
degrees). Now mark square down the outside nearest you (d) to (e), and
(c) to (f). With your back saw cut diagonally across in the marks on
top and straight down the mark on the side to the bottom of the box.
The cut straight across is for a guide for your saw in cutting square
ends and you can use it also for the shoulders of tenons. The 45-degree
cut is for guiding your saw when cutting mitres, like the corner of a
picture frame. You will realize, then, that the sides of the bottom
piece must be carefully squared or the sides of the box will not be
square to the bottom, and it must be exactly 4 in. wide or your angle
will not be true and your mitres will not fit.

If at any time you need a mitre box to take wider material make the
bottom wider and proceed otherwise as above, except that the space on
the inside face of the sides between the diagonal cuts must always be
exactly the same as the width of the bottom. In use, remember that if
you plane anything off the outside edge of a mitred end you make the
piece shorter and anything off the inside makes it longer, as you will
readily understand by experimenting a little. Therefore, you must be
careful to have your piece of the proper dimensions before mitring or
else allow for this in its length.


DOVETAILING.

To make an accurately lifted dovetailed corner is good evidence of a
workman’s ability to use tools. There are three kinds: First, common
dovetailing (Fig. 1), where strength is more important than appearance,
as in box corners, etc. The pins and tails should be of equal size and
about as wide as the material is thick. The pins are the parts widest
on the inside face of the piece (a-a-a) and the tails are the parts
which are widest at their ends (b-b).

Second, lap dovetailing (Fig. 2), which shows only from the side as
at the front ends of drawers. The tails are always on the side piece
and should be two to four times as large as the pins. There is no rule
for size. Use a size that is strong, looks well and divides the space
evenly. Always begin and finish with a half pin.

Third, the mitre dovetail, not illustrated, which is hidden altogether.
It is much more difficult to make and not so strong as the others. You
will have no use for it.

Cut your pins first and mark the tails from them, then if you make a
slip you can correct it before marking the tails and after you have
had some experience you can learn to cut the tails without marking the
bevels.

[Illustration: Exercise No. VIII.]

The object of this exercise is to make a lap dovetail joint, as of a
drawer front. Get out one piece ⅝ in. × 5 in. × 12 in. when jointed
and squared, for the front of the drawer and one piece ½ in. × 5 in. ×
12 in. for the side of the drawer. Select working faces which will be
the insides. Set your marking gauge a shade less than the thickness of
the side piece and see that the marker is sharp. Now mark across the
inside face of the front piece, gauging from the end (c-c). This is
the length of the pin. The length of the tails (which are on the side
piece) should be about ¾ the thickness of the front piece, or about
⅝ in. in this case, so set your gauge ⅝ in. deep and mark across the
end of the front piece gauging from the inside (d-d). Without changing
your gauge mark a line across both sides of the side piece, gauging
from the end (e-e). Place front piece in vise, marked end up and face
towards you. With a pencil, space out the tails, which in this case
will be about ⅜ in. wide, making a half pin at beginning and end and
three full ones between. Make them even distances apart, of course, and
when you have located them set your T bevel at an angle of 1 in 6 and
mark them accurately on the end of the front, and with your try square
continue these lines down to the gauge line (c-c) on the face. Take
your back saw and cutting on the inside of the bevel lines saw down to
the gauge mark (c-c) on the face, but not beyond the gauge mark (d-d)
on the end. In other words, you can only saw the corners. Make all cuts
in one direction first, then the others just as you would file a saw.
It is easier to be accurate this way. Next, with your chisel clean out
the spaces between the pins. These spaces will be like a mortise, open
on the end and wider at the bottom than at the surface. There will be
a little space close in the corner where you cannot get the chisel,
clean this out with your knife. Remember not to cut quite to the line
till the very last. The pins are now complete. Lay the side piece (No.
4) on the bench face up. Stand the end on it with its inside face
just covering the gauge mark (e-e) across the side near the end, as
illustrated. Hold it firmly and mark the side around the pins in the
end piece. Place the side in the vise, end up, and square the tails
across its end. With the back saw cut the sides of the tails (on inside
of lines), and lay on the bench and cut between the tails with your
chisel.

If you have much dovetailing to do it is worth while to get a chisel
bevelled on both sides and across the end, like a lathe chisel. It is
easier to get into the corners with this. Put your pieces together and
dress off the side till it is exactly flush with the front.

When you can do this exercise and the preceding ones accurately you can
do about anything you will be called upon to do. It is hard, but worth
while. You will be able to make the common dovetail easily after this.
Just remember, in that case, to make pins and tails the same size and
about as wide as the thickness of the material.




                              Chapter IV.


FASTENINGS.

There are many ways of fastening the parts and joints of furniture.
Among those most used are brads, screws, wooden pins, shaping of the
parts and glue. Glue is used in almost all joints. Use brads and screws
very sparingly. Any other fastening is preferable in most cases. If
you do use the latter in any part that is visible, first bore a hole
from ⅛ to ¼ in. deep, large enough to take a wooden plug to cover the
head of the metal. For fastening by shaping the parts there are many
devices. You have learned the mortise and tenon, the dowel joint, the
mitre and the dovetail. These will answer almost every requirement,
with glue in most cases, and in some cases pins to hold them together.
When using glue there are several things to be observed. It should not
be too thick or too thin. Experience soon teaches you how thick to use
it for each kind of work. As a rule about as thick as thin syrup will
be right, but hard wood requires thinner glue than soft wood. If the
pieces are very cold they should be warmed and the glue always used
hot. When the joint is such as admits rub the parts together, and in
all cases clamp tight to force out the surplus glue and hold the joint
until the glue is dried. It should stand 8 to 12 hours before being
handled. To glue end grain first size it, that is, put on a coat of
glue, allow it to dry and then proceed as above. Use the best furniture
glue, though the prepared glues are good and very convenient, but if
you use the latter get a small quantity, as it is better to use it hot
and it loses strength by frequent heating.

To prepare glue use a glue pot which is like a double boiler. Put as
much as you think you will use in the inside pot and cover with cold
water. Let it soak six or eight hours, then put the smaller pot in the
larger one with water in the outside one and heat until the glue is hot.

Glue can be made to stand the weather by adding one part boiled linseed
oil to eight parts glue, stirring all the time, or else use skimmed
milk instead of water in the glue.




                              Chapter V.


DRESSING OFF AND SMOOTHING.

As a rule it is better to leave the final dressing off till the joints
are all made and glued or otherwise fastened, so that in case there are
any little inaccuracies the pieces can be planed smooth. This always
has to be done with a glued joint, either with plane or scraper, or
both.

The scraper is simply a flat piece of thin steel about 3 in. × 5 in.
The best ones are cut from an old saw, but you can buy very good ones.
To sharpen a scraper lay it on a flat board and rub the side of the
edge with a piece of hard steel (your nail set is good) laid flat on
it, then take it up and draw the steel firmly along the edge. This
makes it flat on the sides and edges but turns up a little sharp edge.
Use both hands with the scraper and tip it in the direction you are
pushing it and scrape a little across the grain. It is well to scrape
all surfaces to take out any plane marks or nicks and it saves work
when sandpapering. Sandpaper with coarse, then fine sandpaper, or steel
wool, =always rubbing with the grain=. It is hard to be sure that
your work is quite smooth before it has any coloring on it, as the
shadows are very light. Look across it towards the light both ways,
as the shadow is always away from the light, of course. If in doubt,
rub some more. The finish of furniture is of the utmost importance and
it should be absolutely smooth before anything is put on it. Even the
fine sandpaper will make scratches which show on a polished surface if
not always rubbed with the grain. Have horizontal work between you and
the light; vertical work stand between light and work. With oak it is
well to moisten to raise fibre, then rub again when dry. When you are
satisfied and doubly satisfied that not a least blemish remains, and
not before, then proceed to put on your finish.




                              Chapter VI.


STAINING, DYEING, FILLING, POLISHING.

For coloring the wood wipe-stain is perhaps the easiest and quickest
and is very satisfactory. You can get it at any paint store ready
for use. Put it on with a brush of convenient size for the work and
immediately wipe off with old rags or waste. It will not show brush
marks and do not be frightened if it is much darker than you expected
before it is wiped off. If the first coat does not make it dark enough,
allow it to dry 12 hours and apply a second coat. After the last coat
has dried 12 hours or more, and it is thoroughly hard, if on fir or
similar wood, you may proceed to polish. If your material is oak or
other open grain wood you will need to apply a filler, which you can
also get at the paint store. This should be of the same color as the
stain and put on in the same way. When it turns dull, which will be in
a few minutes, wipe off all on the surface. This will leave the pores
filled. Allow filler to dry at least 12 hours before polishing.

The best and easiest polish, as well as the most beautiful, is wax.
To prepare this shave beeswax into a pan, add as much spirits of
turpentine as will moisten it through, and powdered white resin, in
proportion of one part resin to sixteen parts wax. Dissolve on stove,
being careful not to let it catch fire. Stir it up and when cool it is
ready for use. Roll some cloths into a ball, smooth on the outside, and
use to apply the polish. Put the polish on very thin and evenly, allow
it to dry a few hours, then with a clean ball of cloth (preferably
woolen) rub at first gently with the grain, then harder in a circular
motion and finally a few strokes with the grain. After 12 hours rub
again with dry cloth, and if a higher polish is desired apply a second
coat of wax as before. This polish will improve with age and occasional
rubbing.

Instead of the wipe-stains you can use wood dyes which come already
prepared. They sink farther into the wood and do not wear off as soon,
but on the other hand are much harder to apply evenly. The filler,
however, will take off some of the dye and you can sometimes even up a
little any dark spots when rubbing down the filler. The dye does not
take so long to dry as the wipe stain, six hours being plenty. Polish
as above.

The filler in both cases will darken the color a little. Do not forget
this in applying your stain or dye, and in some cases you will not
require any other coloring than the filler itself. Of this you can
judge by the color you desire and a little experimenting.

The hard glossy finish is not used on this kind of furniture and is
very much more difficult to handle. In case you desire to use it on
anything proceed as follows: Put into a glazed vessel a little gum
shellac, just cover with 90 per cent alcohol. Stir till dissolved,
about two hours, though not necessarily all the time. Do not use a
tin vessel. Do not allow lumps to settle. When thoroughly dissolved
take soft cloths and make a ball about 2 in. in diameter smooth on the
bottom. Put on this half a teaspoon of the polish, then around the ball
put a piece of cloth about a foot square, holding the ends in your
hand. On the smooth side put a few drops of linseed oil and rub your
work lightly in a circular motion all over. When it rubs harder put a
few drops more oil on the ball and also on the work. Watch carefully.
If the cloth sticks to the work, thin the polish on the ball with a
little alcohol, first taking off the outside cloth. Replace the outer
cloth with the other side out. When the work is all filled with polish
and has a good gloss, change the outer cloth for a clean one. Put a
few drops of alcohol on it and proceed as before till the oily look
has gone. Too much alcohol will wipe off the polish in splotches. When
the ball leaves little or no mark rub fast and strong with the grain a
few minutes and you are done. This finish improves with age also, but
requires practice to apply properly.

To describe the numberless methods of coloring and finishing woods
would fill a book several times the size of this one. The above are the
best, quickest and most easily learned.


PIANO OR ORGAN BENCH.

[Illustration: PIANO OR ORGAN BENCH]

Piano or Organ Bench: This seat is very easy to make and much handsomer
than the ordinary piano stool. Lumber required 10 ft. 1 in. × 12 in.
and 7 ft. 1 in. × 3 in.

[Illustration: (Bench Plan)]

First, get out the end pieces to dimensions given. Cut the mortises for
the ends of the stretcher as shown, the top of the lower mortise (a) 6
in. above the floor and the top of the upper mortise (a) 18 in. above
the floor. The tenon on the stretcher has only one shoulder, as shown
at (c). Next cut a rabbet ¼ in. deep for the seat to fit in across
the inside face at each end, just above the upper mortise as shown
by dotted lines at (d). Then round the corners and cut the handles
and arches in the bottoms with the compass saw. Next get out the seat
exactly the same width as the ends and ½ in. longer than the space
between the ends to allow for the ¼ in. in the rabbet at each end.
The stretchers (b) are, of course, ½ in. shorter to their shoulders
than the seat for the same reason, though 3½ in. longer including the
tenons. To cut the holes for the pins, insert the tenon through the
end and mark across it on the outside just where it comes through the
mortise, then take it out and bore a hole about ½ in. in diameter
on this line so that when the tenon is inserted through the mortise
one-half of the hole will be outside. You can thus make your pins round
and by splitting them in half have two pins. All sharp edges should
be rounded off a little with the plane so they will not be so easily
marred. Smooth thoroughly before putting together. The seat is held in
place by two screws from underneath through the upper stretcher into
the seat. These screws should be near the ends of the stretcher and
well into the seat, but be very careful they do not go through the seat.


PLANT STAND.

[Illustration: PLANT STAND]

[Illustration: (Plant Stand Plan)]

Plant Stand: Lumber required 4 ft. 1 in. × 12 in. Cut the top from one
end of your board. Then lay out the four legs marking the top of one
next the bottom of the other to save sawing and the four will just
about take up the width of your board. The two stretchers will cut out
of the remaining lumber leaving you a piece about 6 in. wide to spare.
Smooth up the edges of the top and take off the sharp corners with
your plane. Next shape the legs cutting the rabbet ¼ in. deep for the
top to fit in, then the mortises for the tenons on the stretcher. Next
shape stretchers, halving them together where they cross and making the
tenons about one-third as thick as the material itself, and shaped as
in the drawing. Smooth thoroughly before putting together. Fasten the
tenons with glue and the top either with a plug glued in as at (a), or
with screws sunk and covered by a plug as at (b). This plug should be
about one-half inch diameter and allowed to project about ½ in., the
end being rounded as in illustration.

This stand made about 27 in. high, 23 in. in diameter, makes a pretty
tea table.


MAGAZINE STAND.

[Illustration: MAGAZINE STAND]

Magazine Stand: Lumber required 20 ft. 1 in. × 12 in. Get out ends
first to dimensions given. Cut mortises for the tenons on the ends
of the top and bottom shelves, the top of the lower ones 5 in. above
the floor and the top of the upper ones 35 in. above the floor. These
shelves do not fit in a rabbet. Next cut rabbets ¼ in. deep for the
other two shelves, the top of the lower one being 15 in. and the top of
the upper one 25 in. above the floor. Cut holes for pins as described
in directions for piano bench. The brace (a), below the lower shelf has
no tenons and no rabbet but just fits snug and is set back from the
edge of the shelf about an inch, as shown by dotted lines in end view.
Is fastened by two screws from underneath as shown. These screws need
not be plugged, as the holes will not show.

[Illustration: (Magazine Stand Plan)]

Make the tenons on the ends of the lower shelf about 2 in. wide and
about 1½ in. for the upper tenon, the tenons being full thickness of
the shelves.


MUSIC CABINET.

[Illustration: MUSIC CABINET]

Music Cabinet: Lumber required 12 ft. 1 in. × 12 in., 6 ft. 1 in. × 4
in., 2 ft. ½ in. × 9 in., 14 ft. ½ in. × 1 in. and 4 ft. ½ in. × 12 in.

[Illustration: (Music Cabinet Plan)]

Note that the top and bottom shelves are rabbetted ¼ in. into the
sides, and held by screws from the outside covered by plugs. The
door is made with panel ½ in. thick. The three middle shelves are
adjustable, that is, may be set at any height by cutting notched
uprights of the ½ in. × 1 in. material and screwing them to the sides
of the case, as shown in side view at (a), and cross pieces to fit
in these notches and support the shelves at (b). The shelves are not
fastened at all but the corners cut out to fit round these uprights and
rest on the cross pieces (b). The support under the lower shelf (c) is
simply fitted in and fastened with screws from underneath. It will look
well to set the door in about ⅛ of an inch from the front edge of the
sides and top and bottom shelves. Piece (c) should also be set in ⅛ of
an inch. The back should be fitted between the sides and fastened with
screws covered by plugs. Any kind of catch may be used, but a square
wooden knob bevelled to a point on the outside and cut to fit a round
hole and fastened with glue in the door, as illustrated at (d), will
appear best. If this knob is used get a friction catch and set it in
the top of the door.


HALL SEAT.

[Illustration: HALL SEAT]

[Illustration: (Seat Plan)]

Hall Seat: Lumber required 12 ft. 2 in. × 12 in., 36 ft. 1 in. × 12 in.
The ends are of the 2 in. × 12 in. material dowelled and glued. The box
under the seat has two tenons on each end of back and front, which may
either come through flush with the outside of the ends or not quite
all the way through if preferred. These tenons should be about 2 in.
wide, full thickness of board and are fastened with glue and wooden
plugs straight in from the front and back. Note that the box front and
back (a) is set in about an inch from the edge of the seat. The seat
itself is hinged to a 3 in. strip (b) side view at the back, and has
a piece (c) across each end about 2 in. wide same thickness as the
seat and flush with it, instead of battens underneath, to keep it from
splitting. The bottom of the box (d) fits inside resting on a square
strip at each end which is screwed to the ends of the seat. The back is
rabbetted into the sides and fastened with screws from the back as at
(e). This back is made of three boards, as at (f), and fastened with
screws. Note that the edges of these boards are planed to an angle of
45 degrees, then the lower edge of each is just planed off so that when
put together there is a little V at the joint. This makes an easy and
good looking joint, as no crack will be visible, while at the same time
it does not require the care and time necessary in the ordinary joined
edges. This seat will be found very convenient in the hall for rubbers,
etc., if you have a galvanized pan made to fit in the bottom of the box.


HAT TREE.

[Illustration: HAT TREE]

[Illustration: (Hat Tree Plan)]

Hat Tree: Lumber required 16 ft. 1 in. × 6 in., 6 ft. 4 in. × 4 in. The
4 in. × 4 in. is, of course, for the post which should be bevelled to
a point at the top as shown. The feet are made by gluing three pieces
of the 1 in. × 6 in. together, as shown at (a), and then sawing to
shape with compass saw. It will save work to allow the middle piece to
project about 1½ in. for a tenon to fit into mortise in the post, as
shown at (a). The arch in the bottom of the feet need not be cut all
the way across but simply take the corner off, as at (b), which shows
the inner end of a foot. This taking the corner off saves work, gives a
firm footing and has all the appearance of being cut clear across.

To make the coat and hat hooks take a piece of the 1 in. × 6 in., as
at (c), cut a jog about 1 in. deep in the lower inner corner for a
shoulder, measure 6 in. from the inner end along the top edge to (d).
Using this as a center, with your compass mark the half circle (e),
which should be 3 in. in diameter; 4 in. from the inner end of the
piece and 3 in. below the top edge take another point (f) and describe
a circle 3 in. in diameter as before. Next bore a 1 in. hole at (d) as
near the edge of the board as the bit will work and a 1 in. hole at
(f). With the compass saw saw round the outer circle at (e) until you
come straight under (d), then saw straight to the top side of the hole
(f). From the hole (f) slightly above its lower side, so as to leave
a little hook, saw straight to the outer circle and then follow this
outer circle until directly under point (f), then straight into the
shoulder as illustrated. Fit these four pieces into mortises in post,
fasten with glue and pin as illustrated.


DINING TABLE.

[Illustration: DINING TABLE]

[Illustration: (Table Plan)]

Dining Table: Lumber required 10 ft. 3 in. × 3 in., 16 ft. 1 in. × 4
in. and 18 ft. 1 in. × 12 in. For the top join four pieces of the 1 in.
× 12 in. 4½ ft. long with dowels and glue. Allow it to stand at least
twelve hours, then cut circle and dress off the top with plane. The
stretchers (a) are halved together where they cross in the center of
the table and mortised into the legs as shown. Stretchers (b) are also
halved together at center and shaped and mortised as shown. It adds to
the appearance if you put a pin in the top of these stretchers where
they cross as shown at (c). This pin may be either square or round.
The top is fastened with screws from underneath through the stretchers
(a). These screws need not, of course, be long enough to reach entirely
through the stretcher, but the heads may be sunk about 2 in., as shown
at (d).


CHAIR.

[Illustration: SIDE CHAIR]

Chair: Lumber required 12 ft. 1 in. × 4 in., 12 ft. 1 in. × 2 in., 4
ft. ½ in. × 2 in., 3 ft. 1½ in. × 1½ in.

[Illustration: (Chair Plan)]

First get out the back posts from a piece of 1 in. × 4 in. to
dimensions given. Cut the mortises for the back slats, seat frame and
spreaders at positions indicated in sketch. The upper rail in the back
should be about ¾ of an inch below the top of the side posts and by
following the dimensions given in drawing you will get the position of
the lower rail. The three upright slats in the back should be mortised
into the top and bottom rail, as indicated by dotted line, but may be
mortised full thickness and so save cutting a tenon, though if you do
cut a tenon it perhaps saves more time, as you do not have to be so
careful in cutting your mortise, which is covered by the shoulder of
the tenon. When you have got out the back posts, next make the front
posts, cutting your mortises exactly the same height from the floor
as those in the back posts. Then get out the side rails and put these
pieces together. The tenons on the side rail should be as long as
possible without going quite through the leg, as they take all the
strain when the chair is tipped back. Having glued the two sides of the
chair together next get out the top and bottom rail of the back and
fit and glue the three slats into them. Then get out the other rails
of the back and front and glue them in one side of the chair. Then put
on the other side of the chair and the frame is complete. The seat is
what is known as a slip seat and is made and upholstered separately,
then slipped into the frame of the chair. The inner frame for this seat
is shown at (a) by dotted lines. It is made of the 1 in. × 2 in. stuff
firmly mortised and glued at the corners and rests on four brackets
at the corners of the frame, as shown by dotted lines. It should be
a full ⅛th of an inch smaller all around than the frame in order to
allow it to slip into the frame after the leather seat has been tacked
on. This leather seat is made by tacking strips of strong webbing or
canvas about 3½ in. wide over the top of this inner frame. Interlace
these strips like basket work, leaving little or no space between them
and stretch tightly over the frame. With soft cotton, hair or other
padding laid evenly over the whole surface, being careful to leave no
hollows and making the center a little thicker than the edges, build up
your seat as thick as you want it. Then stretch the leather or other
covering tightly over both padding and frame and tack it firmly on the
under side of the frame. To cover the webbing and ends of the leather,
tack a piece of black cloth over the whole bottom, then slip the seat
into the frame. Some workmen put a pin through the leg and tenon where
the rails are mortised into the legs. This adds strength, but we think
is hardly necessary if your tenons fit properly and are strongly glued.


MORRIS CHAIR.

[Illustration: MORRIS CHAIR]

Morris Chair: Lumber required 8 ft. 2 in. × 2 in., 14 ft. 1 in. × 6
in., 14 ft. 1 in. × 2 in., 5 ft. ½ in. × 10 in.

[Illustration: (Chair Plan Top View)]

[Illustration: (Chair Plan Side View)]

First get out the posts. Cut the mortises, as indicated, for the seat
frame. Put the sides together, fastening the arm on top of the posts by
a screw down through the arm into the top of each post. This screw, of
course, is to be covered by a plug, or if you desire mortise the top of
the post through the arm making a square tenon mitred to a point on top
of the arm. Next put in the front and back rail. Screw a strip (a) side
view on the inside of the side rails and slats (b-b-b) resting on these
strips to hold the seat cushion. The back is made separately and hinged
on to the top of the back rail of the frame. It rests against a bar
which fits into notches in the arms, as shown at (c), the bar itself
being shown at (d). Note that the arms project about 1 in. inside of
the posts and therefore are rounded out to the post at the back, where
the back of the chair comes up between them. We would suggest your
having the cushions made at an upholsterer’s, as it is difficult to
make good cushions yourself. In imitation leather these will cost about
$10.00 and in genuine Spanish leather about $20.00.


LIBRARY TABLE.

[Illustration: LIBRARY TABLE]

Library Table: Lumber required 26 ft. 1¼ in. × 12 in., 10 ft. 1¼ in. ×
8 in., 20 ft. about 1 in. or 1¼ in., square.

[Illustration: (Table Plan Side View)]

[Illustration: (Table Plan)]

First select three pieces 5 ft. long of the best of the 1¼ in. × 12
in. for the top. Join these with dowels and glue. When dry fasten four
strips on the under side with glue and screws, as shown at (a) in side
view and bottom view. These strips should be set back about ½ in. from
the edge of the top and mitred at the corners. They strengthen the top
and give it a massive appearance. Next get out the ends. The pieces
(b) and (c) are exactly the same. To mark the curve place one point of
your compass at the corner formed by the dotted lines at (d) and with
the other point mark the curve, the points being 3¼ in. apart. The
upright pieces (e-e) are mortised into the top and bottom pieces and
are made as shown at (f). The shelf should be made before the table is
put together, the position for the tenons being marked by placing the
end of it against the mortises in the uprights after the end is put
together. The ends are fastened to the top by means of a square strip
which is screwed to the top and then the ends screwed to the strip,
as shown at (g) side view and bottom view. The tenons in the ends of
the shelf should be about 1⅛ in. wide and full thickness of the shelf,
which will make them square. The pins for these tenons are shown at (h)
and should be about ½ in. thick.




                            Special Designs


Use the following blank pages for pencil sketches and clippings.

We will furnish working plans, with full instructions for any piece of
furniture you may desire at 50c. each. Just send us a rough sketch or a
picture, giving your idea.


                           The Farm & Orchard
                             Publishing Co.

[Illustration: (Union printing mark: Allied Printing.;
Trades Council; Union Label; Spokane Wash.)]

                                Spokane,
                               Washington.




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Illustrations in this eBook have been positioned between paragraphs
  and outside quotations.

  Illustrations without captions have had a description added, this is
  denoted with parentheses.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAND MADE FURNITURE AND HOW TO MAKE IT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


