The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 7: Quebec, Hurons, Cape Breton, 1634-1635
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents, Vol. 7: Quebec, Hurons, Cape Breton, 1634-1635

Editor: Reuben Gold Thwaites

Release date: September 24, 2016 [eBook #53138]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Karl Hagen, Eleni Christofaki and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by the Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions
        (www.canadiana.org))


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JESUIT RELATIONS AND ALLIED DOCUMENTS, VOL. 7: QUEBEC, HURONS, CAPE BRETON, 1634-1635 ***

Transcriber's Note.

A list of the changes made can be found at the end of the book.
Formatting and special characters are indicated as follows:

  _italic_
  =bold=
  +spaced+




   THE JESUIT RELATIONS AND ALLIED DOCUMENTS

  VOL. VII




               The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents

   TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES IN NEW FRANCE

                               1610-1791

      THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITALIAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH
      TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND
                              FACSIMILES

                               EDITED BY

                         REUBEN GOLD THWAITES
        Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin

                               Vol. VII
                QUEBEC, HURONS, CAPE BRETON: 1634-1635

 CLEVELAND: =The Burrows Brothers Company=, PUBLISHERS, M DCCCXCVII




                            COPYRIGHT, 1897
                                  BY
                        THE BURROWS BROTHERS CO

                          ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

                    _The Imperial Press, Cleveland_




EDITORIAL STAFF


  Editor                                  REUBEN GOLD THWAITES

  Translator from the French              JOHN CUTLER COVERT

  Assistant Translator from the French    MARY SIFTON PEPPER

  Translator from the Latin               WILLIAM FREDERIC GIESE

  Translator from the Italian             MARY SIFTON PEPPER

  Assistant Editor                        EMMA HELEN BLAIR

  Bibliographical Adviser                 VICTOR HUGO PALTSITS




  CONTENTS OF VOL. VII


  PREFACE TO VOLUME VII                                                1

  DOCUMENTS:--

  XXIII. Relation de ce qui s'est passé en La Novvelle France, en
  l'année 1634 [Chapters x.-xiii., completing the document].
  _Paul le Jeune_; Maison de N. Dame des Anges, en Nouvelle France,
  August 7, 1634                                                       5

  XXIV. Lettre à Monseigneur le Cardinal. _Paul le Jeune_; Kebec,
  August 1, 1635                                                     237

  XXV. Relation de ce qui s'est passé en la Novvelle France, en l'année
  1635 [Chapters i., ii.]. _Paul le Jeune_; Kebec, August 28, 1635   247

  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: Volume VII                                   305

  NOTES                                                              309




[Illustration]

ILLUSTRATION TO VOL. VII

  I. Photographic facsimile of title-page, Le Jeune's _Relation_ of 1635
                                                                     250




PREFACE TO VOL. VII


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained in the present
volume:

XXIII. The first installment (chaps. i.-ix.) of Le Jeune's _Relation_
of 1634, written to the provincial at Paris, was given in Vol. VI. of
our series. In the concluding portion herewith presented, the superior
of the Quebec mission continues his account of the Montagnais. He
describes their clothing and ornaments; then their language, which,
though deficient in expressions for abstract ideas, he praises for its
fullness and richness in vocabulary and grammatical forms. He offers
to the provincial numerous reasons why he made so little progress in
learning the tongue while he wintered among them--his own defective
memory; the malice of a medicine man, whom he had opposed; the perfidy
of the interpreter Pierre, who refused to teach him; his sufferings
from hunger and illness; and the inherent difficulties of the language
itself. All these points are elaborated, with many details, the result
being a vivid picture of savage life, and of the hardships, danger,
and suffering endured by this heroic missionary while wandering with
the savages through the forests and mountains along the southern shore
of the River St. Lawrence. At last, after almost six months of this
wretched life, and many hair-breadth escapes from death, Le Jeune, ill
and exhausted, reaches his humble home, the mission house on the St.
Charles. In the closing chapter he recounts, in the form of a journal,
the events of the summer of 1634 at Quebec; the arrival of the French
fleet, with Father Buteux and the colonists of Sieur Robert Giffard;
the departure of Brébeuf, Daniel, and Davost for the Huron mission,
and their hardships on the voyage; the foundation of new settlements
above Quebec,--at St. Croix island (not to be confounded with the site
of De Monts's colony), and Three Rivers. He announces his intention to
go, with Buteux, to Three Rivers; and closes with an appeal for more
missionaries, who shall be competent to learn the Indian dialects.

XXIV. In this letter to Cardinal Richelieu (dated August 1, 1635), Le
Jeune congratulates him on his efforts to root out the Huguenot heresy;
thanks him for his kindness, and for evidences of affection for the
Jesuit mission in Canada; and urges the great man to aid the Company
of New France in their colonizing enterprise, for on their success
depends that of the mission. The cardinal is reminded how many poor
French families might be provided with homes if sent to the New World,
where land is abundant; he is also informed that some savages have been
converted to the faith.

XXV. This document is known as Le Jeune's _Relation_ of 1635.
Heretofore the superior of Quebec has been the sole author of the
annual report of the Jesuit mission in New France. But with the arrival
of new missionaries the work was greatly broadened, and hereafter we
shall find the _Relation_ a composite, arranged by the superior from
the several individual reports forwarded to him by his assistants in
the field, often with the addition of a general review from his own
pen. Of such a character is the present _Relation_, which, like its
successors, is for convenience designated by the name of the superior
who forwarded it to the provincial at Paris, for publication.

The 112 introductory pages are by Le Jeune, dated Kebec, August 28,
1635; of these, we have space in this volume for but 51 pages (chaps,
i., ii.). Commencing with p. 113 (original pagination), we shall find
a report from Brébeuf, dated Ihonatiria (in the Huron country), May
27, 1635. Then will appear, commencing on p. 207, an undated report
from Perrault, for 1634-35, describing the island of Cape Breton and
the characteristics of its people; and, commencing on p. 220, a number
of brief, unaccredited extracts from letters by various members of the
missionary staff.

In his opening letter, addressed to the provincial, Le Jeune
anticipates most hopefully the growth and prosperity of Canada in the
hands of the French, but is especially rejoiced at the great interest
which the mission has aroused in France. There, many pious laymen are
aiding the enterprise with their efforts and money; many priests desire
to join the Canadian mission; and many nuns are eagerly awaiting some
opportunity to labor among the Indian women and children for their
conversion to the Christian faith. Le Jeune advises these sisters not
to come to Canada until they are suitably provided with a house and
means of support: and he appeals to the ladies of France to furnish
this aid for the nuns. He then describes the condition and extent of
the mission, which now has six residences at various points, all the
way from Cape Breton to Lake Huron. At the oldest of these, Notre
Dame des Anges, near Quebec, center their plans for educational work.
He wishes here to establish a college for French children, and is
beginning a seminary for the instruction of Indian youth. He describes
the importance of the Huron mission, and states that he has received
promises of funds for its extension. He recounts the work of himself
and his brethren in the French settlements, especially mentioning the
comfort they gave to the sick and dying during an epidemic of scurvy
at the new settlement at Three Rivers. He then gives detailed accounts
of the religious experiences and deaths of various Indian converts;
and relates the tragic death of the two Montagnais with whom he had
spent the preceding winter,--Carigonan, "the sorcerer," and his brother
Mestigoit, in whose cabin they all lived.

                                                               R. G. T.
  MADISON, WIS., April, 1897.




                           XXIII (concluded)

                       LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1634

                    PARIS: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1635


Chaps. x.-xiii., and Index, completing the document; Chaps. i.-ix.
appeared in Volume VI.




[164] CHAPITRE X.

DE LEURS HABITS & DE LEURS ORNEMENTS.


C'ESTOIT la pensée d'Aristote, que le mõde auoit fait cõme trois pas,
pour [165] arriuer à la perfection qu'il possedoit de son temps. Au
premier les hommes se contentoient de la vie, ne recherchants purement
& simplement que les choses necessaires & vtiles pour sa conseruation.
Au second ils ont conjoint le delectable auec le necessaire, & la
bienseance auec la necessité. On a trouué premierement les viures,
puis les assaisonnements, on s'est couuert au cõmencement contre
la rigueur du temps, & par apres on a donné de la grace & de la
gentillesse aux habits, on a fait des maisons aux premiers siecles
simplement pour s'en seruir, & par apres on les a fait encore pour
estre veuës. Au troisiéme pas les hommes d'esprit voyans que le monde
iouyssoit des choses necessaires & douces pour la vie, ils se sont a
donnez à la contemplation des choses naturelles, & à la recherche des
sciences, si bien que la grande Republique des hommes s'est petit à
petit perfectionnée, la necessité marchant deuant, la bien-seance & la
douceur venant apres, & les sciences tenant la dernier rang.

    [164] CHAPTER X.

    ON THEIR CLOTHES AND ORNAMENTS.


    IT was the opinion of Aristotle that the world had made three
    steps, as it were, to [165] arrive at the perfection which it
    possessed in his time. At first men were contented with life,
    seeking purely and simply only those things which were necessary
    and useful for its preservation. In the second stage, they united
    the agreeable with the necessary, and politeness with necessity.
    First they found food, and then the seasoning. In the beginning,
    they covered themselves against the severity of the weather, and
    afterward grace and beauty were added to their garments. In the
    early ages, houses were made simply to be used, and afterward they
    were made to be seen. In the third stage, men of intellect, seeing
    that the world was enjoying things that were necessary and pleasant
    in life, gave themselves up to the contemplation of natural objects
    and to scientific researches; whereby the great Republic of men has
    little by little perfected itself, necessity marching on ahead,
    politeness and gentleness following after, and knowledge bringing
    up the rear.

Or ie veux dire que nos Sauuages Montagnais & errans, ne sont encore
[166] qu'au premier degré des trois que ie viẽs de toucher, ils ne
pensent qu'à viure, ils mãgent pour ne point mourir, ils se couurent
pour banir le froid, non pour paroistre, la grace, la bienseance,
la connoissance des arts, les sciences naturelles, & beaucoup moins
les veritez surnaturelles, n'ont point encore de logis en cét
hemisphere, du moins en ces contrées. Ce peuple ne croit pas qu'il y
ait autre science au monde, que de viure & de mãger, voila toute leur
Philosophie. Ils s'estõnent de ce que nous faisons cas de nos liures,
puisque leur connoissance ne nous donne point dequoy bannir la faim,
ils ne peuuent comprendre ce que nous demandons à Dieu en nos prieres.
Demande luy, me disoient-ils, des Originaux, des Ours & des Castors,
dis luy que tu en veux manger; & quand ie leur disois que ce la estoit
peu de chose, qu'il y auoit biẽ d'autres richesses à demãder, ils se
rioyent, que pourrois tu, me repondoient-ils souhaitter de meilleur,
que de manger tõ saoul de ces bonnes viandes? Bref ils n'ont que la
vie, encore ne l'ont-ils pas toute entiere, puisque la famine les tuë
assez souuent.

    Now I wish to say that our wandering Montagnais Savages are yet
    only [166] in the first of these three stages which I have just
    touched upon. Their only thought is to live, they eat so as not to
    die; they cover themselves to keep off the cold, and not for the
    sake of appearance. Grace, politeness, the knowledge of the arts,
    natural sciences, and much less supernatural truths, have as yet
    no place in this hemisphere, or at least in these countries. These
    people do not think there is any other science in the world, except
    that of eating and drinking; and in this lies all their Philosophy.
    They are astonished at the value we place upon books, seeing that
    a knowledge of them does not give us anything with which to drive
    away hunger. They cannot understand what we ask from God in our
    prayers. "Ask him," they say to me, "for Moose, Bears, and Beavers;
    tell him that thou wishest them to eat;" and when I tell them that
    those are only trifling things, that there are still greater riches
    to demand, they laughingly reply, "What couldst thou wish better
    than to eat thy fill of these good dishes?" In short, they have
    nothing but life; yet they are not always sure of that, since they
    often die of hunger.

[167] Iugez maintenant qu'elle peut-estre la gentillesse de leurs
habits, la noblesse & la richesse de leurs ornements, vous prẽdriez
plaisir de les voir en cõpagnie: pendant l'Hiuer toutes sortes d'habits
leurs sont propres, & tout est commun tant aux femmes comme aux hommes:
il n'y a point de difformité en leurs vestemens, tout est bon, pourueu
qu'il soit biẽ chaud. Ils sont couuerts propremẽt, quand ils le sont
commodement; dõnez leur vn chaperon, vne homme le portera aussi bien
qu'vne femme, il n'y a habit de fol dont ils ne se seruent sagement,
s'ils s'en peuuent seruir chaudement: ils ne sont point comme ces
Seigneurs qui s'attachent à vne couleur. Depuis qu'ils prattiquent nos
Europeans, ils sont plus bigarrez que des Suisses. I'ay veu vne petite
fille de six ans vestuë de la casaque de son pere, qui estoit vn grand
homme, il ne falut point de Tailleur pour luy mettre cét habit dans
sa iustesse, on le ramasse à l'entour du corps, & on le lie comme vn
fagot. L'vn a vn bonnet rouge, l'autre vn bõnet verd, l'autre vn gris,
tous faits, nõ à la mode de la Cour, mais à la mode de la commodité.
L'autre aura [168] vn chapeau que si les bords l'empeschent, ils les
couppent.

    [167] Judge now how elegant must be their garments, how noble and
    rich their ornaments. You would enjoy seeing them in company.
    During the Winter all kinds of garments are appropriate to them,
    and all are common to both women and men, there being no difference
    at all in their clothes; anything is good, provided it is warm.
    They are dressed properly when they are dressed comfortably. Give
    them a hood, and a man will wear it as well as a woman; for there
    is no article of dress, however foolish, which they will not wear
    in all seriousness if it helps to keep them warm, in this respect
    being unlike those Lords who affect a certain color. Since they
    have had intercourse with our Europeans, they are more motley than
    the Swiss. I have seen a little six-year-old girl dressed in the
    greatcoat of her father, who was a large man; yet no Tailor was
    needed to adjust it to her size, for it was gathered around her
    body and tied like a bunch of fagots. One has a red hood, another
    a green one, and another a gray,--all made, not in the fashion of
    the Court, but in the way best suited to their convenience. Another
    will wear [168] a hat with the brim cut off, if it happens to be
    too broad.

Les femmes ont pour robbe vne camisolle ou vn capot, ou vne casaque,
ou vne castelogne, ou quelque peau dont ils s'enueloppent, se lians
en autãt d'endroits qu'il est necessaire, pour fermer les aduenuës au
vent? L'vn porte vn bas de cuir, l'autre de drap, pour le present ils
couppent leurs vieilles couuertures ou castellongnes, pour faire des
mãches & des bas de chausses. Ie vous laisse à penser si cela est bien
vuidé & bien tiré; en vn mot ie reïtere ce que i'ay desia dit, leur
proprieté est leur commodité, & comme ils ne se couurent que contre
l'injure du tẽps, si tost que l'air est chaud, ou qu'ils entrènt dans
leurs Cabanes, ils iettent leurs atours à bas, les hõmes restãs tous
nuds, à la reserue d'vn brayer qui leur cache ce qui ne peut estre
veu sans vergongne. Pour les femmes elles quittent leur bonnet, leurs
manches & bas de chausses, le reste du corps demeurant couuert. Voila
l'equipage des Sauuages, pour le present qu'ils communiquent auec nos
François.

    The women have for dress a long shirt, or a hooded cloak, or a
    greatcoat, or a blanket, or some skins tied in as many places as
    may be necessary to keep out the wind. A man will wear one stocking
    of leather, and another of cloth; just now they are cutting up
    their old coverings or blankets, with which to make sleeves or
    stockings; and I leave you to imagine how neatly and smoothly
    they fit. In a word, I repeat what I have already said,--to them
    propriety is convenience; and, as they only clothe themselves
    according to the exigencies of the weather, as soon as the air
    becomes warm or when they enter their Cabins, they throw off their
    garments and the men remain entirely naked, except a strip of cloth
    which conceals what cannot be seen without shame. As to the women,
    they take off their bonnets, sleeves and stockings, the rest of
    the body remaining covered. In this you have the clothing of the
    Savages, now during their intercourse and association with our
    French.

Ce peuple va tousi[o]urs teste nuë, hormis [169] dans les plus grands
froids, encore y en a-il plusieurs qui ne se couurient iamais, ce qui
me fait conjecturer que fort peu se seruoient de bõnets, auant qu'ils
communiquassent auec nos Europeãs, aussi n'en sçauroient ils faire,
ains ils les traittent tous faits, ou du moins les font tailler à nos
François. Voila pour leur coiffure, qui n'est autre que leurs cheueux,
tant aux hommes qu'aux femmes, & mesme aux enfans; car ils sont testes
nuës dans leur maillot.

    These people always go bareheaded, except [169] in the most severe
    cold, and even then some of them go uncovered, which makes me think
    that very few of them used hats before their intercourse with our
    Europeans; nor do they know how to make them, buying them already
    made, or at least cut, from our French people. So for their head
    gear they have nothing but their hair, both men and women and even
    the children, for they are bareheaded in their swaddling clothes.

Leurs robbes sont faictes de peaux d'Elans, d'Ours, & d'autres animaux.
Les plus riches en leur estime sont faites des peaux d'vne espece de
petit animal noir, qui se trouue aux Hurons, il est de la grandeur d'vn
Lapin, le poil est doux & luisant, il entre bien vne soixantaine de ces
peaux dans vne robbe, ils attachẽt les queuës de ces animaux aux bas,
pour seruir de franges, & les testes au haut pour seruir d'vne espece
de rebord. La figure de leur robbe est quasi quarrée, les femmes les
peignent, tirant des raïes du haut en bas, ces raïes sont également
distantes & larges, enuiron de deux pouces vous diriez du passement.

    Their clothes are made of the skin of Elk, Bears, and other
    animals. The ones that they value the most are made of the skins
    of a kind of little black animal found in the Huron country; it
    is about the size of a Rabbit, the skin is soft and shiny, and it
    takes about sixty of them to make a robe. The tails of the animals
    are fastened to the bottom, to serve as fringe; and the heads
    above, to make a sort of border. These robes are nearly square in
    shape; the women paint colored stripes on them from top to bottom,
    which are about as wide as two thumbs, and are equally distant from
    each other, giving the effect of a kind of lace-work.

[170] Les hommes portent leurs robbes en deux façons: quand il fait
vn peu chaud ils ne s'en enueloppent point, mais ils la portent sur
vn bras, & sous l'autre, ou bien estendu sur leur dos, retenue par
deux petites cordes de peaux, qu'ils lient dessus leur poictrine;
ce qui n'empesche pas qu'ils ne paroissent quasi tous nuds. Quand
il fait froid, ils la passent tous, hommes & femmes, sous vn bras &
dessus l'epaule de l'autre, puis la croisent & s'en enueloppent assez
commodémẽt contre le froid, mais maussadement; car s'estans liez sous
la poictrine, ils la retroussent, puis ils se lient & se garrottẽt
vers la ceinture, ou vers le milieu du corps, ce retroussement leur
faisant vn gros ventre ou vne grosse pance, dans laquelle ils mettent
leurs petites besongnes. I'ay veu representer vn Caresme prenant sur vn
theatre en France, on luy bastit vn ventre iustement comme en portent
nos Sauuages & Sauuagesses pendant l'Hiuer.

    [170] The men wear their robes in two ways. When it is a little
    warm they do not put these around them, but carry them over one arm
    and under the other; or else stretched across the back, and held in
    place by two little leather strings which they tie over the chest.
    This does not prevent them from appearing almost naked. When it
    is cold they all, men and women, wear the robe under one arm and
    over the shoulder of the other, then crossed; and thus they wrap
    themselves up comfortably, though awkwardly, against the cold; for
    when this garment is tied below the chest, they turn it up, fasten
    and tie it down near the belt or middle of the body, these folds
    forming a big belly or large flap in which they carry their little
    belongings. I once saw a Merry-andrew in a theatre in France, whose
    belly was built out exactly like those affected by our Savage Men
    and Women in Winter.

Or comme ces robbes ne couurent point leurs bras, il se font des
manches de mesme[s] peaux, & tirent dessus ces rayes dõt i'ay parlé,
quelquefois de lõg, [171] quelquefois en rond: ces manches sont fort
larges par haut, couurant les épaules, & se venans quasi ioindre
derriere le dos, deux petites cordes les tiennent liées deuant &
derriere, mais auec si peu de grace, qu'il n'y a fagot d'espine qui ne
soit mieux trouffé qu'vne femme emmitouflée dedans ces peaux. Remarquez
qu'il n'y a point de distinction, de l'habit d'vn homme à celuy d'vne
femme, sinon que la femme est tousiours couuerte de sa robbe, & les
hommes la quittent ou la portent à la legere, quand il fait chaud comme
i'ay dit.

    Now as these robes do not cover their arms, they make themselves
    sleeves of the same skin, and draw upon them the stripes of which
    I have spoken, sometimes lengthwise, [171] sometimes around. These
    sleeves are quite broad at the top, covering the shoulders and
    almost uniting at the back,--two little strings fastening them in
    front and behind, but so clumsily that a bundle of thorn-sticks are
    better put together than the women are muffled up in these skins.
    Observe that there is no difference between the garments of a man
    and those of a woman, except that the woman is always covered with
    her robe, while the men discard theirs or wear them carelessly, in
    warm weather, as I have said.

Leurs bas de chausses sont de poil [peau] d'Orignac passée sans poil,
c'est la nature & non l'art, qui en a trouué la façon, ils sont tout
d'vne venuë, suffit que le pied & la jambe y passent, pour estre biẽ
faits, ils n'ont point l'inuention d'y mettre des coins, ils sont
faits comme des bas à botter, retenus sous le pied, auec vne petite
cordelette. La cousture qui n'est quasi qu'vn faux fil, ne se treuue
pas derriere les jambes, mais entre-deux; les cousans, ils laissent
passer vn rebord de la peau mesme, qu'ils découpent en frange, apres
laquelle ils attachent par [172] fois quelques matachias; ces bas sont
assez longs, notamment pardeuant; car ils laissent vne piece qui passe
bien haut, & qui couure vne grande partie de la cuisse, au plus haut
de cette piece sont attachées de petites cordes, qu'ils lient à vne
ceinture de peau, qu'ils portẽt tous dessus leurs chairs.

    Their stockings are made of Moose skin, from which the hair has
    been removed, nature and not art setting the fashion for them; they
    are considered well made if the feet and legs go into them, no
    ingenuity being used in making corners; they are made like boots,
    and are fastened under the foot with a little string. The seam,
    which is scarcely more than basted, is not at the back of the leg,
    but on the inside. When they sew them, they leave an edge of the
    skin itself, which they cut into fringe, occasionally fastening
    to this [172] a few matachias.[1] These stockings are quite long,
    especially in front, for they leave a piece which reaches quite
    high, and covers a great part of the thigh; to the upper edge of
    this piece are fastened small cords, tied to a leather belt which
    they all wear next to their skin.

Leurs souliers ne sont pas durs comme les nostres, aussi n'ont-ils pas
l'industrie de taner le cuir: nos gands de cerf, sont d'vne peau plus
ferme ou du moins aussi ferme que leurs peaux d'Orignac, dont ils font
leurs souliers, encore faut il qu'ils attendent que ces peaux ayent
seruy de robbes, & qu'elles soient toutes grasses, autrement leurs
souliers se retireroient à la moindre approche du feu, ce qu'ils ne
laissent pas de faire tous gras qu'ils soient quãd on les chauffe vu
peu de trop prés. Au reste, ils boiuent l'eau comme vne éponge, si biẽ
que les Sauuages ne s'en feruẽt pas contre cét Element, mais bien cõtre
la neige & contre le froid. Ce sont les femmes qui sont cousturieres &
cordonnieres, il ne leur coute rien pour apprendre ce mestier, encore
moins pour auoir des [173] lettres de maistrise; vn enfant qui sçauroit
vn peu coudre en seroit à la premiere veuë, tant il y a d'inuention.

    Their shoes are not hard like ours, for they do not know enough
    to tan the leather. Our deerskin gloves are made of skin which is
    firmer, or at least as firm, as their Moose skins of which they
    make their shoes. Also they have to wait until these hides have
    been used as robes, and until they are well oiled, otherwise their
    shoes would shrink at the first approach to the fire, which they do
    anyhow, well oiled as they are, if they are brought too near the
    heat. Besides, they absorb water like a sponge, so that the Savages
    cannot use them in this Element, but they are very serviceable
    against snow and cold. It is the women who are the seamstresses and
    shoemakers; it costs them nothing to learn this trade, and much
    less to procure [173] diplomas as master workmen; a child that
    could sew a little could make the shoes at the first attempt, so
    ingeniously are they contrived.

Ils les font fort amples & fort capables, notamment l'Hiuer, pour
les garnir contre le froid, ils se seruent ordinairement d'vne peau
de Lieure, ou d'vne piece de quelque couuerture, pliée en deux &
trois doubles. Ils mettent auec cela du poil d'Orignac, & puis ayans
enueloppé leurs pieds de ces haillons, ils chauffent leurs souliers,
& par fois deux paires l'vne dessus l'autre, ils les lient & les
arrestent sur le coudepié, auec vne petite corde, qui regne tout à
l'entour des coins du Soulier. Pendant les neiges nous nous seruons
tous, François & Sauuages de cette forte de chaussure, afin de pouuoir
marcher sur des Raquettes; l'Hiuer passé nous reprenons nos souliers
François, & eux vont pieds nuds.

    They make them large and capacious, especially in the Winter. In
    order to furnish them against the cold, they generally use a Rabbit
    skin, or a piece of an old blanket folded two or three times; with
    this they put some Moose hair; and then, having wrapped their feet
    in these rags, they put on their shoes, occasionally wearing two
    pairs, the one over the other. They tie them over the instep with a
    little string which is wound about the corners of the Shoe. During
    the snows we all, French and Savages, have made use of this kind
    of foot gear, in order to walk upon our Snowshoes; when the Winter
    had passed, we resumed our French shoes, and the Savages went
    barefooted.

Voila non pas tout ce qui se peut dire de leurs habits & de leurs
ornements, mais ce que i'en ay veu, & qui me vient pour l'heure en la
pensée; i'oubliois à dire, que ceux qui peuuent auoir ou troquer des
chemises de nos François, s'en feruent à la nouuelle façon: car au lieu
[174] de les mettre comme nous par dessous, ils les mettent par dessus
tous leurs habits, & comme iamais ils ne les essuyent, elles sont en
moins de rien grasses comme des torchons de cuisine, c'est ce qu'ils
demandent, car l'eau, disent-ils, coule là dessus, & ne penetre pas
iusqu'à leurs robbes.

    This is not all that can be said about their clothes and ornaments,
    but it is all that I have seen and that I recall to mind just now;
    I forgot to say that those who can have or buy our French shirts
    wear them in the new fashion; for, instead [174] of wearing them
    under, as we do, they put them on over all their clothes,--and, as
    they never wash them, they are in no time as greasy as dish-cloths;
    but this is just as they wish them to be, for the water, they say,
    runs over them and does not penetrate into their clothes.




CHAPITRE XI.

DE LA LANGUE DES SAUUAGES MONTAGNAIS.


I'ESCRIUY l'an passé, que leur langue estoit tres-riche & tres-pauure;
toute pleine d'abondance & de disette; la pauureté paroist en mille
articles. Tous les mots de pieté, de deuotion, de vertu; tous les
termes dont on se sert pour expliquer les biens de l'autre [vie]; le
langage des Theologiens, des Philosophes, des Mathematiciens, des
Medecins, en vn mot de tous les hommes doctes; toutes les paroles qui
concernent la police & le gouuernement d'vne ville, d'vne Prouince,
d'vn Empire; tout ce qui touche la iustice, la recompense & le
chastimẽt, les noms d'vne infinité d'arts, qui sont en nostre Europe,
d'vne infinité de fleurs [175] d'arbres & de fruits, d'vne infinité
d'animaux de mille & mille inuentions, de mille beautez & de mille
richesses; tout cela ne se trouue point ny dãs la pensée, ny dans la
bouche des Sauuages, n'ayans ny vraye religion ny connoissance des
vertus, ny police, ny gouuernement, ny Royaume, ny Republique, ny
sciences, ny rien de tout ce que ie viens de dire, & par consequent,
toutes les paroles, tous les termes, tous les mots & tous les noms
qui touche ce monde de biens & de grandeurs, doiuent estre defalquez
de leur dictionaire; voila vne grande disette. Tournons maintenant la
medaille, & faisons voir que cette langue regorge de richesses.

    CHAPTER XI.

    ON THE LANGUAGE OF THE MONTAGNAIS SAVAGES.


    I WROTE last year that their language was very rich and very poor,
    full of abundance and full of scarcity, the latter appearing in a
    thousand different ways. All words for piety, devotion, virtue;
    all terms which are used to express the things of the other life;
    the language of Theologians, Philosophers, Mathematicians, and
    Physicians, in a word, of all learned men; all words which refer
    to the regulation and government of a city, Province, or Empire;
    all that concerns justice, reward and punishment; the names of an
    infinite number of arts which are in our Europe; of an infinite
    number of flowers, [175] trees, and fruits; of an infinite number
    of animals, of thousands and thousands of contrivances, of a
    thousand beauties and riches, all these things are never found
    either in the thoughts or upon the lips of the Savages. As they
    have no true religion nor knowledge of the virtues, neither public
    authority nor government, neither Kingdom nor Republic, nor
    sciences, nor any of those things of which I have just spoken,
    consequently all the expressions, terms, words, and names which
    refer to that world of wealth and grandeur must necessarily be
    absent from their vocabulary; hence the great scarcity. Let us now
    turn the tables and show that this language is fairly gorged with
    richness.

Premierement ie trouue vne infinité de noms propres parmy eux, que ie
ne puis expliquer en nostre françois, que par circumlocutions.

    First, I find an infinite number of proper nouns among them, which
    I cannot explain in our french, except by circumlocutions.

Secondement, ils ont de Verbes que ie nomme absolus, dont ny les Grecs,
ny les Latins, ny nous, ny les langues d'Europe, dont ie ne me suis
enquis, n'ont riẽ de semblable, par exemple ce Verbe _Nimitison_,
signifie absolument ie mange, sans dire quoy, car si vous determinez,
la [176] chose que vous mangez, il se faut seruir d'vn autre Verbe.

    Second, they have some Verbs which I call absolute, to which
    neither the Greeks, nor Latins, nor we ourselves, nor any language
    of Europe with which I am familiar, have anything similar. For
    example, the verb _Nimitison_ means absolutely, "I eat," without
    saying what; for, if you determine the [176] thing you eat, you
    have to use another Verb.

Tiercement, ils ont des Verbes differents, pour signifier l'action
enuers vne chose animée, & enuers vne chose inanimée, encore bien
qu'ils conjoignent auec les choses animées, quelques nombres des choses
sans ame, cõme le petun, les pommes, &c. donnons des exemples. Ie vois
vn homme, _Niouapaman iriniou_, ie vois vne pierre, _niouabatẽ_, ainsi
en Grec, en Latin, & en François, c'est vn mesme Verbe, pour dire ie
vois vn homme, vne pierre, & toute autre chose. Ie frappe vn chiẽ _ni
noutinau attimou_, ie frappe vn bois, _ninoutinen misticou_. Ce n'est
pas tout: car si l'actiõ se termine à plusieurs choses animées, il
faut vn autre Verbe, ie vois des hõmes _niouapamaoueth irinioueth_,
_ninoutinaoueth attimoueth_, & ainsi de tous les autres.

    Third, they have different Verbs to signify an action toward an
    animate or toward an inanimate object; and yet they join with
    animate things a number of things that have no souls, as tobacco,
    apples, etc. Let us give some examples: "I see a man," _Niouapaman
    iriniou_; "I see a stone," _niouabatẽ_; but in Greek, in Latin,
    and in French the same Verb is used to express, "I see a man, a
    stone, or anything else." "I strike a dog," _ni noutinau attimou_;
    "I strike wood," _ninoutinen misticou_. This is not all; for, if
    the action terminates on several animate objects, another Verb
    has to be used,--"I see some men," _niouapamaoueth irinioueth_,
    _ninoutinaoueth attimoueth_, and so on with all the others.

En quatriéme lieu, ils ont des Verbes propres pour signifier l'action
qui se termine à la personne reciproque, & d'autres encore qui se
terminent aux choses qui luy appartiennent, & l'on ne pût se seruir
des Verbes enuers les autres personnes non reciproques sans parler
impropremẽt. Ie me fais entẽdre le Ver[be] [177] _nitaouin_, signifie,
ie me sers de quelque chose, _nitaouin agouniscouehon_, ie me sers
d'vn bonnet: que si ie viens à dire, ie me sers de son bonnet, sçauoir
est du bonnet de l'homme, dont on parle, il faut changer de verbe,
& dire _Nitaouiouan outagoumiscouhon_: que si c'est vne chose animée
il faut encor changer le verbe, par exemple, ie me sers de son chien,
_nitaouiouan õtaimai_, & remarquez que tous ces verbes ont leurs
meufs, leurs temps, & leurs personnes, & que leurs conjugaisons sont
dissemblables s'ils different de terminaisons. Ceste abondance n'est
point dãs les langues d'Europe, ie le sçay de quelques vnes, ie le
coniecture des autres.

    In the fourth place, they have Verbs suitable to express an action
    which terminates on the person reciprocal, and others still which
    terminate on the things that belong to him; and we cannot use these
    Verbs, referring to other persons not reciprocal, without speaking
    improperly. I will explain myself. The Verb [177] _nitaouin_
    means, "I make use of something;" _nitaouin agouniscouehon_, "I am
    using a hat;" but when I come to say, "I am using his hat," that
    is, the hat of the man of whom I speak, we must change the verb
    and say, _Nitaouiouan outagoumiscouhon_; but, if it be an animate
    thing, the verb must again be changed, for example, "I am using
    his dog," _nitaouiouan õtaimai_. Also observe that all these verbs
    have their moods, tenses and persons; and that they are conjugated
    differently, if they have different terminations. This abundance
    is not found in the languages of Europe; I know it of some, and
    conjecture it in regard to others.

En cinquiesme lieu, ils se seruent d'autres mots sur la terre, d'autres
mots sur l'eau pour signifier la mesme chose. Voicy comment, Ie veux
dire, i'arriuay hier, si c'est par terre, il faut dire _nitagochinin
outagouchi_, si c'est par eau, il faut dire _nimichagan outagouchi_:
ie veux dire, i'ay esté mouillé de la pluye, si ç'a esté cheminant sur
terre, il faut dire nikimiouanoutan, si c'est faisant chemin, par eau
_nikhimiouanutan_, ie vay querir [178] quelque chose, si c'est par
terre, il faut dire _ninaten_, si c'est par eau _ninahen_: si c'est vne
chose animée & par terre, il faut dire _ninatau_: si c'est vne chose
animée & par eau, il faut dire _ninahouau_: si c'est vne chose animée
qui appartienne à quelqu'vn, il faut dire _ninahimouau_: si elle n'est
pas animée _niuahimouau_, quelle varieté? nous n'auons en François
pour tout cela qu'vn seul mot, ie vay querir, auquel on adiouste pour
distinction par eau, ou par terre.

    In the fifth place, they use some words upon the land, and others
    upon the water, to signify the same thing. As, for instance,
    I want to say, "I arrived yesterday;" if by land, I must say,
    _nitagochinin outagouchi_,--if by water, I must say, _nimichagan
    outagouchi_. I wish to say, "I was wet by the rain;" if it were
    in walking upon land, I must say, nikimiouanoutan,--if it were
    upon the water, _nikhimiouanutan_. "I am going to look for [178]
    something;" if upon land, I must say, _ninaten_,--if by water,
    _ninahen_; if it is an animate thing, and upon land, I must
    say, _ninatau_; if it be animate and in the water, I must say,
    _ninahouau_; if it is an animate thing that belongs to some one, I
    must say, _ninahimouau_; if it is not animate, _niuahimouau_. What
    a variety! We have in French only a single expression for all these
    things, "Ie vay querir," to which we add, in order to distinguish,
    "par eau," or "par terre."

En sixiesme lieu, vn seul de nos adiectifs en François se conioint auec
tous nos substantifs, par exemple, nous disons le pain est froid, le
petun est froid, ce fer est froid; mais en nostre Sauuage ces adiectifs
changent selon les diuerses especes des substantifs, _tabiscau
assini_, la pierre est froide, _tacabisisiou nouspouagan_, mon
petunoir est froid, _ta_k_hisiou_ k_hichtemau_, ce petun est froid,
_tacascouan misticou_, le bois est froid, si c'est quelque grande piece
_tacascouchan misticou_, le bois est froid, _siicatchiou attimou_, ce
chien a froid; voila vne estrange abondance.

    In the sixth place, a single one of our adjectives in French is
    associated with all our substantives. For example, we say, "the
    bread is cold, the tobacco is cold, the iron is cold;" but in our
    Savage tongue these adjectives change according to the different
    kinds of substantives,--_tabiscau assini_, "the stone is cold;"
    _tacabisisiou nouspouagan_, "my tobacco pipe is cold;" _takhisiou
    khichtemau_, "this tobacco is cold;" _tacascouan misticou_, "the
    wood is cold." If it is a large piece, _tacascouchan misticou_,
    "the wood is cold;" _siicatchiou attimou_, "this dog is cold;" and
    thus you see a strange abundance.

Remarquez en passant, que tous ces [179] adiectifs, voire mesme que
tous les noms substantifs se conjuguent comme les verbes Latins
impersonnels, par exemple, _tabiscau assini_, la pierre est froide,
_tabiscaban_, elle estoit froide, _cata tabiscan_, elle sera froide, &
ainsi du reste _Noutaoui_, c'est vn nom substantif, qui signifie mon
pere, _noutaouiban_, c'estoit mon pere, ou bien deffunct mon pere _Cata
noutaoui_, il sera mon pere, si on pouuoit se seruir de ces termes.

    Observe, in passing, that all these [179] adjectives, and even all
    the nouns, are conjugated like Latin impersonal verbs. For example,
    _tabiscau assini_, "the stone is cold;" _tabiscaban_, "it was
    cold;" _cata tabiscan_, "it will be cold;" and so on. _Noutaoui_,
    is a noun which means, "my father;" _noutaouiban_, "it was my
    father, or my deceased father;" _Cata noutaoui_, "it will be my
    father," if such expressions could be used.

En septiesme lieu ils ont vne richesse si importune qu'elle me iette
quasi dans la creance que ie seray pauure toute ma vie en leur langue.
Quand vous cognoissez toutes les parties d'Oraison des langues qui
florissent en nostre Europe, & que vous sçauez comme il les faut lier
ensemble, vous sçauez la langue, il n'en est pas de mesme en la langue
de nos Sauuages, peuplez vostre memoire de tous les mots qui signifient
chaque chose en particulier, apprenez le noeud ou la Syntaxe qui les
allie, vous n'estes encor qu'vn ignorant, vous pourrez bien auec cela
vous faire entendre des Sauuages, quoy que non pas tousiours, mais
vous ne les entendez [180] pas: la raison est, qu'outre les noms de
chaque chose en particulier ils ont vne infinité de mots qui signifient
plusieurs choses ensemble: si ie veux dire en Françoîs le vent pousse
la neige, suffit que i'aye cognoissance de ces trois mots, du vent,
du verbe, ie pousse, & de la neige, & que ie les sçache conioindre,
il n'en est pas de mesme icy. Ie sçay comme on dit le vent _routin_,
comme on dit il pousse vne chose noble comme est la neige en l'estime
des Sauuages, c'est _ra_k_hineou_, ie sçay comme on dit la neige, c'est
_couné_, que si ie veux conioindre ces trois mots _Routin ra_k_hineou
couné_, les Sauuages ne m'entendront pas, que s'ils m'entendent ils se
mettront à rire, pource qu'ils ne parlent pas comme cela, se seruans
de ce seul mot _piouan_, pour dire le vent pousse ou fait voler la
neige: de mesme le verbe _nisiicatchin_ signifie i'ay froid, ce nom
_nissitai_ signifie mes pieds, si ie dis _nisiicat chin nissitai_ pour
dire i'ay froid aux pieds, ils pourront bien m'entendre, mais ie ne les
entẽdray pas quãd ils dirõt _Nitatagouasisin_, qui est le propre mot
pour dire i'ay froid aux pieds: & ce qui [181] tuë vne memoire, ce mot
n'est parent, ny allié, ny n'a point d'affinité en sa consonance auec
les deux autres, d'où prouiẽt que ie les fais souuẽt rire en parlant,
en voulant suiure l'œconomie de la langue Latine, ou Françoise, ne
sçachant point ces mots qui signifient plusieurs choses ensemble? D'icy
prouient encore, que bien souuent ie ne les entends pas, quoy qu'ils
m'entendent: car ne se seruans pas des mots qui signifient vne chose
simple en particulier, mais de ceux qui en signifient beaucoup à la
fois, moy ne sçachant que ces premiers, & non encor à demy, ie ne les
sçaurois entendre s'ils n'ont de l'esprit pour varier & choisir les
mots plus communs, car alors ie tasche de m'en demesler.

    In the seventh place, they have so tiresome an abundance that I
    am almost led to believe that I shall remain poor all my life
    in their language. When you know all the parts of Speech of the
    languages of our Europe, and know how to combine them, you know the
    languages; but it is not so concerning the tongue of our Savages.
    Stock your memory with all the words that stand for each particular
    thing, learn the knot or Syntax that joins them together, and
    you are still only an ignoramus; with that, you can indeed make
    yourself understood by the Savages, although not always, but you
    will not be able to understand [180] them. The reason for this is,
    that, besides the names of each particular thing, they have an
    infinite number of words which signify several things together.
    If I wish to say in French, "the wind drives the snow," it is
    enough for me to know these three words, "the wind," the verb
    "drive," and "the snow," and to know how to combine them; but it
    is not so here. I know how they say "the wind," _routin_; how they
    say "it drives something noble," as the snow is in the Savage
    estimation,--the word for this is _rakhineou_; I know how they
    say "snow," it is _couné_. But, if I try to combine these three
    words, _Routin rakhineou couné_, the Savages will not understand
    me; or, if they understand, will begin to laugh, because they do
    not talk like that, merely making use of a single word, _piouan_,
    to say "the wind drives or makes the snow fly." Likewise the verb
    _nisiicatchin_, means "I am cold;" the noun _nissitai_, means "my
    feet;" if I say _nisiicat chin nissitai_, to say "my feet are
    cold," they will indeed understand me; but I shall not understand
    them when they say _Nitatagouasisin_, which is the proper word to
    say, "my feet are cold." And what [181] ruins the memory is, that
    such a word has neither relation, nor alliance, nor any affinity,
    in its sound, with the other two; whence it often happens that I
    make them laugh in talking, when I try to follow the construction
    of the Latin or French language, not knowing these words which mean
    several things at once. From this it happens, also, that very often
    I do not understand them, although they understand me; for as they
    do not use the words which signify one thing in particular, but
    rather those that mean a combination of things, I knowing only the
    first, and not even the half of those, could not understand them if
    they did not have sufficient intelligence to vary and choose more
    common words, for then I try to unravel them.

C'est assez pour monstrer l'abondance de leur langue, si ie la sçauois
parfaitement i'en parlerois auec plus d'asseurance; ie croy qu'ils ont
d'autres richesses que ie n'ay peu encor découurir iusques icy.

    This is enough to show the richness of their language; if I were
    thoroughly acquainted with it, I would speak with more certainty.
    I believe they have other riches which I have not been able to
    discover up to the present.

I'oubliois à dire que nos Montagnais n'ont pas tant de lettres en leur
Alphabeth, que nous en auons au nostre, ils confondent le B. & le P.
ils confondent [182] aussi le C. le G. & le K. c'est à dire que deux
Sauuages prononçans vn mesme mot, vous croiriez que l'vn prononce vn B.
& que l'autre prononce vn P. que l'vn dit vn C. ou vn K. & l'autre vn
G. ils n'ont point les lettres F, L, V consonante, X. Z. ils prononcent
vn R. au lieu d'vn L. ils diront Monsieur du Pressi pour Monsieur du
Plessi, ils prononcent vn P. au lieu d'vn V. consonante, Monsieur
Olipier pour Monsieur Oliuier; mais comme ils ont la langue assez
bien penduë, ils prendroient bientost nostre prononciation si on les
instruisoit, notamment les enfans.

    I forgot to say that the Montagnais have not so many letters in
    their Alphabet as we have in ours; they confound B and P, and [182]
    also C, G, and K; that is, if two Savages were to pronounce the
    same word, you would think that one was pronouncing a B, and the
    other a P, or that one was using a C or K, and the other a G. They
    do not have the letters F, L, consonant V, X, and Z. They use R
    instead of L, saying Monsieur du Pressi for Monsieur du Plessi;[2]
    they utter the sound of P instead of consonant V, Monsieur Olipier
    instead of Monsieur Olivier. But, as their tongues are quite
    flexible, they will soon acquire our pronunciation if they are
    instructed, especially the children.

Le P. Brebeuf m'a dit que les Hurons n'ont point de M. dequoy ie
m'estonne: car ceste lettre me semble quasi naturelle, tant l'vsage en
est grand.

    Father Brebeuf tells me that the Hurons have no M, at which I
    am astonished, for this letter seems to me almost natural, so
    extensively is it used.

Que si pour conclusion de ce Chapitre V. R. me demande si i'ay beaucoup
auancé dans la cognoissance de ceste langue pendant mon hyuernement
auec ces Barbares, ie luy diray ingenuëment que non: en voicy les
raisons.

    Now if, as conclusion of this Chapter, Your Reverence asks me if
    I made much progress in the knowledge of this language during the
    winter I spent with these Barbarians, I answer frankly, "no;" and
    here are the reasons.

Premierement, le deffaut de ma memoire que ne fut iamais bien
excellente, [183] & qui se va deseichant tous les iours. O l'excellent
homme pour ces pays icy que le Pere Brebeuf, sa memoire tres-heureuse,
sa douceur tres-aymable, feront de grands fruicts dedans les Hurons.

    First, my defective memory, which was never very good, [183] and
    which continues to wither every day. Oh, what an excellent man for
    these countries is Father Brebeuf! His most fortunate memory, and
    his amiability and gentleness, will be productive of much good
    among the Hurons.

Secondement, la malice du sorcier qui defendoit par fois qu'on
m'enseignast.

    Second, the malice of the sorcerer, who sometimes prevented them
    from teaching me.

Tiercement, la perfidie de l'Apostat, qui contre sa promesse, &
nonobstant les offres que ie luy faisois, ne m'a iamais voulu
enseigner, voire sa déloyauté est venuë iusques à ce point de me donner
exprez vn mot d'vne signification pour vn autre.

    Third, the perfidy of the Apostate, who, contrary to his promise,
    and notwithstanding the offers I made him, was never willing to
    teach me,--his disloyalty even going so far as to purposely give me
    a word of one signification for another.

En quatriesme lieu, la famine a esté long temps nostre hostesse, ie
n'osois quasi en sa presence interroger nos Sauuages, leur estomach
n'est pas de la nature des tonneaux qui resonnẽt d'autant mieux qu'ils
sont vuides, il ressemble au tambour, plus il est bandé mieux il parle.

    In the fourth place, famine was for a long time our guest; and I
    scarcely ventured in her presence to question our Savages, their
    stomachs not being like barrels which sound all the louder for
    being empty; they resemble the drum,--the tighter it is drawn, the
    better it talks.

En cinquiesme lieu, mes maladies m'ont fait quitter le soing des
langues de la terre pour penser au langage de l'autre vie où ie pensois
aller.

    In the fifth place, my attacks of illness made me give up the care
    for the languages of earth, to think about the language of the
    other life whither I was expecting to go.

[184] En sixiesme lieu enfin la difficulté de ceste langue qui n'est
pas petite, comme on peut coniecturer de ce que i'ay dit, n'a pas esté
vn petit obstacle pour empescher vue pauure memoire comme la mienne
d'aller bien loing. Ie iargonne neantmoins, & à force de crier ie me
fais entendre.

    [184] In the sixth place, and finally, the difficulty of this
    language, which is not slight, as may be guessed from what I have
    said, has been no small obstacle to prevent a poor memory like
    mine from advancing far. Still, I talk a jargon, and, by dint of
    shouting, can make myself understood.

Vn point me toucheroit viuement, n'estoit que i'estime qu'il ne faut
pas marcher deuant Dieu, mais qu'il faut le fuiure, & se contenter
de sa propre bassesse; c'est que ie ne croy quasi pas pouuoir iamais
parler les langues des Sauuages auec autant de liberté qu'il seroit
necessaire pour leur prescher, & répondre sur le champ sans broncher à
leurs demandes & à leurs obiections, estant notamment occupé comme i'ay
esté iusques à present. Vray que Dieu peut faire d'vne roche vn enfant
d'Abraham. Qu'il soit beny à iamais par toutes les langues des nations
de la terre.

    One thing would touch me keenly, were it not that we are not
    expected to walk before God, but to follow him, and to be contented
    with our own littleness; it is that I almost fear I shall never
    be able to speak the Savage tongues with the fluency necessary to
    preach to them, and to answer at once, without stumbling, their
    demands and objections, being so greatly occupied as I have been up
    to the present. It is true that God can make from a rock a child
    of Abraham. May he be forever praised, in all the tongues of the
    nations of the earth!




[185] CHAPITRE XII.

DE CE QU'IL FAUT SOUFFRIR HYUERNANT AUEC LES SAUUAGES.


EPICTETE dit que celuy qui veut aller aux bains publics, se doit au
prealable figurer toutes les insolences qui s'y commettent, afin que se
trouuant engagé dans la risée d'vn tas de canailles, qui luy laueront
mieux la teste que les pieds, il ne perde rien de la grauité & de la
modestie d'vn homme sage. Ie dirois volontiers le mesme à qui Dieu
donne les pensées, & les desirs de passer les mers, pour venir chercher
& instruire les Sauuages: c'est en leur faueur que ie coucheray ce
Chapitre, afin qu'ayant cogneu l'ennemy qu'ils auront en teste, ils
ne s'oublient pas de se munir des armes necessaires pour le combat,
notamment d'vn patience de fer ou de bronze, ou plustost d'vne patience
toute d'or, pour supporter, fortement & amoureusement les grands
trauaux qu'il faut souffrir parmy ces peuples. Commençons [186] par la
maison qu'ils doiuent habiter s'il[s] les veulent suiure.

    [185] CHAPTER XII.

    WHAT ONE MUST SUFFER IN WINTERING WITH THE SAVAGES.


    EPICTETUS says that he who intends to visit the public baths must
    previously consider all the improprieties that will be committed
    there; so that, when he finds himself surrounded by the derision
    of a mob of scoundrels who would rather wash his head than his
    feet, he may lose none of the gravity and modesty of a wise man. I
    might say the same to those in whom God inspires the thought and
    desire to cross over the seas, in order to seek and to instruct the
    Savages. It is for their sake that I shall pen this Chapter, so
    that, knowing the enemy they will encounter, they may not forget
    to fortify themselves with the weapons necessary for the combat,
    especially with patience of iron or bronze, or rather with a
    patience entirely of gold, in order to bear bravely and lovingly
    the great trials that must be endured among these people. Let us
    begin [186] by speaking of the house they will have to live in, if
    they wish to follow them.

Pour conceuoir la beauté de cest edifice, il en faut décrire la
structure; i'en parleray auec science: car i'ay souuent aydé à la
dresser. Estans donc arriuez au lieu où nous deuions camper; les femmes
armées de haches s'en alloient çà & là dans ces grandes forests coupper
du bois pour la charpente de l'hostellerie où nous voulions loger, ce
pendant les hommes en ayans designé le plan, vuidoient la neige auec
leurs raquilles, ou auec des pelles qu'ils font & portent exprez pour
ce fujet: figurez vous donc vn grand rond, ou vn quarré dans la neige,
haute de deux, de trois, ou de quatre pieds, selon les temps, ou les
lieux où on cabane; ceste profondeur nous faisoit vne muraille blanche,
qui nous enuironnoit de tous costez, excepté par l'endroit où on la
fendoit pour faire la porte: la charpente apportée, qui consiste en
quelque vingt ou trente perches, plus ou moins, selon la grandeur de la
cabane, on la plante, non sur la terre, mais sur le haut de la neige,
puis on iette sur ces perches qui s'approchent [187] vn petit par en
haut, deux ou trois rouleaux d'écorces cousuës ensemble, commençant par
le bas, & voila la maison faite, on couure la terre, comme aussi ceste
muraille de neige qui regne tout à l'entour de la cabane, de petites
branches de pin, & pour derniere perfection, on attache vne méchante
peau à deux perches pour seruir de porte, dont les iambages font la
neige mesme. Voyons maintenant en détail toutes les commoditez de ce
beau Louure.

    In order to have some conception of the beauty of this edifice, its
    construction must be described. I shall speak from knowledge, for
    I have often helped to build it. Now, when we arrived at the place
    where we were to camp, the women, armed with axes, went here and
    there in the great forests, cutting the framework of the hostelry
    where we were to lodge; meantime the men, having drawn the plan
    thereof, cleared away the snow with their snowshoes or with shovels
    which they make and carry expressly for this purpose. Imagine now
    a great ring or square in the snow, two, three or four feet deep,
    according to the weather or the place where they encamp. This depth
    of snow makes a white wall for us, which surrounds us on all sides,
    except the end where it is broken through to form the door. The
    framework having been brought, which consists of twenty or thirty
    poles, more or less, according to the size of the cabin, it is
    planted, not upon the ground but upon the snow; then they throw
    upon these poles, which converge [187] a little at the top, two or
    three rolls of bark sewed together, beginning at the bottom, and
    behold, the house is made. The ground inside, as well as the wall
    of snow which extends all around the cabin, is covered with little
    branches of fir; and, as a finishing touch, a wretched skin is
    fastened to two poles to serve as a door, the doorposts being the
    snow itself. Now let us examine in detail all the comforts of this
    elegant Mansion.

Vous ne sçauriez demeurer debout dans ceste maison, tant pour sa
bassesse, que pour la fumée qui suffoqueroit, & par consequent il faut
estre tousiours couché ou assis sur la platte terre, c'est la posture
ordinaire des Sauuages: de sortir de hors, le froid, la neige, le
danger de s'égarer dans ces grãds bois, vous font rentrer plus vite que
le vent, & vous tiennent en prison dans vn cachot, qui n'a ny clef ny
serrure.

    You cannot stand upright in this house, as much on account of its
    low roof as the suffocating smoke; and consequently you must always
    lie down, or sit flat upon the ground, the usual posture of the
    Savages. When you go out, the cold, the snow, and the danger of
    getting lost in these great woods drive you in again more quickly
    than the wind, and keep you a prisoner in a dungeon which has
    neither lock nor key.

Ce cachot, outre la posture fascheuse qu'il y faut tenir sur vn lict
de terre, a quatre grandes incommoditez, le froid, le chaud, la fumée
& les chiens: [188] Pour le froid vous auez la teste à la neige, il
n'y a qu'vne branche de pin entre deux, bien souuent rien que vostre
bonnet, les vents ont liberté d'entrer par mille endroicts: car ne vous
figurez pas que ces écorces soient iointes comme vn papier colé sur vn
chassis, elles ressemblent bien souuent l'herbe à mille pertuis, sinon
que leurs trous & leurs ouuertures sont vn peu plus grandes, & quand
il n'y auroit que l'ouuerture d'en haut, qui sert de fenestre & de
cheminée tout ensemble, le plus gros hyuer de France y pourroit tous
les iours passer tout entier sans empressement. La nuict estant couché
ie contemplois par ceste ouuerture & les Estoilles & la Lune, autant à
découuert que si i'eusse esté en pleine campagne.

    This prison, in addition to the uncomfortable position that
    one must occupy upon a bed of earth, has four other great
    discomforts,--cold, heat, smoke, and dogs. [188] As to the cold,
    you have the snow at your head with only a pine branch between,
    often nothing but your hat, and the winds are free to enter in a
    thousand places. For do not imagine that these pieces of bark are
    joined as paper is glued and fitted to a window frame; they are
    often like the plant mille-pertuis,[3] except that their holes and
    their openings are a little larger; and even if there were only the
    opening at the top, which serves at once as window and chimney,
    the coldest winter in France could come in there every day without
    any trouble. When I lay down at night I could study through this
    opening both the Stars and the Moon as easily as if I had been in
    the open fields.

Or cependant le froid ne m'a pas tant tourmenté que la chaleur du feu,
vn petit lieu, comme sont leurs cabanes s'échauffe aisément par vn bon
feu, qui me rotissoit par fois & me grilloit de tous costez, à raison
que la cabane estant trop estroitre, ie ne sçauois comment me deffendre
de son ardeur, d'aller à droite ou a gauche, vous ne sçauriez: [189]
car les Sauuages qui vous sont voisins occupent vos costez, de reculer
en arriere, vous rencontrez ceste muraille de neige, ou les écorces de
la cabane qui vous bornent, ie ne sçauois en quelle posture me mettre,
de m'estendre, la place estoit si estroite que mes iambes eussent esté
à moitié dans le feu; de me tenir en ploton, & tousiours racourcy cõme
ils font, ie ne pouuois pas si long temps qu'eux: mes habits ont esté
tout rostis & tout bruslez. Vous me demanderez peut estre si la neige
que nous auions au dos ne se fondoit point quand on faisoit bon feu: ie
dis que non, que si par fois la chaleur l'amolissoit tant soit peu, le
froid la durcissoit en glace. Or ie diray neantmoins que le froid ny
le chaud n'ont rien de [in]tolerable, & qu'on trouue quelque remede à
ces deux maux.

    Nevertheless, the cold did not annoy me as much as the heat from
    the fire. A little place like their cabins is easily heated by a
    good fire, which sometimes roasted and broiled me on all sides, for
    the cabin was so narrow that I could not protect myself against the
    heat. You cannot move to right or left, [189] for the Savages, your
    neighbors, are at your elbows; you cannot withdraw to the rear,
    for you encounter the wall of snow, or the bark of the cabin which
    shuts you in. I did not know what position to take. Had I stretched
    myself out, the place was so narrow that my legs would have been
    halfway in the fire; to roll myself up in a ball, and crouch down
    in their way, was a position I could not retain as long as they
    could; my clothes were all scorched and burned. You will ask me
    perhaps if the snow at our backs did not melt under so much heat. I
    answer, "no;" that if sometimes the heat softened it in the least,
    the cold immediately turned it into ice. I will say, however, that
    both the cold and the heat are endurable, and that some remedy may
    be found for these two evils.

Mais pour la fumée, ie vous confesse que c'est vn martyre, elle me
tuoit, & me faisoit pleurer incessament sans que i'eusse ny douleur
ny tristesse dans le coeur, elle nous terrassoit par fois tous tant
que nous estions dans la cabane, c'est à dire qu'il falloit mettre la
[190] bouche contre terre pour pouuoir respirer: car encor que les
Sauuages soient accoustumez à ce tourment, si est-ce que par fois il
redoubloit auec telle violence, qu'ils estoient contraincts aussi bien
que moy de se coucher sur le ventre, & de manger quasi la terre pour
ne point boire la fumée: i'ay quelquefois demeuré plusieurs heures en
ceste situation, notamment dans les plus grands froids, & lors qu'il
neigeoit: car c'estoit en ces temps là que la fumée nous assailloit
auec plus de fureur, nous saisissant à la gorge, aux naseaux, &
aux yeux: que ce breuuage est amer! que ceste odeur est forte! que
ceste vapeur est nuisible à la veuë! i'ay creu plusieurs fois que ie
m'en allois estre aueugle, les yeux me cuisoient comme feu, ils me
pleuroient ou distilloient comme vn alambic, ie ne voyois plus rien que
confusément, à la façon de ce bon homme, qui disoit, _video homines
velut arbores ambulantes_. Ie disois les Pseaumes de mon Breuiaire
comme ie pouuois, les sçachans à demy par coeur, i'attendois que la
douleur me donnast vn peu de relasche pour reciter les leçons, & quãd
[191] ie venois à les lire elles me sembloient écrites en lettres de
feu, ou d'écarlatte, i'ay souuent fermé mon liure n'y voyant rien que
confusion qui me blessoit la veüe.

    But, as to the smoke, I confess to you that it is martyrdom. It
    almost killed me, and made me weep continually, although I had
    neither grief nor sadness in my heart. It sometimes grounded all
    of us who were in the cabin; that is, it caused us to place our
    [190] mouths against the earth in order to breathe. For, although
    the Savages were accustomed to this torment, yet occasionally
    it became so dense that they, as well as I, were compelled to
    prostrate themselves, and as it were to eat the earth, so as not
    to drink the smoke. I have sometimes remained several hours in
    this position, especially during the most severe cold and when it
    snowed; for it was then the smoke assailed us with the greatest
    fury, seizing us by the throat, nose, and eyes. How bitter is this
    drink! How strong its odor! How hurtful to the eyes are its fumes!
    I sometimes thought I was going blind; my eyes burned like fire,
    they wept or distilled drops like an alembic; I no longer saw
    anything distinctly, like the good man who said, _video homines
    velut arbores ambulantes_. I repeated the Psalms of my Breviary as
    best I could, knowing them half by heart, and waited until the pain
    might relax a little to recite the lessons; and when [191] I came
    to read them they seemed written in letters of fire, or of scarlet;
    I have often closed my book, seeing things so confusedly that it
    injured my sight.

Quelqu'vn me dira que ie deuois sortir de ce trou enfumé, & prendre
l'air, & ie luy répondray, que l'air estoit ordinairement en ce
temps-là si froid, que les arbres qui ont la peau plus dure que celle
de l'homme, & le corps plus solide, ne luy pouuoient resister, se
fendans iusques au coeur faisans vn bruit comme d'vn mousquet en
s'éclatans: ie sortois neantmoins quelque fois de ceste taniere,
fuyant la rage de la fumée pour me mettre à la mercy du froid, contre
lequel ie taschois de m'armer, m'enueloppant de ma couuerture comme vn
Irlandois, & en cet equipage assis sur la neige, ou sur quelque arbre
abbatu, ie recitois mes Heures: le mal estoit que la neige n'auoit pas
plus de pitié de mes yeux que la fumée.

    Some one will tell me that I ought to have gone out from this smoky
    hole to get some fresh air; and I answer him that the air was
    usually so cold at those times that the trees, which have a harder
    skin than man, and a more solid body, could not stand it, splitting
    even to the core, and making a noise like the report of a musket.
    Nevertheless, I occasionally emerged from this den, fleeing the
    rage of the smoke to place myself at the mercy of the cold, against
    which I tried to arm myself by wrapping up in my blanket like an
    Irishman; and in this garb, seated upon the snow or a fallen tree,
    I recited my Hours; the trouble was, the snow had no more pity upon
    my eyes than the smoke.

Pour les chiens que i'ay dit estre l'vne des incommoditez des maisons
des Sauuages, ie ne sçay si ie les dois blasmer: car ils m'ont rendu
par fois de bons [192] seruices, vray qu'ils tiroient de moy la mesme
courtoisie qu'ils me prestoient, si bien que nous nous entr'aydions les
vns les autres, faisans l'emblesme de _mutuum auxilium_, ces pauures
bestes ne pouuans subsister à l'air, hors la cabane se venoient coucher
tantost sur mes épaules, tantost sur mes pieds, & comme ie n'auois
qu'vne simple castalogne pour me seruir de mattelas & de couuerture
tout ensemble, ie n'estois pas marry de cet abry, leurs rendans
volontiers vne partie de la chaleur que ie tirois d'eux: il est vray
que comme ils estoient grands & en grand nombre, ils me pressoient par
fois & m'importunoient si fort, qu'en me donnant vn peu de chaleur, ils
me déroboient tout mon sommeil, cela estoit cause que bien souuant ie
les chassois, en quoy il m'arriua certaine nuict vn traict de confusion
& de risée: car vn Sauuage s'estant ietté sur moy en dormant, moy
croyant que ce fust vn chien, rencontrant en main vn baston, ie le
frappe m'écriant, _Aché, Aché_, qui sont les mots dont ils se seruent
pour chasser les chiens, mon homme s'éueille bien estonné pensant que
[193] tout fut perdu; mais s'estant pris garde d'où venoient les coups:
tu n'as point d'esprit, me dit-il, ce n'est pas vn chien, c'est moy:
à ces paroles ie ne sçay qui resta le plus estonné de nous deux, ie
quittay doucement mon baston, bien marry de l'auoir trouué si pres de
moy.

    As to the dogs, which I have mentioned as one of the discomforts
    of the Savages' houses, I do not know that I ought to blame them,
    for they have sometimes rendered me good [192] service. True,
    they exacted from me the same courtesy they gave, so that we
    reciprocally aided each other, illustrating the idea of _mutuum
    auxilium_. These poor beasts, not being able to live outdoors,
    came and lay down sometimes upon my shoulders, sometimes upon my
    feet, and as I only had one blanket to serve both as covering and
    mattress, I was not sorry for this protection, willingly restoring
    to them a part of the heat which I drew from them. It is true that,
    as they were large and numerous, they occasionally crowded and
    annoyed me so much, that in giving me a little heat they robbed me
    of my sleep, so that I very often drove them away. In doing this
    one night, there happened to me a little incident which caused some
    confusion and laughter; for, a Savage having thrown himself upon me
    while asleep, I thought it was a dog, and finding a club at hand, I
    hit him, crying out, _Aché, Aché_, the words they use to drive away
    the dogs. My man woke up greatly astonished, thinking that [193]
    all was lost; but having discovered whence came the blows, "Thou
    hast no sense," he said to me, "it is not a dog, it is I." At these
    words I do not know who was the more astonished of us two; I gently
    dropped my club, very sorry at having found it so near me.

Retournons à nos chiens, ces animaux estans affamez, d'autant qu'ils
n'auoient pas de quoy mãger non plus que nous, ne faisoient qu'aller
& venir, roder par tout dans la cabane: or comme on est souuẽt couché
aussi bien qu'assis dans ces maisons d'écorce, ils nous passoient
souuent & sur la face & sur le ventre, & si souuent, & auec telle
importunité, qu'estant las de crier & de les chasser, ie me couurois
quelque fois la face, puis ie leur donnois liberté de passer par où
ils voudroient: s'il arriuoit qu'on leur iettait vn os, aussitoit
s'estoit de courre apres à qui l'auroit, culbutans tous ceux qu'ils
rencontroient assis, s'ils ne se tenoient bien fermes; ils m'ont par
fois renuersé & mon écuelle d'écorce, & tout ce qui estoit dedans sur
ma sotane. Ie sousriois quand il y suruenoit quelque querelle parmy-eux
lors que [194] nous disnions: car il n'y auoit celuy qui ne tint son
plat à deux belles mains contre la terre, qui seruoit de table, de
siege & de lict, & aux hommes & aux chiens: c'est de là que prouenoit
la grãde incommodité que nous receuions de ces animaux, qui portoient
le nez dans nos écuelles plustost que nous n'y portions la main. C'est
assez dit des incommoditez des maisons des Sauuages, parlons de leurs
viures.

    Let us return to our dogs. These animals, being famished, as they
    have nothing to eat, any more than we, do nothing but run to and
    fro gnawing at everything in the cabin. Now as we were as often
    lying down as sitting up in these bark houses, they frequently
    walked over our faces and stomachs; and so often and persistently,
    that, being tired of shouting at them and driving them away, I
    would sometimes cover my face and then give them liberty to go
    where they wanted. If any one happened to throw them a bone, there
    was straightway a race for it, upsetting all whom they encountered
    sitting, unless they held themselves firmly. They have often upset
    for me my bark dish, and all it contained, in my gown. I was amused
    whenever there was a quarrel among them at [194] our dinner table,
    for there was not one of us who did not hold his plate down with
    both hands on the ground, which serves as table, seat, and bed
    both to men and dogs. From this custom arose the great annoyance
    we experienced from these animals, who thrust their noses into our
    bark plates before we could get our hands in. I have said enough
    about the inconveniences of the Savages' houses, let us speak of
    their food.

Au commencement que ie fus auec eux, comme ils ne salent ny leurs
boüillons ny leurs viandes, & que la saleté mesme fait leur cuisine, ie
ne pouuois manger de leur salmigondies, ie me contentois d'vn peu de
galette & d'vn peu d'anguille bouccanée, iusques là que mon hoste me
tançoit de ce que ie mangeois si peu, ie m'affamay deuant que la famine
nous acceüillist, cependant nos Sauuages faisoient tous les iours des
festins, en sorte que nous nous vismes en peu de temps sans pain, sans
farine, & sans anguilles, & sans aucun moyen d'estre secourus: car
outre que nous estions fort auant dans les bois, & que nous fussions
morts mille fois deuant [195] que d'arriuer aux demeures des François,
nous hyuernions de là le grãd fleuue qu'on ne peut trauerser en ce
temps là pour le grand nombre de glaces qu'il charie incessamment, &
qui mettroient en pieces non seulement vne chalouppe, mais vn grand
vaisseau, pour la chasse, comme les neiges n'estoient pas profondes à
proportion des autres années, ils ne pouuoiẽt pas prendre l'Elan, si
bien qu'ils n'apportoient que quelques Castors, & quelques Porcs epics,
mais en si petit nombre, & si peu souuent, que cela seruoit plustost
pour ne point mourir que pour viure. Mon hoste me disoit dans ces
grandes disettes. _Chibiné_ aye l'ame dure resiste à la faim, tu seras
par fois deux iours, quelque fois trois ou quatre sans manger, ne te
laisse point abbattre, prẽd courage, quand la neige sera venuë nous
mangerons: nostre Seigneur n'a pas voulu qu'ils fussent si long temps
sans rien prendre; mais pour l'ordinaire nous mangions vne fois en deux
iours, voire assez souuent ayans mangé vn Castor le matin, le lendemain
au soir nous mangions vn Porc-epic gros comme [196] vn Cochon de laict:
c'estoit peu à dixneuf personnes que nous estions, il est vray; mais
ce peu suffisoit pour ne point mourir. Quand ie pouuois auoir vne peau
d'Anguille pour ma iournée sur la fin de nos viures, ie me tenois pour
bien déieuné, bien disné, & bien soupé.

    When I first went away with them, as they salt neither their
    soup nor their meat, and as filth itself presides over their
    cooking, I could not eat their mixtures, and contented myself
    with a few sea biscuit and smoked eel; until at last my host took
    me to task because I ate so little, saying that I would starve
    myself before the famine overtook us. Meanwhile our Savages had
    feasts every day, so that in a very short time we found ourselves
    without bread, without flour, without eels, and without any means
    of helping ourselves. For besides being very far in the woods,
    where we would have died a thousand times before [195] reaching
    the French settlement, we were wintering on the other side of the
    great river, which cannot be crossed in this season on account of
    the great masses of ice which are continually floating about, and
    which would crush not only a small boat but even a great ship. As
    to the chase, the snows not being deep in comparison with those
    of other years, they could not take the Elk, and so brought back
    only some Beavers and Porcupines, but in so small a number and so
    seldom that they kept us from dying rather than helped us to live.
    My host said to me during this time of scarcity, "_Chibiné_, harden
    thy soul, resist hunger; thou wilt be sometimes two, sometimes
    three or four, days without food: do not let thyself be cast down,
    take courage; when the snow comes, we shall eat." It was not our
    Lord's will that they should be so long without capturing anything;
    but we usually had something to eat once in two days,--indeed, we
    very often had a Beaver in the morning, and in the evening of the
    next day a Porcupine as big as [196] a sucking Pig. This was not
    much for nineteen of us, it is true, but this little sufficed to
    keep us alive. When I could have, toward the end of our supply of
    food, the skin of an Eel for my day's fare, I considered that I had
    breakfasted, dined, and supped well.

Au commencement ie m'estois seruy d'vne de ces peaux pour refaire vne
sotane de toille que i'auois sur moy, ayãt oublié de porter des pieces,
mais voyãt que la faim me pressoit si fort, ie mangeay mes pieces, &
si ma sotane eust esté de mesme estoffe, ie vous répond que ie l'eusse
rapportée bien courte en la maison: ie mangeois bien les vieilles
peaux d'Orignac, qui sont bien plus dures que les peaux d'Anguilles,
i'allois dans les bois brouter le bout des arbres & ronger les écorces
plus tendres, comme ie remarqueray dans le iournal. Les Sauuages qui
nous estoient voisins, souffroient encore plus que nous, quelques-vns
nous venans voir, nous disoient que leurs camarades estoient morts de
faim, i'en vy qui n'auoient mangé qu'vne fois en cinq iours, & qui se
tenoient bien heureux quand ils trouuoient de quoy [197] disner au bout
de deux, ils estoient faits comme des squelets, n'ayans plus que la
peau sur les os, nous faisions par fois de bons repas; mais pour vn bon
disner, nous nous passions trois fois de souper. Vn ieune Sauuage de
nostre cabane, mourant de faim, comme ie diray au Chapitre suiuant, ils
me demandoient souuent si ie ne craignois point, si ie n'auois point
peur de la mort, & voyans que ie me monstrois assez asseuré ils s'en
estonnoient, notamment en certain temps que ie les vis quasi tomber
dans le desespoir. Quand ils viennent iusques-là, ils ioüent pour ainsi
dire à sauue qui peut, ils iettent leurs écorces, & leur bagage, ils
abandonnent les vns les autres, & perdans le soin du public, c'est à
qui trouuera de quoy viure pour soy; alors les enfans, les femmes, en
vn mot ceux qui ne sçauroient chasser meurent de froid & de faim, s'ils
en fussent venus à ceste extremité ie serois mort des premiers.

    At first, I had used one of these skins to patch the cloth gown
    that I wore, as I forgot to bring some pieces with me; but, when I
    was so sorely pressed with hunger, I ate my pieces; and if my gown
    had been made of the same stuff, I assure you I would have brought
    it back home much shorter than it was. Indeed, I ate old Moose
    skins, which are much tougher than those of the Eel; I went about
    through the woods biting the ends of the branches, and gnawing the
    more tender bark, as I shall relate in the journal. Our neighboring
    Savages suffered still more than we did, some of them coming to
    see us, and telling us that their comrades had died of hunger. I
    saw some who had eaten only once in five days, and who considered
    themselves very well off if they found something [197] to dine
    upon at the end of two days; they were reduced to skeletons,
    being little more than skin and bones. We occasionally had some
    good meals; but for every good dinner we went three times without
    supper. When a young Savage of our cabin was dying of hunger, as
    I shall relate in the following Chapter, they often asked me if
    I was not afraid, if I had no fear of death; and seeing me quite
    firm, they were astonished, on one occasion in particular, when I
    saw them almost falling into a state of despair. When they reach
    this point, they play, so to speak, at "save himself who can;"
    throwing away their bark and baggage, deserting each other, and
    abandoning all interest in the common welfare, each one strives to
    find something for himself. Then the children, women, and for that
    matter all those who cannot hunt, die of cold and hunger. If they
    had reached this extremity, I would have been among the first to
    die.

Voila ce qu'il faut preuoir auant que de se mettre à leur suitte:
car encor qu'ils ne soient pas tous les ans pressez de ceste famine,
ils en courent tous les [198] ans les dangers puis qu'ils n'ont
point à manger, ou fort peu, s'il n'y a beaucoup de neige & beaucoup
d'Orignaux, ce qui n'arriue pas tousiours.

    So these are the things that must be expected before undertaking
    to follow them; for, although they may not be pressed with famine
    every year, yet they run the risk every [198] winter of not having
    food, or very little, unless there are heavy snowfalls and a great
    many Moose, which does not always happen.

Que si vous me demandez maintenant quels estoient mes sentimens dans
les afres de la mort, & d'vne mort si langoureuse comme est celle qui
prouient de la famine, ie vous diray que i'ay de la peine à répondre;
neantmoins afin que ceux qui liront ce Chapitre, n'apprehendent point
de nous venir secourir, ie puis asseurer auec verité que ce temps
de famine m'a esté vn temps d'abondance. Ayant recogneu que nous
commençions à floter entre l'esperance de la vie & la crainte de la
mort, ie fis mon conte que Dieu m'auoit condamné à mourir de faim pour
mes pechez, & baisant mille fois la main qui auoit minuté ma sentence,
i'en attendois l'execution auec vne paix & une ioye qu'on peut bien
sentir, mais qu'on ne peut décrire: ie confesse qu'on souffre, & qu'il
se faut resoudre à la Croix: mais Dieu fait gloire d'ayder vne ame
quand elle n'est plus secouruë des creatures. Poursuiuons nostre chemin.

    Now if you were to ask me what my feelings were in the terrors of
    death, and of a death so lingering as is that which comes from
    hunger, I will say that I can hardly tell. Nevertheless, in order
    that those who read this Chapter may not have a dread of coming
    over to our assistance, I can truly say that this time of famine
    was for me a time of abundance. When I realized that we began to
    hover between the hope of life and the fear of death, I made up
    my mind that God had condemned me to die of starvation for my
    sins; and, a thousand times kissing the hand that had written
    my sentence, I awaited the execution of it with a peace and joy
    which may be experienced, but cannot be described. I confess that
    one suffers, and that he must reconcile himself to the Cross; but
    God glories in helping a soul when it is no longer aided by his
    creatures. Let us continue on our way.

[199] Apres ceste famine nous eusmes quelques bons iours, la neige
qui n'estoit que trop haute pour auoir froid, mais trop basse pour
prendre l'Orignac, s'estant grandement accreuë sur la fin de Ianuier,
nos Chasseurs prirent quelques Orignaux, dont ils firent seicherie: or
soit que mon intemperance, ou que ce boucan dur comme du bois, & sale
comme les ruës fut contraire à mon estomach, ie tombay malade au beau
commencement de Feurier, me voila donc contraint de demeurer tousiours
couché sur la terre froide, ce n'estoit pas pour me guerir des
tranchées fort sensibles qui me tourmentoient, & qui me contraignoient
de sortir à toute heure iour & nuict, m'engageant à chaque sortie
dedans les neiges iusques aux genoux, & parfois quasi iusques à la
ceinture, notamment au commencement que nous nous estions cabanez en
quelque endroit, ces douleurs sensibles me durerent enuiron huict ou
dix iours, comme aussi vn grand mal d'estomach, & vne foiblesse de
coeur qui se répandoit par tout le corps, ie guary de ceste maladie,
non pas tout à fait: car ie ne fis [200] que traisner iusques à la
my-Caresme que le mal me reprit. Ie dis cecy pour faire voir le peu de
secours qu'on doit attendre des Sauuages quand on est malade: estant vn
iour pressé de la soif ie demanday vn peu d'eau, on me répondit qu'il
n'y en auoit point & qu'on me donneroit de la neige fonduë si i'en
voulois: comme ce breuuage estoit contraire à mon mal, ie fis entendre
à mon hoste que i'auois veu vn lac nõ pas loing de là, & que i'en eusse
bien voulu auoir vn peu d'eau, il fit la sourde oreille à cause que le
chemin estoit vn peu fascheux, si bien que non seulement ceste fois;
mais encore en tous les endroits que quelque fleuue ou quelque ruisseau
estoit vn peu trop esloigné de nostre cabane, il falloit boire de ceste
neige fonduë dans vne chaudiere, dont le cuiure estoit moins épais que
la saleté: qui voudra sçauoir l'amertume de ce breuuage qu'il le tire
d'vn vaisseau sortant de la fumée & qu'il en gouste.

    [199] After this famine, we had some good days. The snow, which had
    been only too deep to be cold, but too shallow to take the Moose,
    having greatly increased toward the end of January, our Hunters
    captured some Moose, which they dried. Now either on account of my
    lack of moderation, or because this meat, dried as hard as wood and
    as dirty as the street, did not agree with my stomach, I fell sick
    in the very beginning of February. So behold me obliged to remain
    all the time lying upon the cold ground; this did not tend to cure
    me of the severe cramps that tormented me and compelled me to go
    out at all hours of the day and night, plunging me every time in
    snow up to my knees and sometimes almost up to my waist, especially
    when we had first begun our encampment in any one place. These
    severe attacks lasted about eight or ten days, and were accompanied
    by a pain in the stomach, and a weakness in the heart, which spread
    through my whole body. I recovered from this sickness, but not
    entirely, for I was [200] only dragging myself around at mid-Lent,
    when I was again seized with this disease. I tell the following in
    order to show how little help may be expected from the Savages when
    a person is sick. Being very thirsty one day, I asked for a little
    water; they said there was none, and that they would give me some
    melted snow if I wanted it. As this drink was bad for my disease, I
    made my host understand that I had seen a lake not far from there,
    and that I would like very much to have some of that water. He
    pretended not to hear, because the road was somewhat bad; and it
    happened thus not only this time, but at any place where the river
    or brook was a little distance from our cabin. We had to drink this
    snow melted in a kettle whose copper was less thick than the dirt;
    if any one wishes to know how bitter this drink is, let him take
    some from a kettle just out of the smoke and taste it.

Quant à la nourriture, ils partagent le malade comme les autres; s'ils
prennent de la chair fresche, ils luy en donnent sa part s'il en veut,
s'il ne la mange, [201] pour lors on ne se met pas en peine de luy
en garder vn petit morceau quand il voudra manger, on luy donnera de
ce qu'il y aura pour lors en la cabane, c'est à dire du boucan & non
pas du meilleur: car ils le reseruent pour les festins, si bien qu'vn
pauure malade est contraint bien souuent de manger parmy eux, ce qui
luy feroit horreur dans la santé mesme s'il estoit auec nos François.
Vne ame bien alterée de la soif du Fils de Dieu, ie veux dire des
souffrances, trouueroit icy dequoy se rassasier.

    As to the food, they divide with a sick man just as with the
    others; if they have fresh meat they give him his share, if he
    wants it, but if he does not eat it [201] then, no one will take
    the trouble to keep a little piece for him to eat when he wants it;
    they will give him some of what they happen to have at the time in
    the cabin, namely, smoked meat, and nothing better, for they keep
    the best for their feasts. So a poor invalid is often obliged to
    eat among them what would horrify him even in good health if he
    were with our Frenchmen. A soul very thirsty for the Son of God, I
    mean for suffering, would find enough here to satisfy it.

Il me reste encore à parler de leur conuersation, pour faire
entierement cognoistre ce qu'on peut souffrir auec ce peuple. Ie
m'estois mis en la compagnie de mon hoste & du Renegat, à condition
que nous n'hyuerneriõs point auec le Sorcier, que ie cognoissois pour
tres-meschant homme, ils m'auoient accordé ces conditions, mais ils
furent infidelles, ne gardans ny l'vne ny l'autre: ils m'engagerent
donc auec ce pretendu Magicien, comme ie diray cy apres; or ce
miserable homme, & la fumée m'ont esté les deux plus grands tourmens
[202] que i'aye enduré parmy ces Barbares: ny le froid, ny le chaud,
ny l'incommodité des chiens, ny coucher à l'air, ny dormir sur vn lict
de terre, ny la posture qu'il faut tousiours tenir dans leurs cabanes,
se ramassans en peloton, ou se couchans, ou s'asseans sans siege &
sans mattelas, ny la faim, ny la soif, ny la pauuerté & saleté de leur
boucan, ny la maladie, tout cela ne m'a semblé que ieu à comparaison de
la fumée & de la malice du Sorcier, auec lequel i'ay tousiours esté en
très mauuaise intelligence pour les raisons suiuantes.

    It remains for me yet to speak of their conversation, in order to
    make it clearly understood what there is to suffer among these
    people. I had gone in company with my host and the Renegade, on
    condition that we should not pass the winter with the Sorcerer,
    whom I knew as a very wicked man. They had granted my conditions,
    but they were faithless, and kept not one of them, involving me in
    trouble with this pretended Magician, as I shall relate hereafter.
    Now this wretched man and the smoke were the two greatest trials
    [202] that I endured among these Barbarians. The cold, heat,
    annoyance of the dogs, sleeping in the open air and upon the bare
    ground; the position I had to assume in their cabins, rolling
    myself up in a ball or crouching down or sitting without a seat or
    a cushion; hunger, thirst, the poverty and filth of their smoked
    meats, sickness,--all these, things were merely play to me in
    comparison to the smoke and the malice of the Sorcerer, with whom I
    have always been on a very bad footing, for the following reasons:--

Premierement, pource que m'ayant inuité d'hyuerner auec luy, ie
l'auois éconduy, dequoy il se ressentoit fort, voyant que ie faisois
plus d'estat de mon hoste, son cadet, que de luy.

    First, because, when he invited me to winter with him, I refused;
    and he resented this greatly, because he saw that I cared more for
    my host, his younger brother, than I did for him.

Secondement, pource que ie ne pouuois assouuir sa cõuoitise, ie n'auois
rien qu'il ne me demandast, il m'a fait fort souuent quitter mon
manteau de dessus mes espaules pour s'en couurir: or ne pouuant pas
satisfaire à toutes ses demandes, il me voyoit de mauuais oeil, voire
mesme quand ie luy eusse donné tout le peu que i'auois, ie n'eusse
peu gagner [203] son amitié: car nous auions bien d'autres sujets de
diuorce.

    Second, because I could not gratify his covetousness. I had nothing
    that he did not ask me for, often taking my mantle off my shoulders
    to put it on his own. Now as I could not satisfy all his demands,
    he looked upon me with an evil eye; indeed, even if I had given him
    all the little I had, I could not have gained [203] his friendship,
    because we were at variance on other subjects.

En trois[i]esme lieu, voyant qu'il faisoit du Prophete, amusant ce
peuple par mille sottises qu'il inuente à mon aduis tous les iours,
ie ne laissois perdre aucune occasion de le conuaincre de niaiserie
& puerilité, mettant au iour l'impertinence de ses superstitions:
or c'estoit luy arracher l'ame du corps par violence: car comme il
ne sçauroit plus chasser, il fait plus que iamais du Prophete & du
Magicien pour conseruer son credit, & pour auoir les bons morceaux, si
bien qu'esbranlant son authorité qui se va perdant tous les iours, ie
le touchois à la prunelle de l'œil, & luy rauissois les delices de son
Paradis, qui sont les plaisirs de la gueule.

    In the third place, seeing that he acted the Prophet, amusing these
    people by a thousand absurdities, which he invented, in my opinion,
    every day, I did not lose any opportunity of convincing him of
    their nonsense and childishness, exposing the senselessness of his
    superstitions. Now this was like tearing his soul out of his body;
    for, as he could no longer hunt, he acted the Prophet and Magician
    more than ever before, in order to preserve his credit, and to get
    the dainty pieces. So that in shaking his authority, which was
    diminishing daily, I was touching the apple of his eye and wresting
    from him the delights of his Paradise, which are the pleasures of
    his jaws.

En quatriesme lieu, se voulant recrer à mes dépens, il me faisoit par
fois escrire en sa langue des choses sales, m'assurant qu'il n'y auoit
rien de mauuais, puis il me faisoit prononcer ces impudences, que ie
n'entendois pas deuant les Sauuages: quelques femmes m'ayans aduerty
de ceste malice, ie luy dis que ie ne salirois plus mon papier ny ma
[204] bouche, de ces vilaines paroles, il ne laissa pas de me commander
de lire en la presence de toute la cabane, & de quelques Sauuages qui
estoient suruenus, quelque chose qu'il m'auoit dicté, ie luy répondis
que l'Apostat m'en donnat l'interpretation, & puis que ie lirois, ce
Renegat refusant de le faire, ie refusay aussi de lire, le Sorcier me
le commande auec empire, c'est à dire auec de grosses paroles, ie le
prie au commencement auec grande douceur de m'en dispenser: mais comme
il ne vouloit pas estre éconduit deuant les Sauuages, il me presse fort
& me fait presser par mon hoste qui fit du fasché: enfin recognoissant
que mes excuses n'auoiẽt plus de lieu, ie luy parle d'vn accent fort
haut, & apres luy auoir reproché ses lubricitez, ie luy addresse ces
paroles: Me voicy en ton pouuoir, tu me peux massacrer, mais tu ne
sçaurois me contraindre de proferer des paroles impudiques: elles ne
sont pas telles, me dit-il, Pourquoy donc, luy dis-je, ne m'en veut-on
pas donner l'interpretation? il sortit de ceste meslée fort vlceré.

    In the fourth place, wishing to have sport at my expense, he
    sometimes made me write vulgar things in his language, assuring
    me there was nothing bad in them, then made me pronounce these
    shameful words, which I did not understand, in the presence of the
    Savages. Some women having warned me of this trick, I told him I
    would no longer soil my paper nor my [204] lips with these vile
    words. He insisted, however, that I should read before all those
    of the cabin, and some Savages who had come thither, something he
    had dictated to me. I answered him that, if the Apostate would
    interpret them to me, I would read them. That Renegade refusing to
    do this, I refused to read. The Sorcerer commanded me imperiously,
    that is, with high words, and I at first begged him gently to
    excuse me; but as he did not wish to be thwarted before the
    Savages, he persisted in urging me, and had my host, who pretended
    to be vexed, urge me also. At last, aware that my excuses were of
    no avail, I spoke to him peremptorily, and, after reproaching him
    for his lewdness, I addressed him in these words: "Thou hast me in
    thy power, thou canst murder me, but thou canst not force me to
    repeat indecent words." "They are not such," he said. "Why then,"
    said I, "will they not interpret them to me?" He emerged from this
    conflict very much exasperated.

En cinquiesme lieu, voyant que mon [205] hoste m'aymoit, il eut peur
que cet amour ne le priuast de quelque friand morceau, ie taschay de
luy oster ceste apprehension, témoignant publiquement que ie ne viuois
pas pour manger, mais que ie mangeois pour viure, & qu'il importoit
peu quoy qu'on me donnast, pourueu que i'en eusse assez pour ne point
mourir: il me repartit nettement, qu'il n'estoit pas de mon aduis, mais
qu'il faisoit profession d'estre friand, d'aymer les bons morceaux, &
qu'on l'obligeoit fort quand on luy en presentoit: or iaçoit que mon
hoste ne luy donnast aucun sujet de craindre en cet endroit, si est ce
qu'il m'attaquoit quasi en tous les repas, comme s'il eut eu peur de
perdre la preseance, ceste apprehension augmentoit sa haine.

    In the fifth place, seeing that my [205] host was greatly attached
    to me, he was afraid that this friendliness might deprive him of
    some choice morsel. I tried to relieve him of this apprehension
    by stating publicly that I did not live to eat, but that I ate to
    live; and that it mattered little what they gave me, provided it
    was enough to keep me alive. He retorted sharply that he was not of
    my opinion, but that he made a profession of being dainty; that he
    was fond of the good pieces, and was very much obliged when people
    gave them to him. Now although my host gave him no cause for fear
    in this direction, yet he attacked me at almost every meal as if he
    were afraid of losing his precedence. This apprehension increased
    his hatred.

En sixiesme lieu, comme il voyoit que les Sauuages des autres cabanes
me portoient quelque respect, cognoissant d'ailleurs que i'estois grand
ennemy de ses impostures, & que si i'entrois dans l'esprit de ses
oüailles, que ie le perdrois de fond en comble, il faisoit son possible
pour me détruire, & pour me rendre ridicule en la creance de son peuple.

    In the sixth place, when he saw that the Savages of the other
    cabins showed me some respect, knowing besides that I was a great
    enemy of his impostures, and that, if I gained influence among his
    flock, I would ruin him completely, he did all he could to destroy
    me and to make me appear ridiculous in the eyes of his people.

[206] En septiesme lieu, adioustez à tout cecy l'auersion que luy &
tous les Sauuages de Tadoussac ont eu iusques icy des François depuis
le commerce des Anglois, & coniecturez quel traictement ie peux auoir
receu de ces Barbares, qui adorent ce miserable Sorcier, contre lequel
le plus souuent i'auois guerre declarée. I'ay creu cent fois que ie ne
sortirois iamais de ceste meslée que par les portes de la mort. Il m'a
traité fort indignement, il est vray, mais ie m'estonne qu'il n'a pis
fait, veu qu'il est idolatre de ces superstitiõs, que ie combattois
de toutes mes forces. De raconter par le menu toutes ses attaques,
ses risées, ses gausseries, ses mépris, ie ferois vn Liure pour vn
Chapitre, suffit de dire qu'il s'attaquoit mesme par fois à Dieu pour
me déplaire, & qu'il s'efforçoit de me rendre la risée des petits &
des grands, me décriant dans les autres cabanes aussi bien que dans la
nostre, il n'eut neantmoins iamais le credit d'animer contre moy les
Sauuages nos voisins, ils baissoient la teste quand ils entendoient
les benedictiõs qu'il me donnoit. Pour les domestiques incitez par
[207] son exemple, & appuyez de son authorité, ils me chargeoient
incessamment de mille brocards, & de mille injures, ie me suis veu en
tel estat, que pour ne les aigrir, ou ne leur donner occasion de se
fascher, ie passois les iours entiers sans ouurir la bouche. Croyez
moy si ie n'ay rapporté autre fruict des Sauuages, i'ay pour le moins
appris beaucoup d'injures en leur langue, ils me disoient à tout
bout de champ _eca titou, eca titou nama_ k_hitirinisin_, tais toy,
tais toy, tu n'as point d'esprit. _Achineou_, il est orgueilleux,
_Moucachtechiou_, il fait du compagnon, _sasegau_ il est superbe,
_cou attimou_ il ressemble à vn Chien, _cou mascoua_ il ressemble à
vn Ours, _cou ouabouchou ouichtoui_ il est barbu comme vn Lieure,
_attimonai ou_k_himau_ il est Capitaine des Chiens, _cou oucousimas
ouchtigonan_ il a la teste faite comme vn citroüille, _matchiriniou_
il est difforme, il est laid, k_hichcouebeon_ il est yure; voila les
couleurs dont ils me peignoient, & de quantité d'autres que i'obmets:
le bon est qu'ils ne pensoient pas quelquesfois que ie les entendisse,
& me voyans sous-rire ils demeuroient confus, du moins ceux qui ne
chantoiẽt [208] ces airs que pour complaire au Sorcier: les enfans
m'estoient fort importuns me faisans mille niches, m'imposans silence
quand ie voulois parler. Quand mon hoste estoit au logis i'auois
quelque relache, & quand le Sorcier s'absentoit i'estois dans la bonace
maniant les grands & les petits quasi comme ie voulois. Voila vne bonne
partie des choses qu'on doit souffrir parmy ces peuples: cecy ne doit
épouuenter personne, les bons soldats s'animent à la veuë de leur sang
& de leurs playes, Dieu est plus grand que nostre cœur, on ne tombe pas
tousiours dans la famine, on ne rencontre pas tousiours des Sorciers,
ou des iongleurs de l'humeur de celuy-cy: en vn mot si nous pouuions
sçauoir la langue & la reduire en preceptes il ne seroit plus de besoin
de suiure ces Barbares. Pour les nations stables, d'où nous attendons
le plus grand fruict, nous pouuons auoir nostre cabane à part, & par
consequent nous deliurer d'vne partie de ces grandes incommoditez: mais
finissons ce Chapitre, autrement ie me voy en danger d'estre aussi
importun que cet imposteur [209] que ie recommande aux prieres de
tous ceux qui liront cecy, ie coucheray au Chapitre suiuant quelques
entretiens que i'ay eu auec luy, lors que nous estions dans quelque
tréue.

    [206] In the seventh place, add to all these things the aversion
    which he and all the Savages of Tadoussac had, up to the present
    time, against the French, since their intercourse with the
    English; and judge what treatment I might have received from these
    Barbarians, who adore this miserable Sorcerer, against whom I was
    generally in a state of open warfare. I thought a hundred times
    that I should only emerge from this conflict through the gates of
    death. He treated me shamefully, it is true; but I am astonished
    that he did not act worse, seeing that he is an idolater of those
    superstitions which I was fighting with all my might. To relate
    in detail all his attacks, gibes, sneers, and contempt, I would
    write a Book instead of a Chapter. Suffice it to say, that he
    sometimes even attacked God to displease me; and that he tried
    to make me the laughingstock of small and great, abusing me in
    the other cabins as well as in ours. He never had, however, the
    satisfaction of inciting our neighboring Savages against me; they
    merely hung their heads when they heard the blessings he showered
    upon me. As to the servants, instigated by [207] his example,
    and supported by his authority, they continually heaped upon me
    a thousand taunts and a thousand insults; and I was reduced to
    such a state, that, in order not to irritate them or give them
    any occasion to get angry, I passed whole days without opening my
    mouth. Believe me, if I have brought back no other fruits from the
    Savages, I have at least learned many of the insulting words of
    their language. They were saying to me at every turn, _eca titou,
    eca titou nama khitirinisin_, "Shut up, shut up, thou hast no
    sense." _Achineou_, "He is proud;" _Moucachtechiou_, "He plays the
    parasite;" _sasegau_, "He is haughty;" _cou attimou_, "He looks
    like a Dog;" _cou mascoua_, "He looks like a Bear;" _cou ouabouchou
    ouichtoui_, "He is bearded like a Hare;" _attimonai oukhimau_, "He
    is Captain of the Dogs;" _cou oucousimas ouchtigonan_, "He has a
    head like a pumpkin;" _matchiriniou_, "He is deformed, he is ugly;"
    _khichcouebeon_, "He is drunk." So these are the colors in which
    they paint me, and a multitude of others, which I omit. The best
    part of it was that they did not think sometimes that I understood
    them; and, seeing me smile, they became embarrassed,--at least,
    those who sang [208] these songs only to please the Sorcerer. The
    children were very troublesome, playing numberless tricks upon me,
    and imposing silence when I wanted to talk. When my host was at
    home, I had some rest; and, when the Sorcerer was absent, I was in
    smooth water, managing both great and small just as I wished. So
    these are some of the things that have to be endured among these
    people. This must not frighten any one; good soldiers are animated
    with courage at the sight of their blood and their wounds, and God
    is greater than our hearts. One does not always encounter a famine;
    one does not always meet Sorcerers or jugglers with so bad a temper
    as that one had; in a word, if we could understand the language,
    and reduce it to rules, there would be no more need of following
    these Barbarians. As to the stationary tribes, from which we expect
    the greatest fruit, we can have our cabins apart, and consequently
    be freed from many of these great inconveniences. But let us finish
    this Chapter; otherwise I see myself in danger of becoming as
    troublesome as that impostor, [209] whom I commend to the prayers
    of all those who will read this. I shall set down in the following
    Chapter some conversations I had with him when we were enjoying a
    truce.




CHAPITRE XIII.

CONTENANT VN IOURNAL DES CHOSES QUI N'ONT PEU ESTRE COUCHÉES SOUS LES
CHAPITRES PRECEDENS.


SI ce Chapitre estoit le premier dans ceste relation, il donneroit
quelque lumiere à tous les suiuans: mais ie luy ay donné le dernier
rang, pource qu'il se grossira tous les iours iusques au depart des
vaisseaux, par le rencontre des choses plus remarquables qui pourront
arriuer, n'estant qu'vn memoire en forme de Iournal, de tout ce qui n'a
peu estre logé dans les Chapitres precedens.

    CHAPTER XIII.

    CONTAINING A JOURNAL OF THINGS WHICH COULD NOT BE SET FORTH IN THE
    PRECEDING CHAPTERS.


    IF this Chapter were the first in this relation, it would throw
    some light upon all the following ones; but I have given it
    the last place, because it will continue to increase every day
    until the departure of the ships, through the occurrence of more
    noteworthy events which may happen. It is only a memoir, in the
    form of a Journal, of all the things that could not be given in the
    preceding Chapters.

Apres le depart de nos François qui sortirent de la rade de Kebec, le
16. d'Aoust de l'an passé 1633. pour tirer à Tadoussac, & de là en
France, cherchant [210] l'occasion de conuerser auec les sauuages,
pour apprendre leur langue; ie me transportay delà le grand fleuue de
sainct Laurens dans vne cabane de fueillages, & allois tous les iours à
l'escole dans celles des sauuages, qui nous enuironnoient, alleché par
l'esperance que i'auois, sinon de reduire le Renegat à son deuoir, du
moins de tirer de luy quelque cognoissance de sa langue: ce miserable
estoit nouuellement arriué de Tadoussac, où il s'estoit mõstré fort
contraire aux François, la faim qui pressoit l'Apostat & ses freres,
les fit monter à Kebec pour trouuer dequoy viure: estãs donc occupez à
leur pesche, i'estois fort souuent en leur cabane, inuitant par fois
le Renegat de venir vne autre fois hyuerner auec nous dans nostre
maisonnette, il s'y fust aysément accordé n'estoit qu'il auoit pris
femme d'vne autre nation que la sienne, & qu'il ne la pouuoit pas
renuoyer pour lors: voyant donc qu'il ne me pouuoit pas suiure, ie
luy iettay quelque propos de passer l'hyuer auec luy, mais sur ces
entrefaictes vne furieuse tempeste nous ayant battu en ruine certaine
nuict, le [211] Pere de Noüe, deux de nos hommes, & moy, dans nostre
cabane, ie fus saisy d'vne grosse fiéure, qui me fit chercher nostre
petite maisonnette pour y trouuer la santé.

    After the departure of our French,--who left the roadstead of Kebec
    on the 16th of August of last year, 1633, to sail for Tadoussac and
    thence to France,--in order to have [210] opportunity of conversing
    with the savages, and thus learning their language, I crossed the
    great saint Lawrence river to a cabin of branches, and went every
    day to school in those of the savages, who were encamped around
    me,--allured by my hopes, if not of bringing the Renegade to a
    sense of his duty, at least of drawing from him some knowledge of
    the language. This poor wretch had newly arrived from Tadoussac,
    where he had shown great repugnance to the French. The famine which
    afflicted this Apostate and his brothers caused them to come up to
    Kebec in search of food. Now, as they were occupied in fishing,
    I was very often in their cabin, and occasionally invited the
    Renegade to come again and pass the winter with us in our little
    house. He would very readily have agreed to this, had he not taken
    a wife from another nation than his own, and he could not send her
    away then. Therefore, seeing that he could not follow me, I threw
    out some hints about passing the winter with him; but during these
    negotiations, a furious tempest having one night swept down upon
    us, [211] Father de Noüe, two of our men, and myself, in our cabin,
    I was seized with a violent fever, which made me go back to our
    little home to recover my health.

L'Apostat ayant veu mon inclination traicta de mon dessein auec ses
freres, il en auoit trois, l'vn nommé Carigonan, & surnommé des
François l'Espousée, pource qu'il fait le grand comme vne espousée,
c'est le plus fameux sorcier, ou _manitousiou_, (c'est ainsi qu'ils
appellent ces iongleurs) de tout le pays, c'est celuy dont i'ay fort
parlé cy-dessus: l'autre se nómme Mestigoït, ieune homme âgé de quelque
trente-cinq ou quarante ans, braue Chasseur, & d'vn bon naturel: le
troisiesme se nommoit Sasousinat, c'est le plus heureux de tous: car
il est maintenant au Ciel, estãt mort bon Chrestien, comme ie l'ay
fait voir au Chapitre second. Le sorcier ayant appris du Renegat que
ie voulois hyuerner auec les Sauuages, me vint voir sur la fin de ma
maladie, & m'inuita de prendre sa cabane, me donnant pour raison qu'il
aymoit les bons, pource qu'il estoit bon, qu'il auoit [212] tousiours
esté bon dés sa tendre ieunesse: il me demanda si Iesus ne m'auoit
parlé de la maladie qui le trauailloit: viens, me disoit-il, auec
moy, & tu me feras viure maintenant: ie suis en danger de mourir: or
comme ie le cognoissois comme vn homme tres-impudent, ie l'éconduy
le plus doucement qu'il me fut possible, & tirant à part l'Apostat,
qui taschoit de m'auoir de son costé, ayant tesmoigné au Pere de
Noüe quelque desir de retourner à Dieu, ie luy dy que i'hyuernerois
volontiers auec luy, & auec son frere Mestigoït, à condition que nous
n'irions point de la le grand fleuue, que le sorcier ne seroit point
en nostre compagnie, & que luy qui entend bien la langue Françoise
m'enseigneroit: ils m'accorderent tous deux ces trois conditions, mais
ils n'en tindrent pas vne.

    The Apostate, seeing how I was inclined, discussed my plan with
    his brothers. There were three of them; one named Carigonan, and
    surnamed by the French the Married Man, because he made a great
    deal of the fact that he was married. He was the most famous
    sorcerer, or _manitousiou_, (thus they call these jugglers) of all
    the country; it is he of whom I have spoken above. The other was
    called Mestigoït, a young man about thirty-five or forty years
    of age, a brave Hunter, and endowed with a good disposition. The
    third was called Sasousinat, who is the happiest of all, for he is
    now in Heaven, having died a good Christian, as I stated in the
    second Chapter. The sorcerer, having learned from the Renegade
    that I wished to pass the winter with the Savages, came to see
    me toward the end of my sickness, and invited me to share his
    cabin,--giving me as his reason that he loved good men, because
    he himself was good, and had [212] always been so from his early
    youth. He asked me if Jesus had not spoken to me about the disease
    which tormented him. "Come," said he, "with me, and thou wilt make
    me live now, for I am in danger of dying." But as I knew him for
    a very impudent fellow, I refused him as gently as I could; and,
    taking the Apostate aside, who also wished to have me, as he had
    shown to Father de Noüe that he had some desire to return to God,
    I told him that I would be glad to winter with him and with his
    brother Mestigoït, on condition that we should not go across the
    great river, that the sorcerer should not be of our party, and that
    he, who understood the French language well, would teach me. They
    both agreed to these three conditions, but they did not fulfill one
    of them.

Le iour du départ estant pris, ie leur donnay pour mon viure vne
barrique de galette, que nous empruntasmes au magazin de ces Messieurs,
vn sac de farine, & des espics de bled d'Inde, quelques pruneaux,
& quelques naueaux, [213] ils me presserent fort de porter vn peu
de vin, mais ie n'y voulois point entendre, craignant qu'ils ne
s'enyurassent: toutesfois m'ayans promis qu'ils n'y toucheroient point
sans ma permission, & les ayant asseuré qu'au cas qu'ils le fissent,
que ie le ietterois dans la mer, ie suiuy l'inclination de ceux qui
me conseillerent d'en porter vn petit barillet; ie promis en outre à
Mestigoït que ie le prenois pour mon hoste: car l'Apostat n'est pas
Chasseur, & n'a aucune conduite, que ie luy ferois quelque present au
retour, comme i'ay fait: c'est l'attente de ces viures qui leur fait
desirer d'auoir vn François auec eux.

    On the day of our departure I gave them, for my support, a barrel
    of sea biscuit, which we borrowed from the storehouse of those
    Gentlemen, a sack of flour, some ears of Indian corn, some prunes,
    and some parsnips. [213] They urged me very strongly to take a
    little wine, but I did not wish to yield to them, fearing they
    would get drunk. However, having promised me they would not touch
    it without my permission, and having assured them that, if they
    did, I would throw it into the sea, I followed the advice of those
    who counseled me to carry a little barrel of it. Also I promised
    Mestigoït that I would take him for my host, for the Apostate is
    not a Hunter, and has no management; but I promised to make him a
    present upon our return, which I did. It was the expectation of
    this food which made them wish to have a Frenchman with them.

Ie m'embarquay donc en leur chalouppe, iustement le 18. d'Octobre,
faisant profession de petit écolier à mesme iour que i'auois autrefois
fait profession de maistre de nos écoles, estãt allé prendre congé de
Monsieur nostre Gouuerneur, il me recommãda tres-particulieremẽt aux
Sauuages, mon hoste luy repartit, si le Pere meurt ie mourray auec
luy, & iamais plus on ne me reuerra en ce pays icy, nos Frãçois me
tesmoignoient [214] tout plein de regret de mon depart, veu les dangers
esquels on s'engage en la fuitte de ces Barbares. Les Adieu faits de
part & d'autre, nous fismes voile enuiron les dix heures du matin,
i'estois seul de François auec vingt Sauuages, comptant les hommes, les
femmes, & les enfans, le vent & la marée nous fauorisans, nous allasmes
descendre au delà de l'Isle d'Orleans dans vne autre Isle nommée des
Sauuages _Ca ouahascoumaga_k_he_, ie ne sçay si la beauté du iour se
respandoit dessus ceste Isle, mais ie la trouuay fort agreable.

    So I embarked in their shallop on the 18th of October precisely,
    making profession as a little pupil on the same day that I had
    previously begun the profession of master of our schools. When I
    went to take leave of Monsieur our Governor, he recommended me
    very particularly to the Savages; and my host answered him, "If
    the Father dies, I will die with him, and you will never see me
    in this country again." Our French people showed [214] the most
    profound regret at my departure, knowing the dangers that one
    encounters in following these Barbarians. When all our Farewells
    were said, we set sail about ten o'clock in the morning. I was the
    only Frenchman, with twenty Savages, counting the men, women and
    children. The wind and tide were favorable, and we turned to go
    down past the Island of Orleans to another Island called by the
    Savages _Ca ouahascoumagakhe_; I know not whether it was the beauty
    of the day which spread over this Island, but I found it very
    pleasant.

Si tost que nous eusmes mis pied à terre, mon hoste prend vne
harquebuse qu'il a acheté des Anglois, & s'en va chercher nostre
souper: cependant les femmes se mettent à bastir la maison où nous
deuions loger. Or l'Apostat s'estãt pris garde que tout le monde estoit
occupé, s'en retourna à la chalouppe qui estoit à l'anchre, prit le
petit barillet de vin & en beut auec tel excez, que s'estãt enyuré
comme vne souppe, il tomba dedans l'eau, & se pensa noyer: enfin il
en sortit apres auoir bien barbotté, il s'en vint vers le lieu où on
dressoit la cabane, [215] criant & hurlant comme vn demoniaque, il
arrache les perches, frappe sur les écorces de la cabane, pour tout
briser: les femmes le voyant dans ces fougues s'enfuyent dans le bois,
qui deçà qui delà, mon Sauuage que ie nomme ordinairemẽt mon hoste,
faisoit boüillir dans vn chauderon quelques oyseaux qu'il auoit tuez:
cet yurogne suruenãt rompt la cramaillere, & renuerse tout dans les
cendres: à tout cela pas vn ne fait mine d'estre fasché, aussi est
ce folie de se battre contre vn fol, mon hoste ramasse ses petits
oyseaux, les va luy-mesme lauer à la riuiere, puise de l'eau, & remet
la chaudiere sur le feu, les femmes voyant que cét homme enragé couroit
ça & là sur le bord de l'Isle, écumant comme vn possedé, viennent viste
prendre leurs écorces, & les emportent en vn lieu écarté, de peur qu'il
ne les mette en pieces comme il auoit commencé: à peine eurent-elles
le loysir de les rouler qu'il parut aupres d'elles tout forcené,
& ne sçachant sur qui descharger sa fureur: car elles disparurent
incontinent à la faueur de la nuict qui commençoit à nous cacher, il
s'en vint [216] par le feu qui se descouuroit par sa clarté, & voulant
mettre la main sur la chaudiere pour la renuerser vne autre fois, mon
hoste son frere, plus habile que luy, la prit & luy ietta au nez toute
boüillante comme elle estoit, ie vous laisse à penser quelle contenance
tenoit ce pauure homme, se voyant pris à la chaude, iamais il ne fut si
bien laué, il changea de peau en la face, & en tout l'estomach, pleust
à Dieu que son ame eust changé aussi bien que son corps: il redouble
ses hurlemens, arrache le reste des perches, qui estoient encor debout:
mon hoste m'a dit depuis qu'il demandoit vne hache pour me tuer, ie ne
sçay s'il la demanda en effect, car ie n'entendois pas son langage,
mais ie sçay bien que me presentant à luy pour l'arrester il me dit,
parlant François, Retirez-vous, ce n'est pas à vous à qui i'en veux,
laissez-moy faire, puis me tirant par la sotane, Allons, disoit-il,
embarquons-nous dans un canot, retournons en vostre maison, vous ne
cognoissez pas ces gens cy, ce qu'ils en font, c'est pour le ventre,
ils ne se soucient pas de vous, mais de vos viures, [217] à cela ie
répondois tout bas à part moy, _in vino veritas_.

    As soon as we had set foot on land, my host took an arquebus he
    had bought from the English, and went in search of our supper.
    Meanwhile the women began to build the house where we were to
    lodge. Now the Apostate, having observed that every one was busy,
    returned to the boat that was lying at anchor, took the keg of
    wine, and drank from it with such excess, that, being drunk as a
    lord, he fell into the water and was nearly drowned. Finally he
    got out, after considerable scrambling, and started for the place
    where they were putting up the cabin. [215] Screaming and howling
    like a demon, he snatched away the poles and beat upon the bark of
    the cabin, to break everything to pieces. The women, seeing him in
    this frenzy, fled to the woods, some here, some there. My Savage,
    whom I usually call my host, was boiling in a kettle some birds
    he had killed, when this drunken fellow, coming upon the scene,
    broke the crane and upset everything into the ashes. No one seemed
    to get angry at all this, but then it is foolish to fight with a
    madman. My host gathered up his little birds and went to wash them
    in the river, drew some water and placed the kettle over the fire
    again. The women, seeing that this madman was running hither and
    thither on the shores of the Island, foaming like one possessed,
    ran quickly to get their bark and take it to a place of security,
    lest he should tear it to pieces, as he had begun to do. They
    had scarcely had time to roll it up, when he appeared near them
    completely infuriated, and not knowing upon what to vent his fury,
    for they had suddenly disappeared, thanks to the darkness which had
    begun to conceal us. He approached [216] the fire, which could be
    seen on account of its bright light, and was about to take hold of
    the kettle to overturn it again; when my host, his brother, quicker
    than he, seized it and threw the water into his face, boiling as
    it was. I leave you to imagine how this poor man looked, finding
    himself thus deluged with hot water. He was never so well washed.
    The skin of his face and whole chest changed. Would to God that his
    soul had changed as well as his body. He redoubled his howls, and
    began to pull up the poles which were still standing. My host has
    told me since that he asked for an ax, with which to kill me; I do
    not know whether he really asked for one, as I did not understand
    his language; but I know very well that, when I went up to him and
    tried to stop him, he said to me in French, "Go away, it is not you
    I am after; let me alone;" then pulling my gown, "Come," said he,
    "let us embark in a canoe, let us return to your house; you do not
    know these people here; all they do is for the belly, they do not
    care for you, but for your food." [217] To this I answered in an
    undertone and to myself, _in vino veritas_.

La nuict s'auançant bien fort ie me retiray dedans le bois pour fuir
l'importunité de cet yurongne, & pour prendre quelque repos; comme
ie faisois mes prieres aupres d'vn arbre, la femme qui faisoit le
ménage de mon hoste me vint trouuer, & ramassant quelques feüilles
d'arbres tombées, me dit; couche toy là, & ne fais point de bruit,
puis m'ayant ietté vne écorce pour me couurir, elle se retira: voila
donc mon premier giste à l'enseigne de la Lune qui me découuroit de
tous costez, me voila passé Cheualier dés le premier iour de mon
entrée en ceste Academie, la pluye suruenant vn peu auant minuict, me
donna quelque apprehension d'estre moüillé, mais elle ne dura pas long
temps: le lendemain matin ie trouuay que mon lict, quoy qu'on ne l'eut
point remué depuis la creation du monde, n'estoit point si dure qu'il
m'empeschat de dormir.

    As the night was coming on rapidly, I retired into the woods, to
    escape being annoyed by this drunkard, and to get a little rest.
    While I was saying my prayers near a tree, the woman who managed
    the household of my host came to see me; and, gathering together
    some leaves of fallen trees, said to me, "Lie down there and make
    no noise," then, having thrown me a piece of bark as a cover, she
    went away. So this was my first resting place at the sign of the
    Moon, which shone upon me from all sides. Behold me an accomplished
    Chevalier, after the first day of my entrance into this Academy.
    The rain coming on, a little before midnight, made me fear that I
    might get wet, but it did not last long. The next morning I found
    that my bed, although it had not been made up since the creation of
    the world, was not so hard as to keep me from sleeping.

Le iour suiuant ie voulu ietter le barillet & le reste du vin dans la
riuiere, comme ie leurs auois dit que ie ferois, [218] au cas qu'on en
abusast, mon hoste me saisissant par le milieu du corps, s'écria _eca
toute, eca toute_, ne fais pas cela, ne fais pas cela, ne vois tu pas
que _Petrichtich_ (c'est ainsi qu'ils nomment le Renegat par derision)
n'a point d'esprit, que c'est vn chien, ie te promets qu'on ne touchera
plus au barillet que tu ne sois present: ie m'arrestay auec resolution
d'en faire largesse, afin de me deliurer de la crainte qu'vn peu de vin
ne nous fit boire beaucoup d'eau: car s'ils se fussent enyurez pendant
que nous faisions voile, c'estoit pour nous perdre.

    The next day I wanted to throw the barrel, with what was left of
    the wine, into the river, as I had told them I would do, [218] in
    case any one abused it; but my host, seizing me around the waist,
    cried out, _eca toute, eca toute_, "Do not do that, do not do
    that. Dost thou not see that _Petrichtich_" (it is thus they call
    the Renegade in derision) "does not know anything, that he is a
    dog? I promise thee that we will never touch the barrel unless
    thou art present." I yielded, and made up my mind to distribute it
    liberally, in order to free myself of the fear that a little wine
    might make us drink a great deal of water; for, if they were to get
    drunk while we were sailing, we would be lost.

Nous voulions sortir le matin de ceste Isle; mais la marée se retirant,
plustost que nous ne pensions, nostre Chalouppe s'échoüa: si bien qu'il
fallut attendre la marée du soir, en laquelle nous nous embarquasmes, &
voguans à la faueur de la Lune aussi bien que du vent, nous abordasmes
vne autre Isle nommée _Ca ouapascounagate_. Comme nous arriuasmes sur
la minuict, nos gens ne prirent pas la peine de nous bastir vne maison,
si bien que nous couchasmes au mesme lict, & logeasmes à la mesme
enseigne que la nuict precedente, [219] abriez des arbres & du ciel.

    We intended leaving this Island in the morning; but the tide fell
    sooner than we expected, and stranded our Boat. Hence we had to
    wait for the evening tide, upon which we embarked, and sailed away
    by the aid of the Moon as well as of the wind. We reached another
    Island, called _Ca ouapascounagate_. As we arrived about midnight,
    our people did not take the trouble to make a house; and we slept
    in the same bed and lodged at the same sign as the night before,
    [219] under the shelter of the trees and sky.

Le lendemain nous quittasmes ceste Isle pour entrer dans vne autre
appellée _Ca chibariouachcate_, nous la pourrions nommer l'Isle aux
Oyes blanches, car i'y en vis plus de mille en vne bande.

    The next day we left this Island to go to another one, called _Ca
    chibariouachcate_; we might have called it the Island of the white
    Geese, for I saw there more than a thousand of them in one flock.

Le iour d'apres nous la voulions quitter, mais nous fusmes contraints
pour le mauuais temps de relascher au bout de ceste mesme Isle, elle
est deserte comme tout le pays, c'est à dire qu'elle n'a des habitans
qu'en passant, ce peuple n'ayant point de demeure assurée: elle est
bordée de rochers si gros, si hauts, & si entrecouppez & peuplée
neantmoins de Cedres & de Pins si proprement, qu'vn Peintre tiendroit
à faueur d'en auoir la veüe pour tirer l'idée d'vn desert affreux pour
ses precipices, & tres agreable pour la varieté de quantité d'arbres
qu'on diroit auoir esté plantez par la main de l'art plustost que de la
Nature. Comme elle est entre-taillée de bayes pleines de vases, il s'y
retire si grande quantité de gibier & de plusieurs especes que ie n'ay
point veu en France, qu'il le faut quasi voir pour le croire.

    The following day we tried to leave, but the bad weather compelled
    us to land again at the end of this same Island. It is a solitude,
    like all the country; that is, it has only temporary inhabitants,
    for these people have no fixed habitation. It is bordered by rocks
    so massive, so high, and so craggy, and is withal covered so
    picturesquely with Cedars and Pines, that a Painter would consider
    himself favored to view it, in order to derive therefrom an idea
    of a desert frightful in its precipices and very pleasing in the
    variety and number of its trees, which one might say had been
    planted by the hand of art rather than of Nature. As it is indented
    by bays full of mud, there hides here such a quantity and variety
    of game, some of which I have never seen in France, that it must be
    seen in order to be believed.

[220] Sortans de ceste Isle au gibier nous nauigeasmes tout le
iour & vinsmes descendre sur la nuict dans vne petite Islette
nommé _Atisaoucanich etagoukhi_, c'est à dire lieu où se trouue la
teinture, ie me doute que nos gens luy donnerent ce nom, pource qu'ils
y trouuerent de petites racines rouges, dont ils se seruent pour
teindre leurs _Matachias_. I'appellerois volontiers ce lieu l'Islette
mal-heureuse: car nous y souffrismes beaucoup huict iours durant que
les tempestes nous y retindrent prisonniers. Il estoit nuict quand
nous l'abordasmes, la pluye & les vents nous attaquoient, & ce pendant
à peine peut on trouuer cinq ou six perches pour seruir de poultres
à nostre bastiment, qui fut si petit, si estroit, & si decouuert, &
par vn temps si fascheux, voulant euiter vne incommodité on tomboit
dans deux autres, il se falloit racourcir, ou se rouler en herisson,
sur peine de se brusler la moitié du corps pour nostre souper, & pour
nostre disner tout ensemble: car nous n'auions point mangé depuis le
matin, mon hoste fit ietter à chacun vn morceau de la galette que ie
luy auois [221] donnée, m'aduertissant que nous mangerions sans boire,
car l'eau de ce grand fleuue commence en ce lieu d'estre salée, le
lendemain nous recueillismes de l'eau de pluye, tombée dans des roches
fort sales, & la beusmes auec autant de plaisir qu'on boit le vin d'Aï
en France.

    [220] Leaving this Island of game, we sailed all day and toward
    nightfall landed at a small Island, called _Atisaoucanich
    etagoukhi_, that is, place where dyes are found; I am inclined to
    think that our people gave it that name, for they found there some
    little red roots which they use in dyeing their _Matachias_.[1]
    I would like to call it the Isle of misfortune; for we suffered
    a great deal there during the eight days that the storms held us
    prisoners. It was night when we disembarked; the rain and wind
    attacked us, and in the meantime we could scarcely find five or
    six poles to serve as beams for our house,--which was so small, so
    narrow, and so exposed for such weather as this, that in trying to
    avoid one discomfort we fell into two others. We had to shorten
    ourselves, or roll up like hedgehogs, lest we scorch the half of
    our bodies. For our supper, and dinner as well, because we had
    eaten nothing since morning, my host threw to each one a piece of
    the biscuit I had [221] given him, informing me that we were not
    to drink anything with our food, as the water of this great river
    began to be salty in this place. The next day we collected some
    rainwater, which had fallen into dirty rocks, and drank it with as
    much enjoyment as they drink the wine of Aï in France.

Ils auoient laissé nostre Chaloupe à l'anchre dans un grand courant de
marée, ie les aduerty qu'elle n'estoit pas bien, & qu'il la falloit
mettre à l'abry derriere l'Islette; mais comme nous n'attendions qu'vn
bon vent pour partir, ils n'en tindrent conte. La nuict la tempeste
redoublant, on eust dit que les vents deuoient deraciner nostre Islete,
mon hoste se doutant de ce qui arriua éueille l'Apostat, & le presse
de le venir ayder à sauuer nostre Chaloupe, qui s'alloit perdre: or
soit que ce miserable fust paresseux, ou qu'il eust peur des ondes,
iamais il ne se voulut leuer, donnant pour tout réponse, qu'il estoit
las: dans ce retardement les vents rompent l'amare, ou la corde de
l'anchre, & en vn instant font disparoistre nostre Chaloupe, mon hoste
voyant ce beau [222] ménage, me vint dire _Nicanis_, mon bien-aymé,
la Chalouppe est perduë, les vents qui l'ont enleuée la briseront
contre les roches qui nous enuironnent de tous costez. Qui n'eust
entré en verue contre ce Renegat, dont la negligence nous iettoit dans
des peines inexplicables, veu qu'il y auoit quantité de paquets dans
nostre bagage, & beaucoup d'enfans à porter. Mon hoste cependant, tout
barbare & tout sauuage qu'il est, ne se troubla point à cet accident,
ains craignant que cela ne m'attristast, il me dit, _Nicanis_, mon
bien-aymé, n'es-tu point fasché de ceste perte, qui nous causera de
grands trauaux? ie n'en suis pas bien ayse, luy repartis-ie, ne t'en
attriste point, me fit-il: car la fascherie ameine la tristesse, & la
tristesse ameine la maladie, _Petrichtich_ n'a point d'esprit, s'il
m'eust voulu secourir ce malheur ne fust point suruenu, voyla tous les
reproches qu'on luy fit. Veritablement cela me confond, que l'interest
de la fanté arreste la cholere, & la fascherie d'vn Barbare, & que
la loy de Dieu, que son bon plaisir, que l'espoir de ses grandes
recompenses, que la crainte de ses [223] chastimens, que nostre propre
paix & consolation ne puisse seruir de bride à l'impatience & à la
cholere d'vn Chrestien.

    They had left our Shallop at anchor in a strong tidal current. I
    told them it was not safe, and that it ought to be placed under
    shelter behind the Island; but, as we were only waiting for a
    good breeze in order to depart, they did not heed me. During the
    night the tempest increased, so that it seemed as if the winds
    were uprooting our Island. Our host, foreseeing what might occur,
    roused the Apostate, and urged him to come and help him save our
    Shallop, which threatened to go to pieces. Now either this wretch
    was lazy, or he was afraid of the billows; for he did not even try
    to get up, giving as his only reason that he was tired. During this
    delay, the wind broke the fastening, or cable of the anchor, and
    in an instant carried away our Shallop. My host, seeing this fine
    [222] management, came and said to me, "_Nicanis_, my well-beloved,
    the Shallop is lost; the winds, which have loosened it, will break
    it to pieces against the rocks which surround us on all sides."
    Who would not have been vexed at that Renegade, whose negligence
    caused us untold trials, considering that we had a number of
    packages among our baggage, and several children to carry? Yet my
    host, barbarian and savage that he is, was not at all troubled at
    this accident; but, fearing it might discourage me, he said to me,
    "_Nicanis_, my well-beloved, art thou not angry at this loss, which
    will cause us so many difficulties?" "I am not very happy over it,"
    I answered. "Do not be cast down," he replied, "for anger brings
    on sadness, and sadness brings sickness. _Petrichtich_ does not
    know anything; if he had tried to help me, this misfortune would
    not have happened." And these were all the reproaches he made.
    Truly, it humiliates me that considerations of health should check
    the anger and vexation of a Barbarian; and that the law of God,
    his good pleasure, the hope of his great rewards, the fear of his
    [223] chastisements, our own peace and comfort, cannot check the
    impatience and anger of a Christian.

Au malheur susdit en suruint vn autre, nous auions outre la Chaloupe
vn petit Canot d'écorce, la marée se grossissant plus qu'à l'ordinaire
par le souffle des vents nous le déroba, nous voila prisonniers
plus que iamais, ie ne vis ny larmes ny plaintes, non pas mesme
parmy les femmes, sur le dos desquelles ce desastre tomboit plus
particulierement, à raison qu'elles sont comme les bestes de voiture,
portant ordinairement le bagage des Sauuages, au contraire tout le
monde se mit à rire.

    The above misfortune was soon followed by another. In addition
    to the Shallop, we had a little bark Canoe, and the tide, rising
    higher than usual through the force of the wind, robbed us of
    that; and there we were, more than ever prisoners. I neither saw
    tears nor heard complaints, not even among the women, upon whose
    shoulders this disaster fell more particularly, as they are like
    beasts of burden, usually carrying the baggage of the Savages; on
    the contrary, everybody began to laugh.

Le iour venu, car ce fut la nuict que la tempeste commit ce larcin,
nous courusmes tous sur les riues du fleuue, pour apprendre par nos
yeux des nouuelles de nostre pauure Chaloupe, & de nostre Canot,
nous vismes l'vn & l'autre échoüez fort loing de nous, la Chaloupe
parmy des roches, & le Canot au bord du bois de la terre continente,
chacun pensoit que tout estoit en pieces: si tost que la mer se fut
retirée les [224] vns courrent vers la Chaloupe, les autres vers le
Canot, chose estrange; rien ne se trouua endommagé, i'en demeuray tout
estonné: car de cent vaisseaux fussent-ils d'vn bois aussi dur que le
bronze, à peine s'en sauueroit-il pas vn dans ces grands coups de vent
& sur des roches.

    When morning came, for it was at night when the tempest committed
    this theft, we all ran along the edge of the river, to learn with
    our own eyes some news of our poor Shallop and our Canoe. We
    saw both of them stranded a long distance from us, the Shallop
    among the rocks and the Canoe along the edge of the woods of the
    mainland. Every one thought they were all in pieces; as soon as
    the sea had receded [224], some ran toward the Shallop, and others
    toward the Canoe. Wonderful to relate, nothing was harmed; I was
    amazed, for out of a hundred ships made of wood as hard as bronze,
    scarcely one would have been saved in those violent blasts of wind,
    and upon those rocks.

Pendant que les vents nous tenoient prisonniers dans ceste malheureuse
Islete, vne partie de nos gens s'en allerent visiter quelques Sauuages
qui estoient à cinq ou six lieuës de nous, si bien qu'il ne resta que
les femmes & les enfans, & _L'hiroquois_ dans nostre cabane. La nuict
vne femme estant sortie s'en reuint toute effarée criant qu'elle auoit
oüy le _Manitou_, ou le diable, voila l'allarme dans nostre camp, tout
le monde remply de peur garde vn profond silence, Ie demanday d'où
procedoit ceste épouuente: car ie n'auois pas entendu ce qu'auoit dit
ceste femme, _eca titou, eca titou_, me dit on, _Manitou_, tais-toy,
tais-toy, c'est le diable: ie me mis à rire, & me leuant en pied ie
sors de la cabane, & pour les asseurer i'appelle en leur langage le
_Manitou_, criant tout haut que ie [225] ne le craignois pas, & qu'il
n'oseroit venir où i'estois: puis ayant fait quelques tours dans
nostre Islete, ie rentray, & leur dis, ne craignez point, le diable ne
vous fera aucun mal tant que ie seray auec vous, il craint ceux qui
croyent en Dieu, si vous y voulez croire il s'enfuïra de vous. Eux bien
estonnez, me demandent si ie ne le craignois point, ie repars pour les
deliurer de leur peur, que ie n'en craignois pas vne centaine, ils
se mirent tous à rire, se rasseurans petit à petit: or voyant qu'ils
auoient ietté de l'anguille dans le feu i'en demanday la raison,
tais-toy, me firent-ils, nous donnons à manger au diable afin qu'il ne
nous fasse point de mal.

    While the wind held us prisoners in this unhappy Island, a number
    of our people went to visit some Savages who were five or six
    leagues from us, so that there only remained in our cabin the
    women and children, and the _Hiroquois_. During the night, a woman
    who had gone out, returned, terribly frightened, crying out that
    she had heard the _Manitou_, or devil. At once all the camp was
    in a state of alarm, and everyone, filled with fear, maintained a
    profound silence. I asked the cause of this fright, for I had not
    heard what the woman had said; _eca titou, eca titou_, they told
    me, _Manitou_, "Keep still, keep still, it is the devil." I began
    to laugh, and rising to my feet, went out of the cabin; and to
    reassure them I called, in their language, the _Manitou_, crying
    in a loud voice that I [225] was not afraid, and that he would not
    dare come where I was. Then, having made a few turns in our Island,
    I reëntered, and said to them, "Do not fear, the devil will not
    harm you as long as I am with you, for he fears those who believe
    in God; if you will believe in God, the devil will flee from you."
    They were greatly astonished, and asked me if I was not afraid of
    him at all. I answered, to relieve them of their fears, that I was
    not afraid of a hundred of them; they began to laugh, and were
    gradually reassured. Now seeing that they had thrown some eels
    in the fire, I asked them the reason for it. "Keep still," they
    replied; "we are giving the devil something to eat, so that he will
    not harm us."

Mon hoste à son retour ayant sceu ceste histoire, me remercia fort
de ce que i'auois rasseuré tous ses gens, me demandant si en effet
ie n'auois point de peur du _Manitou_, ou du diable, & si ie le
cognoissois bien, que pour eux qu'ils le craignoient plus que la
foudre; Ie luy répondis, que s'il vouloit croire, & obeïr à celuy qui
a tout fait, que le _Manitou_ n'auroit nul pouuoir sur luy: pour nous
qu'estans assistez de celuy que [226] nous adorions, le diable auoit
plus de peur de nous, que nous n'auions de luy; il s'estonna, & me dit
qu'il eust bien voulu que i'eusse eu cognoissance de sa langue: car
figurez vous que nous nous faisions entendre l'vn l'autre plus par les
yeux, & par les mains, que par la bouche.

    My host, upon his return, having learned this story, thanked me
    very much for giving courage to his people, and asked me if I
    really had no fear of the _Manitou_, or devil, and if I knew him
    very well; as for them, they feared him more than a thunderbolt. I
    answered that, if he would believe and obey him who had made all,
    the _Manitou_ would have no power over him; that for ourselves,
    being helped by him whom [226] we adored, the devil had more fear
    of us than we had of him. He was astonished, and told me that he
    would be very glad if we knew his language, for you must be aware
    that we were making each other understand more through our eyes and
    hands than through our lips.

Ie dressay quelques prieres en leur langue, auec l'ayde de l'Apostat:
or comme le Sorcier n'estoit pas encore venu, ie les recitois le matin,
& auant nos repas, eux-mesmes m'en faisans souuenir, & prenans plaisir
à les ouīr prononcer; si ce miserable Magicien ne fust point venu auec
nous ces Barbares auroient pris grand plaisir de m'écouter: mon hoste
me faisoit mille questions, me demandant pourquoy nous mouriõs, où
alloient nos ames, si la nuit estoit vniuerselle par tout le monde, &
choses semblables, se monstrant fort attentif à mes réponses. Changeons
de discours.

    I arranged a few prayers in their language, with the help of the
    Apostate. Now, as the Sorcerer had not yet come, I repeated them
    in the morning and before our meals, they themselves reminding me
    of them, and taking pleasure in hearing them pronounced; if the
    wretched Magician had not come with us, these Barbarians would
    have taken great pleasure in listening to me. My host asked me a
    thousand questions,--why we died, where our souls went, if night
    was universal all over the world, and similar things,--and was very
    attentive to my answers. Let us change the subject.

Ie remarquay en ce lieu cy, que les ieunes femmes ne mangent point dans
le plat de leurs marys: i'en demanday la raison, le Renegat me dit que
les ieunes [227] filles à marier, & les femmes qui n'auoient point
encore d'enfans, n'auoient rien en maniement, & qu'on leur faisoit leur
part comme aux enfans, de là vient que sa femme mesme me dit vn iour,
Dis à mon mary qu'il me donne bien à manger: mais ne luy dis pas que ie
t'ay prié de luy dire.

    I observed in this place that the young women did not eat from the
    same dish as their husbands. I asked the reason, and the Renegade
    told me that the young [227] unmarried women, and the women who had
    no children, took no part in the management of affairs, and were
    treated like children. Thence it came that his own wife said to me
    one day, "Tell my husband to give me plenty to eat, but do not tell
    him that I asked you to do so."

Pendant certaine nuict, tout le monde estant dans vn profond sommeil,
ie me mis à entretenir ce pauure miserable Renegat, ie luy fis voir
qu'estant en nostre maison, rien de tout ce que nous auions ne luy
manquoit, qu'il y pouuoit passer sa vie doucement, & qu'en quittant
Dieu il s'estoit ietté dans vne vie de beste, qui enfin abboutiroit à
l'enfer, s'il n'ouuroit les yeux, que l'eternité estoit bien longue,
& que d'estre à iamais compagnon des diables, c'estoit vn long terme.
Ie voy bien, me fit-il, que ie ne fais pas bien; mais mon malheur
est que ie n'ay pas l'esprit assez fort pour demeurer ferme dans vne
resolution, ie croy tout ce qu'on me dit; quand i'ay esté auec les
Anglois, ie me suis laissé aller à leurs discours; quand ie suis auec
les Sauuages ie fais comme eux; [228] quand ie suis auec vous ie
tiens vostre creance pour veritable, pleut à Dieu que ie fusse mort
quand i'estois malade en France, ie serois maintenant sauué, tant que
i'auray des parens ie ne feray iamais rien qui vaille: car quand ie
veux demeurer auec vous, mes freres me disent que ie pouriray demeurant
tousiours en vn endroit, cela est cause que ie quitte tout pour les
suiure. Ie luy apportay toutes les raisons, & luy fis toutes les offres
que ie peus pour l'affermir: mais son frere le Sorcier qui sera bien
tost auec nous renuersera tous mes desseins, car il manie comme il veut
ce pauure Apostat.

    One night, when every one had sunk into a deep sleep, I began to
    talk to this poor miserable Renegade. I showed him that while he
    was in our house he had lacked for nothing of whatever we had,
    and that he might have spent his life there peacefully; that in
    forsaking God he had rushed into the life of a brute, which would
    finally end in hell if he did not open his eyes; that eternity was
    very long, and to be a companion of devils forever was a long term.
    "I see clearly," he replied, "that I am not doing right; but my
    misfortune is that I have not a mind strong enough to remain firm
    in my determination; I believe all they tell me. When I was with
    the English, I allowed myself to be influenced by their talk; when
    I am with the Savages, I do as they do; [228] when I am with you,
    it seems to me your belief is the true one. Would to God I had
    died when I was sick in France, and I would now be saved. As long
    as I have any relations, I will never do anything of any account;
    for when I want to stay with you, my brothers tell me I will rot,
    always staying in one place, and that is the reason I leave you to
    follow them." I urged all the reasons and made him all the offers
    I could to strengthen him; but his brother, the Sorcerer, who will
    soon be with us, will upset all my plans, for he does whatever he
    wills with this poor Apostate.

Le trentiesme iour d'Octobre nous sortismes de ceste malheureuse
Islete, & vinsmes aborder sur la nuict dans vne autre Isle qui
porte vn nom quasi aussi grand comme elle est, car elle n'a pas
demy lieuë de tour, & voicy comme nos Sauuages me dirẽt qu'elle se
nommoit, _Ca pacoucachtecho_k_hi_ _chachagou achigani_k_hi_, _Ca
pa_k_hitaouananioui_k_hi_, ie croy qu'ils forgent ces noms sur le
champ, ceste Isle n'est quasi qu'vn grand rocher affreux, comme elle
n'a point de fontaine d'eau douce nous fusmes contrains de [129 i.e.,
229] boire des eauës de pluyes fort sales que nous ramassions dans des
fondrieres, & sur des roches; on ietta le voile de nostre chalouppe sur
des perches quand nous y arriuasmes, & nous nous mismes à l'abry là
dessous, nostre lict estoit blanc & verd, c'est à dire qu'il y auoit
si peu de branches de pin dessous nous, que nous touchiõs la neige
en plusieurs endroits, laquelle auoit commencé depuis trois iours à
couurir la terre d'vn habit blanc.

    On the thirtieth day of October, we went away from this unhappy
    Island, and toward nightfall disembarked at another Island
    which bears a name almost as big as it is, for it is not half a
    league in circumference; and this is what our Savages tell me
    it is called, _Ca pacoucacktechokhi chachagou achiganikhi, Ca
    pakhitaouananiouikhi_; I believe they forge these names upon the
    spot. This Island is nothing but a big and frightful rock; as there
    was no spring of fresh water, we had to [129 i.e., 229] drink very
    dirty rainwater that we collected in the bogs and upon the rocks.
    The sail of our shallop was thrown over some poles, on our arrival
    at this place, and this formed our shelter; our beds were white
    and green, I mean there were so few pine branches under us that in
    several places we touched the snow, which three days before had
    begun to cover the earth with a white mantle.

Nous trouuasmes en ce lieu la cabane d'vn Sauuage, que nostre hoste
cherchoit, nommé Ek_hennabamate_, il apprit de luy que son frere le
Sorcier estoit passé depuis peu, & qu'ayant eu le vent contraire, il
n'estoit pas loing, il n'attendit pas qu'il fut iour tout à fait pour
le suiure, son Canot poussé par trois rameurs alloit comme le vent:
bref le beau premier iour de Nouembre dedié à la memoire de tous les
Saincts, il nous ramena ce Demon, i'entends ce Sorcier. Ie fus bien
estonné quand ie le vis: car ie ne l'attendois pas, me figurant que
mon hoste estoit allé à la chasse, fut-il ainsi, & que ceste miserable
proye [230] luy eust eschappé des mains.

    We found here the cabin of a Savage, named _Ekhennabamate_, whom
    our host was seeking. He learned from him that his brother, the
    Sorcerer, had passed, a short time before; and that, having the
    wind against him, he had not gone far. He did not wait until broad
    daylight to follow him; his Canoe, paddled by three men, went like
    the wind; and, in short, on the first of November, a beautiful day,
    dedicated to the memory of all the Saints, he brought back this
    Demon, I mean the Sorcerer. I was very much surprised when I saw
    him, for I was not expecting him, imagining that my host had gone
    hunting; would that he had, and that this miserable prey [230] had
    escaped from his hands.

Si tost qu'il fut arriué ce n'estoient plus que festins dans nos
cabanes, nous n'auions plus que fort peu de viures de reste, ces
Barbares les mangeoient auec autant de paix & d'asseurance, comme si
les animaux qu'ils deuoient chasser eussent esté renfermez dans vne
estable.

    As soon as he came, there was nothing but feasting in our cabins;
    we had only a little food left, but these Barbarians ate it with as
    much calmness and confidence as if the game they were to hunt was
    shut up in a stable.

Mon hoste faisant vn iour festin à son tour, les conuiez me firent
signe que ie haranguasse en leur langue, ils auoiẽt enuie de rire:
car ie prononce le Sauuage comme vn Alemant prononce le François,
leur voulant donner ce contentement, ie me mis à discourir, & eux
à s'éclatter de rire: eux bien aises de gausser, & moy bien ioyeux
d'apprendre à parler: Ie leur dis pour conclusion, que i'estois
vn enfant, & que les enfans faisoient rire leurs peres par leur
begayement: mais qu'au reste ie deuiendrois grand dans quelques années,
& qu'alors sçachant leur langue ie leur ferois voir qu'eux-mesmes sont
enfans en plusieurs choses, ignorans de belles veritez, dont ie leur
parlerois, & sur l'heure mesme ie leur demãday si la Lune estoit [231]
aussi hautemẽt logée que les Estoilles, si elle estoit en mesme Ciel,
où alloit le Soleil quãd il nous quittoit, quelle figure auoit la
terre, (si ie sçauois leur langue en perfection ie leur proposerois
tousiours quelque verité naturelle deuant que de parler des points
de nostre creãce: car i'ay remarqué que ces curiositez les rendent
attentifs) pour ne m'éloigner de mon discours, l'vn d'eux prenant la
parole apres m'auoir ingenuëment confessé qu'ils ne pouuoient répondre
à ces questions, me dit: mais comment pourrois-tu toy mesme cognoistre
ces choses, puis que nous les ignorons? ie tiray aussi tost vn petit
cadran que i'auios dans ma pouche, ie l'ouure, & luy mettant en main,
ie luy dis: nous voyla dans la nuict profonde, le Soleil ne nous
paroist plus, dis moy maintenãt enuisageant ce que ie te presente, en
quelle part du monde il est; designe moy le lieu où il se doit demain
leuer, où il se doit coucher, où il sera en son midy, marque moy les
endroits du Ciel, où il ne va iamais: mon homme répondit des yeux me
regardant sans dire mot: ie prens le cadran & luy fais [232] voir en
peu de mots tout ce que ie venois de proposer, adioustant en suitte; hé
bien comment se peut-il faire que ie cognoisse ces choses, & que vous
les ignoriez? i'ay bien d'autres veritez plus grandes à vous dire quand
ie sçauray parler. Tu as de l'esprit, me dirent-ils, tu sçauras bien
tost nostre langue, ils se sont trompez.

    One day, when my host had a feast in his turn, the guests made me
    a sign that I should make them a speech in their language, as they
    wanted to laugh; for I pronounce the Savage as a German pronounces
    French. Wishing to please them, I began to talk, and they burst out
    laughing, well pleased to make sport of me, while I was very glad
    to learn to talk. I said to them in conclusion that I was a child,
    and that children made their fathers laugh with their stammering;
    but in a few years I would become large, and then, when I knew
    their language, I would make them see that they themselves were
    children in many things, ignorant of the great truths of which I
    would speak to them. Suddenly I asked them if the Moon was [231]
    located as high as the Stars, if it was in the same Sky; where the
    Sun went when it left us; what was the form of the earth. (If I
    knew their language perfectly I would always propose some natural
    truth, before speaking to them of the points of our belief; for I
    have observed that these curious things make them more attentive.)
    Not to let me wander from my speech, one of them beginning to
    speak, after having frankly confessed that they could not answer
    these questions, said to me: "But how canst thou thyself know
    these things, since we do not know them?" I immediately drew out
    a little compass that I had in my pocket, opened it, and, placing
    it in his hand, said to him, "We are now in the darkness of night,
    the Sun no longer shines for us; tell me now, while you look at
    what I have given you, in what part of the world it is; show me
    the place where it must rise to-morrow, where it will set, where
    it will be at noon; point out the places in the Sky where it will
    never be." My man answered with his eyes, staring at me without
    saying a word. I took the compass and explained [232] to him with
    a few words all that I had just asked about, adding, "Well, how is
    it that I can know these things and you do not know them? I have
    still other greater truths to tell you when I can talk." "Thou art
    intelligent," they responded; "thou wilt soon know our language."
    But they were mistaken.

Ce que i'escris dans ce iournal n'a point d'autre suitte, que la suitte
du temps, voila pourquoy ie passeray souuent du coq à l'asne, comme on
dit, c'est à dire que quittant vne remarque ie passeray à vne autre
qui ne luy a point de rapport, le temps seul seruant de liaison à mon
discours.

    What I write in this journal has no other order except that of
    time, and hence I shall frequently be telling cock-and-bull
    stories, as the saying is; that is, I shall pass from one
    observation to another which has no connection with it, time alone
    serving as a link to the parts of my discourse.

Comme l'arc & la fleche semble des armes inuentées par la Nature, puis
que toutes les Nations de la terre en ont trouué l'vsage, de mesme vous
diriez qu'il y a de certains petits ieux que les enfans trouuent sans
qu'on leur enseigne; les petits Sauuages ioüent à se cacher aussi bien
que les petits François, ils font quantité d'autres traits d'enfance,
que i'ay remarqué en nostre Europe, entre autres i'ay veu les petits
Parisiens [233] ietter vne balle d'arquebuse en l'air, & la receuoir
auec vn baston vn petit creusé, les petits Sauuages montagnards font
le mesme, se seruans d'vn petit faisseau de branches de Pin, qu'ils
reçoiuent ou picquent en l'air auec vn baston pointu: les petits
Hiroquois ont le mesme passe-temps iettans vn osselet percé qu'ils
enlassent en l'air dans vn autre petit os: vn ieune homme de ceste
nation me le dit, voyant ioüer les enfans montagnards.

    As the bow and arrow seem to be weapons invented by Nature,
    since all the Nations of the earth have made use of them, so you
    might say there are certain little games that children find out
    for themselves without being taught. The little Savages play at
    hide-and-seek as well as the little French children. They have a
    number of other childish sports that I have noticed in our Europe;
    among others, I have seen the little Parisians [233] throw a musket
    ball into the air and catch it with a little bat scooped out; the
    little montagnard Savages do the same, using a little bunch of Pine
    sticks, which they receive or throw into the air on the end of a
    pointed stick. The little Hiroquois have the same pastime, throwing
    a bone with a hole in it, which they interlace in the air with
    another little bone. I was told this by a young man of that nation
    as we were watching the montagnard children play.

Mõ Sauuage & le Sorcier son frere, ayãt appris qu'il y auoit quãtité
de Mõtagnais és enuirõs du lieu où ils vouloiẽt hyuerner, prirent
resolution de passer du costé du Nord, craignans que nous ne nous
affamassions les vns les autres: les voyla donc resolus d'aller
où m'auoit promis mon hoste & le Renegat; mais à peine auiõs nous
fait trois lieuës sur le grand fleuue pour le trauerser, que nous
rencontrasmes quatre canots qui nous ramenerent au Sud, disans que
la chasse n'estoit pas bonne du costé du Nord, si bien que ie fus
contraint de demeurer auec le sorcier, & d'hyuerner au delà de la
grande riuiere, quoy que ie peusse [234] alleguer au contraire. Ie
voyois bien les dangers dans lesquels ils me iettoient, mais ie ne
voyois point d'autre remede que de se confier en Dieu, & le laisser
faire.

    My Savage and the Sorcerer, his brother, having learned that there
    were a great many Montagnais near the place where they wished to
    pass the winter, decided to turn Northward, lest we should starve
    each other. They decided to go to the place where my host and the
    Renegade had promised me they would go; but we had scarcely made
    three leagues in crossing the great river, when we met four canoes
    which turned us back to the South, saying the hunting was not good
    up North. So I was obliged to remain with the sorcerer, and to
    winter beyond the great river, in spite of all I could [234] urge
    to the contrary. I realized well the dangers into which they were
    throwing me, but I saw no other remedy than to trust in God and
    leave all to him.

Si tost que les nouueaux Sauuages venus dans ces quatre canots eurent
mis pied à terre, mon hoste leur fit vn bãquet d'anguilles boucanées,
car nous n'auions déja plus de pain. A peine ces conuiés furent-ils
de retour en leur cabane, qu'ils dresserent vn festin de pois qu'ils
auoient acheté passans à Kebec, mais afin que vous voyez les excez de
ce peuple, au sortir de ce banquet, on vint à vn troisiesme, que le
sorcier auoit preparé, composé d'anguilles, & de la farine que i'auois
donnée à mon hoste: cet homme me pressa fort d'estre de la partie, il
auoit fait faire vn retranchemẽt dans nostre cabane auec des peaux, &
des couuertures, tous les conuiez entrerent là dedans, on me donna ma
part dans vne petite écuelle, mais comme ie n'estois pas encor tout à
fait accoustumé à manger de leur boüillies si sales & si fades, apres
en auoir gousté i'en voulu donner le reste à la parẽte de mon hoste,
[235] aussi tost on me dit K_hita_, K_hita_, mange tout, mange tout,
_acoumagouchan_, c'est vn festin à tout manger, ie me mis à rire, &
leur dis qu'ils ioüoient à se faire creuer, veu qu'ayans desia esté
à deux festins, ils en faisoient vn troisiesme à ne rien laisser,
mon hoste m'entendant me dit, que dis tu _Nicanis_? Ie dis que ie ne
sçaurois tout manger, donne moy, ce fit-il, ton écuelle ie t'ayderay,
luy ayant presenté il auala tout ce qui estoit dedans en deux tours de
gueule, tirant vne langue longue de la main pour la lecher au fond &
par tout, afin qu'il n'y restast rien.

    As soon as these new Savages, who had come in the four canoes, had
    landed, my host made them a banquet of smoked eels, for we were
    already out of bread. Hardly had these guests returned to their
    cabin, when they made a feast of peas which they had bought in
    passing through Kebec. But that you may understand the excesses
    of these people, [I will add that] in emerging from this banquet,
    they went to a third, prepared by the sorcerer, composed of eels,
    and of the flour I had given to my host. This man gave me a hearty
    invitation to be one of the party. He had made a little apartment
    in our cabin with skins and blankets, and all the guests entered
    this place. They gave me my share in a little bark plate; but, as
    I was not altogether accustomed to eating their mixtures, so dirty
    and insipid, after having tasted it, I wanted to give the rest to
    one of the relations of my host; [235] but they immediately cried
    out, _Khita, Khita_, "Eat all, eat all," _acoumagouchan_. "It is an
    eat-all feast." I began to laugh, and told them they were playing
    a game of "burst themselves open," seeing they had already had two
    feasts, and were making a third at which nothing was to be left.
    My host, hearing me, said, "What art thou saying, _Nicanis_?" "I
    am saying that I cannot eat all." "Give it to me," he answered,
    "give me thy plate, I will help thee." Having presented it to him,
    he gulped down all it contained in two swallows, thrusting out a
    tongue as long as your hand to lick the bottom and sides, so that
    nothing might remain.

Quand ils furent saouls quasi iusqu'à creuer, le Sorcier prit son
tambour & inuita tout le monde à chanter, celuy là chantoit le mieux
qui heurloit le plus fort; à la fin de leur tintamarre les voyans d'vne
humeur assez gaye, ie leur demanday permission de parler, cela m'estant
accordé, ie commençay à leur déclarer l'affection que ie leur portois,
vous voyez, disois-ie, de quel amour ie fuis porté en vostre endroit,
i'ay non seulement quitté mon pays, qui est beau, & bien agreable
pour venir dans vos [236] neiges & dans vos grands bois; mais encore
ie m'esloigne de la petite maison que nous auons en vos terres pour
vous suiure & pour apprendre vostre langue. Ie vous chery plus que
mes freres puis que ie les ay quittez pour vostre amour, c'est celuy
qui a tout fait qui me donne ceste affection enuers vous, c'est luy
qui creé le premier homme d'où nous sommes tous issus, voyla pourquoy
n'ayans qu'vn mesme pere nous sommes tous freres, & nous deuons tous
recognoistre vn mesme Seigneur & vn mesme Capitaine, nous deuons tous
croire en luy, & obeïr à ses volontez, Le Sorcier m'arrestant dit tout
haut, quand ie le verray, ie croiray en luy, autrement non, le moyen de
croyre en celuy qu'on ne void pas? Ie luy répondis, quand tu me dis que
ton pere, ou l'vn de tes amis a tenu quelque discours, ie croy ce qu'il
a dit, me figurant qu'il n'est point menteur, & ce pendant ie n'ay
iamais veu ton pere: de plus tu crois qu'il y a vn _Manitou_ & tu ne
l'as pas veu. Tu crois qu'il y a des _Khichicoua_k_hi_, ou des Genies
du iour, & tu ne les a pas veus: d'autres les ont veus, me dit-il, Tu
ne me sçaurois dire, luy reparty-ie, [237] ny quand, ny comment, ny
en quelle façon, ou en quel endroit on les a veus, & moy ie te puis
dire commẽt se nommoient ceux qui ont veu le Fils de Dieu en terre,
quand il l'ont veu, & en quel lieu, ce qu'ils ont faict, & en quels
pays ils ont esté. Ton Dieu, me fit-il, n'est point venu en nostre
pays, voila pourquoy nous ne croyons point en luy, fais que ie le voye,
& ie croiray en luy. Escoute moy & tu le verras, luy repliquay-ie,
Nous auons deux sortes de veuë, la veuë des yeux du corps, & la veuë
des yeux de l'ame, ce que tu vois des yeux de l'ame peut estre aussi
certain que ce que tu vois des yeux du corps: Non, dit-il, ie ne vois
rien sinon des yeux du corps, si ce n'est en dormãt, mais tu n'approuue
pas nos songes. Escoute moy iusqu'au bout, luy fis-ie, Quand tu passe
deuant vne cabane delaissée, que tu vois encor toutes les perches en
rond, que tu vois l'aire de la cabane tapissée de branches de Pin,
quand tu vois le fouyer qui fume encore, n'est-il pas vray que tu
cognois asseurément, & que tu vois bien qu'il y a eu là des Sauuages?
& que ces perches & tout le [238] reste que vous laissez quand vous
decabanez, ne se sont point rassemblées par cas fortuit? ouy, me
dit-il, or ie dis le mesme quand tu vois la beauté & la grandeur de
ce monde, que le Soleil tourne incessamment sans s'arrester, que les
saisons retournent en leur temps, & que tous les Astres gardent si
bien leur ordre, tu vois bien que les hommes n'ont point fait ces
merueilles, & qu'ils ne les gouuernent pas, il faut donc qu'il y ait
quelqu'vn plus noble que les hommes qui ait basty & qui gouuerne ceste
grande maison: or c'est celuy là que nous appellons Dieu, qui void
tout, & que nous ne voyons pas maintenant; mais nous le verrons apres
la mort, & nous serons bien-heureux à iamais auec luy si nous l'aymons
& si nous luy obeïssons. Tu ne sçais ce que tu dis, me repart-il,
apprends à parler & nous t'entendrons.

    When they were full almost to bursting, the Sorcerer took his drum
    and invited everyone to sing. The best singer was the one who
    howled the loudest. At the end of this uproar, seeing that they
    were in a very good humor, I asked permission to talk. This being
    granted, I began to affirm the affection I had for them, "You
    see," I said, "what love I bear you; I have not only left my own
    country, which is beautiful and very pleasant, to come into your
    [236] snows and vast woods, but I have also left the little house
    we have in your lands, to follow you and learn your language; I
    cherish you more than my brothers, since I have left them for love
    of you; it is he who has made all who has given me this affection
    for you, it is he who created the first man from whom we have all
    descended; hence see how it is that, as we have the same father,
    we are all brothers, and ought all to acknowledge the same Lord
    and the same Captain; we ought all to believe in him, and obey his
    will." The Sorcerer, stopping me, said in a loud voice, "When I
    see him, I will believe in him, and not until then. How believe
    in him whom we do not see?" I answered him: "When thou tellest
    me that thy father or one of thy friends has said something, I
    believe what he has said, supposing that he is not a liar, and yet
    I have never seen thy father: also, thou believest that there is a
    _Manitou_, and thou hast never seen him. Thou believest that there
    are _Khichicouakhi_, or Spirits of light, and thou hast not seen
    them." "Others have seen them," he answered. "Thou couldst not
    tell," said I, [237] "neither when, nor how, nor in what way, nor
    in what place they were seen; and I, I can tell thee the names of
    those who have seen the Son of God upon earth,--when they saw him,
    and in what place; what they have done, and in what countries they
    have been." "Thy God," he replied, "has not come to our country,
    and that is why we do not believe in him; make me see him and I
    will believe in him." "Listen to me and thou wilt see him," said I.
    "We have two kinds of sight, the sight of the eyes of the body, and
    the sight of the eyes of the soul. What thou seest with the eyes of
    the soul may be just as true as what thou seest with the eyes of
    the body." "No," said he, "I see nothing except with the eyes of
    the body, save in sleeping, and thou dost not approve our dreams."
    "Hear me to the end," I said. "When thou passest a deserted cabin,
    and seest yet standing the circle of poles, and the floor of the
    cabin covered with Pine twigs, when thou seest the hearth still
    smoking, is it not true that thou knowest positively, and that thou
    seest clearly, that Savages have been there, and that these poles
    and all the [238] rest of the things that you leave when you break
    camp, are not brought together by chance?" "Yes," he answered.
    "Now I say the same. When thou seest the beauty and grandeur of
    this world,--how the Sun incessantly turns round without stopping,
    how the seasons follow each other in their time, and how perfectly
    all the Stars maintain their order,--thou seest clearly that men
    have not made these wonders, and that they do not govern them;
    hence there must be some one more noble than men, who has built
    and who rules this grand mansion. Now it is he whom we call God,
    who sees all things, and whom we do not see; but we shall see him
    after death, and we shall be forever happy with him, if we love and
    obey him." "Thou dost not know what thou art talking about," he
    answered, "learn to talk and we will listen to thee."

Là dessus ie priay l'Apostat de déduire mes raisons & de les expliquer
en Sauuage: car i'en voyois de fort attentifs: mais ce miserable
Renegat, craignant de deplaire à son frere, ne voulut iamais ouurir
la bouche. Ie le prie, [239] ie le coniure auec toute douceur, en fin
ie redouble ma voix, & le menace de la part de Dieu, luy protestant
qu'il seroit responsable de l'ame de la femme de son frere le Sorcier,
laquelle ie voyois fort malade, & pour laquelle i'estois entré en
discours, esperant que si les Sauuages goustoient mes raisons, qu'ils
me permettroient aisément de l'instruire; ce coeur de bronze ne
flechit iamais, ny à mes prieres, ny à mes menaces; Ie prie Dieu qu'il
luy fasse misericorde, mon hoste me voyant parler d'vn accent assez
haut, me dit, _Nicanis_ ne te fasche point, auec le temps tu parleras
comme nous, & tu nous enseigneras ce que tu sçais, nous te presterons
l'oreille plus volontiers qu'à cet opiniastre qui n'a point d'esprit,
auquel nous n'auons nulle creance, voila les eloges qu'il donnoit à ce
Renegat. Ie luy repliquay, si ceste femme se portoit bien ie serois
consolé, mais elle est pour mourir dans peu de iours, & son ame faute
de cognoistre Dieu sera perduë, que si ton frere me vouloit prester
sa parole ie l'instruirois en peu de temps, sa réponse fut que ie le
laissasse, & que ie sçauois bien que c'estoit [240] vn lourdaut, pour
conclusion on dit les mots qui terminent le festin, & chacun se retira,
moy bien dolent de voir ceste ame se perdre en ma presence sans la
pouuoir secourir: car le Sorcier ayant commencé à leuer le masque &
l'Apostat à m'éconduire en sa cõsideration, toutes les esperances que
ie pouuois auoir d'ayder ceste femme malade d'instruire les autres
commencerent à s'éuanoüir, i'ay souuent souhaitté qu'vn Sainct fust en
ma place pour operer en Sainct, les petites ames crient beaucoup & font
peu, il se faut contenter de la bassesse: poursuiuons nostre voyage.

    Thereupon I asked the Apostate to enumerate my reasons and to
    explain them in the Savage tongue, for I saw that they were very
    attentive; but this miserable Renegade, fearing to displease his
    brother, would not even open his mouth. I begged him, [239] I
    conjured him with all gentleness; finally I spoke harshly, and
    threatened him in the name of God, insisting that he would be
    responsible for the soul of the wife of his brother, the Sorcerer,
    who I perceived was very sick, and for whose sake I had begun this
    discourse, hoping that if the Savages approved of my explanations,
    they would readily allow me to instruct her. This heart of bronze
    melted neither at my prayers nor at my threats. I pray God that he
    may be merciful to him. My host, seeing me speaking earnestly to
    him, said, "_Nicanis_, do not get angry; in time thou wilt speak as
    we do, and thou wilt teach us what thou knowest, we will listen to
    thee more willingly than to this stubborn fellow who has no sense
    and in whom we have no faith." These were the eulogies he passed
    upon the Renegade. I replied to him that, if this woman were well,
    I would feel consoled; but that she was going to die in a few days,
    and her soul, not knowing God, would be lost; if his brother wished
    to lend me his tongue I would instruct her in a little while. His
    answer was that I should leave him alone, for I knew very well that
    he was [240] a blockhead. In conclusion, they pronounced the words
    which ended the feast, and we all withdrew; I very sad at seeing
    this soul lost in my presence, without being able to help it. For
    the Sorcerer having begun to lift the mask, and the Apostate to
    refuse me his consideration, all the hopes I had of helping this
    sick woman, and of teaching the others, commenced to vanish. I have
    often wished that a Saint were in my place, to act the Saint; small
    souls cry out a great deal, and do very little, but one must be
    content with one's own insignificance. Let us continue our voyage.

Le douziesme de Nouembre nous commençasmes en fin d'entrer dedans les
terres, laissans nos Chalouppes & nos Canots, & quelqu'autre bagage
dans l'Isle au grand nom, de laquelle nous sortismes de mer basse,
trauersans vne prairie qui la separe du continent: iusques icy nous
auons fait chemin dans le pays des poissons, tousiours sur les eauës,
ou dans les Isles, doresnauant nous allons entrer dans le Royaume des
bestes sauuages, ie veux dire de beaucoup plus d'estẽduë que toute la
Frãce.

    On the twelfth of November we at last began to go into the country,
    leaving our Shallops and Canoes, and some other baggage, in the
    Island with the long name, which we left at low tide, crossing the
    meadow which separated us from the mainland. Up to this time we
    had journeyed through a country where fish abound, always upon the
    water or on Islands. From this time on, we were going to invade
    the Kingdom of wild beasts, I mean a country far broader in extent
    than all France.

[241] Les Sauuages passent l'hyuer dedans ces bois, courans çà & là,
pour y chercher leur vie; au commencement des neiges ils cherchent le
Castor dans des petits fleuues, & le Porc-espic dans les terres quand
la neige est profonde ils chassent à l'Orignac & au Caribou, comme i'ay
dit.

    [241] The Savages pass the winter in these woods, ranging here and
    there to get their living. In the early snows, they seek the Beaver
    in the small rivers, and Porcupines upon the land; when the deep
    snows come, they hunt the Moose and Caribou, as I have said.

Nous auons fait dans ces grands bois, depuis le 12. Nouembre de l'an
1633. que nous y entrasmes, iusques au 22. d'Auril de ceste année 1634.
que nous retournasmes aux riues du grand fleuue de sainct Laurens,
vingt-trois stations, tantost dans des valées fort profondes, puis sur
des montagnes fort releuées; quelque fois en plat pays, & tousiours
dans la neige: ces forests où i'ay esté sont peuplées de diuerses
especes d'arbres, notamment de Pins, de Cedres, & de Sapins. Nous auons
trauersé quantité de torrens d'eau, quelques fleuues, plusieurs beaux
lacs & estangs marchans sur la glace; mais descendons en particulier &
disons deux mots de chaque station, la crainte que i'ay d'estre long me
fera retrancher quãtité de choses que i'ay iugé assez legeres, [242]
quoy qu'elles puissent donner quelque iour à ces memoires.

    We made in these vast forests, from the 12th of November of the
    year 1633, when we entered them, to the 22nd of April of this
    year 1634, when we returned to the banks of the great river saint
    Lawrence, twenty-three halts,--sometimes in deep valleys, then upon
    lofty mountains, sometimes in the low flat country; and always in
    the snow. These forests where I was are made up of different kinds
    of trees, especially of Pines, Cedars and Firs. We crossed many
    torrents of water, some rivers, several beautiful lakes and ponds,
    walking upon the ice. But let us come down to particulars, and say
    a few words about each station. My fear of becoming tedious will
    cause me to omit many things that I have considered trifling, [242]
    although they might throw some light upon these memoirs.

A nostre entrée dans les terres nous estions trois cabanes de
compagnie, il y auoit dixneuf personnes en la nostre, il y en auoit
seize en la cabane du Sauuage nommé Ekhennabamate, & dix dans la
cabanne des nouueaux venus. Ie ne conte point les Sauuages qui estoient
à quelques lieuës de nous, nous faisions en tout quarante cinq
personnes, qui deuions estre nourris de ce qu'il plairoit à la saincte
Prouidence du bon Dieu de nous enuoyer; car nos prouisions tiroient par
tout à la fin.

    Upon our entrance into these regions, there were three cabins
    in our company,--nineteen persons being in ours, sixteen in the
    cabin of the Savage named Ekhennabamate, and ten in that of the
    newcomers. This does not include the Savages who were encamped a
    few leagues away from us. We were in all forty-five persons, who
    were to be kept alive on what it should please the holy Providence
    of the good God to send us, for our provisions were altogether
    getting very low.

Voicy l'ordre que nous gardions leuans le camp, battans la campagne, &
dressans nos tentes & nos pauillons. Quand nos gens remarquoient qu'il
n'y auoit plus de chasse à quelques trois ou quatre lieuës à l'entour
de nous, vn Sauuage qui cognoissoit mieux le chemin du lieu où nous
allions, crioit à pleine teste, en vn beau matin hors de la cabane,
Escoutez hommes ie m'en vais marquer le chemin pour decabaner demain
au point du iour, il prenoit vne hache & marquoit quelques arbres qui
[243] nous guidoient: on ne marque le chemin qu'au commencement de
l'hyuer: car quand tous les fleuues & les torrens sont glacez & que la
neige est haute on ne prend pas ceste peine.

    This is the order we followed in breaking up our camps, in tramping
    over the country and in erecting our tents and pavilions. When our
    people saw that there was no longer any game within three or four
    leagues of us, a Savage, who was best acquainted with the way to
    the place where we were going, cried out in a loud voice, one fine
    day outside the cabin, "Listen, men, I am going to mark the way for
    breaking camp to-morrow at daybreak." He took a hatchet and marked
    some trees which [243] guided us. They do not mark the way except
    in the beginning of winter; for, when all the rivers and torrents
    are frozen, and the snow is deep, they do not take this trouble.

Quand il y a beaucoup de pacquets, ce qui arriue lors qu'ils ont tué
grand nombre d'Eslans, les femmes en vont porter vne partie iuīqu'au
lieu où l'on doit camper le iour suiuant; quand la neige est haute,
ils font des traisnées de bois qui se fend, & qui se leue comme par
fueilles assez minces & fort longues, ces traisnées sont fort estroites
à raisõ qu'elles se doiuent tirer entre vne infinité d'arbres fort
pressez en quelques endroits, mais en recompense elles sont fort
longues. Voyant vn iour celle de mon hoste dressée contre vn arbre, à
peine peus ie atteindre au milieu estendant le bras autant qu'il me fut
possible. Ils lient leur bagage là dessus, & auec vne corde qui leur
vient passer sur l'estomach, ils traisnent sur la neige ces chariots
sans rouës.

    When there are a number of things to be carried, as often happens
    when they have killed a great many Elk, the women go ahead, and
    carry a part of them to the place where they are to camp the
    following day. When the snow is deep, they make sledges of wood
    which splits, and which can be peeled off like leaves in very thin,
    long strips. These sledges are very narrow, because they have to be
    dragged among masses of trees closely crowded in some places; but,
    to make up for this, they are very long. One day, seeing that of my
    host standing against a tree, I could scarcely reach to the middle
    of it, stretching out my arm as far as I could. They fasten their
    baggage upon these, and, with a cord which they pass over their
    chests, they drag these wheelless chariots over the snow.

Pour ne m'éloigner dauantage de mon chemin, si tost qu'il est iour
chacun se prepare pour déloger, on commence [244] par le desieuner
s'il y a dequoy; car par fois on part sans desieuner, on poursuit
sans disner & on se couche sans souper, chacun fait son pacquet le
mieux qu'il peut, les femmes battent la cabane pour faire tomber la
glace & la neige de dessus les écorces qu'elles roulent en faisseaux,
le bagage estant plié ils iettent sur leur dos ou sur leurs reins de
longs fardeaux qu'ils supportent auec vne corde, qui passe sur leur
front, soubs laquelle ils mettent vn morceau d'écorce de peur de se
blesser; tout le monde chargé on monte à cheual sur des raquettes
qu'on se lie aux pieds afin de ne point enfoncer dans la neige, cela
fait on marche en campagne & en montagnes, faisant passer deuant
les petits enfans qui partent bien tost & n'arriuent par fois que
bien tard, ces pauures petits ont leur pacquet, ou leur traisne pour
s'accoustumer de bonne heure à la fatigue, & tascheon de leur donner
de l'emulation à qui portera ou traisnera dauantage, de vous depeindre
la difficulté des chemins, ie n'ay ny plume ny pinceau qui le puisse
faire, il faut auoir veu cét obiect pour le cognoistre, & [245] auoir
gousté de ceste viande pour en sçauoir le goust, nous ne faisions que
monter & descendre, il nous falloit souuent baisser à demy corps pour
passer soubs des arbres quasi tombez, & monter sur d'autres couchez
par terre, dont les branches nous faisoient quelques fois tomber assez
doucement, mais tousiours froidement, car c'estoit sur la neige. S'il
arriuoit quelque dégel, ô Dieu quelle peine! il me sembloit que ie
marchois sur vn chemin de verre qui se cassoit à tous coups soubs mes
pieds: la neige congelée venant à s'amollir tomboit & s'enfonçoit par
esquarres ou grandes pieces, & nous en auions bien souuent iusques aux
genoux, quelquefois iusqu'à la ceinture, que s'il y auoit de la peine
à tomber, il y en auoit encor plus à se retirer: car nos raquettes
se chargeoient de neiges & se rendoient si pesantes, que quand vous
veniez à les retirer il vous sembloit qu'on vous tiroit les iambes
pour vous démembrer. I'en ay veu qui glissoient tellement soubs des
souches enseuelies soubs la neige, qui ne pouuoient tirer ny iambes ny
raquettes sans secours: or figurez vous [246] maintenant vne personne
chargée comme vn mulet, & iugez si la vie des Sauuages est douce.

    But not to wander farther from my subject, as soon as it is day
    each one prepares to break camp. They begin [244] by having
    breakfast, if there is any; for sometimes they depart without
    breakfasting, continue on their way without dining, and go to bed
    without supping. Each one arranges his own baggage, as best he can;
    and the women strike the cabin, to remove the ice and snow from the
    bark, which they roll up in a bundle. The baggage being packed,
    they throw it upon their backs or loins in long bundles, which they
    hold with a cord that passes over their foreheads, beneath which
    they place a piece of bark so that it will not hurt them. When
    every one is loaded, they mount their snowshoes, which are bound
    to the feet so that they will not sink into the snow; and then
    they march over plain and mountain, making the little ones go on
    ahead, who start early, and often do not arrive until quite late.
    These little ones have their load, or their sledge, to accustom
    them early to fatigue; and they try to stimulate them to see who
    will carry or drag the most. To paint to you the hardships of the
    way, I have neither pen nor brush that could do it; they must be
    experienced in order to be appreciated, and [245] this dish must be
    tried to know how it tastes. We did nothing but go up and go down;
    frequently we had to bend halfway over, to pass under partly-fallen
    trees, and step over others lying upon the ground whose branches
    sometimes knocked us over, gently enough to be sure, but always
    coldly, for we fell upon the snow. If it happened to thaw, Oh God,
    what suffering! It seemed to me I was walking over a road of glass,
    which broke under my feet at every step. The frozen snow, beginning
    to melt, would fall and break into blocks or big pieces, into
    which we often sank up to our knees, and sometimes to our waists.
    If there was pain in falling, there was still more in pulling
    ourselves out, for our raquettes were loaded with snow, and became
    so heavy that, when we tried to draw them out, it seemed as if
    somebody were tugging at our legs to dismember us. I have seen some
    who slid so far under the logs buried in the snow, that they could
    not pull out either their legs or their snowshoes without help. Now
    imagine [246] a person loaded like a mule, and judge how easy is
    the life of the Savage.

En France dans la difficulté des voyages encor trouue-on quelques
villages pour se rafraischir, & pour se fortifier; mais les
hostelleries que nous rencontrions, & où nous beuuions, n'estoient que
des ruisseaux, encor falloit il rompre la glace pour en tirer de l'eau;
il est vray que nous ne faisions pas de longues traites, aussi nous
eust il esté tout à fait impossible.

    In the discomforts of a journey in France, villages are found
    where one can refresh and fortify one's self; but the inns that
    we encountered and where we drank, were only brooks; we even had
    to break the ice in order to get some water. It is true that we
    did not make long stages, which would indeed have been absolutely
    impossible for us.

Estans arriuez au lieu où nous deuions camper, les femmes alloient
couper les perches pour dresser la cabane, les hommes vuidoient la
neige, comme ie l'ay plus amplement déduit au Chapitre precedent: or
il falloit trauailler à ce bastiment, ou bien trembler de froid trois
grosses heures sur la neige en attendant qu'il fut fait, ie mettois par
fois la main à l'œuure pour m'échauffer, mais i'estois pour l'ordinaire
tellement glacé que le feu seul me pouuoit dégeler; les Sauuages en
estoient estonnez: car ils suoient soubs le trauail, leur témoignant
quelquefois que i'auois grãd [247] froid, ils me disoient, donne tes
mains que nous voyons si tu dis vray, & les trouuans toutes glacées,
touchez de compassion ils me donnoient leurs mitaines échauffées, &
prenoient les miennes toutes froides: iusque là que mõ hoste apres
auoir experimenté cecy plusieurs fois, me dit _Nicanis_ n'hyuerne
plus auec les Sauuages, car ils te tuëront; il vouloit dire, comme ie
pense, que ie tõberois malade & que ne pouuant estre traisné auec le
bagage, qu'on me feroit mourir, ie me mis à rire, & luy reparty qu'il
me vouloit épouuenter.

    When we reached the place where we were to encamp, the women went
    to cut the poles for the cabin, and the men to clear away the snow,
    as I have stated more fully in the preceding Chapter. Now a person
    had to work at this building, or shiver with cold for three long
    hours upon the snow, waiting until it was finished. Sometimes I put
    my hand to the work to warm myself, but usually I was so frozen
    that fire alone could thaw me. The Savages were surprised at this,
    for they often sweat under the work. Assuring them now and then
    that I was very [247] cold, they would say to me, "Give us thy
    hands that we may see if thou tellest the truth;" and, finding them
    quite frozen, touched with compassion, they gave me their warm
    mittens and took my cold ones. This went so far, that my host,
    after having tried it several times, said to me, "_Nicanis_, do not
    winter any more with the Savages, for they will kill thee." I think
    he meant that I would fall ill, and, as I could not be dragged
    along with the baggage, they would kill me; I began to laugh, and
    told him that he was trying to frighten me.

La cabane estant faite, ou sur la nuit, ou vn peu deuant, on parloit
de disner & de souper tout ensemble: car sortant le matin apres auoir
mangé vn petit morceau, il falloit auoir patience qu'on fut arriué &
que l'hostellerie fust faite pour y loger, & pour y manger, mais le
pis estoit que ce iour là nos gens n'allans point ordinairement à la
chasse, c'estoit pour nous vn iour de ieusne aussi bien qu'vn iour de
trauail. C'est trop retarder venons à nostre station.

    The cabin finished, either toward nightfall or a little before,
    they began to talk about dinner and supper all in one, for as we
    had departed in the morning after having eaten a small morsel, we
    had to have patience to reach our destination and to wait until
    the hotel was erected, in order to lodge and eat there. But,
    unfortunately, on this particular day, our people did not usually
    go hunting; and so it was for us a day of fasting as well as a day
    of work. We have delayed long enough, let us come to our station.

Nous quittasmes les riues du grand fleuue le 12. de Nouembre, comme
i'ay [248] desia dit, & vinsmes cabaner pres d'vn torrent, faisans
chemin à la façon que ie viens de dire, chacun portant son fardeau.
Tous les Sauuages se mocquoient de moy de ce que ie n'estois pas bon
cheual de male, me contentant de porter mon manteau qui estoit assez
pesant, vn petit sac où ie mettois mes menuës necessitez & leurs
gausseries, qui ne me pesoient pas tant que mon corps, voila ma charge:
mon hoste & l'Apostat portoient sur des bastons croisez en forme de
brancard la femme du Sorcier qui estoit fort malade, ils la mettoient
sur la neige en attendant que la cabane fut faite, où elle passoit plus
de trois heures sans feu, & sans iamais se plaindre, & sans monstrer
aucun signe d'impatience, ie me mettois plus en peine d'elle qu'elle
mesme: car ie criois souuent qu'on fit faire pour le moins vn peu de
feu aupres d'elle, mais la réponse estoit qu'elle se chaufferoit la
cabane estant faite: ces barbares sont faits à ces souffrances, ils
s'attẽdent bien que s'ils tombent malades qu'on les traittera à mesme
monnoye. Nous seiournasmes trois iours en ceste station, pendant
lesquels [249] voicy vne partie des choses que i'ay marqué dans mon
memoire.

    We left the banks of the great river on the 12th of November, as
    I have [248] said, and pitched our camp near a torrent, traveling
    in the way I have just described, each one carrying his pack. All
    the Savages made sport of me because I was not a good pack horse,
    being satisfied to carry my cloak, which was heavy enough; a small
    bag in which I kept my little necessaries; and their sneers, which
    were not as heavy as my body; and this was my load. My host and the
    Apostate carried upon poles, crossed in the form of a stretcher,
    the wife of the Sorcerer, who was very sick; they placed her on the
    snow, while waiting for the cabin to be made, and there she passed
    more than three hours without fire, and did not once complain nor
    show any sign of impatience. I was more troubled about her than
    she was about herself, for I often appealed to them to make at
    least a little fire near her; but the answer was that she would get
    warm when the cabin was made. These savages are hardened to such
    sufferings; they expect if they fall sick to be paid in the same
    coin. We sojourned three days at this station; and the following
    [249] are some of the things I noted down in my memoirs during this
    time.

C'est icy que les Sauuages consulterent les genies du iour, en la façon
que i'ay couché au Chapitre quatriesme: or comme ie m'estois ris de
ceste superstition, & qu'à toutes les occasions qui se rencontroient,
ie faisois voir que les mysteres du Sorcier n'estoient que ieux
d'enfans, m'efforçant de luy rauir ses oüailles pour les rendre auec
le temps à celuy qui les a rachetées au prix de son sang, cét homme
forcené fit le iour d'apres ceste consulte, que ie vay décrire.

    It was here that the Savages consulted their genii of light, in the
    manner I have described in Chapter four. Now as I had always shown
    my amusement at this superstition, and on all possible occasions
    had made them see that the mysteries of the Sorcerer were nothing
    but child's play,--endeavoring to carry off his flock so that, in
    time, I might deliver them up to him who had bought them with his
    blood,--this unscrupulous man, the day afterward, went through with
    the performance I am going to describe.

Mõ hoste ayãt inuité au festin tous les Sauuages nos voisins, comme
ils estoiẽt desia venus, & assis à l'entour du feu & de la chaudiere,
attendans l'ouuerture du banquet, voila que le Sorcier qui estoit
couché vis à vis de moy se leue tout à coup, n'ayant point encor parlé
depuis la venuë des conuiez, il paroist tout furieux, se iettant sur
vne des perches de la cabane pour l'arracher, il la rompt en deux
pieces, il roule les yeux en la teste, regardant çà & là comme vn
homme hors de soy, puis enuisageant les [250] assistans, il leur dit
_Iriniticou nama Nitirinisin_, ô hommes i'ay perdu l'esprit, ie ne
sçay où ie suis, esloignez de moy les haches & les espées, car ie suis
hors du sens. A ces paroles tous les Sauuages baissent les yeux en
terre, & ie les leue au ciel, d'où i'attendois secours, me figurant que
cét homme faisoit l'enragé pour se vanger de moy, en m'ostant la vie,
ou du moins pour m'épouuenter, afin de me reprocher par apres que mon
Dieu me manquoit au besoin, & de publier parmy les siens, qu'ayant si
souuent témoigné que ie ne craignois pas leur _Manitou_, qui les fait
trembler, ie pallissois deuant vn homme. Tant s'en faut que la peur qui
dans les dangers d'vne mort naturelle me faisoit quelquefois rentrer
dans moy-mesme, me saisit pour lors, qu'au contraire i'enuisageois ce
forcené auec autant d'asseurance que si i'eusse eu vne armée à mes
costez, me representant que le Dieu que i'adorois pouuoit lier les
bras aux fols & aux enragez aussi bien qu'aux demons: qu'au reste si
sa Majesté me vouloit ouurir les portes de la mort, par les mains d'vn
homme qui faisoit l'endiablé, que [251] sa Prouidence estoit tousiours
aymable. Ce Thrason redoublant ces fougues fit mille actions de fol,
d'ensorcelé, de demoniaque, tantost il crioit à pleine teste, puis il
demeuroit tout court comme épouuanté: il faisoit mine de pleurer, puis
il s'éclattoit de rire comme vn diable follet; il chantoit sans regles
ny sans mesures, il sifloit comme vn serpent, il hurloit comme vn loup,
ou comme vn chien, il faisoit du hibou & du chathuan, tournant les yeux
tout effarez dedans sa teste, prenant mille postures, faisant tousiours
semblant de chercher quelque chose pour la lancer, i'attendois à tous
coups qu'il arrachast quelque perche pour m'en assommer, ou qu'il se
iettast sur moy, ie ne laissay pas neantmoins pour luy monstrer que ie
ne m'estonnois pas de ses diableries, de faire toutes mes actions à
l'ordinaire de lire, d'écrire, de faire mes petites prieres, & l'heure
de mon sommeil estant venuë ie me couchay & reposay aussi paisiblement
dans son sabbat comme i'eusse fait dans vn profond silence, i'estois
déja aussi accoustumé de m'endormir à ses cris, & à ses bruits de [252]
tambour, qu'vn enfant aux chansons de sa nourisse.

    My host having invited all the neighboring Savages to the feast,
    when they had come and seated themselves around the fire and the
    kettle, waiting for the banquet to be opened, lo, the Sorcerer, who
    had been lying down opposite me, suddenly arose, not yet having
    uttered a word since the arrival of the guests. He seemed to be
    in an awful fury, and threw himself upon one of the poles of the
    cabin to tear it out; he broke it in two, rolled his eyes around
    in his head, looked here and there like a man out of his senses,
    then facing those [250] present, he said to them, _Iriniticou nama
    Nitirinisin_, "Oh, men, I have lost my mind, I do not know where
    I am; take the hatchets and javelins away from me, for I am out
    of my senses." At these words all the Savages lowered their eyes
    to the ground, and I raised mine to heaven, whence I expected
    help,--imagining that this man was acting the madman in order to
    take revenge on me, to take my life or at least to frighten me,
    so that he could reproach me afterwards that my God had failed me
    in time of need, and to proclaim among his people, that I, who had
    so often testified that I did not fear their _Manitou_, who makes
    them tremble, had turned pale before a man. So far was I from being
    seized by fear which, in the dangers of a natural death, makes me
    shrink within myself, that, on the contrary, I faced this furious
    man with as much assurance as if I had had an army at my side,
    reflecting that the God whom I adored could bind the arms of fools
    and madmen as well as those of demons; that besides, if his Majesty
    wished to open to me the portals of death by the hands of a man who
    was acting the devil, [251] his Providence was always loving and
    kind. This Thraso [braggart], redoubling his furies, did a thousand
    foolish acts of a lunatic or of one bewitched; sometimes he would
    cry out at the top of his voice, and then would suddenly stop
    short, as if frightened; he pretended to cry, and then burst into
    laughter like a wanton devil; he sang without rules and without
    measure, he hissed like a serpent, he howled like a wolf, or like
    a dog, he screeched like an owl or a night hawk,--rolling his eyes
    about in his head and striking a thousand attitudes, always seeming
    to be looking for something to throw. I was expecting every moment
    he would tear up one of the poles with which to strike me down, or
    that he would throw himself upon me; but in order to show him that
    I was not at all astonished at these devilish acts, I continued, in
    my usual way, to read, write and say my little prayers; and when
    my hour for retiring came, I lay down and rested as peacefully
    through his orgies, as I would have done in a profound silence; I
    was already as accustomed to go to sleep in the midst of his cries
    and the sound of his [252] drum, as a child is to the songs of its
    nurse.

Le lendemain au soir à mesme heure il sembla vouloir entrer dans les
mesmes fougues, & donner vne autrefois l'alarme au camp, disant qu'il
perdoit l'esprit, le voyant desia demy fol, il me vint vne pensée qu'il
pourroit estre trauaillé de quelque fiévre chaude, ie l'aborde & luy
prens le bras pour luy toucher l'artere, il me regarde affreusemẽt,
faisant de l'estõné, comme si ie luy eusse apporté des nouuelles de
l'autre monde, il roule les yeux çà & là comme vn insensé: luy ayant
touché le poulx & le front ie le trouuay frais comme vn poisson, &
aussi éloigné de la fiévre comme i'estois de France, cela me confirma
dans mon opinion qu'il faisoit de l'enragé pour m'estonner, & pour
tirer à compassion tous ses gens qui dans nostre disette luy donnoient
ce qu'ils pouuoient auoir de meilleur.

    The next evening, at the same hour he seemed disposed to enter into
    the same infuriated state, and to again alarm the camp, saying that
    he was losing his mind. Seeing him already half-mad, it occurred
    to me that he might be suffering from some violent fever; I went
    up to him and took hold of his arm to feel the artery; he gave me
    a frightful look, seeming to be astonished, and acting as if I had
    brought him news from the other world, rolling his eyes here and
    there like one possessed. Having touched his pulse and forehead, I
    found him as cool as a fish, and as far from fever as I was from
    France. This confirmed me in my suspicion that he was acting the
    madman to frighten me, and to draw down upon himself the compassion
    of all our people, who in our dearth, were giving him the best they
    had.

Le 20. du mesme mois de Nouembre ne se trouuans plus de Castors, ny de
Porcs-espics en nostre quartier, nous tirasmes pays, & ce fut nostre
deuxiesme station, on porta la femme du Sorcier [253] sur vn brancart,
& la mit-on, comme i'ay desia dit, dessus la neige en attendant
que nostre palais fût dressé, ce pendant ie m'approchay d'elle luy
témoignant beaucoup de compassion: il y auoit desia quelques iours
que ie taschois de gagner son affection, afin qu'elle me prestast plus
volontiers l'oreille, cognoissant bien qu'elle ne pouuoit pas viure
long-temps, car elle estoit comme vne squelette, n'ayant quasi plus la
force de parler, quand elle appelloit quelqu'vn la nuit, ie me leuois
moy mesme, & l'éueillois, ie luy faisois du feu, ie luy demandois
ce dont elle auoit besoin, elle me cõmandoit de petites chosettes,
comme de fermer les portes ou boucher quelque trou de la cabane qui
l'incõmodoit, apres ces menus discours & offices de charité, ie
l'aborday, & luy demãday si elle ne vouloit pas bien croire en celuy
qui a tout faict, & que son ame apres sa mort seroit bien-heureuse. Au
commencement elle me répondit qu'elle n'auoit point veu Dieu, & que ie
luy fisse voir, autrement qu'elle ne pouuoit croire en luy, elle auoit
tiré ceste réponse de la bouche de sõ mary, Ie luy repartis qu'elle
[254] croyoit plusieurs choses qu'elle ne voyoit pas, & qu'au reste son
ame seroit bruslée pour vne eternité si elle n'obeïssoit à celuy qui
a tout fait; elle s'adoucit petit à petit, & me témoigna qu'elle luy
vouloit obeïr, ie n'osois l'entretenir long temps, mais seulement par
reprises, ceux qui me voyoient me crians que ie la laissasse.

    On the 20th of the same month of November, finding no more Beavers
    and Porcupines in our quarter, we resumed our journey, this being
    our second station. The Sorcerer's wife was carried [253] upon
    a stretcher, and they placed her, as I have already said, upon
    the snow until our palace was erected. Meanwhile I approached
    her, showing how greatly I sympathized with her; already for some
    days I had been trying to gain her affection, that she might more
    willingly listen to me; I knew that she could not live long, as
    she was like a skeleton, hardly having strength enough to talk.
    When she called some one in the night, I arose and awoke him, I
    made fires for her, I asked her if she was in need of anything;
    she had me do little things for her, such as closing the door, or
    stopping up a hole in the cabin which annoyed her. After these
    little conversations and acts of charity, I approached and asked
    her if she did not want to believe in him who has made all, so that
    her soul after death would be blest. At first she answered that she
    had not seen God, and that I should make her see him, otherwise she
    could not believe in him. She got this answer from the lips of her
    husband. I told her that she [254] believed in a great many things
    she had not seen, and besides, her soul would be burned through
    eternity if she did not obey him who has made all. She softened,
    little by little, and testified to me that she wished to obey him.
    I did not dare confer with her long, and only at intervals, for
    those who saw me would cry out that I should leave her alone.

Sur le soir estãs tous dãs nostre nouuelle cabane, ie m'approchay
d'elle, l'appellant par son nom, iamais elle ne me voulut parler en
la presence des autres, ie priay le Sorcier de luy dire qu'elle me
répondist, & de m'ayder à l'instruire, luy representant qu'il ne
pouuoit arriuer que du bien de ceste action, il me répond non plus que
la malade, ie m'addresse à l'Apostat le pressant auec de tres humbles
prieres de me prester sa parole, point de répõse; ie retourne à la
malade, ie l'appelle, ie luy parle, ie luy demande si elle ne vouloit
pas aller au Ciel, à tout cela pas vn mot: Ie solicite de rechef le
Sorcier son mary, ie luy promets vne chemise & du petun, pourueu qu'il
dise à sa femme qu'elle m'écoute, comment veux-tu, me dit-il, que nous
[255] croyõs en ton Dieu ne l'ayãs iamais veu? ie t'ay desia respondu
à cela, luy fis-je, il n'est pas temps de disputer, cette ame se va
perdre pour vn iamais si tu n'en as pitié: Tu vois bien que celuy qui
a faict le Ciel pour toy, te veut donner de plus grands biens, que
d'aller manger des escorces en vn village qui ne fut iamais, mais aussi
te punira il seuerement si tu ne crois en luy, & si tu ne luy obeis.
Ne pouuant tirer aucune raison de ce miserable homme, ie pressay encor
vne fois la malade, mon hoste me l'entendant nommer par son nom me
tança, tais toy me dit-il, ne la nomme point, elle est desia morte, son
ame n'est plus dans son corps. C'est vne grande verité que personne
ne va à +IESVS-CHRIST+ que son pere ne luy tende la main, c'est vn grãd
present que la foy, quãd ces pauures Barbares voyẽt qu'vn pauure malade
ne parle plus, ou qu'il tombe en syncope, ou en quelque phrenesie, ils
disent que son esprit n'est plus dans son corps, si le malade retourne
en son bon sens, c'est l'èsprit qui est de retour: en fin quand il
est mort il n'en faut plus parler, ny le nommer en aucune façon: pour
conclurre ce point, il [256] me fallust retirer sans rien faire.

    Toward evening, when we were all in our new cabin, I approached and
    called her by name. She never would talk with me in the presence
    of the others. I begged the Sorcerer to tell her to answer me, and
    to help me teach her, showing him that nothing but good could come
    of this action. He would not answer me any more than the invalid.
    I addressed the Apostate, urging him with very humble prayers to
    lend me his voice, but no answer; I return to the sick woman, I
    call her by name, I speak to her, I ask her if she does not wish to
    go to Heaven; to all this not a word. I again beg her husband, the
    Sorcerer; I promise him a shirt and some tobacco, if he will tell
    his wife to listen to me. "How canst thou ask us," he said, "to
    [255] believe in thy God, never having seen him?" "I have already
    answered that question for thee," I returned; "this is no time to
    argue, this soul is going to be forever lost if thou dost not have
    pity. Thou seest well that he who has made the Heavens for thee,
    wishes to give thee greater blessings than to go about eating bark
    in a village which never existed; but he will also severely punish
    thee if thou dost not believe in him and obey him." Not being able
    to draw any answer from this miserable man, I again urged the sick
    woman. My host, hearing me call her by name, chided me, saying,
    "Keep still, do not name her; she is already dead, her soul is no
    longer in her body." It is a great truth that no one goes to +JESUS
    CHRIST+ until the father extends to him the hand. How wonderful a
    gift is this faith! When these simple Barbarians see that a poor
    invalid no longer speaks, or that he has fainted, or been seized by
    a frenzy, they say that the spirit is no longer in the body; and,
    if the invalid returns to his senses, it is the spirit which has
    returned. Finally, when he is dead, they must no longer speak of
    him, nor name him in any way. To finish this story, [256] I had to
    retire without accomplishing anything.

On tint conseil en ce lieu de ce qu'on deuoit faire pour trouuer à
manger, nous estions desia reduits à telle extremité que ie fa[i]sois
vn bon repas d'vne peau d'anguille boucannée, que ie iettois aux chiens
quelques iours auparauant. Deux choses me toucherent ici le cœur:
jettant vne fois vn os, ou vne arreste d'anguille aux chiens, vn petit
garçon fut plus habile que le chien, il se jetta sur l'os & le rongea &
mangea: vne autre fois vn enfant ayant demandé à manger, comme on luy
eust respõdu qu'il n'y en auoit point, ce pauure petit s'en prit à ses
yeux, les larmes rouloient sur sa face grosses commes des pois, & ses
souspirs & ses sanglots me touchoient de compassion, encor taschoit
il de se cacher: c'est vne leçon qu'on fait aux enfans de se monstrer
courageux dans la famine.

    They took counsel in this place as to what they should do to get
    something to eat. We were already reduced to such extremities that
    I made a good meal on a skin of smoked eel, which a few days before
    I had thrown to the dogs. Here two incidents occurred which touched
    my heart. Once when I threw a bone or remnant of an eel to the
    dogs, a little boy, more nimble than they, threw himself upon the
    bone, and gnawed and bit into it. Another time, a child having
    asked for something to eat, when he was told there was nothing at
    all, the poor little fellow's eyes filled, and tears as big as peas
    rolled down his cheeks, and his sighs and sobs filled me with pity,
    although he tried to suppress them. One lesson they teach their
    children is to be brave in time of famine.

Le 28. du mesme mois, nous decampasmes pour la troisiesme fois, il
neigeoit fort, mais la necessité nous pressant le mauuais temps ne peut
nous arrester. Ie fus bien estonné en cette troisiesme demeure que ie
ne vis point apporter la malade, ie n'osois demander ce qu'elle [257]
estoit deuenuë, car ils ne veulent pas qu'on parle des morts: sur le
soir i'accostay le Renegat, ie luy demanday parlant François où estoit
ceste pauure femme, s'il ne l'auoit point tuée, voyant qu'elle s'en
alloit mourir, cõme il auoit autrefois assommé à coups de bastons vne
pauure fille qui tiroit à la mort, ainsi que luy mesme l'auoit raconté
à nos François. Non, dit-il, ie ne l'ay pas tuée: qui donc, luy fis
ie, est-ce le ieune Hiroquois? Nenny, me répond-il, car il est party
de grand matin: c'est donc mon hoste, ou le Sorcier son mary; car elle
parloit encor quand ie suis sorty ce matin de la cabane, il baissa la
teste, m'aduoüãt tacitement que l'vn des deux l'auoit mise à mort:
vn vieillard m'a ceneãtmoins dit depuis, qu'elle mourut de sa mort
naturelle vn peu apres que ie fus party, ie m'en rapporte à ce qui en
est, quoy que s'en soit ayant refusé de recognoistre le Fils de Dieu
pour son Pasteur pendant sa vie, il n'est que trop probable qu'il ne
l'a pas recogneuë pour vne de ses oüailles, après sa mort.

    On the 28th of the same month, we broke camp for the third time. It
    was snowing hard; but, with necessity urging us on, the bad weather
    could not stop us. I was surprised, in this third halt, not to
    see them bring the invalid; but I did not dare ask what [257] had
    become of her, for they do not want any one to mention the dead. In
    the evening, I went to the Renegade, and asked him in French where
    this poor woman was,--if he had not killed her, seeing her about
    to die, as he had once before killed with blows from a club a poor
    girl who was on the point of death, which he himself had related
    to our French. "No," said he, "I have not killed her." "Who has
    then," said I, "is it the young Hiroquois?" "No, no," he answered,
    "for he went away very early this morning." "It is then my host,
    or the Sorcerer her husband, for she was still able to talk when I
    left the cabin this morning." He bowed his head, admitting tacitly
    that one of them had put her to death. But, since then, an old man
    has told me that she died a natural death a little while after I
    departed. I am unable to say which is correct; but, at all events,
    as she refused to recognize the son of God as her Shepherd during
    her life, it is no more than probable that he refused to recognize
    her as one of his flock after death.

I'ay remarqué iusques icy de trois sortes de medecines naturelles parmy
les [258] Sauuages, l'vne c'est leur suërie, dont i'ay parlé cy-dessus,
l'autre consiste à se taillader legerement la partie du corps qui
leur fait mal, la mettant toute en sang qu'ils font sortir de ces
decoupeures en assez grande abondance, ils se seruirent vne fois de mon
canif pour taillader la teste d'vn enfant de dix iours. La troisiesme
de ces medecines est composée de racleure d'écorces interieures de
bouleau, du moins cet arbre me sembloit tel, ils font boüillir ces
racleures dans de l'eau, qu'ils boiuent par apres pour se faire vomir,
ils m'ont souuent voulu donner ceste potion pendant que i'estois
malade, mais ie ne la iugeois pas à mon vsage.

    Up to the present I have observed three kinds of natural medicines
    among the [258] Savages. One of these is their sweat-box, of which
    I have spoken above; the second consists in making a slight gash
    in the part of the body where the pain is, covering it with blood
    which they make issue from these cuts quite abundantly. They once
    made use of my penknife to cut the head of a child ten days old.
    The third of these medicines is composed of the scrapings of the
    inside bark of the birch, at least it seems to be this tree. They
    boil these scrapings in water, which they afterwards drink to make
    them vomit. They often wanted me to drink this potion when I was
    sick, but I did not think it would agree with me.

Le iour de sainct François Xauier, nostre pretendu Magicien ayant
sur le soir battu son tambour, & bien hurlé à l'ordinaire, car il ne
manquoit point de nous donner ceste aubade toutes les nuits à nostre
premier sommeil, voyant que tout le monde estoit endormy, & cognoissant
que ce pauure homme faisoit ce tintamare pour sa guarison. I'entray
en discours auec luy, ie commençay par vn témoignage de grand amour
[259] en son endroit, & par des loüanges que ie luy iettay comme
vne amorce pour le prendre dans les filets de la verité. Ie luy fis
entendre que si vn esprit capable des choses grandes comme le sien
cognoissoit Dieu, que tous les Sauuages induis par son exemple le
voudroient aussi cognoistre, aussi tost il prit l'essor, & se mit à
declarer la puissance, l'authorité & le credit qu'il a sur l'esprit
de ses compatriotes, il dit que dés sa ieunesse les Sauuages luy
donnerent le nom de _Khimouchouminau_, c'est à dire nostre ayeul &
nostre maistre, que tout passe par ses aduis, & que chacun suit ses
conseils, ie l'aydois à se loüer le mieux que ie pouuois: car il est
vray qu'il a de belles parties pour vn Sauuage: enfin ie luy dis que
ie m'estonnois qu'vn homme de iugement ne peut recognoistre le peu de
rapport qu'il y a entre ce tintamare & la santé. Quand tu as bien crié
& bien battu ton tambour, que fait ce bruit sinon de t'estourdir la
teste, pas vn Sauuage n'est malade, qu'on ne luy batte les oreilles de
ce tambour, afin qu'il ne meure point, en as-tu veu de dispensez de la
mort; ie te veux faire [260] vne proposition: Escoute moy patiemment,
luy dis-ie, bas ton tambour dix iours durant, chante & faits chanter
les autres tant que tu voudras, fais tout ce qui sera en ton possible
pour recouurer ta santé, si tu n'en guary dans ce temps-là, confesse
que ton tintamare, que tes hurlemens, & que tes chansons ne te
sçauroient remettre en santé, abstiens toy dix autres iours de toutes
ces superstitions, quitte ton tambour, & tous ces bruits dereglez,
demande au Dieu que i'adore, qu'il te donne sa cognoissance, pense &
crois que ton ame doit passer à vne autre vie que celle-cy, efforce toy
d'aymer son bien cõme tu ayme le bien de ton corps, & quand tu auras
passé ces dix autres derniers iours en ceste façon, ie me retireray
trois iours durant en oraison dans vne petite cabane qu'on fera plus
auant dans le bois, là ie prieray mon Dieu qu'il te donne la santé du
corps & de l'ame, toy seul me viendras voir au temps que ie diray, & tu
feras de tout ton cœur les prieres que ie t'enseigneray; promettant à
Dieu que s'il luy plaist de te rendre la santé, tu appelleras tous les
Sauuages de ce lieu, & en [261] leur presence tu brusleras ton tambour,
& toutes les autres badineries dont tu te sers pour les amasser, que tu
leur diras que le Dieu des Chrestiens est le vray Dieu, qu'ils croyẽt
en luy, & qu'ils luy obeïssent, si tu promets cecy veritablement & de
cœur, i'espere que tu seras deliuré de ta maladie, car mon Dieu est
tout puissant.

    On the day of saint François Xavier, our pretended Magician began
    in the evening to beat his drum and to utter his howls as usual;
    for he did not fail to give us this entertainment every night at
    our first sleep. I saw that every one was asleep, and, knowing that
    this poor man made all this racket in order to cure himself, I
    entered into conversation with him. I began by expressing a great
    deal of affection [259] for him, and by heaping praises upon him,
    as bait to draw him into the nets of truth. I made him understand
    that if a mind as capable of great things as his was, should know
    God, that all the Savages, influenced by his example, would like to
    know him also. He immediately began to soar, and to talk about the
    power, the authority, and the influence he had over the minds of
    his fellow-savages. He said that since his youth they had given him
    the name, _Khimouchouminau_, meaning, "our sire and our master;"
    that everything was done according to his opinion, and that they
    all followed his advice. I helped in this self-praise as well
    as I could, for he has indeed some good qualities for a Savage. I
    finally told him that I was surprised that a man of judgment could
    not realize that there was little connection between this uproar
    and health. "When thou hast screamed and beaten thy drum with all
    thy might, what good does it do except to make thy head dizzy? No
    Savage is sick, whose ears they do not deafen with this drum, to
    keep him from dying; yet hast thou ever seen it dispel death? I am
    going to make a proposal [260] to thee, listen to me patiently,"
    I said to him. "Beat thy drum for ten days, sing and make all the
    others sing as much as thou wilt, do all thou canst to recover thy
    health, and if thou art not cured in that time confess that thy
    din, howls and songs cannot restore thee to health. Now abstain
    ten more days from all these superstitions; give up thy drum, and
    all these wild noises; ask of the God whom I adore that he give
    thee knowledge of himself; reflect, and believe that thy soul must
    pass to a life other than this; endeavor to interest thyself in
    its welfare as thou dost in the welfare of thy body; and when thou
    shalt have passed these last ten days in this way, I will withdraw
    for three days to pray in a little cabin that shall be made farther
    back in the woods. There I will pray my God to give thee health of
    body and of soul; thou alone shalt come to see me at the time I
    shall indicate, and thou shalt say with all thy heart the prayers I
    will teach thee--promising God that, if it pleases him to restore
    thee thy health, thou wilt call together all the Savages of the
    place, and in [261] their presence thou wilt burn thy drum and
    all the other silly stuff that thou usest to bring them together,
    saying to them that the God of the Christians is the true God,
    that they must believe in him and obey him. If thou promise this
    truthfully and from thy heart, I hope that thou wilt be delivered
    from thy disease, for my God is all-powerful."

Or comme cét homme est tres desireux de recouurer sa santé, il ouurit
les oreilles, & me dit, ton discours est fort bon, i'accepte les
conditions que tu me donne; mais commence le premier, retire toy en
oraison, & dis à ton Dieu qu'il me guarisse, car c'est par là qu'il
faut commencer, & puis ie feray tout ce que tu m'as prescrit: ie ne
cõmenceray point, luy reparty-ie, car si tu estois guary, pendant que
ie prierois tu attribuerois ta santé à ton tambour, que tu n'aurois
pas quitté; & non pas au Dieu que i'adore, lequel seul te peut guarir;
non, me dit-il, ie ne croiray pas que cela vienne de mon tambour, i'ay
chanté & fait tout ce que ie sçauois, & n'ay peu sauuer la vie à pas
vn; moy-mesme estãt malade ie fais ioüer pour me guarir tous [262]
les ressorts de mon art, & me voila plus mal que iamais; i'ay employé
toutes mes inuentions pour sauuer la vie à mes enfans, notamment au
dernier qui est mort depuis peu, & pour conseruer ma femme qui vient de
trespasser, tout cela ne m'a point reüssi, & partant si tu me guaris,
ie n'attribueray point ma santé à mon tambour, ny à mes chansons. Ie
luy répondis que ie ne pouuois pas le guarir; mais que mon Dieu pouuoit
tout, qu'au reste il ne falloit point faire de marché auec luy, ny luy
prescrire des conditions comme il faisoit, disant qu'il me guarisse
premierement, & puis ie croiray en luy: dispose toy, luy fis ie, de
ton costé, & sa bonté ne te manquera pas, que s'il ne te donne la santé
du corps, il te donnera la santé de l'ame qui est incomparablement plus
à priser. Ne me parle point de l'ame, me repart-il, c'est de quoy ie
ne me soucie pas: voila (me monstrant sa chair) ce que i'ayme, c'est
le corps que ie cheris, pour l'ame ie ne la voy point, en arriue ce
qui pourra. As tu de l'esprit, luy fis-ie? tu parle comme les bestes,
les chiens n'ayment que les corps; celuy qui a fait le Soleil [263]
pour t'éclairer, n'a-il rien preparé de plus grand à ton ame, qu'à
l'ame d'vn chien? Si tu n'ayme que ton corps tu perdras le corps &
l'ame, si vne beste pouuoit parler elle ne parleroit que de son corps
& de sa chair, n'as-tu rien par dessus les bestes qui sont faites pour
te seruir? n'ayme-tu que la chair & le sang? ton ame est-elle l'ame
d'vn chien que tu la traite auec vn tel mépris? peut estre que tu
dis vray, me répond-il, & qu'il y a quelque chose de bon en l'autre
vie: mais nous autres en ce pays-cy n'en sçauons rien, que si tu me
rends la santé ie feray ce que tu voudras. Ce pauure miserable ne
peut iamais releuer sa pensée plus haut que la terre: ne voyant donc
aucune disposition en cét esprit superbe, qui croyoit pouuoir obliger
Dieu, s'il croyoit en luy, ie le quittay pour lors, & me retiray pour
reposer, car il estoit bien auant dans la nuit.

    Now as this man is very desirous of recovering his health, he
    opened his ears, and said to me, "Thy discourse is very good, I
    accept the conditions that thou givest; but thou begin first, go
    away and pray, and tell thy God to cure me, for with that we must
    begin; then I will do all that thou hast prescribed for me." "I
    shall not begin it," I replied to him, "for if thou get back thy
    health while I would be praying, thou wouldst be attributing thy
    recovery to thy drum, which thou wouldst not have given up, and
    not to the God whom I adore, who alone can cure thee." "No," he
    replied, "I shall not think it has come from my drum; I have sung
    and have done all I could, yet I have not been able to save the
    life of one man; I myself am sick, and to cure myself have made
    use of all [262] the resources of my art; and behold I am worse
    than ever. I have used all my inventions to save the lives of my
    children, especially of the last one who died only a short time
    ago, and to save my wife, who has just passed away, yet all this
    has not succeeded; so if thou curest me I shall not attribute my
    health to my drum nor to my songs." I answered him that I could
    not cure him, but that my God could do all, and besides we must
    not make bargains with him, nor prescribe to him the conditions
    upon which he was to act, saying, "Let him cure me first, and then
    I will believe in him." "Prepare thyself," I continued, "on thy
    part, and his goodness will not fail thee; for, if he does not
    give thee health of the body, he will give thee health of the soul,
    which is of incomparably higher value." "Do not speak to me about
    the soul," he replied, "that is something that I give myself no
    anxiety about; it is this (showing his flesh) that I love, it is
    the body I cherish; as to the soul, I do not see it, let happen
    to it what will." "Hast thou any reason?" I asked, "thou speakest
    like a brute, dogs love only their bodies; he who has made the Sun
    [263] to shine upon thee, has he not prepared something better for
    thy soul than for the soul of a dog? If thou lovest only the body,
    thou wilt lose both thy body and thy soul. If a brute could talk,
    it would talk about nothing but its body and its flesh; hast thou
    nothing above the brute, which is made to serve thee? Dost thou
    love only flesh and blood? Thy soul, is it only the soul of a dog,
    that thou dost treat it with such contempt?" "Perhaps thou sayest
    truly," he replied, "and there is something good in the other
    life; but we here in this country know nothing about it. If thou
    restorest my health, I will do what thou wishest." This poor wretch
    is never able to raise his thoughts above earth. Seeing then no
    inclination in this haughty spirit, who thought he was obliging God
    by believing in him, I gave him up for the time being, and retired
    to rest, for it was well along into the night.

Le 3. de Decembre nous cõmençasmes nostre quatriesme station, ayans
délogé sans trompette, mais non pas sans tambour: car le Sorcier
n'oublioit iamais le sien, nous plantasmes nostre camp proche d'vn
fleuue large & rapide, [264] mais peu profond, ils le nomment _Ca
pititetchiouetz_, il se va dégorger dans le grand fleuue de sainct
Laurens, quasi vis à vis de Tadoussac, nos Sauuages n'ayans point icy
de viandes pour faire des festins, ils faisoient des banquets de fumée,
s'inuitans les vns les autres, dans leurs cabanes, & faisans la ronde à
vn petit plat de terre remply de Tabac, chacun en prenoit vne cornetée
qu'il reduisoit en fumée, remettant la main au plat s'il vouloit
petuner dauantage: l'affection qu'ils portent à ceste herbe est au
delà de toute créance, ils s'endormẽt le cabanet en la bouche, ils se
leuent par fois la nuit pour petuner, ils s'arrestent souuent en chemin
pour le mesme sujet, c'est la premiere action qu'ils font rentrant
dans leurs cabanes: ie leur ay battu le fusil pour les faire petuner
en ramants dans vn canot, ie leur ay veu souuent manger le baston de
leur calumet, n'ayans plus de petun, ie leur ay veu racler & pulueriser
vn calumet de bois pour petuner, disons auec compassion qu'ils passent
leur vie dans la fumée, & qu'ils tombent à la mort dans le feu.

    On the 3rd of December we began our fourth station, having broken
    camp without trumpets, but not without drums, for the Sorcerer
    never forgot his. We pitched our camp near a broad and rapid, [264]
    but rather shallow river, which they called _Ca pititetchiouetz_;
    it flows into the great river saint Lawrence, almost opposite
    Tadoussac. Our Savages, having no food for a feast here, made a
    banquet of smoke; each inviting the others to his cabin, they
    passed around a little earthen plate containing Tobacco, and every
    one took a pipeful, which he reduced to smoke, returning his hand
    to the dish if he wanted to smoke any more. The fondness they have
    for this herb is beyond all belief. They go to sleep with their
    reed pipes in their mouths, they sometimes get up in the night to
    smoke; they often stop in their journeys for the same purpose, and
    it is the first thing they do when they reënter their cabins. I
    have lighted tinder, so as to allow them to smoke while paddling a
    canoe; I have often seen them gnaw the stems of their pipes when
    they had no more tobacco, I have seen them scrape and pulverize a
    wooden pipe to smoke it. Let us say with compassion that they pass
    their lives in smoke, and at death fall into the fire.

[265] I'auois porté du petun auec moy, non pour mõ vsage, car ie n'en
prends point, i'en donnay largement selon que i'en auois à plusieurs
Sauuages; m'en reseruant vne partie pour tirer de l'Apostat quelque
mot de sa langue; car il ne m'eust pas dit vne parole qu'en le payãt
de ceste monnoye, quand nos gens eurent consommé ce que ie leur auois
donné, & ce qu'ils auoient en leur particulier, ie n'auois plus de
paix, le Sorcier me pressoit auec vne importunité si audacieuse, que ie
ne le pouuois souffrir, tous les autres sembloient me vouloir manger,
quand ie leur en refusois: i'auois beau leur dire qu'ils n'auoient
point de consideration, que ie leur en auois plus donné trois fois
que ie ne m'estois reserué; vous voyez, leur disois-ie, que i'ayme
vostre langue, & qu'il faut que ie l'achepte auec cét argent, que s'il
me manque on ne m'enseignera pas vn mot, vous voyez que s'il me faut
vn verre d'eau, il faut que i'en aille chercher bien loing, ou que
ie dõne vn bout de petun à vn enfant pour m'en aller querir; vous me
dites que le petun rassasie, si la famine qui nous presse cõtinuë, i'en
[266] veux faire l'experience, laissez moy ce peu que i'ay de reserue,
il me fut impossible de resister à leur importunité, il fallut tirer
iusques au bout, ce ne fut pas sans estonnement de voir des personnes
si passionnées pour de la fumée.

    [265] I brought some tobacco with me, but not for myself, as I
    do not use it. I have given liberally, according to my store,
    to several Savages, saving some to draw from the Apostate a few
    words of his language, for he would not say a word if I did not
    pay him with this money. When our people had consumed what I had
    given them, and what they had of their own, I had no more peace.
    The Sorcerer was so annoying in his demands for it, that I could
    not endure him; and all the others acted as if they wanted to
    eat me, when I refused them. In vain I told them that they had
    no consideration, that I had given them more than three times as
    much as I had reserved for myself. "You see," I said to them,
    "that I love your language and that I must buy it with this money,
    for if it is lacking no one will teach me a word; you see if I
    have to have a glass of water, I must go a long way to get it,
    or I must give a bit of tobacco to a child to get it for me; you
    tell me that tobacco satisfies hunger; if the famine which now
    presses us continues, I wish [266] to experiment with it, so leave
    me the little I have in reserve." It was impossible to resist
    their teasing, and I had to draw out the last bit, not without
    astonishment at seeing people so passionately fond of smoke.

Le sixiesme du mesme mois, nous délogeasmes pour la cinquiesme fois, il
m'arriua vne disgrace au départ, au lieu de prẽdre le vray chemin, ie
me iettay dans vn autre que nos chasseurs auoient fort battu, ie vay
donc fort loing sans prendre garde que ie me perdois, ayant fait une
longue traitte, ie m'apperceu que mon chemin se diuisoit en cinq ou six
autres, qui tiroient qui deçà, qui delà, me voila demeuré tout court,
il y auoit vn petit enfant qui m'auoit suiuy, ie ne l'osois quitter,
car auss[i]-tost il se mettoit à pleurer, i'enfilay tantost l'vn,
tantost l'autre de ces sentiers, & voyant qu'ils tournoient çà & là,
& qu'ils n'estoient marquez que d'vne sorte de raquette, ie concluds
que ces chemins ne conduisoient point au lieu où mes Sauuages alloient
cabaner, ie ne sçauois que faire du petit garçon: car s'estant apperceu
de nostre erreur il ne m'osoit [267] perdre de veuë sans se pasmer;
d'ailleurs n'ayant qu'enuiron six ans il ne me pouuoit pas suiure,
car ie doublois mes pas: ie m'aduisay de luy laisser mon manteau pour
marque que ie retournerois, si ie trouuois nostre vray chemin, luy
faisant signe qu'il m'attendist, car nous ne nous attendions pas l'vn
l'autre: ie iettay donc mon manteau sur la neige, & m'en reuay sur
mes brisées criant de temps en temps pour me faire entendre de nos
gens, si tant est que le bon chemin ne fust pas loing de moy; ie crie,
i'appelle dans ces grands bois, personne ne répond, tout est dans vn
profond silence, les arbres mesme ne faisoient aucun bruit, car il ne
faisoit point de vent: le froid estoit si violent que ie m'attendois
infailliblemẽt de mourir la nuit au cas qu'il me la fallust passer
sur la neige, n'ayant ny hache ny fusil pour faire du feu; ie vay,
ie viens, ie tourne de tous costez, ie ne trouue rien qui ne m'égare
dauantage: la derniere chose que l'homme quitte c'est l'esperance,
ie la tenois tousiours par vn petit bout, me figurant à toute heure
que i'allois trouuer mon chemin; mais enfin apres [268] auoir bien
tourné, voyant que les creatures ne me pouuoient donner aucun secours,
ie m'arrestay pour presẽter mes petites prieres au Createur dont ie
voyois ces grands bois tout remplis aussi bien que le reste du monde:
il me vint vne pensée que ie n'estois pas perdu, puis que Dieu sçauoit
bien où i'estois, & ruminant ceste verité en mon esprit, ie tire
doucement vers le fleuue que i'auois trauersé au sortir de la cabane,
ie crie, i'appelle de rechef, tout le monde estoit desia bien loing;
ie commençois desia à laisser cheoir de mes mains le petit filet de
l'esperance que i'auois tenu iusques alors, quand i'aduisay quelques
vestiges de raquette derriere des broussailles, ie m'y transporte, _&
vidi vestigia virorum, & mulierum & infantium_, en vn mot ie trouue ce
que i'auois cherché fort long-temps, au commencement ie n'estois pas
asseuré que c'estoit là vn bon chemin, voila pourquoy ie me diligentay
de le recognoistre: estant desia bien auancé ie trouue l'Apostat qui
nous venoit chercher, il me demanda où estoit ce petit enfant, ie luy
repars que ie l'auois laissé [269] aupres de mon manteau: i'ay, me
dit-il, trouué vostre manteau & l'ay reporté à la nouuelle cabane; mais
ie n'ay point veu l'enfant: me voila bien estonné, de l'aller chercher,
c'estoit me perdre vne autre fois; ie prie l'Apostat d'y aller, il fit
la sourde oreille, ie tire droit à la cabane pour en donner aduis, où
enfin i'arriuay tout brisé & tout moulu pour la difficulté & pour la
longueur des chemins que i'auois fait sans trouuer hostellerie que des
ruisseaux glacez: si tost que les Sauuages me virent ils me demandent
où estoit le petit garçon, crians que ie l'auois perdu, ie leur raconte
l'histoire, les asseurants que ie luy auois laissé tout exprez mon
manteau pour l'aller retrouuer, mais ayant quitté ce lieu là, ie ne
sçauois où l'aller chercher, veu mesmement que ie n'en pouuois plus,
n'ayant point mangé depuis le grand matin, & deux ou trois bouchées de
boucan tant seulement, on me donna pour reconfort vn peu d'eau glacée,
que ie fis chauffer dans vn chaudron fort sale, ce fut tout mon souper:
car nos chasseurs n'ayans rien pris il fallut ieusner ce iour là.
[270] Pour l'enfant, deux femmes m'ayans ouy depeindre l'endroit où ie
l'auois laissé, coniecturant où il auoit tiré, l'allerent chercher,
& le trouuerent. Il ne faut pas s'estonner si vn François se perd
quelquesfois dans ces forests, i'ay veu de nos plus habiles Sauuages
s'y esgarer plus d'vn iour entier.

    On the sixth of the same month we broke camp for the fifth time.
    I had a mishap at our departure, for, instead of taking the right
    road, I started upon another that had been well beaten down by our
    hunters, and so I went some distance without perceiving that I was
    lost. After a long stage, I observed that the way divided into five
    or six others, which led in several directions. So I was brought
    to a standstill. There was a little child who had followed me, and
    whom I did not dare to leave, for it would at once begin to cry. I
    followed first one and then another of these paths; and seeing that
    they wound here and there, and that they were marked by only one
    kind of snowshoe, I concluded that these ways did not lead to the
    place where my Savages were going to encamp. I did not know what to
    do with the little boy; for, having found out our mistake, he did
    not dare [267] lose me out of his sight without going into spasms;
    and besides, as he was only about six years old, he could not keep
    up with me as I increased my speed. I decided to leave him my
    cloak, to show that I intended to return, if I found the right way,
    making him a sign that he should wait, for we did not understand
    each other. So I threw my cloak upon the snow, and retraced my
    steps, crying out from time to time to make myself heard by our
    people, in case the right road was not far away from me. I shout
    and halloo in these great forests, but no one answers; the silence
    is profound, for even the trees do not rustle, as there is no
    wind. The cold was so severe that I was sure I would die during
    the night, if I had to pass it upon the snow, having neither axe
    nor tinder with which to make a fire. I go, I come, I turn on all
    sides; but I find nothing which does not confuse me still more. The
    last thing that a man abandons is hope; I continued to hold on to
    it by the little end, imagining every moment that I was going to
    find my way; but at last, after [268] many windings, seeing that
    human beings could give me no help, I stopped in order to offer my
    little prayers to the Creator, with whom I saw these great woods
    all filled as well as the rest of the world. The thought came into
    my mind that I was not lost, since God knew where I was; and,
    turning over this truth in my mind, I slowly approached the river
    I had crossed on leaving the cabin. I cried out, I called again,
    but everybody was already far away. I was beginning to loosen my
    hold upon the little thread of hope that I had held up to that
    time, when I perceived some snowshoe tracks behind the brushwood.
    I betook myself thither, _et vidi vestigia virorum, et mulierum et
    infantium_. In a word, I found what I had so long been seeking. At
    first I was not sure this was a good road, hence I reconnoitred
    it very carefully. When I had advanced some distance, I met the
    Apostate, who was coming in search of us. He asked me where the
    little child was; and I replied that I had left it [269] near my
    cloak. "I have found your cloak," he said, "and have carried it to
    the new cabin; but I have not found the child." This was a great
    shock to me; to go in search of it would be to lose myself a second
    time. I prayed the Apostate to go, but he turned a deaf ear to my
    entreaties. I started directly for the cabin, to advise them of
    the matter, and finally reached it, sore all over and bruised from
    the hardships and length of the journey, which I had made without
    finding other hostelry than the frozen brooks. As soon as the
    Savages saw me, they asked where the little boy was, crying out
    that I had lost him. I told them the story, assuring them that I
    had left my cloak with him purposely, that I might go back and find
    him; but, as he had left that place, I did not know where to look
    for him, especially as I had no more strength left, having eaten
    nothing since early morning, and then only two or three mouthfuls
    of smoked meat. They comforted me with a little frozen water, which
    I melted in a very dirty kettle, and this was all the supper I had;
    for our hunters had not taken anything, so we had to fast that
    day. [270] As to the child, two women having heard me describe the
    place where I had left it, guessing where it had wandered, went in
    search of and found it. You must not be astonished if a Frenchman
    sometimes loses himself in these forests; for I have known some of
    our cleverest Savages to wander about in them more than a whole day.

Le 20. de Decembre, quoy que les Sauuages ne se mettent pas
ordinairement en chemin pendant le mauuais temps si fallut-il
decabanner durant la pluye, & desloger à petit bruit sans desieuner, la
fin [faim] nous faisoit marcher, mais le mal est, qu'elle nous suiuoit
par tout où nous allions; car nous ne trouuions par tout, ou fort peu,
ou point de chasse: En ceste station, qui fut la sixiesme, le Renegat
me vint dire que les Sauuages estoient fort espouuantez, & mon hoste
m'abordant tout pensif, me demanda si ie ne sçauois point quelque
remede à leur mal-heur, il n'y a pas, me disoit-il, assez de neige pour
tuer l'Orignac, des Castors, & des Porcs-espics, nous n'en trouuõs
quasi point, que ferons nous? ne sçais tu point ce qui nous doit
arriuer? ne sens tu point dans toy-mesme ce qu'il [271] faut faire?
Ie luy voulus dire que nostre Dieu estoit tres-bon, & tres-puissant,
qu'il falloit que nous eussions recours à sa misericorde, mais cõme ie
ne parlois pas bien, ie priay l'Apostat de me seruir de truchement; ce
miserable est possedé d'vn diable muet, iamais il ne voulut parler.

    On the 20th of December, although the Savages do not usually
    take the road in bad weather, yet we had to break up during the
    storm, and move away quietly without any breakfast, for hunger
    drove us onward; the trouble is it followed us everywhere we went,
    for we found no game anywhere, or at least very little of it. At
    this station, which was the sixth, the Renegade came to tell me
    that the Savages were greatly terrified; and my host, addressing
    me seriously, asked if I did not know some remedy for their
    misfortune. "There is not," said he, "enough snow to kill Moose,
    Beavers, and Porcupines; we find almost no game; what shall we do?
    Dost thou not know what may happen to us? Dost thou not see within
    thyself what [271] ought to be done?" I wanted to tell him that our
    God was very good and very powerful, and we ought to have recourse
    to his mercy; but as I did not speak well, I begged the Apostate to
    be my interpreter, but this wretch is possessed of a mute devil, he
    never wants to talk.

Le 24. Decembre, veille de la naissance de nostre Sauueur, nous
decampasmes pour la septiesme fois, nous partismes sans manger, nous
cheminasmes vn assez long temps; nous trauaillasmes à faire nostre
maison, & pour nostre souper N. S. nous donna vn Porc-espic gros comme
vn cochon de lait, & vn liéure, c'estoit peu pour dix-huict ou vingt
personnes que nous estions, il est vray, mais la saincte Vierge & son
glorieux Espoux sainct Ioseph, ne furent pas si bien traictez à mesme
iour dans l'estable de Bethleem.

    On the 24th of December, the evening before the birth of our
    Savior, we broke up for the seventh time. We departed without
    eating, and journeyed for a long, long time, then worked at
    house-building; and for our supper Our Lord gave us a Porcupine
    as large as a sucking pig, and a hare. It was not much for our
    eighteen or twenty people, it is true; but the holy Virgin and her
    glorious Spouse, saint Joseph, were not so well treated on the same
    day in the stable at Bethle[h]em.

Le lendemain iour de resiouyssance parmy les Chrestiens, pour l'enfant
nouueau né, fust pour nous vn iour de ieusne, on ne me donna rien
du tout à manger; la faim qui fait sortir le loup du bois, m'y fit
entrer plus auant, pour chercher [272] des petits bouts d'arbres que ie
mãgeois auec delices, des femmes ayant ietté aux chiens par mesgarde
ou autrement, quelques rongneures de peaux dont on fait les cordes des
raquettes, ie les ramassay, & en fis vn bon disner, quoy que les chiens
mesmes, quand ils auoient tant soit peu à manger, n'en voulussent
pas gouster: I'ay souuent mangé, notamment ce mois cy, des raclures
d'escorces, des rongneures de peaux, & autres choses semblables, &
cependant ie ne m'en suis point trouué mal.

    The next day, a day of rejoicing among Christians on account of the
    newborn child, was for us a day of fasting. I was given nothing at
    all to eat. Hunger, which makes the wolf come out of the woods,
    made me go farther in to seek [272] the little ends of the trees,
    which I ate with delight. Some women, having thrown to the dogs,
    either unintentionally or otherwise, some bits of hide from which
    they make the strings for their snowshoes, I gathered them up and
    made a good dinner of them; although the dogs themselves, when they
    have ever so little else to eat, will not touch them. I have often
    eaten, especially during that month, scrapings of bark, bits of
    leather, and similar things, and yet they have never made me ill.

Le mesme iour de Noël ie m'en allay sur le soir visiter nos voisins,
nous n'estions plus que deux cabanes, celle du Sauuage Ekhenneabamate
auoit tiré d'vn autre costé depuis cinq ou six iours, à raison qu'il
n'y auoit pas assez de chasse pour nourrir tout le monde, ie trouuay
deux ieunes chasseurs tout tristes, pour n'auoir rien pris ce iour là,
ny le precedent, ils estoient comme tous les autres maigres & defaits,
taciturnes & fort pensifs, comme gens qui ne pouuoient mourir qu'à
regret, cela me toucha le cœur, apres leur auoir dit quelque parole
de consolation, & donné quelque [273] esperance de chose meilleure,
ie me retiray en ma cabane pour prier Dieu, l'Apostat me demãda quel
iour il estoit? il est auiourd'huy la feste de Noël, luy respondis-je;
Il fut vn peu touché, & se tournant vers le Sorcier, il luy dit, qu'à
tel iour estoit né le Fils de Dieu que nous adorions nommé IESVS:
Remarquant en luy quelque estonnement, ie luy dis que Dieu vsoit
ordinairement de largesse en ces bons iours, & que si nous auions
recours à luy qu'il nous assisteroit infailliblement; à cela point de
parole, mais aussi point de contrarieté: prenant donc l'occasion au
poil, ie le priay de me tourner en sa langue deux petites Oraisons,
dont i'en dirois l'vne, & les Sauuages l'autre. Esperant que nous
serions secourus, l'extremité où nous estions reduits luy fit accorder
que de bond, que de volée ce que ie demandois. Ie composay sur l'heure
deux petites prieres, qu'il me tourna en Sauuage, me promettant en
outre qu'il me seruiroit d'interprete si i'assemblois les Sauuages,
me voila fort content. Ie recommande l'affaire à N.S. & le lendemain
matin ie dresse vn petit Oratoire, ie pends aux [274] perches de la
cabane vne seruiette que i'auois portée, sur laquelle i'attachay vn
petit Crucifix & vn Reliquaire, que deux personnes fort Religieuses
m'ont enuoyé: ie tire encore quelque Image de mon Breuiaire, cela fait
ie fais appeller tous les Sauuages de nos deux cabanes, & ie leur fais
entendre tant par mon begayemẽt, que par la bouche d'vn Renegat, que la
crainte de mourir de faim faisoit parler, qu'il ne tiendroit qu'à eux
qu'ils ne fussent secourus, ie leur dis que nostre Dieu est la bonté
mesme, que rien ne luy estoit impossible, qu'encore bien qu'on l'eust
mesprisé, que si neantmoins on croyoit, & si on esperoit en luy d'vn
bon cœur, qu'il se monstreroit fauorable: Or comme ces pauures gens
n'auoient plus d'esperance en leurs arcs, ny en leurs flesches, ils me
tesmoignerẽt vn grand contentement de ce que ie les auois assemblez,
m'asseurant qu'ils feroient tout ce que ie leur commanderois; ie prens
mon papier & leurs lis l'Oraison que ie desirois qu'ils fissent, leur
demandant s'ils estoient contens d'addresser au Dieu que i'adorois ces
paroles de tout leur cœur, & sans feintise; ils me [275] respondent
tous _nimiroueritenan, nimiroueritenan_, nous en sommes cõtens, nous
en sõmes contens. Ie me mets le premier à genoux, & eux tous auec moy,
iettans les yeux sur nostre petit Oratoire, le seul Sorcier demeuroit
assis, mais luy ayant demandé s'il n'en vouloit pas estre aussi bien
que les autres, il fit comme il me voyoit faire, nous estions testes
nuës, ioignans tous les mains & les esleuans vers le Ciel, ie commençay
donc à faire ceste Oraison tout haut en leur langue.

    In the evening of this same Christmas day I went to visit
    our neighbors. We were now only two cabins, as the Savage
    Ekhenneabamate had gone off in another direction five or six days
    before, because there had not been enough game for all of us. I
    found there two young hunters, in deep distress at not having
    captured anything that day, nor the one before. They were like all
    the others, wasted and thin, silent and very sad, like people who
    parted with life regretfully. It made my heart bleed to see them.
    After having said a few words of consolation, and cheered them
    with the [273] hope of better things, I withdrew into my cabin to
    pray to God. The Apostate asked me what day it was. "To-day is the
    Christmas festival," I answered him. He was slightly touched, and,
    turning toward the Sorcerer, said that on this day was born the
    son of God, called JESUS, whom we adored. Observing that he showed
    some wonder, I told him that God was generally very bountiful
    on these days; and, if we had recourse to him, he would surely
    help us. To this there was not a word, neither was there any
    opposition. So seizing the opportunity, I begged him to translate
    for me two little Prayers into his language, and I would say one of
    them and the Savages the other. Hoping that we would be succored,
    the extremity to which we were reduced made him grant, in pure
    recklessness, what I asked. I immediately composed two little
    prayers, which he turned into Savage, promising me besides that he
    would serve me as interpreter if I would call the Savages together,
    so I was very happy. I commended the matter to Our Lord and the
    next morning I erected a little Oratory. I hung to the [274] poles
    of the cabin a napkin I had brought with me; to this I attached a
    small Crucifix and a Reliquary that two very Religious persons had
    sent me, also I took from my Breviary one of the Pictures. When
    this was done, I had all the Savages from our two cabins called,
    and made them understand, partly through my stammering and partly
    through the lips of the Renegade, whom the fear of dying from
    hunger made speak, that it depended upon them alone whether or not
    they should be relieved. I told them that our God was goodness
    itself, that nothing was impossible to him; that even though a
    person had despised him, yet if he believed in him and hoped in
    him with a sincere heart, he would show himself favorable. Now as
    these poor people had no more hope in their bows or arrows, they
    showed much gladness that I had thus called them together, assuring
    me they would do all I commanded them. I took my paper and read
    to them the Prayer I wished them to offer, asking if they were
    content to address to the God whom I adored these prayers from
    their hearts, and without dissimulation. They all [275] responded,
    _nimiroueritenan, nimiroueritenan_, "We are satisfied, we are
    satisfied." I knelt down first and the others followed, fixing our
    eyes upon our little Oratory. The Sorcerer alone remained seated;
    but, when I asked him if he did not wish to be like the others, he
    did as he saw me do. We were bareheaded, our hands all clasped and
    raised toward Heaven; and in this attitude I began to repeat the
    following Prayer aloud in their language.

Mon Seigneur qui auez tout fait, qui voyez tout, & qui cognoissez tout,
faites nous misericorde. O +IESVS+, fils du Tout-puissant, qui auez
pris chair humaine pour nous, qui estes né pour nous d'vne Vierge, qui
estes mort pour nous, qui estes resuscité & monté au Ciel pour nous,
vous auez promis que si on demandoit quelque chose en vostre nom que
vous l'accorderiez: ie vous supplie de tout mon cœur de donner la
nourriture à ce pauvre peuple, qui veut croire en vous, & qui vous
veut obeïr, ce peuple vous promet entierement que si vous le secourez
qu'il croira parfaitement en vous, & qu'il vous obeïra [276] de tout
son cœur, Mon Seigneur, exaucez ma prieré, ie vous presente ma vie pour
ce peuple tres content de mourir à ce qu'ils viuent, & qu'ils vous
cognoissent. Ainsi soit-il.

    "My Lord, you who have made all, who see all and who know all, have
    pity upon us. O +JESUS+, son of the All-powerful, you who have
    taken human flesh for us, who were born of a Virgin for us, who
    have died for us, who were resurrected and ascended into Heaven
    for us, you have promised that if anything is asked in your name,
    you will grant it. I beseech you with all my heart to give food
    to these poor people, who wish to believe in you and to obey you.
    These people promise you faithfully that, if you will help them,
    they will believe entirely in you, and that they will obey you
    [276] with all their hearts. My Lord, hearken to my prayer; I offer
    you my life for these people, content to die that they may live and
    acknowledge you. Amen."

A ces paroles de mourir pour eux que ie proferois pour gagner leur
affection, quoy qu'en effect ie le disois de bon cœur, mon hoste
m'arresta & me dit; retranche ces paroles, car nous t'aymons tous, & ne
desirons pas que tu meure; ie vous veux témoigner, leur repartis-ie,
que ie vous ayme, & que ie donnerois volontiers ma vie pour vostre
salut, tant c'est chose grande que d'estre sauué. Apres que i'eus faict
ceste Oraison, chacun d'eux à mains iointes, teste nuë, & les genoux
en terre, comme i'ay remarqué, profera la suiuante, que ie prononçois
deuant-eux fort posément.

    At these words, "to die" for them, which I used to gain their
    affection, although really I said it with a sincere heart, my
    host stopped me and said, "Take back those words, for we all love
    thee, and do not wish thee to die for us." "I wish to show you,"
    I answered, "that I love you, and that I would willingly give my
    life for your salvation, so great a thing is it to be saved." After
    I had offered this Prayer, all of them with hands joined, heads
    bare, and knees upon the ground, as I have observed, repeated the
    following, which I pronounced to them with great solemnity.

Grand Seigneur qui auez fait le ciel & la terre, vous sçauez tout, vous
pouuez tout, ie vous promets de tout mon cœur (ie ne sçaurois vous
mentir) ie vous promets entierement, que s'il vous plaist nous donner
nostre nourriture, que ie vous obeïray cordiallement, que ie croiray
asseurément en vous, ie vous [277] promets sans feintise, que ie feray
tout ce qu'on me dira deuoir estre fait pour vostre amour, aydez nous,
vous le pouuez faire, ie feray asseurément ce qu'on m'enseignera deuoir
estre fait pour l'amour de vous, ie le promets sans feintise, ie ne
ments pas, ie ne sçaurois vous mentir, aydez nous à croire en vous
parfaictement, puis que vous estes mort pour nous. Ainsi soit il.

    "Great Lord, you who have made heaven and earth, you know all, you
    can do all. I promise you with all my heart (I could not lie to
    you) I promise you wholly, that, if it pleases you to give us food,
    I will obey you cheerfully, that I will surely believe in you. I
    promise [277] you without deceit that I will do all that I shall be
    told ought to be done for love of you. Help us, for you can do it;
    I will certainly do what they shall teach me ought to be done for
    your sake. I promise it without pretence, I am not lying, I could
    not lie to you; help us to believe in you perfectly, for you have
    died for us. Amen."

Ils firent tous ceste priere, & l'Apostat & le Sorcier aussi bien que
les autres, c'est à Dieu de iuger de leurs cœurs, ie leur dis après
cela qu'ils s'en allassent à la chasse auec confiance, ce qu'ils
firent, la plus part témoignans par leur visage & par leurs paroles
qu'ils auoient pris plaisir en ceste action; mais auant que d'en voir
le succez couchons en leur langue ces deux Oraisons, afin qu'on voye
l'œconomie de leurs paroles, & leur façon de s'énoncer.

    They all offered this prayer, the Apostate and the Sorcerer as well
    as the others; God alone can judge of their hearts. After this I
    told them that they should go to the chase with confidence, as
    they did, the greater part showing by their faces and words that
    they had taken pleasure in this act. But, before finding out what
    success they had, let us couch in their language these two Prayers,
    in order that you may see the arrangement of their words, and their
    way of expressing themselves.

  _Nou_K_himame missi ca_ K_hichitaien missi,_
  Mon Capitaine tout  qui as fait      tout,

  K_hesteritamen missi, ouia batamen chaoueriminan_.
  qui sçais      tout,  qui vois,    aye pitié de nous.

  _Iesus oucouchichai missi ca  nitaouitát_
  Iesus Fils          out   qui a faict

  [278] _Niran ca  outchi, arichiirinicasouien, niran_
       de nous qui à cause es fait hõme         de nous

  _ca outchi, iriniouien iscouechich, niran    ca_
  qui à cause es né      d'vne fille  de nous, qui

  _outchi nipien, niran   ca  outchi  ouascou_k_hi,_
  à cause es mort de no⁹, qui à cause au ciel

  _itoutaien; egou_  K_hisitaie, nitichenicassouini_k_i,_
  es allé     ainsi  tu disois   en mon nom

  K_hegoueia netou tamagaouian       niga chaoueri_K_an,_
  quelque    chose si ie suis requis i'ẽ  auray pitié,

  k_hitaia mihitin naspich     ou mitchimi,_
  ie te prie       entierement la nourriture

  _a richiriniou miri, ca  ouitapouetasc,_
  à  ce peuple   dõne  qui veux croire en toy,

  _ca ouipamitasc,   arichiriniou_ k_hiticou_
  qui te veux obeyr, ce peuple     te dit

  _naspich,    ouitchihien_ k_higatapouetatin_
  entièrement, si tu m'ayde ie te croyray

  _naspich_,  k_higa pamtatim naspich,   Nou_k_himame_
  parfaitemẽt ie t'obeïray    entieremẽt mon Capitaine

  _chaoueritamitaouitou,      oui_
  aye pitié de ce que ie dis, si tu

  _michoutchi         nipousin, iterimien_
  veux en contrechãge ma mort   penser

  _ouirouau mag iriniouisonan, egou  inousin._
  quant à   eux qu'ils viuent, ainsi soit-il.

    _Noukhimame missi ca  Khichitaien missi_,
    My Captain  all   who hast made,  all

    _Khesteritamen missi, ouia batamen chaoueriminan_.
    who knowest,   all    who seest,   have pity on us.

    _Jesus oucouchichai missi ca  nitaouitât_
    Jesus, the Son      all   who has made

    [278]_Niran ca  outchi, arichiirinicasouien, niran_
         of us  who because art made man,        of us

    _ca outchi, iriniouien iscouechich, niran ca_
    who because art born   of a maiden, of us who

    _outchi nipien,    niran ca  outchi  ouascoukhi,_
    because hast died, of us who because to heaven

    _itoutaien; egou Khisitaie,   nitichenicassouiniki,_
    art gone;   thus thou saidst, in my name

    _Khegoueia netou tamagaouian   niga  chaouerikan,_
    any        thing if I am asked on it I will have pity,

    _khitaia mihitin naspich ou  mitchimi,_
    I pray thee      wholly  the food

    _a richiriniou  miri, ca  ouitapouetasc,_
    to these people give, who wish to believe in thee,

    _ca ouipamitasc,       arichiriniou khiticiou_
    who wish to obey thee; these people say to thee

    _naspich, ouitchihien       khigatapouetatin_
    wholly,   if thou aidest me I will believe thee

    _naspich, khiga pamtatim   naspich, Noukhimame_
    perfectly I will obey thee entirely my Captain

    _chaoueritamitaouitou      oui_
    have pity upon what I say, if thou

    _michoutchi      nipousin, iterimien_
    wish in exchange my death  take care

    _ouironau mag  iriniouisonan,      egou inousin._
    as to     them that they may live, so   be it.

Voicy celle qu'ils prononcerent.

  [279] _Khicheou_K_himan ca_ k_hichitaien ouascou,_
        Grand Capitaine   qui as faict     le Ciel

  _mag asti,    missi_ k_hi_k_histeriten, missi_       K_hipicoutan_,
  &    la Terre tout   tu sçais           toute chose, tu fais bien

  k_hititin naspich,    tanté_
  ie te dis entierement comment

  _bona       ou_k_hiran? khititin  naspich,     oui miriatchi_
  pourrois-je mẽtir?      ie te dis sãs feintise si  tu no⁹ veux dõner

  _nimitchiminan,   ochitau_
  nostre nourriture tout

  _tapoué_ k_higa      pamitatin,   ochitau,_
  expres   asseurement ie t'obeïray tout

  _tapoué_ K_higa    tapouetatin,_  K_hititin_
  expres,  en verité ie te croiray, ie te le dis

  _naspich,   niga tin missi,_ K_hé eitigaouané;_
  entieremẽt, ie feray tout    ce   qu'õ me dira

  k_hir_ k_he, outchi_  K_hian,     ouitchihinan,_
  de toy       à cause  ie le feray ayde nous

  k_higa_ k_hi ouitchi hinan, naspich    niga_
           tu nous peux ayder absolument ie feray

  _tin   missi_, k_hé     eitigaouané_ k_hir_ K_he, outchi_
      tout       ce qu'on me dira      de toy       à cause

  k_hian,     Khititin     naspich;       nama_
  ie le feray ie te le dis sans feintise, ie ne

  _ni_k_hirassin, nama_    k_hinita_ k_hirassicatin,_
  mens pas,       ie ne te sçaurois  mentir,

  _ouitchihinan_ k_higai   tapouetatinan   naspich;_
  ayde nous      affin que nous te croyons parfaictemẽt,

  [280] _ouichihinan mag  missi   irinioua_k_hi_
       ayde nous     puis de tous les hõmes

  _ouetchi nipouané.   Egou  inousin._
  à cause  tu es mort, ainsi soit-il.

    And here is the one they repeated.

    [279] _Khicheoukhiman ca  khichitaien ouascou,_
        Great Captain     who hast made   the Sky

    _mag asti,     missi khikhisteriten, missi_
    and the Earth, all   thou knowest,   everything

    _Khipicoutan,   khititin      naspich, tanté_
    thou doest well I say to thee wholly   how

    _bona oukhiran? khititin    naspich,         oui miriatchi_
    could I lie?    I tell thee without pretence if  thou wilt give us

    _nimitchiminan, ochitau_
     our food       quite

    _tapoué    khiga  pamitatin,       ochitau,_
    positively surely I will obey thee quite

    _tapoué   Khiga tapouetatin,            Khititin_
    certainly truly I will believe in thee, I tell it thee

    _naspich, niga tin  missi Khé  eitigaouané;_
    wholly,   I will do all   that they shall tell me

    _khir khe, outchi  Khian,        ouitchihinan,_
    of thee    because I will do it, help us

    _khiga khi ouitchi hinan, naspich    niga_
           thou canst help us absolutely I will do

    _tin missi, khe   eitigaouané        khir Khe, outchi_
       all that which they shall tell me of thee   because

    _khian,      Khititin       naspich;          nama_
    I will do it I tell it thee without pretence, I do not

    _nikhirassin, nama khinita        khirassicatin_,
    lie,          I could not to thee lie,

    _ouitchihinan khigai tapouetatinan       naspich;_ [280]
    help us       that   we may believe thee perfectly,

    _ouichihinan mag  missi  iriniouakhi_
      help us    then of all the men

    _ouetchi nipouané.      Egou inousin._
    because  thou art dead, Amen.

Nos chasseurs ayans fait leurs prieres s'en allerent, qui deça qui de
là chercher dequoy manger, mon hoste & deux ieunes hommes s'en vont
voir vne cabane de Castors, qu'ils auoient voulu quitter desesperans
d'y rien prendre, il en prit trois pour sa part: l'estant allé voir
apres midy, ie luy en vis prendre vn de mes yeux, ses compagnons
en prirent aussi ie ne sçay pas combien, le Sorcier estant allé ce
iour là à la chasse auec vn sien ieune neueu, prit vn Porc épic, &
découurit la piste d'vn Orignac qui fut depuis tué à coup de fleches,
contre l'attente de tous tant qu'ils estoient, n'y ayant que fort peu
de neige, vn ieune Hiroquois, dont ie parleray cy apres, tua aussi vn
fort beau Porc-epic; bref chacun prit quelque chose, il n'y eut que
l'Apostat qui reuint les mains vuides, le soir mon hoste apportant
trois Castors, comme il rentroit dans la cabane ie luy tendis la main,
il s'en vint tout ioyeux vers moy recognoissant le [281] secours de
Dieu, & demandant ce qu'il deuoit faire, ie luy dits _Nicanis_, mon
bien-aymé, il faut remercier Dieu qui nous a assisté; voila bien
dequoy, dit l'Apostat, nous n'eussions pas laissé de trouuer cela sans
l'ayde de Dieu. A ces paroles ie ne sçais quels mouuemens ne sentit
mõ coeur, mais si ce traistre m'eust donné vn coup de poignard, il
ne m'eust pas plus attristé, il ne falloit que ces paroles pour tout
perdre, mon hoste ne laissa point de me dire qu'il feroit ce que ie
voudrois, & il se fust mis en deuoir, si le Sorcier ne se fust point
ietté à la trauerse: car l'Apostat n'a point d'authorité parmy les
Sauuages, ie voulu attendre le festin qu'on deuoit faire, où tous
les Sauuages se deuoient trouuer; afin qu'ayant deuant leurs yeux
les presens que nostre Seigneur leur auoit fait, ils fussent mieux
disposez à recognoistre son assistance; mais comme ie vins à leur
vouloir parler, le Renégat fasché de ce que luy seul n'auoit rien pris,
non seulement ne me voulut pas ayder, ains au contraire il m'imposa
silence me commandant tout nettement de me taire; non feray pas luy
dis-ie, si vous estes [282] ingrat les autres ne le seront pas, le
Sorcier voyant qu'on estoit assez disposé à m'écouter; croyant que si
on me prestoit l'oreille il perdroit autant de son crédit, me dit d'vne
façon arrogante, tais-toy, tu n'as point d'esprit, il n'est pas temps
de parler, mais de manger; ie luy voulu demander s'il auoit des yeux,
s'il ne voyoit pas manifestement le seruice de Dieu, mais il ne me
voulut pas écouter; les autres qui estoient dans vn profond silence,
voyans que le Sorcier m'estoit contraire, n'oserent pas m'inuiter à
parler: si bien que celuy qui faisoit le festin se mit à le distribuer,
& les autres à manger; voila mes pourceaux qui deuorent le gland sans
regarder celuy qui leur abbat, c'est à qui se réioüira dauantage, ils
estoient remplis de contentement & moy de tristesse, si fallut-il bien
se remettre à la volonté de Dieu, l'heure de ce peuple n'est pas encore
venuë.

    Our hunters having finished their prayers, went away, some here,
    some there, to look for something to eat. My host and two young
    men went off to a Beaver lodge, which they were about to give up,
    hopeless of taking any thing, when he, on his part, took three;
    in the afternoon, when I went to find him, I saw him, with my own
    eyes, take one; and his companions captured some also, but I do
    not know how many. The Sorcerer, having gone hunting on this
    same day with one of his young nephews, caught a Porcupine, and
    discovered the tracks of a Moose, which has since been killed with
    arrows, contrary to the expectations of all the people, for there
    was only a little snow. A young Hiroquois, of whom I shall speak
    hereafter, also killed a very fine Porcupine. In short, everyone
    took something, except the Apostate, who returned empty-handed.
    In the evening, when my host returned to the cabin, carrying
    three Beavers, I extended to him my hand. He approached joyfully,
    recognizing the [281] help of God, and asked what he should do. I
    said to him, "_Nicanis_, my well-beloved, we must thank God who has
    helped us." "What for indeed?" said the Apostate, "we could not
    have failed to find that without the aid of God." At these words I
    cannot tell what emotions surged in my heart; but if this traitor
    had given me a sword-thrust, he could not have saddened me more;
    these words alone were needed that all might be lost. My host did
    not fail to tell me that he would do what I wished; and he might
    have fulfilled his duty, had not the Sorcerer interposed. For, as
    the Apostate had no authority among the Savages, I intended to
    await the banquet they would have, where all the Savages would be
    assembled; so that, having before their eyes the gifts our Lord
    had made them, they would be better disposed to recognize his
    assistance. But when I was about to speak to them, the Renegade,
    angry at being the only one who had not taken something, not only
    would not help me, but even imposed silence upon me, abruptly
    commanding me to keep still. "I will not do it," I said to him, "if
    you are [282] ungrateful, the others are not." The Sorcerer, seeing
    they were rather disposed to listen to me, and believing that, if
    they gave me their attention, he himself would lose so much of his
    authority, said to me, arrogantly, "Hold thy tongue, thou hast no
    sense; this is no time to talk, but to eat." I tried to ask him if
    he had no eyes, if he did not plainly see the help of God, but he
    would not listen to me. The others, who were maintaining a profound
    silence, seeing that the Sorcerer was hostile to me, did not dare
    ask me to speak; so the one who prepared the banquet began to
    distribute it, and the others to eat. Then behold my pigs devouring
    the acorns, regardless of him who shook them down. They vied with
    each other in their happiness; they were filled with joy, and I
    with sadness; we must yield to the will of God, for the hour of
    this people is not yet come.

Cecy se passa le Lundy, le Mercredy suiuant mon hoste & vn ieune
chasseur tuerent à coups de fleches l'Orignac dont ils auoient veu les
traces, ils en virent d'autres depuis, mais comme [283] il y auoit
fort peu de neige ils n'en peurent iamais approcher à la portée de
leurs arcs si tost qu'ils eurẽt ceste proye ils la mirent en pieces, en
apportant vne bonne partie dans nos cabannes, & enseuelissans le reste
soubs la neige; voila tout le monde en ioye, on fait vn grand banquet
où ie fus inuité, voyant les grandes pieces de chair qu'on donnoit à
vn chacun, ie demanday à l'Apostat si c'estoit vn festin à mãger tout,
& m'ayant dit qu'ouy, il est impossible, luy reparty-ie, que ie mange
tout ce qu'on m'a donné, si faut-il bien, me répondit-il, que vous le
mangiez, les autres sont assez empeschez à manger leur part, il faut
que vous mangiez la vostre: ie luy fais entẽdre que Dieu deffendoit
ces excez, & que ie ne le cõmettrois point y allast-il de la vie, ce
mechant blasphemateur pour animer les autres contre moy, leur dit que
Dieu estoit fasché de ce qu'ils auoient à manger: Ie ne dis pas cela,
luy repliquay-ie en Sauuage, mais bien qu'il deffend de manger auec
excez, le Sorcier me repart, ie n'ay iamais plus grand bien sinon quand
ie suis saoul. Or comme ie ne pouuois venir à [284] bout de ma portion,
i'inuite vn Sauuage mon voisin d'en prendre vne partie, luy donnant du
petun en recompense de ce qu'il mangeoit pour moy, i'en iette vne autre
partie secrettement aux chiens, les Sauuages s'en estans doutez par la
querelle qui suruint entre ces animaux, se mirent à crier contre moy,
disans que ie cõtaminois leur festin, qu'ils ne prendroient plus rien,
& que nous mourrions de faim, les femmes & les enfans ayans sceu cela,
me regardoient par apres comme vn tres-meschant homme, me reprochant
auec dedain que ie les ferois mourir, & veritablement si Dieu ne nous
eust donné rien de long temps, i'estois en danger d'estre mis à mort
pour auoir commis vn tel sacrilege: voila, iusques où s'estend leur
superstition, pour obuier à cét inconuenient: les autres fois on me fit
ma part plus petite, & encore me dit on que ie n'en mãgeasse sinon que
ce que ie voudrois, qu'eux mangeroient le reste, mais sur tout que ie
me donnasse bien de garde de rien ietter aux chiens.

    This happened on Monday. On the Wednesday following, my host and a
    young hunter killed with arrows the Moose whose tracks we had seen;
    they saw others afterwards, but, as [283] there was so little snow,
    they could never approach within arrow-shot of them. As soon as
    they had captured this game, they divided it up, bringing a large
    part of it to our cabins, and burying the rest under the snow.
    Now every one was happy, and a great banquet was made, to which I
    was invited. Seeing the big pieces of meat they gave to each one,
    I asked the Apostate if this was an eat-all feast. He answered,
    "yes;" and I said to him, "It is impossible for me to eat all they
    have given me." "Indeed you must," he answered, "you must eat
    it all; the others have to eat all theirs, and you must eat all
    yours." I made him understand that God forbids such excess, and I
    would not commit it even if my life depended upon it. This wicked
    blasphemer, to arouse the others against me, said that God was
    angry because they had something to eat. "I did not say that," I
    replied to him in Savage, "but that he prohibits eating to excess."
    The Sorcerer answered me, "I am never so well off as when I am
    full." Now as I could not come to the [284] end of my portion, I
    invited one of my neighboring Savages to take a part of it, giving
    him some tobacco as a reward for what he would eat for me. I threw
    another piece of it, secretly, to the dogs. The Savages began to
    suspect something, from the fight that afterwards took place among
    these animals; and commenced to cry out against me, saying that
    I was contaminating their feast, that they would capture nothing
    more, and that we would die of hunger. When the women and children
    heard of this afterward, they looked upon me as a very bad man,
    reproaching me disdainfully, and saying that I would be the cause
    of their death; and truly, if God had not granted us anything for
    a long time, I would have been in danger of being put to death for
    having committed such a sacrilege, to such an extent does their
    superstition go. To prevent the recurrence of this misfortune,
    after that they gave me only a small portion; and they also told me
    that I should not eat any more than I wanted to, that they would
    eat the rest, but above all I should take care not to throw any to
    the dogs.

Le trentiesme du mesme mois de Decembre, nous decabanasmes, faisans
[285] chemin nous passasmes sur deux beaux lacs tout glacez; nous
tirions vers l'endroit où estoit la cache de nostre Orignac, qui ne
dura guere en ceste huictiesme demeure.

    On the thirtieth of the same month of December, we broke camp, and
    in the course of our [285] journey we passed over two beautiful
    lakes covered with ice. We turned toward the place where our Moose
    was hidden, which would not last long in this eighth station.

Le Sorcier me demanda si en vérité i'aymois l'autre vie que ie luy
auois figuré remplie de tous biens, ayant répondu que ie l'aymois en
effect; & moy, dit-il, ie la haï: car il faut mourir pour y aller,
& c'est dequoy ie n'ay point d'enuie, que si i'auois la pensée & la
creance que cette vie est miserable, & que l'autre est pleine de
delices, ie me tuërois moy-mesme pour me deliurer de l'vne, & ioüir
de l'autre: Ie luy repars que Dieu nous defendoit de nous tuer, ny de
tuer autruy; & que si nous nous faisions mourir nous descendrions dans
la vie de malheur, pour auoir contreuenu à ses cormmandemens: Hé bien,
dit il, ne te tuë point toy-mesme, mais moy ie te tuëray pour te faire
plaisir, afin que tu ailles au Ciel, & que tu ioüisse des plaisirs que
tu dis: Ie me sousris, luy repliquant que ie ne pouuois pas consentir
qu'on m'ostast la vie sans pecher: Ie vois bien, me fit-il, en se
moquant [286] que tu n'as pas encore enuie de mourir non plus que moy,
non pas repliquay-ie en cooperant à ma mort.

    The Sorcerer asked me if I really did love the other life, that I
    had described as so full of all blessings; having replied that I
    did, indeed, love it, "And I," said he, "I hate it, for to go there
    one must die, and that is something I have no desire to do; and yet
    if I thought and believed that this life was miserable, and that
    the other was full of delights, I would kill myself, to be freed
    from the one and to enjoy the other." I answered that God forbade
    us to kill ourselves, or to kill any one else, and if we destroyed
    ourselves we would go down into a life of misery, for having acted
    contrary to his commands. "Oh well," said he, "thou needst not kill
    thyself; but I will kill thee, to please thee, that thou mayest
    go to Heaven, and enjoy the pleasures that thou tellest about." I
    smiled, and replied to him that I could not without sin agree to
    have my life taken. "I see plainly," said he, sneeringly, [286]
    "that thou hast not yet the desire to die any more than I have."
    "None," said I, "to bring about my own death."

En ce mesme temps nos chasseurs ayans poursuiuy vn Orignac, & ne
l'ayans peu prendre, l'Apostat se mit à blasphemer, disant aux
Sauuages, le Dieu qui est marry quand nous mangeons, est maintenant
bien ayse de ce que nous n'auons pas dequoy disner: & voyant vue
autre fois qu'on apportoit quelques Porcs-espics, Dieu, disoit-il,
se va fascher de ce que nous nous saoulerons. O langue impie que
tu seras chastié! esprit brutal que tu seras confus, si Dieu ne
te fait misericorde! que les Anges & les sainctes Ames redoublent
autant de fois leur Cantique d'honneur & des loüanges, que cét athée
le blasphemera; ce pauure miserable ne laisse pas par fois d'auoir
quelques craintes de l'enfer, qu'il tasche d'étouffer tant qu'il peut,
comme ie le menaçois vn iour de ces tourmens, peut estre, me fit-il,
que nous autres n'auons point d'ame, ou que nos ames ne sont pas faites
comme les vostres, ou qu'elles ne vont point en mesme [287] endroit:
qui est iamais venu de ce pays là pour nous en dire des nouuelles? ie
luy reparty qu'õ ne pouuoit voir le Ciel sans cognoistre qu'il y a vn
Dieu, qu'on ne peut conceuoir qu'il y a vn Dieu, sans conceuoir qu'il
est iuste, & par consequent qu'il rend à vn chacun selon ses œuures,
d'où s'ensuiuent de grandes recompenses, ou de grands chastimens: cela
est bon, repliqua-il, pour vous autres que Dieu assiste, mais il n'a
point soin de nous: car quoy qu'il fasse, nous ne laisserons pas de
mourir de faim, ou de trouuer de la chasse; iamais cét esprit hebeté ne
peut conceuoir que Dieu gouuerne la grande famille du monde, auec plus
de cognoissance & plus de soin qu'vn Roy ne gouuerne son Royaume, & vn
pere de famille sa maison; ie serois trop long de rapporter tout ce que
ie luy dis sur ses blasphemes & sur ses resueries.

    At this time, our hunters having followed a Moose, and not having
    been able to capture it, the Apostate began to blaspheme, saying to
    the Savages, "The God who is sorry when we eat, is now very glad
    that we have not anything to dine upon." And another time, seeing
    them bringing some Porcupines, "God," said he, "will be angry
    because we are going to fill ourselves up." Oh, blasphemous tongue,
    how wilt thou be chastised! Oh, brutal spirit, how wilt thou be
    confounded, if God does not take pity on thee! May the Angels and
    holy Spirits redouble their Songs of honor and of praise, as many
    times as this atheist will blaspheme them! This poor wretch does
    not fail at times to have some fear of hell, which he tries to
    suppress as much as he can. As I was threatening him with these
    torments one day, "Perhaps," he replied, "we people here have no
    souls, or perhaps they are not made like yours, or it may be that
    they do not go to the same [287] place. Who has ever come back
    from that country to bring us news of it?" I answered him that one
    cannot see the Sky, without recognizing that there is a God; that
    one cannot conceive that there is a God, without conceiving that
    he is just, and that consequently he renders to each one according
    to his works, whence it follows that there are great rewards or
    great punishments. "That's all very well," said he, "for you others
    whom God helps; but he has no interest in us, for, whatever he may
    do, we still die of hunger unless we find game." Never will this
    besotted mind be able to conceive that God rules the great family
    of the world with more wisdom and more care than a King governs his
    Kingdom, and the father of a family his household. I would be too
    tedious if I reported all I said to him about his blasphemies and
    dreams.

Le quatriesme de Ianuier de ceste année mil six cens trente quatre,
nous allasmes faire nostre habitation depuis nostre depart des riues du
grand fleuue cherchant tousiours à viure. I'obiectay en cét endroit au
Sorcier qu'il n'estoit [288] pas bon Prophete, car il m'auoit asseuré
les deux dernieres fois que nous auions decabané, qu'il neigeroit
abondamment aussi tost que nous aurions changé de demeure, ce qui se
trouua faux, i'ay rapportay cecy à mon hoste pour luy oster vne partie
de la creance qu'il a en cét homme qu'il adore, il me répondit que le
Sorcier ne m'auoit pas asseuré qu'il neigeroit, mais qu'il en auoit
seulement quelque pensée; non, dis-ie, il m'a asseuré qu'il voyoit
venir la neige, & qu'elle tomberoit aussi-tost que nous aurions cabané,
_Khi_k_hirassin_, me fit-il, tu as menty, si tost que vous leur dites
quelque chose qu'ils ne veulent point accorder ils vous payent de
ceste monnoye.

    On the fourth of January of this year one thousand six hundred
    and thirty-four, we started to make our [ninth] settlement since
    our departure from the banks of the great river, always seeking
    something upon which to live. In this place I reproached the
    Sorcerer with not being [288] a good Prophet, for he had assured
    me, the last two times when we had broken camp, that it would snow
    abundantly as soon as we had changed our dwelling place, which had
    proved to be untrue. I reported this to my host, in order to take
    away some of the belief that he has in this man, whom he adores. He
    answered that the Sorcerer had not assured me that it would snow,
    but simply that he thought it would. "No," said I, "he assured me
    that he saw the snow coming, and that it would fall as soon as we
    had settled down." _Khikhirassin_, he replied, "Thou hast lied." As
    soon as you tell them something they do not wish to agree to, they
    pay you in this coin.

La veille des Rois, mon hoste me dit qu'il auoit fait vn songe qui luy
donnoit bien de l'apprehension; i'ay veu, dit-il, en dormant que nous
estions reduits en la derniere extremité de la faim, & celuy que tu
nous dis qui a tout fait, m'a asseuré que tu tomberas dans vne telle
langueur, que ne pouuant plus mettre vn pied deuant l'autre tu mourras
seul delaissé au milieu des bois, ie [289] crains que mon songe ne soit
que trop veritable: car nous voila autant que iamais dans la necessité
faute de neige: i'eu quelque pensée que ce songeur me pouuoit bien
ioüer quelque mauuais traict, & m'abandonner tout seul pour faire du
Prophete; voila pourquoy ie me seruy de ses armes, opposant _altare
contra altare_, songe contre songe: & moy, luy dis-ie, i'ay songé tout
le contraire, car i'ay veu dans mon sommeil deux Orignaux, dont l'vn
estoit desia tué, & l'autre encore viuant, bon, dit le Sorcier, voila
qui va bien, aye esperance, tu raconte de bonnes nouuelles, en effect
i'auois fait ce songe quelques iours auparauant, hé bien, dis ie à mon
hoste, lequel de nos deux songes sera trouué veritable, tu dis que nous
mourrons de faim, & moy ie dis que non, il se mit à rire. Alors ie luy
dis que les songes n'estoient que des mensonges, que ie ne m'appuyois
point là dessus, que mon esperance estoit en celuy qui a tout fait,
que ie craignois neantmoins qu'il ne nous chastiast, veu qu'aussi tost
qu'ils auoient à mãnger, ils se gaussoient de [290] luy notamment
l'Apostat, il n'a point d'esprit, dirent-ils, ne prends pas garde à luy.

    On the eve of Epiphany my host told me that he had had a dream
    which caused him much anxiety. "I have seen in my sleep," said he,
    "that we were reduced to the last extremity of hunger; and that he
    who thou hast told us has made all, assured me that thou wouldst
    fall into such a stupor, that, not being able to put one foot
    before the other, thou wouldst die alone abandoned in the midst of
    the woods; I [289] fear that my dream will be only too true, for
    we are now in as great need as ever for lack of snow." I had an
    idea that this dreamer might play some bad trick on me and abandon
    me, to prove himself a Prophet. For this reason I made use of his
    weapons, opposing _altare contra altare_, dream against dream.
    "As for me," I replied, "I have dreamed just the opposite; for in
    my sleep I saw two Moose, one of which was already killed and the
    other still living." "Good," said the Sorcerer, "that's very nice;
    have hope, thou tellest us good news." In truth, I had had this
    dream some days before. "Well, then," I said to my host, "which of
    our two dreams will be found to be true? Thou sayest we shall die
    of starvation, and I say we shall not." He began to laugh. Then
    I told him that dreams were nothing but lies, that I placed no
    dependence upon them; that my hope was in him who has made all, and
    yet I feared he would chastise us, seeing that, as soon as they had
    something to eat, they mocked [290] him, especially the Apostate.
    "He doesn't know anything," they said, "do not pay any attention to
    him."

Le iour que les trois Rois adorerent nostre Seigneur, nous receusmes
trois mauuaises nouuelles; La premiere, que le ieune Hyroquois estãt
allé à la chasse le iour precedent n'estoit point retourné, & comme
on sçauoit bien que la faim l'ayant affoibly il ne se pouuoit pas
beaucoup éloigner, on creut qu'il estoit mort, ou demeuré en quelque
endroit si debile pour n'auoir dequoy manger, que la faim & le froid le
tuëroient, en effect il n'a plus paru depuis, quelques vns ont pensé
qu'il pourroit bien s'estre efforcé de retourner en son pays; mais que
la plus part asseurent qu'il est mort en quelque endroit sur la neige,
c'estoit l'vn des trois prisonniers à Tadoussac, dont i'ay parlé és
premieres lettres que i'ay enuoyé de ce païs-cy, ses deux compatriotes
furent executez à mort auec des cruautez nompareilles, pour luy comme
il estoit ieune on luy sauua la vie à la requeste du sieur Emery de
Can, que nous priasmes d'interceder [291] pour luy, ce pauure ieune
homme s'en souuenoit fort bien, il auoit grande enuie de demeurer en
nostre maison; mais le Sorcier á qui il appartenoit ne le voulut iamais
donner ny vendre.

    On the day that the three Kings adored our Lord, we received three
    pieces of bad news. The first was that the young Hyroquois, who had
    gone hunting the day before, had not returned; and, as they were
    very well aware that hunger had weakened him so that he could not
    go far, they thought he was dead, or lying somewhere so weak from
    lack of food that hunger and cold would kill him. In fact, he has
    never yet appeared; some thought he might have tried to return to
    his own country, but the greater part are sure he is lying dead
    somewhere upon the snow. He was one of the three prisoners at
    Tadoussac, of whom I spoke in the first letters I sent from these
    countries;[4] his two compatriots were executed with unparalleled
    cruelties, but his life was saved because he was young, at the
    request of sieur Emery de Can, whom we begged to intercede [291]
    for him. This poor young man had very kind memories of me, and had
    a great desire to live in our house; but the Sorcerer, to whom he
    belonged, would neither give nor sell him.

La seconde mauuaise nouuelle nous fut apportée par vn ieune Sauuage qui
venoit d'vn autre cartier, lequel nous dit qu'vn Sauuage d'vne autre
cabane plus esloignée estoit mort de disette, que ses gens estoient
fort épouuentez ne trouuans pas de quoy viure, & nous voyant dans la
mesme necessité, cela l'estonnoit encore dauantage. La troisiesme fut
que nos gens découurisent la piste de plusieurs Sauuages qui nous
estoient plus voisins que nous ne pensions, car ils venoient chasser
iusques sur nos marches, enleuans nostre proye & nostre vie tout
ensemble; ces trois nouuelles abbatirent grandement nos Sauuages,
l'alarme estoit par tout, on ne marchoit plus que la teste baissée, ie
ne sçay comme i'estois fait, mais ils me paroissoiẽt tous fort maigres,
fort pensif, & fort mornes, si l'Apostat m'eust voulu [292] ayder à
porter & à gagner le Sorcier, c'estoit bien le temps; mais son diable
muet luy lioit sa langue.

    The second piece of bad news was brought by a young Savage who
    came from another quarter, who told us that a Savage of a more
    distant cabin had died of hunger, and that his people were greatly
    terrified at not finding anything to eat; when he saw us suffering
    from the same scarcity, he was frightened still more. The third
    news was that our people had discovered the trail of several
    Savages, who were nearer to us than we thought, for they were
    coming to hunt upon our very grounds, taking away our game and our
    lives at the same time. These three pieces of news discouraged
    our Savages greatly, the alarm spread everywhere, and all walked
    with bowed heads. I do not know how I looked, but they seemed to
    me very much emaciated, very sad and mournful. If the Apostate had
    consented [292] to help me influence and win over the Sorcerer,
    this was the time to do it; but his mute devil tied his tongue.

Il faut que ie remarque en ce lieu le peu d'estime que font de luy
les Sauuages, il est tombé dans vne grande confusion, voulant éuiter
vn petit reproche, il a quitté les Chrestiens & le Christianisme, ne
pouuãt souffrir quelques brocards des Sauuages, qui se gaussoient
par fois de luy de ce qu'il estoit Sedentaire, & non vagabond comme
eux, & maintenãt il est leur ioüet & leur fallot, il est esclaue du
Sorcier, deuant lequel il n'oseroit branler, ses freres & les autres
Sauuages m'ont dit souuent qu'il n'auoit point d'esprit, que c'estoit
vn busart, qu'il ressembloit à vn chien, qu'il mourroit de faim si on
ne le nourrissoit, qu'il s'égaroit dans les bois comme vn European, les
femmes en font leur entretien, si quelque enfant pleuroit n'ayant pas
dequoy manger, elles luy disoient, tais-toy, tais-toy, ne pleure point,
_Petrichtrich_, c'est ainsi qu'on le nomme par mocquerie, rapportera
vn Castor, & tu mangeras; quand elles [293] l'entendoient reuenir,
allez voir, disoiẽt elles aux enfans, s'il n'a point tué vne Orignac se
gaussant de luy comme d'vn mauuais chasseur, qui est vn grand blasme
parmy les Sauuages: car ces gens là ne sçauroient trouuer ou retenir
des femmes, l'Apostat en a desia eu quatre ou cinq à la faueur de ses
freres, toutes l'ont quitté, celle qu'il auoit cét hyuer me disoit
qu'elle le quitteroit au Prin-temps, & si elle eust esté de ce païs,
elle l'auroit quitté dés lors; i'apprends qu'en effect elle l'a quitté.

    I must here speak of the little esteem the Savages have for him.
    He has fallen into great embarrassment, in trying to avoid a
    slight reproach. He gave up Christians and Christianity, because
    he could not suffer the taunts of the Savages, who jeered at him
    occasionally because he was Sedentary and not wandering, as they
    were; and now he is their butt and their laughingstock. He is a
    slave to the Sorcerer, in whose presence he would not dare to move.
    His brothers and the other Savages have often told me that he has
    no sense, that he is a buzzard, that he resembles a dog, that he
    would die of hunger if they did not feed him, that he gets lost
    in the woods like a European; the women make fun of him,--if some
    child cries because it does not have enough to eat, they say to
    it, "Hush, hush, do not cry, _Petrichtrich_ (they call him this in
    sport) will bring back a Beaver, and then thou shalt have something
    to eat." When they [293] hear him return, "Go and see," they say to
    their children, "if he has not killed a Moose;" thus making sport
    of him for being a poor hunter, a great reproach among the Savages.
    Because such men cannot find wives or retain them, the Apostate,
    with the help of his brothers, has already had four or five, all
    of whom have left him. The one he has had this winter told me she
    would leave him in the Spring, and, if she had belonged to this
    part of the country, she would have left him then. I hear that she
    has, in fact, deserted him.

Certain iour nos chasseurs estans tous dehors, il se tint vn conseil
des femmes dans nostre cabane: or comme elles ne croyoient pas que
ie les peusse entendre, elles parloient tout haut, & tout librement,
déchirant en pieces ce pauure Apostat, l'occasion estoit que le iour
precedent il n'auoit rien rapporté à sa femme d'vn festin où il
auoit esté inuité, & qui n'estoit pas à tout manger, ô le gourmand,
disoient-elles, qui ne donne point à manger à sa femme! encore s'il
pouuoit tuer quelque chose, il n'a point d'esprit, il mange tout [294]
comme vn chien: il y eut vne grande rumeur entre les femmes sur ce
sujet: car comme elles ne vont point ordinairement aux festins, elles
seroient bien affligées, si leurs marys perdoient la bonne coustume
qu'ils ont de rapporter leurs restes à leurs familles, le Renegát
suruenant pendant que cés femmes le depeignoient, elles sceurent fort
bien dissimuler leur ieu, luy témoignant vn aussi bon vsage qu'à
l'ordinaire, voire mesme celle qui en disoit plus de mal, luy donna vn
bout de petun, qui estoit pour lors vn grand present.

    On a certain day, when our hunters had gone out, a council of
    women was held in our cabin. Now as they did not think I could
    understand, they spoke aloud and freely, tearing this poor Apostate
    to pieces. The occasion for this was, that the day before he had
    not carried anything home to his wife from a feast to which he
    had been invited, and which was not an eat-all feast. "Oh, the
    glutton," they said, "who gives his wife nothing to eat! If he
    could only kill something! He has no sense; he eats everything
    [294] like a dog." There was great excitement among the women over
    this subject, for, as they do not usually go to the feasts, they
    would be very sorely afflicted if their husbands lost the good
    habit they have of bringing home the remains to their families.
    The Renegade coming in while these women were drawing this picture
    of him, they knew very well how to put a good face on the matter,
    showing countenances as smiling as usual, even to such an extent
    that the one who had said the worst things about him, gave him a
    bit of tobacco, which was then a great present.

Le neufiesme de Ianuier, vn Sauuage nous venant visiter nous dit, qu'vn
homme & vne femme du lieu dont il venoit estoient morts de faim, & que
plusieurs n'en pouuoient plus, le pauure homme ieusna le iour de sa
venuë aussi bien que nous, pource qu'il ny auoit rien à manger, encore
fallut-il attendre iusques au lendemain à dix heures de nuit, que mon
hoste rapporta deux Castors qui nous firent grand bien.

    On the ninth of January, a Savage, who came to visit us, said that
    a man and a woman of the place from which he had come had starved
    to death, and that several others were on the verge of starvation.
    The poor man fasted the day of his arrival as well as we, for there
    was nothing to eat; and we had to wait until ten o'clock of the
    next night, when my host brought in two Beavers, which were a great
    blessing to us.

[295] Le iour suiuant nos gens tuerent le second Orignac, ce qui causa
par tout vne grande ioye, il est vray qu'elle fut vn peu troublée par
l'arriuée d'vn Sauuage, & de deux ou trois femmes, & d'vn enfant que
la famine alloit bien tost égorger, s'ils n'eussent fait rencontre de
nostre cabane, ils estoient fort hideux, l'homme particulierement plus
que les femmes, dont l'vne auoit accouché depuis dix iours dans les
neiges, & dans la famine, ayant passé plusieurs iours sans manger.

    [295] On the following day our people killed the second Moose, at
    which there was general rejoicing. True, it was a little marred by
    the arrival of a Savage, and of two or three women and a child,
    whom famine would have slaughtered, if they had not happened to
    come to our cabin. They looked most hideous, the man especially,
    more so than the women, one of whom had given birth to a child ten
    days before in the snow, and, in the famine, had passed several
    days without eating.

Mais admirez s'il vous plaist l'amour que ces barbares se portent les
vns aux autres, on ne demanda point a ces nouueaux hostes pourquoy ils
venoient sur nos limites, s'ils ne sçauoient pas bien que nous estions
en aussi grand danger qu'eux, qu'ils nous venoient oster le morceau
de la bouche; ains au contraire on les receut, non de paroles, mais
d'effect, sans courtoisie exterieure, car les Sauuages n'en ont point,
mais non pas sans charité: on leur ietta de grandes pieces de l'Orignac
nouuellement tué, [296] sans leur dire autre parole, _mitisou_k_ou_
mangez, aussi leur eust on fait grand tort d'appliquer pour lors leurs
bouches à autre vsage: pendant qu'ils mangeoient on prepara vn festin,
auquel ils furent traictez à grand plat, ie vous en réponds: car la
portion qu'on leur donna à chacun, sortoit beaucoup hors de leurs
_ouragans_ qui sont tres capables.

    But admire, if you please, the love these barbarians have for each
    other. These new guests were not asked why they came upon our
    boundaries, if they were not well aware that we were in as great
    straits as they were, and that they were coming to take the morsel
    out of our mouths. On the contrary, they were received, not with
    words, but with deeds; without exterior ceremony, for of this the
    Savages have none, but not without charity. They threw them large
    pieces of the Moose which had just been killed, [296] without
    saying another word but, _mitisoukou_, "eat;" and indeed it would
    have been very wrong to ask them then to use their mouths for any
    other purpose. While they were eating, a feast was prepared, at
    which they were treated generously, I assure you; for the portion
    given to each one of them more than filled their _ouragans_, which
    are very large.

Le seiziesme du mesme mois nous battismes la campagne, & ne pouuans
arriuer au lieu où nous pretendions, nous ne fismes que gister dans
vne hostelerie que nous dressasmes à la haste, & le lendemain nous
poursuiuismes nostre chemin passans sur vne montagne si haute,
qu'encore que nous ne montassions point iusques au sommet, qui me
paroissoit armé d'horribles rochers, neantmoins le Sorcier me dit, que
si le Ciel obscurcy d'vn broüillard eust esté serain nous eussions
veu à mesme tẽps Kebec & Tadoussac, esloignez l'vn de l'autre de
quarante lieuës pour le moins, ie voyois au dessous de moy auec horreur
des precipices, qui me [297] faisoient trembler, i'apperceuois des
montagnes au milieu de quelques plaines qui me paroissoient comme
des petites tours, ou plustost comme de petits chasteaux, quoy qu'en
effect elles fussent fort grandes & fort hautes: figurez vous quelle
peine ont ces barbares de traisner si haut leur bagage, i'auois de la
peine à monter, i'en trouuois encore plus à descendre: car quoy que
ie m'esloignasse des precipices, neantmoins la pante estoit si roide,
qu'il estoit fort aisé de rouler à bas, & de s'aller fendre la teste
contre vn arbre.

    On the sixteenth of the same month, we rambled about the country;
    and, not being able to find the place we wanted, we could only
    lodge in a hostelry that we erected in haste; the next day we
    pursued our journey, passing over a mountain so high, that even
    though we did not ascend to its summit, which seemed to be
    fortified with horrible rocks, yet the Sorcerer told me that if the
    Sky, which was obscured by a cloud, had been clear, we might have
    seen at the same time, both Kebec and Tadoussac, distant from each
    other at least forty leagues. I saw with horror precipices beneath
    me, which made [297] me tremble. In the midst of some plains, I
    saw mountains which seemed to me like little towers, or rather
    diminutive castles, although in reality they were very large and
    very high. Imagine how hard it is for these barbarians to drag
    their baggage so high. I had trouble in getting up, but still more
    in coming down; for, although I was going away from the precipices,
    yet the slope was so steep that it was very easy to roll down and
    break one's head against a tree.

Le vingt neufiesme nous acheuasmes de descendre ceste montagne portant
nostre maison sur la pante d'vne autre où nous allasmes: voila le
terme de nostre pelerinage, nous commencerons d'oresnauant à tourner
bride & à tirer vers l'Isle où nous auons laissé nostre Chaloupe, nous
vismes icy les sources de deux petits fleuues, qui se vont rendre dans
vn fleuue aussi grand au dire de nos Sauuages, que le fleuue de S.
Laurens, ils l'appellent _Oueraouachticou_.

    On the twenty-ninth, we finished our descent of this mountain, and
    carried our house up the slope of another to which we were going.
    As this was the end of our pilgrimage, we shall begin hereafter to
    turn back and direct our course toward the Island where we had left
    our Shallop. We saw here the sources of two little rivers, which
    flow into a river as large, our Savages say, as the St. Lawrence;
    they call it _Oueraouachticou_.

[298] Ceste douziesme demeure nous a deliuré de la famine, car les
neiges se trouuant hautes assez pour arrester les grandes iambes de
l'Elan, nous eusmes dequoy manger. Au commencement ce n'estoient que
festins & que danses, mais cela ne dura pas, car on se mit bientost
à faire seicherie passant de la famine dans la bonne nourriture,
ie me portay bien: mais passant de la chair fraische au boucan ie
tombay malade, & ne recouuray point entierement la santé que trois
semaines apres mon retour en nostre petite maisonnette. Il est vray
que depuis le commencement de Feurier iusques en Auril nous eusmes
tousiours dequoy manger, mais d'vn boucan si dur & si sale & en si
petite quantité, horsmis quelques iours d'abondance qui se passoient
en festins que nos Sauuages contoient ces derniers, mois aussi bien
que les precedens entre les mois & les hyuers de leurs famines. Ils
me disoient que pour estre traicté mediocrement & sans patir, il nous
falloit vn Elan gros comme vn boeuf en deux iours, tant à raison du
[299] nombre que nous estions, comme aussi qu'on mange beaucoup de
chair quand on n'a ny pain ny autre chose pour faire durer la viande,
adioustez qu'ils sont grands disneurs, & que la chair d'Elan ne demeure
pas long-temps dans l'estomach.

    [298] This twelfth station delivered us from famine; for the
    snow was deep enough to impede the long legs of the Elk, and we
    had something to eat. At first, there was nothing but feasts and
    dancing; but this did not last long, as they soon began to dry the
    meat. Passing thus from starvation to good food, I felt very well;
    but when we changed from fresh meat to smoked, I fell ill, and did
    not entirely recover my health until three weeks after my return to
    our little house. It is true that from the beginning of February
    until April we always had something to eat; but it was smoked
    meat, so hard and so dirty, and in so small quantities, except
    a few days of plenty which passed in feasting, that our Savages
    counted these last months as well as the preceding ones, among the
    months and winters of their famines. They told me that, to live
    moderately well and without suffering, they had to have an Elk as
    large as an ox every two days, both because [299] we were rather
    numerous, and also because people eat a great deal of meat when
    they have neither bread nor anything else to make the food hold
    out; add to this that they are great diners, and that Elk meat does
    not remain long in the stomach.

Ie me suis oublié de dire ailleurs que les Sauuages content les années
par les hyuers, pour dire quel aage as-tu, ils disent combien d'hyuers
as-tu passé? ils content aussi par les nuicts comme nous faisons par
les iours, au lieu que nous disons, il est arriué depuis trois iours,
ils disent depuis trois nuicts.

    I have forgotten to say elsewhere that the Savages count the years
    by winters. To say, "How old art thou?" they say, "How many winters
    hast thou passed?" They count also by nights, as we do by days;
    instead of saying, "It happened three days ago," they say, "three
    nights ago."

Le cinquiesme de Feurier nous quittasmes nostre douziesme demeure pour
aller faire la treiziesme, ie me trouuois fort mal, le Sorcier me
tuoit auec ses cris, ses hurlemens, & son tambour, il me reprochoit
incessamment que ie faisois l'orgueilleux, & que le _Manitou_ m'auoit
fait malade aussi bien que les autres. Ce n'est pas, luy disois-je, le
_Manitou_ ou le diable qui m'a causé ceste maladie, mais la mauuaise
nourriture qui m'a gasté l'estomach, & les [300] autres trauaux qui
m'ont debilité, tout cela ne le contentoit point, il ne laissoit pas
de m'attaquer, notamment en la presence des Sauuages, disant que ie
m'estois mocqué du _Manitou_, & qu'il s'estoit vangé de moy comme
d'vn superbe. Vn iour comme il me faisoit ces reproches ie me leue
en mon seant, ie luy dis, afin que tu sçache que ce n'est point ton
_Manitou_ qui cause les maladies & qui tuë les hommes, escoute comme ie
luy parleray, ie m'escrie en leur langue grossissant ma voix, approche
_Manitou_, vien demon, massacre moy si tu as le pouuoir, ie te deffie,
ie me mocque de toy, ie ne te crains point, tu n'as point de pouuoir
sur ceux qui croyent & qui ayment Dieu, viens & me tuë si tu as les
mains libres, tu as plus de peur de moy que ie n'ay de toy, le Sorcier
fut espouuenté, & me dit pourquoy l'appelle tu? puis que tu ne le
crains pas, c'est signe que tu l'appelle afin qu'il te tuë, non pas luy
dis-je, mais ie l'appelle afin que tu ayes cognoissance qu'il n'a point
de puissance sur ceux qui adorent le vray Dieu, & pour te faire [301]
voir qu'il n'est pas la seule cause des maladies comme tu crois.

    On the fifth of February, we left our twelfth dwelling to proceed
    to our thirteenth. I was very sick; the Sorcerer was killing me
    with his cries, his howls, and his drum; he continually reproached
    me with being proud, saying that the _Manitou_ had made me sick
    as well as the others. "It is not," I said to him, "the _Manitou_
    or devil that has caused this sickness, but bad food, which has
    injured my stomach, and [300] other hardships that have weakened
    me." All this did not satisfy him; he did not cease to attack me,
    especially in the presence of the Savages, saying I had mocked the
    _Manitou_, and that he had revenged himself upon me for my pride.
    One day, when he was casting these slurs upon me, I sat upright,
    and said, "That thou mayest know it is not thy _Manitou_ who
    causes sickness and kills people, hear how I shall speak to him."
    I cried out in their language, in a loud voice, "Come, _Manitou_;
    come, demon; murder me if thou hast the power, I defy thee, I mock
    thee, I do not fear thee; thou hast no power over those who believe
    and love God; come and kill me if thy hands are free; thou art more
    afraid of me than I am of thee." The Sorcerer was terrified and
    said, "Why dost thou call him, since thou dost not fear him? it is
    the same as calling him to kill thee." "Not at all," said I; "but
    I am calling him to make you see that he has no power over those
    who worship the true God, and to show [301] thee that he is not the
    sole cause of sickness, as thou thinkest."

Le neufiesme du mesme mois de Feurier nous battismes la campagne, le
Sorcier nonobstant ma maladie me vouloit faire porter du bagage à toute
force, mais mon hoste eust pitié de moy, voire mesme m'ayant rencontré
en chemin que ie n'en pouuois quasi plus, il prit de son bon gré ce que
ie portois, & le mit sur sa traisne.

    On the ninth of the same month of February we scoured the plains.
    The Sorcerer, in spite of the fact that I was sick, would force me
    to carry some of the baggage; but my host took pity on me, and,
    having encountered me on the way when I was ready to sink from
    exhaustion, he took what I carried, of his own free will, and
    placed it upon his sledge.

Le quatorziesme & quinziesme nous fismes de longues traictes pour aller
planter nostre cabane proche de deux petits Orignaux que mon hoste
auoit tué: faisant chemin on reconneust la piste d'vn troisiesme,
mon hoste fit arrester le camp pour l'aller descouurir; i'estois en
l'arriere garde de nostre armée, c'est à dire que ie venois doucement
derriere les autres quand tout à coup ie vis paroistre cét Elan qui
couroit droit à moy, & mon hoste apres, qui luy donnoit la chasse, la
neige estoit fort haute, voila pourquoy il ne fit qu'enuiron cinq cens
pas deuant que d'estre mis à mort, nous cabanames aupres & en fismes
curée.

    On the fourteenth and fifteenth, we made long stages, to go and
    plant our cabin near two small Moose that my host had killed.
    Upon the way, as we discovered the tracks of a third, my host
    interrupted the journey to go and look for it. I belonged to the
    rear guard of our army; that is, I was coming up slowly behind the
    others, when suddenly this Elk appeared, coming straight toward
    me, and after it my host in hot pursuit. The snow was very deep,
    and hence, ere it had gone five hundred steps, it was killed. We
    encamped near there and made a feast of it.

[302] L'Apostat continuant icy ses blasphemes, me demandoit deuant
ses freres pour les animer contre Dieu, pourquoy ie priois celuy qui
n'entendoit ny ne voyoit rien, ie le repris fort vertement & luy
imposay silence.

    [302] The Apostate, continuing to blaspheme here, asked me, in the
    presence of his brothers, in order to turn them against God, why
    I prayed to him who neither saw nor heard anything. I rebuked him
    very sharply and imposed silence upon him.

Le sixiesme iour de Mars nous changeasmes de demeure, le Sorcier, le
Renegat, & deux ieunes chasseurs tirerent deuant nous droit aux riues
du grand fleuue, l'occasion de cette separation fut que mon hoste braue
chasseur ayant descouuert quatre Orignaux, & quantité de cabanes de
Castors, ne pouuant luy seul en mesme temps chasser en tant d'endroits
fort separez, le Sorcier mena ces ieunes chasseurs pour courre les
Orignaux, & luy demeura pour les Castors: cette separation me fit du
bien & du mal. Du bien, pource que ie fus deliuré du Sorcier, ie n'ay
point de paroles pour declarer l'importunité de ce meschant homme. Du
mal, pource que mon hoste ne prenant point d'Orignaux nous ne mangions
que du boucan qui m'estoit fort contraire, que s'il prenoit des Castors
on en faisoit seicherie, [303] excepté des petits que nous mangions,
les plus beaux & les meilleurs estoient reseruez pour les festins
qu'ils deuoient faire au Printemps, au lieu où ils s'estoient donnez le
rendez-vous.

    On the sixth day of March, we shifted our quarters. The Sorcerer,
    the Renegade, and two young hunters, directed their steps before
    us straight to the banks of the great river. The cause of this
    separation was that my host, a good hunter, had discovered four
    Moose, and a number of Beaver lodges; and not being able alone to
    hunt in places so widely separated, the Sorcerer took these young
    hunters to chase the Moose, and he remained for the Beavers. This
    separation was fraught with both good and evil for me. With good,
    because I was freed from the Sorcerer; I have no words to describe
    the pertinacity of this wicked man. With evil, because my host did
    not capture any Moose, and we had nothing to eat but smoked meat,
    which was very distasteful to me; for, if he captured any Beavers,
    they were smoked, [303] except the little ones, which we ate; the
    finest and best ones were reserved for the feasts they were to give
    in the Spring, at the place where they had appointed a rendezvous.

Le treiziesme du mesme mois nous fismes nostre dix-huictiesme demeure
proche d'vn fleuue dont les eaux me sembloient sucrées apres la
saleté des neiges fonduës que nous beuuions és stations precedentes
dans vn chauderon gras & enfumé, ie commençay à ressentir en ce lieu
l'incommodité du coucher sur la terre bien froide pendant l'hyuer &
fort humide au Printemps, car le costé droit sur lequel ie reposois
s'estourdit tellement par la froidure qu'il n'auoit quasi plus de
sentiment: or craignant de ne remporter que la moitié de moy-mesme dans
nostre petite maison, l'autre demeurante paralytique, ie promis vne
chemise & vne petite robbe à vn enfant pour vn meschãt bout de peau
d'Orignac que sa mere me donna, ceste peau non passée estoit bien aussi
dure que la terre, mais non pas si humide, [304] i'en fis mon lict qui
se trouua si court que la terre qui auoit iusques alors pris possession
de tout mon corps en retint encore la moitié.

    On the thirteenth of the same month, we made our eighteenth station
    near a river, whose waters seemed to me sweet as sugar after the
    dirt of the melted snow that we drank at former stations, out of a
    greasy and smoky kettle. I began here to experience the discomfort
    of sleeping upon the ground, which was cold in winter and damp in
    Spring; for my right side, upon which I lay, became so benumbed
    from cold that it scarcely had any sense of feeling. Now fearing I
    would only carry half of myself back to our little house, the other
    being paralyzed, I promised a shirt and a little gown to a child,
    for a miserable piece of Moose skin, which his mother gave me; this
    undressed skin was about as hard as the ground, but not as damp.
    [304] Of this I made my bed, which was so short that the ground,
    which had up to that time taken possession of all my body, still
    kept the half of it.

Depuis le depart du Sorcier, mon hoste prenoit plaisir à me faire des
questions, notamment des choses naturelles, il me demanda vn iour comme
la terre estoit faite, & m'apportant vne écorce & vn charbon, il me la
fit décrire, ie luy despeins donc les deux Hemispheres, & apres luy
auoir tracé l'Europe, l'Asia, & l'Affrique, ie vins à nostre Amerique,
luy monstrant comme elle est vne grande Isle, ie luy d'écriuy la coste
de l'Acadie, la grande Isle de Terre-neufue, l'entrée & golfe de nostre
grand fleuue de sainct Laurens, les peuples qui habitent ses riues,
le lieu où nous estions pour lors, ie montay iusques aux Algonquains,
aux Hiroquois, aux Hurons, à la nation neutre, &c. luy designant les
endroits plus & moins peuplez, ie passay à la Floride, au Perou,
au Brasil, &c. luy parlant en mon jargon de ces contrées le mieux
qu'il m'estoit possible, il m'interrogea [305] plus particulierement
des païs dont il a connoissance, puis m'ayans escouté fort
patiemment, il s'escria prononçant vne de leurs grandes admirations
_Amonitatinanioui_k_hi_! Ceste robbe noire dit vray! parlant à vn
vieillard qui me regardoit, puis se tournant deuers moy il me dit,
_nicanis_, mon bien aymé tu nous donne en verité de l'admiration, car
nous connoissons la plus part de ces terres & de ces peuples, & tu
les a descrit comme ils sont, i'insiste là dessus, comme tu vois que
ie dis vray parlant de ton pays, aussi dois-tu croire que ie ne ments
pas parlant des autres, ie le croy ainsi, me repartit-il, ie poursuy
ma pointe, comme ie suis veritable en parlant des choses de la terre,
aussi tu dois te persuader que ie ne voudrois pas mentir quand ie te
parle des choses du Ciel, & partant tu dois croire ce que ie t'ay dit
de l'autre vie: il s'arresta vn peu de temps tout court, puis ayant
vn peu pensé à part soy, Ie te croiray, dit-il quand tu sçauras bien
parler, nous auons maintenant trop de peine à nous faire entendre.

    After the departure of the Sorcerer, my host took pleasure in
    asking me questions, especially about the things of nature. One
    day he asked me how the earth was made; and, bringing me a piece
    of bark and some charcoal, he had me describe it. So I drew for
    him the two Hemispheres; and, after having traced Europe, Asia and
    Africa, I came to our America, showing him that it is an immense
    Island. I described for him the coast of Acadia, the great Island
    of Newfoundland, the entrance and gulf of our great river saint
    Lawrence, the people who inhabit its banks, the place where we
    then were. I went up as far as the Algonquains, the Hiroquois,
    the Hurons, to the neutral nation, etc., showing him the places
    more and less populous. I passed to Florida, to Peru, to Brazil,
    etc., speaking to him in my jargon the best I could about these
    countries. He asked me [305] more particularly about the countries
    of which he had some knowledge. Then having listened to me
    patiently, he exclaimed, using one of their words expressive of
    great admiration, _Amonitatinaniouikhi!_ "This black robe tells
    the truth," speaking to an old man who was looking at me; and
    turning toward me, he said, "_nicanis_, my well-beloved, thou dost
    indeed cause our wonder; for we are acquainted with the greater
    part of these lands and tribes, and thou hast described them as
    they are." Thereupon I urge, "As thou seest I tell the truth in
    speaking of thy country, thou shouldst also believe that I do not
    lie in speaking of the others." "I do believe thus," he replied. I
    followed up my point: "As I am truthful in speaking about things of
    the earth, also thou shouldst persuade thyself that I am not lying
    when I speak to thee about the things of Heaven; and therefore thou
    oughtst believe what I have told thee about the other life." He
    paused a few moments, and then, having reflected a little, said, "I
    will believe thee when thou shalt know how to speak; but we have
    now too much trouble in understanding each other."

[306] Il m'a fait mille autres questions, du Soleil, de la rondeur de
la terre, des Antipodes, de la France, & fort souuent il me parloit de
nostre bon Roy, il admiroit quand ie luy disois que la France estoit
remplie de Capitaines, & que le Roy estoit le Capitaine de tous les
Capitaines, il me prioit de le mener en France pour le voir, & qu'il
luy feroit des presens, ie me mis à rire luy disant que toutes leurs
richesses n'estoient que pauureté à comparaisson des grandeurs du Roy,
Ie veux dire, me fit-il, que ie feray des presens à ceux de sa suitte,
pour luy ie me contenteray de le voir, il racontoit par apres aux
autres ce qu'il m'auoit ouy dire. Il me demanda vne autrefois s'il y
auoit de grands saults dans la mer, c'est à dire des cheutes d'eau, il
y en a beaucoup dans les fleuues de ce païs cy, vous verrez vne belle
riuiere coulant fort doucement tomber tout à coup dans vn lit plus
bas, les terres ne s'abbaissant pas également, mais comme par degrez
en certains endroits, nous voyons vn de ces sauts proche de Kebec
nommé le saut de [307] Montmorency, c'est vne riuiere qui vient des
terres, & qui se precipite de fort haut dans le grand fleuue de sainct
Laurens, les riues qui le bornent estans fort releuées en cét endroit:
Or quelques Sauuages croyoient que la mer a de ces cheutes d'eau dans
lesquelles se perdent quantité de nauires ie luy ostay cét erreur, ces
inegalitez ne se retrouuans point dans l'Ocean.

    [306] He asked me a thousand other questions,--about the Sun, the
    roundness of the earth, the Antipodes, France, and he frequently
    spoke to me about our good King. He was surprised when I told him
    that France was full of Captains, and that the King was the Captain
    of all the Captains. He begged me to take him to France to see him,
    and to make him some presents. I began to laugh, telling him that
    all their riches were nothing but poverty compared to the splendors
    of the King. "I mean," said he, "that I will make presents to his
    followers; as to him, I will be content to see him." He recounted
    afterwards to the others what he had heard me say. Another time
    he asked me if there were any great falls in the sea, that is,
    waterfalls. There are a great many in the rivers of this country.
    You will see a beautiful river flowing along peacefully; and
    all at once it will fall into a lower bed, as the land does not
    slope gradually, but as if by steps in certain places. We see
    one of these falls near Kebec; it is called the "falls of [307]
    Montmorency." They are formed by a river which comes from the
    interior, and falls from a very high level into the great river
    saint Lawrence, the banks enclosing it being considerably elevated
    at this place. Now some of the Savages believe that the sea has
    these waterfalls, and that a great many ships are lost in them. I
    removed this error by telling them that these inequalities are not
    found in the Ocean.

Le vingt-troisiesme de Mars nous repassames le fleuue
_Capititetchioueth_, que nous auions passé le troisiesme de Decembre.

    On the twenty-third of March, we again crossed the river
    _Capititetchioueth_, over which we had passed on the third of
    December.

Le trentiesme du mesme mois, nous vinsmes cabaner sur vn fort beau
lac, en ayant passé vn autre plus petit en nostre chemin, ils estoient
encore autant glacez qu'au milieu de l'hyuer, mon hoste me consoloit
icy me voyant fort foible & fort abbatu, ne t'attriste point, me
disoit-il, si tu t'attriste tu seras encore plus malade, si ta maladie
augmente tu mourras, considere que voicy vn beau pays, ayme-le, si tu
l'ayme, tu t'y plairas, si tu t'y plais tu te resioüiras, si tu te
resioüis tu guariras, ie [308] prenois plaisir d'entendre le discours
de ce pauure barbare.

    On the thirtieth of the same month, we encamped upon a very
    beautiful lake, having passed another smaller one on our way, both
    of them still frozen over as hard as in the middle of winter.
    Here my host, seeing that I was very weak and cast down, consoled
    me, saying, "Do not be sad: if thou art sad, thou wilt become
    still worse; if thy sickness increases, thou wilt die. See what a
    beautiful country this is; love it: if thou lovest it, thou wilt
    take pleasure in it, and if thou takest pleasure in it thou wilt
    become cheerful, and if thou art cheerful thou wilt recover." I
    [308] took pleasure in listening to the conversation of this poor
    barbarian.

Le premier iour d'Auril nous quittasmes ce beau lac & tirasmes à grande
erre vers nostre rendez vous, nous passames la nuit dans vn meschant
trou enfumé & dés le matin continuasmes nostre chemin faisant plus en
ces deux iournées que nous n'auions faict en cinq, Dieu nous fauorisa
d'vn beau temps: car il gela bien fort, & l'air fut serain, s'il eust
fait vn degel comme les iours precedens, & que nous eussions enfoncé
dans la neige, comme quelques fois il nous est arriué, ou il m'eust
fallu traisner, ou ie fusse demeuré en chemin tant i'estois mal. Il est
bien vray que la nature a plus de force qu'elle ne s'en fait accroire,
ie l'experimentay en ceste iournée en laquelle i'estois si foible, que
m'asseant de temps en temps sur la neige pour me reposer, tous les
membres me trembloient, non pas de froid, mais par vne debilité qui me
causoit vne sueur au front. Or comme i'estois alteré voulant puiser
de l'eau dans vn torrent [309] que nous rencontrasmes, la glace que
ie cassois auec mon baston tomba dessous moy, & fit vn grand escarre:
quand ie me vis auec mes raquettes aux pieds sur ceste glace flottante
sur vne eau fort rapide, ie sautay plustost sur le bord du torrent,
que ie n'eu consulté si ie le deuois faire, & la nature qui suoit de
foiblesse trouua assez de force pour sortir de ceste grande eau n'en
voulant pas tant boire à la fois, ie n'eus que la peur d'vn peril qui
fut plustost esuité que recognu.

    On the first day of April, we left this beautiful lake, and drew
    rapidly toward our rendezvous. We passed the night in a miserable
    smoky hole, and in the morning continued on our way, going farther
    in these two days than we had previously gone in five. God favored
    us with fine weather, for there was a hard frost, and the air was
    clear. If it had thawed as on the preceding days, and we had sunk
    down in the snow, as sometimes happened, either they would have
    had to drag me, or I would have remained on the way, so ill was I.
    It is true that nature has more resistance than she makes believe;
    I experienced this that day, when I was so weak that, if I sat down
    upon the snow occasionally to rest myself, my limbs would tremble,
    not from cold, but from a weakness which caused the perspiration
    to come out upon my forehead. Now, as I was thirsty, I tried to
    drink some water from a torrent [309] that we were passing. The
    ice, which I broke with my club, fell under me and separated into a
    big cake. When I saw myself with my snowshoes on my feet, upon this
    ice, floating in a very rapid current, I leaped to the edge of the
    torrent before consulting as to whether I ought to do it or not,
    and nature, which perspired from weakness, found strength enough
    to escape from this mass of water, not wishing to drink so much of
    it at once; I had nothing but the fear of a peril which was sooner
    escaped than realized.

Le danger passé ie poursuiuis mon chemin assez lentement, aussi ne
pouuois-ie pas estre bien fort, car outre la maladie qui ne m'auoit
point quitté parfaitement depuis le dernier iour de Ianuier, ie ne
mangeois ces derniers iours que trois bouchées de boucan le matin,
& cheminois quasi tout le reste du iour sans autre rafraichissement
qu'vn peu d'eau quand i'en pouuois rencontrer. Enfin i'arriuay apres
les autres sur les riues du grand fleuue, & trois iours apres nostre
[310] arriuée, sçauoir est le quatriesme du mesme mois d'Auril nous
sismes nostre vingt-troisiesme station allant planter nostre cabane
dans l'Isle où nous auions laissé nostre Chalouppe, nous y fusmes
tres-mal logez: car outre que le Sorcier s'estoit remis auec nous, nous
estions si remplis de fumée que nous n'en pouuions plus, d'ailleurs le
grand fleuue estant icy falé, & l'Isle n'ayant aucune fontaine nous ne
beuuions que des eaux de neige, ou de pluye encore tres sale. Ie ne
fis pas long sejour en ce lieu, mon hoste voyant que ie ne guerissois
point, prit resolution de me remener en nostre maisonnette, le Sorcier
l'en voulut detourner, mais ie rompis ses menées, i'obmets mille
particularitez pour tirer à la fin.

    The danger passed, I pursued my way quite slowly; indeed I was not
    likely to be very strong, for, besides the malady from which I had
    been suffering since the last day of January, and which had not
    entirely left me, during these last days I had not been eating more
    than three mouthfuls of smoked meat in the morning, and would walk
    nearly all the rest of the day without any other refreshment than
    a little water, when I could get any. At last I arrived after the
    others upon the banks of the great river, and, three days later,
    [310] namely, on the fourth of the same month of April, we made our
    twenty-third station, going to erect our cabin on the Island where
    we had left our Shallop. Here we were very badly lodged; for, in
    addition to the presence of the Sorcerer who had returned to us,
    we were so full of smoke that we could stand no more; besides, as
    the water of the great river was salty here, and as there was no
    spring in the Island, we could only drink snow or rainwater, and
    that very dirty. I did not make a long stay in this place. My host,
    seeing that I was not getting well, decided to take me back to our
    little house; the Sorcerer wished to dissuade him from this, but I
    broke up his conspiracies. I am omitting a thousand particulars in
    order to get to the end.

Le cinquiesme du mois d'Auril, mon hoste, l'Apostat, & moy, nous
embarquasmes dans vn petit canot pour tirer à Kebec fur le grand
fleuue, apres auoir pris congé de tous les Sauuages: or comme il
faisoit encore froid nous ne fusmes pas loin que [311] nous trouuasmes
vne petite glace formée pendant la nuict, qui feruoit de superficie
aux eaux, voyant qu'elle s'estendoit fort loing, nous donnons dedans,
l'Apostat qui estoit deuant, la brifant auec son auiron: or soit
qu'elle fut trop trenchante, ou l'écorce de nostre gòndole trop foible,
il se fit vne ouuerture qui donna entrée à l'eau dans nostre canot &
à la crainte dans nostre cœur, nous voila aussi tost tous trois en
action, mes deux Sauuages de ramer, & moy de ietter l'eau, nous tirons
à force de rames dans vne Isle que nous rencontrasmes fort à propos,
& mettant pied à terre les Sauuages empoignent leur canot, le tirent
de l'eau, le renuerfent, battent leur fusil, font du feu, recousent
l'escorce fenduë, y appliquent de leur bray, qui est vne espece
d'encens qui decoule des arbres, remettent le canot à l'eau, nous nous
rembarquons & continuons nostre chemin: ie leur dy voyant ce peril que
s'ils croyoient rencontrer souuent de ces glaces tranchantes, [312]
qu'il valloit mieux retourner d'où nous estions partis, & attendre que
le temps fut plus chaud, il est vray me fit mon hoste que nous auons
pensé perir, si l'ouuerture eust esté vn peu plus grande c'estoit
fait de nous, poursuiuons neantmoins nostre chemin ces petites glaces
ne m'estonnent pas. Sur les trois heures du soir nous apperceusmes
deuant nous vn banc de glaces espouuentables qui nous bouchoit le
chemin, s'estendant au trauers de ce fleuue à plus de quatre lieuës
loin: nous fusmes vn peu estonnez, mes gens ne laissent pas pourtant
de les aborder ayant remarqué vne petite esclaircie, ils se glissent
là dedans faisant tournoyer nostre petite gondole, tantost d'vn costé
& puis tantost de l'autre pour gaigner tousjours païs, en fin nous
trouuasmes ces glaces si fort serrées qu'il fut impossible d'auancer
ny de reculer, car le mouuement de l'eau nous enferma de toutes parts,
au milieu de ces glaces s'il y fut suruenu vn vent vn peu violent nous
estions froissez & brisez & [313] nous & nostre canot comme le grain
entre les deux pierres du moulin, car figurez-vous que ces glaces sont
plus grandes & plus espaisses que les meules & la tremuë tout ensemble,
mes Sauuages nous voyant si empressez sautent de glaces en glaces comme
vn ecririeux d'arbres en arbres, & les repoussant auec leurs auirons
font passage au canot dans lequel i'estois tout seul plus prest de
mourir par les eaux que de maladie, nous combattismes en cette sorte
iusques à cinq heures du soir que nous prismes terre: ces barbares sont
tres habiles en ces rencontres, ils me demandoient par fois dans la
plus grande presse des glaces si ie ne craignois point, veritablement
la nature n'ayme point à ioüer à ce jeu là, & leurs sauts de glaces en
glaces me sembloient des sauts perilleux & pour eux & pour moy, veu
mesmes que leür pere, à ce qu'ils me disoient, s'est autrefois noyé en
semblable occasion. Il est vray que Dieu dont la bonté est par tout
aymable, se trouue aussi bien dessus les eaux [314] & parmy les glaces
que dessus la terre, nous eschappasmes encore de ce danger qui ne leur
sembla pas si grand que le premier.

    On the fifth of the month of April, my host, the Apostate, and I
    embarked in a little canoe to go to Kebec upon the great river,
    after having taken leave of all the Savages. Now, as it was still
    cold, we had not gone far when [311] we found that a little ice had
    formed during the night, which covered the surface of the water;
    seeing that it extended quite far, we entered it, the Apostate,
    who was in front, breaking it with his paddle. But either it
    was too sharp, or the bark of our gondola too thin; for it made
    an opening which let the water into our canoe and fear into our
    hearts. So behold us all three in action, my two Savages paddling,
    and I baling out the water. We drew with all the strength of our
    paddles to an Island which we very fortunately encountered. When
    we set foot upon shore, the Savages seized the canoe, drew it out
    of the water, turned it upside down; lighted their tinder, made a
    fire, sewed up the slit in the bark; applied to it their resin, a
    kind of gum that runs out of trees; placed the canoe again in the
    water, and we reëmbarked and continued our journey. In view of
    this danger, I told them that, if they expected to encounter much
    of this sharp ice, [312] it would be better to return whence we
    had come, and wait until the weather was warmer. "It is true,"
    replied my host, "that we came near perishing; if the hole had
    been a little larger it would have been all over with us. But let
    us pursue our way, this little ice does not frighten me." Towards
    the third hour of the evening we saw before us a horrible bank of
    ice which blocked our way, extending across the great river for a
    distance of more than four leagues. We were a little frightened,
    but my people approached it nevertheless, as they had noticed a
    small opening in it; they glided into this, turning our little
    gondola first to one side and then to the other, in order to always
    make some headway. At last we found these masses of ice so firmly
    wedged together, that it was impossible either to advance or
    recede, for the movement of the water closed us in on all sides. In
    the midst of this ice, if a sharp wind had arisen, we would have
    been crushed and broken to pieces, [313] we and our canoe, like the
    grain of wheat between two millstones; for imagine these blocks of
    ice, larger and thicker than the millstone and hopper together. My
    Savages, seeing our predicament, leaped from one piece of ice to
    another, like squirrels from tree to tree; and, pushing it away
    with their paddles, made a passage for the canoe, in which I sat
    alone, nearer dying from water than from disease. We struggled
    along in this way until five o'clock in the evening, and then we
    landed. These barbarians are very skillful in such encounters.
    They asked me from time to time, in the greatest danger, if I were
    not afraid; truly nature is not fond of playing at such games, and
    their leaps from ice to ice seemed to me to be full of peril both
    for them and for me, especially as their father, as I have been
    told, was drowned under similar circumstances. It is true that God,
    whose goodness is everywhere adorable, is found as well upon the
    waters, [314] and among the ice, as upon the land. We escaped also
    from this danger, which did not seem to them as great as the first.

Arriuez que nous fusmes à terre nostre maison fut de nous coucher au
pied d'vn arbre, nous mangeasmes vn peu de boucan, beusmes vn peu d'eau
de neige fonduë, ie fis mes petites prieres & me couchay aupres d'vn
bon feu qui contrequarra la gelée & le froid de la nuict.

    When we reached land, our house was the foot of a tree, where we
    lay down, after having eaten a bit of smoked meat and drunk a
    little melted snow-water. I repeated my little prayers, and rested
    beside a good fire which counteracted the frost and cold of the
    night.

Le lendemain nous nous embarquasmes de bonne heure, la marée qui nous
auoit amené ces armées de glaces les porta la nuict d'vn autre costé,
nous fismes donc quelque chemin deliurés de cette importunité, mais le
vent s'animant & nostre petite gondole, commençant à dancer sur les
vagues nous nous iettasmes incontinant à terre. I'auois prié mes gens
de prendre auec eux des escorces pour nous faire la nuict vne cabane &
des viures pour quelques iours n'estant pas asseurez du retardement que
le mauuais temps nous pourroit apporter, ils ne firent [315] ny l'vn
ny l'autre, si bien, qu'il fallut coucher à l'air, & manger en quatre
iours les viures d'vne iournée, ils s'attendoient d'aller à la chasse,
mais les neiges se fondans ils ne pouuoient courre, le temps faisant
mine de s'appaiser nous nous rembarquasmes, mais à peine auions nous
faict trois lieuës que le vent se renforcant nous va ietter dans des
glaces que la marée nous ramenoit, & nous d'enfiler viste vn petit
ruisseau, de sauter tous trois sur ces grandes glaces qui estoient aux
bords, & de gagner la terre, nos Sauuages portant sur les espaules
nostre nauire d'écorce.

    The next day we embarked early. The tide, which had brought us
    these legions of icebergs, had carried them during the night to the
    other side, so we were for some distance free from this annoyance;
    but the wind arose, and as our little gondola began to dance upon
    the waves, we turned shoreward and hurriedly landed. I had begged
    my people to take with them some pieces of bark, with which to make
    a cabin to cover us at night, and food enough for several days, as
    we were not sure that the bad weather might not cause us delays.
    They did neither [315] one thing nor the other, so we had to lie
    out in the open air, and make one day's food last four; they had
    expected to go hunting, but, as the snow was melting, they could
    not pursue the game. The weather promising to clear up, we embarked
    again, but scarcely had we gone three leagues when the wind,
    growing stronger, cast us upon the ice which the tide was bringing
    back, and caused us to glide quickly through a little stream, and
    all three to leap upon these great blocks of ice which were along
    its edge, and thus to gain land, our Savages carrying our bark ship
    upon their shoulders.

Nous voila donc logez à vne pointe de terre exposée à tous vents,
nous mettons nostre canot derriere nous pour nous abrier, & comme
nous craignions la pluye ou la neige mon hoste iette vne meschante
peau sur des perches, & voila nostre maison faicte. Les vents furent
si violens toute la nuict qu'ils nous penserent enleuer nostre canot,
le lendemain la [316] tempeste continuant dessus l'eau, mes gens
n'ayant dequoy manger vont à la chasse par vn tres mauuais temps, le
Renegat ne prit rien, mon hoste rapporta vn perdreau qui nous seruit
de deieusner, de disner, & de soupper, vray que i'auois mangé quelques
fueilles de fraisiers, que la terre nouuellement descouuerte de neige
en quelques endroits me donna, nous passasmes donc cette iournée sans
faire chemin, la nuict les tempestes, les foudres de vent, & le froid
nous assaillirent auec telle furie qu'il fallut ceder à la force, nous
estions couchez à platte terre, car ils n'auoient pas pris la peine de
la couurir de branches de pin, nous nous leuasmes tout glassez pour
entrer dans le bois & emprunter des arbres l'abry contre le vent & le
couuert contre le Ciel, nous fismes vn bon feu, & nous nous endormismes
sur la terre encore toute humide pour auoir seruy de lict à la neige
peut-estre la nuict precedente, Dieu soit beny sa prouidence est
adorable, nous mettions ce [317] iour & ceste nuict dans le catalogue
des iours & des nuicts mal-heureux, & ce nous fut vn temps de bon-heur,
car si ces tempestes & ces vents ne nous eussent tenus prisonniers
sur terre pendant qu'ils escartoient les glaces les poussant à val
la riuiere, elles se fussent reserrées au trauers des Isles où nous
deuions passer, & nous eussent faict mourir de trop boire ecrasant
nostre canot, ou de trop peu manger, nous arrestans dans quelque Isle
deserte. Bref si nous fussions eschappez c'eust esté à grand peine,
de plus i'estois si debile & si malade quand ie m'embarquay, que si
i'eusse preueu les trauaux du chemin i'aurois creu deuoir mourir cent
fois, & neantmoins Nostre Seigneur commença à me fortifier dans ces
difficultez, en sorte que i'ayday mes Sauuages à ramer notamment sur la
fin de nostre voyage.

    Now we were lodged upon a point of land exposed to all the winds.
    As a shelter, we placed our canoe back of us, and fearing rain or
    snow, my host threw a wretched skin upon some poles, and lo, our
    house was made. The winds were so boisterous all night that they
    nearly blew away our canoe. The next day the [316] storm continuing
    upon the water, and my people having nothing to eat, they went
    hunting during most wretched weather. The Renegade did not capture
    anything; but my host brought back a young partridge, which served
    as breakfast, dinner, and supper. True, I had eaten some leaves of
    the strawberry plant that I had found upon the ground, from which
    the snow had recently melted in some places. So we passed this day
    without resuming our journey. That night the storm, gusts of wind,
    and the cold, assailed us with such fury that we had to surrender
    to these forces, and get up half-frozen (for we had been lying
    upon the bare ground, not having taken the trouble to cover it
    with pine branches) and go into the woods to borrow from the trees
    their shelter against the wind and their covering against the Sky.
    Here we made a good fire and went to sleep upon ground still damp
    from snow which had probably covered it the night before. God be
    praised, his providence is adorable! We set this [317] day and this
    night down in the calendar of wretched days and nights, yet it was
    for us a period of good fortune. For, if these tempests and winds
    had not held us prisoners upon the land while they were clearing
    away the ice and driving it down the river, it would have been
    massed across the way to the Islands by which we must pass; and we
    would have had to die from too much drink crushing our canoe, or
    from too little food, caused by having to stop in some deserted
    Island. In short, if we had escaped it would have been with great
    difficulty. Moreover, I was so weak and sick when I embarked, that
    if I had foreseen the hardships of the way I would have expected to
    die a hundred times; yet Our Lord began to strengthen me in these
    trials, so that I aided my Savages to paddle, especially toward the
    end of our journey.

Le iour qui suiuit ces tempestes paroissant encor animé de vents,
mon hoste & l'Apostat s'en allerent à la chasse, vne heure apres
leur depart le [318] Soleil paroist beau, l'air serein, les vents
s'appaisent, les vagues cessent, la mer se calme, en vn mot il abonit
pour parler en matelot, me voila bien en peine de vouloir suiure mes
Sauuages à la trace pour les appeller, c'estoit mettre vn tortuë apres
des leuriers, ie iette les yeux au Ciel comme au lieu de refuge les
abbaissant vers la terre ie vy mes gens courir comme des cerfs sur
l'orée du bois, tirans vers moy, aussi-tost ie me leue portant nostre
petit bagage vers la riuiere, mon hoste arriuant _eco, eco, pousitau,
pousitau_, viste, viste, embarquons nous, embarquons nous, plustost
fait qu'il n'est dit, le vent & la marée nous fauorisent, nous allons
à rames & à voile, nostre petit vaisseau d'escorce fendant les ondes
d'vne vitesse incomparable, nous arriuasmes en fin sur les dix heures
du soir à la pointe de la grande Isle d'Orleans, il n'y auoit plus que
deux lieuës iusques à nostre petite maison, mes gens n'auoient point
mangé tout le iour, ie leur donne courage, nous nous [319] efforçons
de passer outre, mais le courant de la marée qui descendoit encor
estant fort rapide, il fallut attendre le flot pour trauerser la grande
riuiere, nous entrasmes cependant dans vne anse de terre, & nous nous
endormismes sur le sable aupres d'vn bon feu que nous allumasmes.

    The day after these tempests being still rather windy, my host
    and the Apostate went hunting. An hour after their departure the
    [318] Sun shone out brightly, the air became clear, the winds died
    away, the waves fell, the sea became calm,--in a word, it mended,
    as the sailors say. Then I was in great perplexity about following
    my Savages to call them back, for it would have been like a turtle
    pursuing a greyhound. I turned my eyes to Heaven as to a place of
    refuge; and, when I lowered them, I saw my people running like deer
    along the edge of the wood straight toward me. I immediately arose,
    and started for the river, bearing our little baggage. When my host
    arrived, _eco, eco, pousitau, pousitau_, "Quick, quick, let us
    embark, let us embark!" No sooner said than done; the wind and tide
    favored us, we glided on with paddle and sail, our little bark ship
    cutting the waves with incomparable swiftness. We at last arrived
    about ten o'clock in the evening at the end of the great Island of
    Orleans, from which our little house was not more than two leagues
    distant. My people had eaten nothing all day; I encouraged them. We
    [319] tried to go on, but the current of the tide, which was still
    ebbing, being very rapid, we had to await the flood to cross the
    great river. Therefore we went into a little cove, and slept upon
    the sand, near a good fire that we lighted.

Sur la minuit le flot retournant nous nous embarquasmes, la Lune
nous éclairant, le vent & la marée nous faisoient voler, mon hoste
n'ayant pas voulu tirer du costé que ie luy dis, nous pensasmes nous
perdre dans le port, car comme nous vinsmes pour entrer dans nostre
petite riuiere nous la trouuasmes encore toute glacée, nous voulusmes
approcher du riuage, mais le vent y auoit rangé vn grand banc de glace,
qui se choquoient les vnes les autres nous menaçoient de mort si nous
les abordions, si bien qu'il fallut tourner bride, mettre le cap au
vent & se roidir contre la marée, c'est icy que ie vy les vaillances de
mon hoste, il s'estoit [320] mis deuant comme au lieu le plus important
dans les grands perils, ie le voyois au trauers de l'obscurité de la
nuict qui nous donnoit de l'horreur & augmentait nostre danger, bander
ses nerfs, se roidir contre la mort, tenir nostre petit canot en estat
dans des vagues capables d'engloutir vn grand vaisseau, ie luy crie
_Nicanis ouabichtigoueia_K_hi ouabichtigoueia_k_hi_, mon bien-aymé
à Kebec, à Kebec, tirons là. Quand nous vismes à doubler le saut au
Matelot, c'est le detour de nostre riuiere dans le grand fleuue, vous
l'eussiez veu ceder à vne vague, en couper vne autre par le milieu,
éuiter vne glace, en repousser vne autre, combattre incessamment contre
vn furieux vent de Nordest qu'il auoit en teste.

    Toward midnight, the tide again arising, we embarked. The Moon
    shone brightly, and wind and tide made us fly. As my host would
    not take the direction I advised, we very nearly perished in the
    port; for, when we came to enter our little river, we found it
    still covered with ice. We tried to approach the banks, but the
    wind had piled up great masses of ice there, striking and surging
    against each other, which threatened us with death if we approached
    them. So we had to veer around and turn our prow to the wind and
    work against the tide. It was here I saw the valor of my host.
    He had [320] placed himself in front, as the place where the
    greatest danger was to be found. I saw him through the darkness
    of the night, which filled us with terror while augmenting our
    peril, strain every nerve and struggle against death, to keep
    our little canoe in position amid waves capable of swallowing up
    a great ship. I cried out to him, _Nicanis ouabichtigouciakhi
    ouabichtigouciakhi_, "My well-beloved, to Kebec, to Kebec, let us
    go there." When we were about to double the Sailor's leap, that is,
    the bend where our river enters the great river, you might have
    seen him ride over one wave, cut through the middle of another,
    dodge one block of ice, and push away another, continually fighting
    against a furious Northeast wind which we had in our teeth.

Ayans éuité ce danger nous voulumes aborder la terre, mais vne armée
de glaces animée par la fureur des vents nous en deffendoit l'entrée:
nous allõs donc iusques deuant le fort costoyant le riuage, cherchant
dans les tenebres [323 i.e., 321] vn petit iour ou vne petite eclaircie
parmy ces glaces; mon hoste ayant apperceu vn rerin on detour qui est
au bas du fort, où les glaces ne branloiẽt point pour estre à l'abry
du vent, en detourne auec son auiron trois on quatre furieuses qu'il
rencontre, & vous iette là dedans, il saute viste hors du Canot,
craignant le retour des glaces, criant _Capatau_, desembarquons nous;
le mal estoit que les glaces estoient si hautes & si épaisses sur
le riuage, qu'à peine y pouuois-ie atteindre auec les mains; ie ne
sçauois à quoy m'aggraffer pour sortir du Canot, & monter sur ces riues
glacées; ie prends mon hoste par le pied d'vne main, & de l'autre vn
coing de glace que ie rencontre, & ie me iette en sauueté, vn auec les
deux autres, vn lourdaut deuient habille homme en ces occasions: estant
sorty du Canot, ils l'enleuent par les deux bouts, & le mettent en lieu
d'asseurance: cela fait nous nous regardons tous trois, & mon hoste
reprenant son haleine, me dit, _nicanis_ k_hegat nipiacou_, mon grand
amy, nous auons pensé mourir: il auoit encore horreur, de la grandeur
du peril. Il est vray que [324 i.e., 322] s'il n'eust eu des bras de
Geant (il est homme grand & puissant) & vne industrie non commune,
ny aux François ny aux Sauuages, ou vne vague nous eust englouty, ou
le vent nous eust renuersé, ou vne glace nous eust escrasé; disons
plustost que si Dieu n'eust esté nostre Nocher, les ondes qui battent
les riues de nostre demeure auroient esté nostre sepulchre. De
verité quiconque habite parmy ces peuples, peut bien dire auec le Roy
Prophete, _anima mea in manibus meis semper_: depuis peu vn de nos
François s'est noyé en semblable occasion, & encore moindre, car il ny
auoit plus de glaces.

    Having escaped this danger, we would have liked to land; but an
    army of icebergs, summoned by the raging wind, barred our entrance.
    So we went on as far as the fort, coasting along the shores, and
    sought in the darkness [323 i.e., 321] a little gleam of light or a
    small opening among these masses of ice. My host having perceived
    a rerin, or turn, which is at the bottom of the fort, where the
    ice did not move, as it was outside the current of wind, he turned
    away with his paddle three or four dreadful masses of it which
    he encountered, and dashed in. He leaped quickly from the Canoe,
    fearing the return of the ice, crying, _Capatau_, "Let us land;"
    the trouble was, that the ice was so high and densely packed
    against the bank, that it was all I could do to reach to the top
    of it with my hands; I did not know what to take hold of to pull
    myself out of the Canoe, and to climb up upon these icy shores.
    With one hand I took hold of my host's foot, and with the other
    seized a piece of ice which happened to project, and threw myself
    into a place of safety with the other two. A clumsy fellow becomes
    agile on such occasions. All being out of the Canoe, they seized it
    at both ends and placed it in safety; and, when this was done, we
    all three looked at each other, and my host, taking a long breath,
    said to me, _nicanis khegat nipiacou_, "My good friend, a little
    more, and we would have perished;" he still felt horror over the
    gravity of our danger. It is true that [324 i.e., 322] if he had
    not had the arms of a Giant (he is a large and powerful man), and
    an ingenuity uncommon among either Frenchmen or Savages, either a
    wave would have swallowed us up, or the wind would have upset us,
    or an iceberg would have crushed us. Or rather let us say, if God
    had not been our Pilot, the waves which beat against the shores of
    our home would have been our sepulchre. In truth, whoever dwells
    among these people can say with the Prophet King, _anima mea in
    manibus meis semper_. Only a little while ago one of our Frenchmen
    was drowned, under like circumstances, yet less dangerous, for
    there was no longer any ice.

Estant échappez de tant de périls, nous trauersâmes nostre riuiere sur
la glace, qui n'estoit point encore partie; & sur les trois heures
apres minuict, le Dimanche de Pasques fleurie 9. d'Auril, ie r'entray
dans nostre petite maisonnette, Dieu sçait auec quelle ioye de part &
d'autre, ie trouuay la maison remplie de paix & de benediction, tout
le monde en bonne santé par la grace de nostre Seigneur. Monsieur le
Gouuerneur sçachant mon retour, m'enuoya [323] deux des principaux
de nos François pour sçauoir de ma santé, son affection nous est
tres sensible; l'vn des chefs de l'ancienne famille du pays accourut
aussi pour se resioüyr de mon retour, ils auoient connu par le peu de
neige qu'il y a eu cét Hiuer, moins rigoureux que les autres, que les
Sauuages & moy par consequent estions pressez de la faim; c'est ce
qui en resioüit quelques-vns iusques aux larmes, me voyant reschappé
d'vn si grand danger; nostre Seigneur soit beny dans les temps & dans
l'eternité.

    Having escaped so many perils, we crossed our river on the ice,
    which was not yet broken; and three hours after midnight, on Palm
    Sunday, April 9th, I reëntered our little house. God knows what
    joy there was on both sides! I found the house filled with peace
    and blessings, every one being in good health, by the grace of
    our Lord. Monsieur the Governor, learning of my return, sent to
    me [323] two of our most prominent Frenchmen, to inquire after my
    health. His affection for us is indeed very evident. One of the
    heads of the old family in the country[5] also hastened to express
    his joy at my return. They knew by the small amount of snow that
    had fallen that Winter, which was less severe than others, that
    the Savages, and consequently I, would suffer greatly from famine;
    and hence some even shed tears of joy at seeing me escaped from so
    great a danger. Blessed be our Lord, in time and in eternity.

I'ay bien voulu d'escrire ce voyage, pour faire voir à V. R. les
grands trauaux qu'il faut souffrir en la suitte des Sauuages, mais ie
supplie pour la derniere fois ceux qui auroient enuie de les ayder, de
ne point prendre l'espouuente, non seulement pource que Dieu se faict
sentir plus puissamment dans la disette, & dans les delaissements des
creatures, mais aussi pource qu'il ne sera plus de besoin de faire ces
courses, quãd on aura la connoissance des langues, & qu'on les aura
reduites en preceptes: I'ay rapporté quelques particularitez [324]
qui se pouuoient obmettre, i'en ay passé beaucoup sous silence, qu'on
auroit peu lire auec plaisir, mais la crainte d'estre long, & mon peu
de loisir, me fait tomber dans le desordre; il est vray que i'escris
à vne personne, _quæ ordinabit me charitatem_, les autres qui verront
cette Relation par son entremise, me feront la mesme faueur. Ie dirois
volontiers ces deux mots, à quiconque lira ces escrits, _ama & fac quod
vis_, retournons à nostre journal.

    I wanted to describe this journey, to show Your Reverence the
    great hardships that must be endured in following the Savages; but
    I entreat, for the last time, those who have any desire to help
    them not to be frightened; not only because God makes himself more
    powerfully felt in our time of need, and in the helplessness of his
    creatures, but also because it will no longer be necessary to make
    these sojourns when we shall know their languages and reduce them
    to rules. I have reported some details [324] which might have been
    omitted; and have passed over in silence much that would, perhaps,
    have been read with pleasure; but the fear of being tedious, and
    my little leisure, have caused some disorder in my work. It is true
    that I am writing to a person, _quæ ordinabit me charitatem_; and
    the others who through his agency see this Relation will do me the
    same favor. I feel like saying these two words to whomsoever will
    read these writings, _ama et fac quod vis_. Let us return to our
    journal.

Le 31. de May, arriua vne chalouppe de Tadoussac, qui apportoit
nouuelle que trois vaisseaux de Messieurs les Associez estoient
arriuez, deux estoient dans le port, & le troisiéme au Moulin Baude,
c'est vn lieu proche de Tadoussac, que les François ont ainsi nommé:
on attendoit le quatriéme, dans lequel commandoit Monsieur du Plessis,
general de la flotte, qui vint bien-tost apres, & loüa grandement le
Capitaine Bontemps, pour s'estre rendu fort recommandable en la prise
du nauire Anglois, dont i'ay parlé cy-dessus; si tost que ces bonnes
nouuelles furent portées à Mõsieur de Champlain, comme il n'obmet
[325] aucune occasion de nous tesmoigner son affection, il nous en fit
donner aduis par homme exprés, nous enuoyans en outre les lettres du
R. P. Lallement qui m'escriuoit qu'il estoit arriué auec N. F. Iean
Ligeois en bonne santé, & qu'au premier vent il seroit des nostres, il
est aisé à conjecturer auec quelle ioye nous benismes & remerciasmes
nostre Seigneur de ces bonnes & si fauorables nouuelles; il arriua deux
iours apres dans la barque que commandoit Monsieur Castillon, qu'on dit
s'estre fort bien comporté en la prise de l'Anglois.

    On the 31st of May, a shallop arrived from Tadoussac which bore
    the news that three vessels of Messieurs the Associates had
    arrived,--two being in that port, and the third at Moulin Baude,
    a place near Tadoussac, thus named by the French.[6] They were
    waiting for the fourth, commanded by Monsieur du Plessis, general
    of the fleet, who came soon afterwards and bestowed high praise
    upon Captain Bontemps for having shown very meritorious conduct in
    the capture of the English ship, of which I have spoken above. As
    soon as this good news was brought to Monsieur de Champlain, as he
    never omits [325] any occasion to show his good will, he sent us
    tidings thereof by a special messenger, sending us also the letters
    of Reverend Father Lallement who wrote me that he had arrived
    with Our Brother Jean Ligeois in good health, and that the first
    breeze would bring him to us.[7] It is easy to guess with what joy
    we blessed and thanked our Lord for this good and so favorable
    news. He arrived two days later in the bark commanded by Monsieur
    Castillon, who is said to have done good work in the capture of the
    English.

Le quatriéme iour de Iuin Feste de la Pentecoste le Capitaine de Nesle
arriua à Kebec, dans son vaisseau estoit Mõsieur Giffard, & toute sa
famille, composée de plusieurs personnes qu'il ameine, pour habiter le
pays, sa femme s'est mõstrée fort courageuse à suiure son mary: elle
estoit enceinte quand elle s'embarqua; ce qui luy faisoit apprehender
ses couches, mais nostre Seigneur la grandement fauorisée, car huict
iours apres son arriuée, sçauoir est le Dimanche de la Saincte Trinité,
elle s'est deliurée fort heureusement d'vne fille qui se porte [326]
fort bien, & que le Pere Lallement baptisa le lendemain.

    On the fourth day of June, the Feast of Pentecost, Captain de Nesle
    arrived at Kebec; in his vessel was Monsieur Giffard and his whole
    household, composed of many persons, whom he brought to settle
    in this country.[8] His wife showed great courage in following
    her husband; she was pregnant when she embarked, which made her
    dread her accouchement; but our Lord was wonderfully kind to her,
    for eight days after her arrival, that is, on the Sunday of holy
    Trinity, she was delivered happily of a daughter who is doing [326]
    very well and whom Father Lallement baptized the following day.

Le 24. du mesme mois, feste de S. Iean Baptiste, le vaisseau de
l'Anglois commandé par le Capitaine de Lormel, monta iusques icy,
& nous apporta le P. Iacques Buteux en assez bonne santé, Monsieur
le General nous honorant de ses lettres, me manda que ce bon Pere
auoit esté fort malade pendant la trauersée, & le Pere nous dit qu'il
auoit esté secouru & assisté si puissamment, & si charitablement de
Monsieur le General & de son Chirurgien, qu'il en restoit tout confus,
maintenant il se porte mieux que iamais il n'a fait.

    On the 24th of the same month, feast of St. John the Baptist, the
    English ship, commanded by Captain de Lormel, came up thus far, and
    brought us Father Jacques Buteux[9] in fairly good health. Monsieur
    the General, honoring us with his letters, sent me word that this
    good Father had been very sick during the passage; the Father told
    us that he had been so effectively nursed and assisted by Monsieur
    the General and his Surgeon, that he felt overwhelmed by their
    kindness; he feels better now than ever before.[10]

Le premier de Iuillet le P. Breboeuf & le P. Daniel partirent dans
vne barque, pour s'en aller aux trois Riuieres, au deuant des Hurons,
la barque alloit commencer vne nouuelle habitation en ce quartier
là, le P. Dauost qui estoit descendu de Tadoussac, pour l'assistance
de nos François, suiuit nos Peres trois iours apres, en la compagnie
de Monsieur le General, qui se vouloit trouuer à la traite auec ces
peuples. Ils attendoient là quelque temps les Hurons, qui ne sont point
descendus en si grand nombre cette année qu'à l'ordinaire, à raison que
les Hiroquois estans aduertis que cinq cens hommes de cette nation
tiroient en leur pays, pour leur faire la guerre, leurs allerent au
deuant au nombre de quinze cens dit on, & ayant surpris ceux qui les
vouloient surprendre: ils en ont tué enuiron deux cens, & pris plus
d'vne centaine de prisonniers, dont Louys Amantacha est du nombre; on
disoit que son pere estoit mis à mort, mais le bruit est maintenant
qu'il s'est sauué des mains de l'ennemy. On nous rapporte que ces
Hiroquois [327] triomphans ont renuoyé quelques Capitaines aux Hurons
pour traitter de paix, retenans par deuers eux les plus apparens, apres
auoir cruellement massacré les autres.

    On the first of July, Father Brebœuf and Father Daniel left in a
    bark to go to three Rivers, there to wait for the Hurons. This
    bark was destined to begin a new settlement in that quarter.
    Father Davost, who had come down from Tadoussac for the assistance
    of our French, followed our Fathers three days later in company
    with Monsieur the General, who wanted to meet these people at the
    trading post.[11] They waited there some time for the Hurons, who
    did not come down in so great numbers this year as usual; because
    the Hiroquois, having been informed that five hundred men of this
    nation were moving toward their country to make war upon them,
    themselves went on ahead to the number of fifteen hundred, it is
    said; and, having surprised those who were to surprise them, they
    killed about two hundred of them, and took more than one hundred
    prisoners, Louys Amantacha[12] being one of the number. They said
    his father was put to death, but the report is now that he escaped
    the hands of the enemy. We were told that these triumphant [327]
    Hiroquois sent some Captains to the Hurons to treat for peace,
    retaining the most prominent ones in their possession after having
    cruelly massacred the others.

Cette perte a esté cause que les Hurons sont venus en petites trouppes,
au commencement ils ne sont descendus que sept Canots: Le Pere Brebœuf
en ayant eu nouuelle, les aborde, & fait tout ce qu'il peut pour les
engager à le receuoir, & ses compagnons, & les porter en leur pays,
ils s'y accordent volontiers. Là dessus [328] vn Capitaine Algonquain,
nommé la Perdrix, qui demeure en ville, fit vne harangue, par laquelle
il recommandoit qu'on n'embarquast aucun François: Voila les Hurons qui
doiuent passer par le pays de ce Capitaine, à leur retour entierement
refroidis: sur ces entrefaites arriue Monsieur du Plessis, tout cecy se
passoit en vn lieu nommé les trois Riuieres, trente lieuës plus haut
que Kebec; comme il desiroit ardemment que nos Peres penetrassent dans
ces nations, il fit assembler les Algonquains en Conseil, notamment
ce Capitaine, pour luy faire rendre raison de sa deffence; il en
apporte plusieurs, on luy satisfaict sur le chãp, il insistoit, comme
ie le conjecture, des lettres du Pere Brebœuf, sur le desordre qui
arriueroit, au cas que quelque François mourut aux Hurons; on luy
repart que les Peres n'estans point en son pays, la paix entre les
François, & ses Compatriotes, ne seroit point rompue, quoy qu'ils
mourussent d'vne mort naturelle ou violente. Voila les Algonquains
contents: mais les Hurons commencerent à s'excuser sur leur [329] petit
nombre, qui ne sçauroit passer tant de François sur la petitesse de
leurs Canots, & sur leurs maladies; en vn mot ils eussent bien voulu
embarquer quelques François bien armez, mais non pas de ces longues
robbes, qui ne portent point d'arquebuses. Monsieur du Plessis presse
tant qu'il peut, prent nostre cause en main, on trouue place pour
quelques vns; vn certain Sauuage s'adresse au Pere, & luy dit, fais moy
traiter mon petun pour de la porcelaine, & mon Canot estant deschargé;
ie prendray vn François, le Pere n'en auoit point, mais Monsieur du
Plessis sçachãt cela, & Monsieur de l'Espinay acheterent ce petun;
voila donc place pour six personnes, quand se vint à s'embarquer, les
Sauuages qui estoient malades en effect, disent qu'ils n'en sçauroient
porter que trois, deux ieunes hommes Frãçois, & vn Pere; les Peres
promettẽt qu'ils rameront, ils font des presents, Monsieur du Plessis
en fait aussi, insiste tant qu'il peut, ils n'en veulent point receuoir
dauantage.

    This loss caused the Hurons to come in small bands, only seven
    Canoes coming down at first. When Father Brebœuf heard of their
    arrival, he went to them, and did all he could to make them
    promise to receive him and his companions, and take them to their
    country; this they willingly granted. Thereupon [328] an Algonquain
    Captain, called the Partridge, who lives in the town, made a
    speech recommending them not to take any Frenchmen on board. Now
    these Hurons, who had to pass through the country of this Captain
    on their return, became very cold, and at this point Monsieur du
    Plessis arrived. All this had occurred at a place called the three
    Rivers, thirty leagues farther up the river than Kebec. As he was
    very anxious to have our Fathers penetrate into these nations, he
    had the Algonquains assembled in Council, especially this Captain,
    to have him explain the reason of his opposition. He brought forth
    several arguments, which they answered for him at once; he dwelt,
    as I judge from Father Brebœuf's letters, upon the trouble that
    would occur in case some Frenchman should die among the Hurons.
    He was told that, as the Fathers would not be in his country,
    the peace between the French and his Compatriots would not be
    disturbed, whether their death were a natural or a violent one. So
    now the Algonquains were satisfied; but the Hurons began to excuse
    themselves on account of the [329] small number of their men, who
    could not carry so many Frenchmen; also on account of their small
    Canoes and the presence of sickness among them. In a word, they
    would have been very willing to take on board some Frenchmen who
    were well armed; but they did not want these long robes, who carried
    no guns. Monsieur du Plessis became urgent, pressing our cause
    with all the power he had; they find a place for a few. A certain
    Savage, addressing the Father, said, "Arrange for me to trade my
    tobacco for porcelain; and, my Canoe being unloaded, I will take
    one Frenchman." The Father had none of this; but, when Monsieur du
    Plessis and Monsieur de l'Espinay[5] heard of it, they bought his
    tobacco, and this made a place for six persons. When they came to
    embark, the Savages, who were, in fact, sick, said they could not
    carry more than three,--two young Frenchmen, and one Father. The
    Fathers promised that they would paddle; they made presents, and
    Monsieur du Plessis made some also and urged them as strongly as he
    could; they would not receive any more.

Le Pere Brebœuf a recours à Dieu, [330] voicy comme il parle en sa
lettre: Iamais ie ne veys embarquement tant balotté & plus trauersé
par les menées, comme ie croy de l'ennemy commun du salut des hommes,
c'est vn coup du Ciel que nous soyons passé outre, & en effect du
pouuoir du Glorieux sainct Ioseph, auquel Dieu m'inspira dans le
desespoir de toutes choses, de promettre 20. sacrifices en son
honneur; ce veu fait, le Sauuage qui auoit embarqué Petit Pré, l'vn
de nos François, le quitta pour me prendre, veu mesme que Monsieur du
Plessis insistoit fort que cela se fist. Et ainsi le Pere Brebœuf,
le Pere Daniel, & vn ieune homme nommé le Baron, furent acceptez de
ces Barbares qui les portent en leur pays dans des Canots d'escorce.
Restoient le Pere Dauost, & cinq de nos François, ne demandez pas si
le Pere estoit triste: voyant partir ses compagnons sans luy, & sans
quasi rien porter des choses necessaires pour leur vie, & pour leurs
habits: De verité ils ont monstré qu'ils auoient vn grand cœur! car le
desir d'entrer dans le pays de la Croix, leur fit quitter leur petit
bagage, pour ne point chercher [331] leurs Sauuages qui se trouuoient
mal, se contentants des ornements de l'Autel, & se confiant du reste
en la prouidence de nostre Seigneur, leur depart de trois Riuieres fut
si precipité, qu'ils ne peurent pas nous rescrire: mais estant arriuez
au lõg Sault, à quelque quatre vingts lieuës de Kebec, & rencontrant
des Hurons qui descendoient, ils nous enuoyerent quelques lettres, dans
l'vne desquelles le Pere Brebœuf ayant raconté les difficultez de son
embarquement, parle ainsi: Ie prie V. R. de remercier, mais de bonne
façon Monsieur du Plessis, auquel apres Dieu nous deuons grandement en
nostre embarquement: car outre les presents qu'il a fait aux Sauuages,
tant publics que particuliers, & la Porcelaine qu'il a traittée, il
a tenu autant de conseils que nous auons desiré, il nous a fourny de
viures au depart, & nous a honorez de plusieurs coups de Canon; & le
tout auec vn grand soing & vn tesmoignage d'vne tres-particuliere
affection.

    Father Brebœuf has recourse to God; [330] this is the way he speaks
    of it in his letter: "Never did I see an embarkation about which
    there was so much quibbling and opposition, through the tactics,
    as I believe, of the common enemy of man's salvation. It was by a
    Providential chance that we were taken, and through the power of
    the Glorious saint Joseph, to whom God inspired me to offer, in
    my despair of all things, the promise of 20 masses in his honor.
    After this vow was made, the Savage who had taken on board Petit
    Pré, one of our Frenchmen, gave him up to receive me, especially as
    Monsieur du Plessis insisted strongly that this should be done."
    And thus Father Brebœuf, Father Daniel, and a young man named le
    Baron were accepted by these Barbarians, who carried them into
    their country in bark Canoes. There remained Father Davost and
    five of our Frenchmen. Do not ask if the Father was sad at thus
    seeing his companions depart without him, almost without taking
    the necessaries of life, or their clothing. In truth, they have
    shown that they possess a generous heart! For the desire to go into
    the country of the Cross made them leave their little baggage, in
    order not to irritate [331] their Savages, who were ill, contenting
    themselves merely with the Altar ornaments, and trusting the
    rest to the providence of our Lord. Their departure from three
    Rivers was so hurried that they could not write to us; but when
    they reached the long Sault, some twenty-four leagues from Kebec,
    they encountered some Hurons who were coming down the river, and
    sent us letters, in one of which Father Brebœuf, having recounted
    the difficulties of his embarkation, speaks thus: "I beg Your
    Reverence to express our warmest thanks to Monsieur du Plessis,
    to whom, after God, we are greatly indebted for our embarkation.
    For--besides the presents he made to the Savages, publicly and
    privately, and the Porcelain he traded--he held as many councils
    as we desired, furnished us with provisions at our departure, and
    honored us with several Cannon salutes; and all with great care,
    and an appearance of very special interest in us."

Nous nous en allons à petites iournées bien sains, quand à nous, mais
nos Sauuages sont tous malades, nous ramons [332] continuellement, &
ce d'autant plus que nos gens sont malades pour Dieu & pour les ames
racheptés du sang du Fils de Dieu, que ne faut-il faire! tous nos
Sauuages sõt tres-cõtents de nous, & ne voudroiẽt pas en auoir embarqué
d'autres; ils disent tant de biẽ de nous à ceux qu'ils rẽcõtrent,
qu'ils leurs persuadent de n'en embarquer point d'autres, Dieu soit
beny. V. R. excuse à l'escriture & l'ordre, & le tout: nous partons si
matin, gistons si tard, & ramons si continuellement, que nous n'auons
quasi pas le loisir de satisfaire à nos prieres; de sorte qu'il m'a
fallu acheuer la presente à la lueur du feu, ce sont les propres
paroles du Pere, qui adjouste en vn autre endroit, que les peuples par
où ils passent sont quasi tous malades, & meurent en grand nombre. Il y
a eu quelque espece d'Epidimie cette année, qui s'est mesme communiquée
aux François, mais Dieu mercy personne n'en est mort, c'estoit vne
façon de rougeolle, & vne oppression d'estomach; reuenons aux trois
Riuieres.

    "We are going on by short stages, quite well, as far as we are
    concerned; but our Savages are all sick. We paddle [332] all the
    time, and do this the more because our people are sick. What ought
    not to be done for God, and for souls redeemed by the blood of
    the son of God! All our Savages are very much pleased with us,
    and would not have cared to take others on board; they speak well
    of us to those whom they meet, persuading them not to embark any
    others. God be praised! Your Reverence will excuse this writing,
    order and all; we start so early in the morning, and lie down so
    late, and paddle so continually, that we hardly have time enough
    to devote to our prayers; indeed, I have been obliged to finish
    this by the light of the fire." These are the exact words of the
    Father, who adds in another place that the people of the countries
    through which they pass are nearly all sick, and are dying in
    great numbers. There has been a sort of Epidemic this year, which
    has even been communicated to the French; but, thank God, no one
    has died of it; it is a sort of measles, and an oppression of the
    stomach. Let us return to three Rivers.

Ceux qui attendoient quelque autre occasion pour s'embarquer, furent
consolez [333] par la venuë de trois Canots, dans lesquels Monsieur du
Plessis fit embarquer le Pere Dauost, & deux de nos François, auec vne
vigilance incomparable, comme m'escrit le Pere. A quelque temps de là
vindrent encore d'autres Hurons, il plaça dans leurs Canots & hommes &
bagage; en vn mot tout ce qui restoit, si bien que trois de nos Peres,
& six de nos François, sont montez aux Hurons.

    Those who were awaiting some other occasion to embark were consoled
    [333] by the coming of three Canoes, in which Monsieur du Plëssis
    had Father Davost and two of our Frenchmen embark, looking out for
    their interests with wonderful care, as the Father writes me. A
    short time after this, other Hurons came; and he placed in their
    Canoes both men and baggage, in a word, all that remained. So that
    three of our Fathers and six of our Frenchmen have gone up to the
    Hurons.

Ils ont trois cents lieuës à faire dans des chemins qui font horreur
à en ouyr parler les Hurons, auec lesquels ils vous cachent de deux
iours en deux iours de leur farine pour manger au retour, il n'y a
point d'autres hostelleries que ces cachettes, s'ils manquent à les
retrouuer, ou si quelqu'vn les desrobe, car ils sont larrons au dernier
point, il se faut passer de manger, s'ils les retrouuent; ils ne font
pas pour cela grande chere, le matin ils detrempent vn peu de cette
farine auec de l'eau, & chacun en mange enuiron vne ecuellée; là dessus
ils ioüent de leur auiron tout le iour & sur la nuit: ils mangent
comme [334] au point du iour, c'est la vie que doiuent mener nos Peres
iusques à ce qu'ils soient arriués au païs de ces barbares, où estants,
ils se feront bastir vne maison d'escorce, dans laquelle ils viuront du
bled & de farine d'inde, de poisson en certain temps: pour la chair,
comme il n'y a point de chasse ou ils sont, ils n'en mangent pas six
fois l'an, s'ils ne veulent manger leurs chiens, comme fait le peuple
qui en nourrit, comme on fait des moutons en Frãce; leur boisson c'est
de l'eau. Voila les delices du païs, pour les sains & pour les malades,
le pain, le vin, les diuerses sortes de viandes, les fruits, & mille
raffraichissements qui sõt en France, ne sont point encore entrés dans
ces contrées.

    They have three hundred leagues to make over a route full of
    horrors, as it is described by the Hurons; on their way down,
    they hide meal every two days, to eat on their return, and these
    hiding-places are the only hotels they have. If they fail to find
    them, or if some one robs them, for they are the worst kind of
    thieves, they must get along without eating. If they do find their
    provisions, they cannot feast very sumptuously upon them. In the
    morning they mix a little of this meal with water, and each one
    eats about a bowlful of it; upon this they ply their paddles all
    day, and at nightfall they eat as [334] they did at break of day.
    This is the kind of life that our Fathers must lead until they
    reach the country of these barbarians. When they arrive, they will
    build themselves a bark house, and there they will live on wheat,
    and cornmeal, and, in certain seasons, on fish. As for meat, there
    being no hunting where they are, they will not eat it six times a
    year, unless they eat their dogs, as the people do, who raise these
    animals as they do sheep in France; their drink will be water.
    So these are the delicacies of the country for well people and
    sick,--bread, wine, different kinds of meat, fruit, and a thousand
    refreshing viands found in France not yet having been introduced
    into these countries.

La mõnoye dõt ils acheteront leurs viures, leur bois, leur maisõ
d'écorce, & autres necessités, sont des petits canons ou tuiaux de
verre, des couteaux, des alesnes, des castelognes, des chaudieres, des
haches: & choses semblables, c'est l'argent qu'il faut porter auec soy:
si la paix se fait entre les Hurons, & les Hiroquois, ie preuoy vne
grande porte ouuerte à l'Euangile, [33 i.e., 335] nous disons alors
auec ioye & auec tristesse _messis, quidem multa operarij vero pauci_:
car on ver[r]a la disette de personnes qui entendent les langues.
I'apprend qu'en 25 ou 30 lieuës de pays qu'occupent les Hurons,
d'autres en mettent bien moins; il se trouue plus de trente mille
ames, la nation neutre est bien plus peuplée, les Hiroquois le sont
grandement, les Algonquains ont vn pays de fort grande estenduë. Ie
ne souhaitterois maintenant que cinq ou six de nos Peres en chaqu'vne
de ces nations, & cependant ie n'oserois les demander quoy que pour
vn qu'on desire, il s'en presente dix toute prests de mourir dans ces
trois: mais i'apprend que tout ce que nous auons en France pour cette
mission est peu: comme donc prendrons nous les enfans, notamment de
ces nations peuplées, pour les nourrir & les instruire, las! faut il
que les biens de la terre, empeschent les biens du Ciel! que n'auons
nous tant seulement les mies de pain qui tombent de la table des riches
du monde, pour donner à ces petits enfans! Ie ne me plains [336]
point, ie ne demande rien à qui que ce soit: mais ie ne puis tenir mes
sentiments, quand ie voy que la fange (que sont autres choses les biens
d'icy bas) empesche que Dieu ne soit conneu & adoré de ces peuples. Et
si quelqu'vn trouue estrange que ie parle en cette sorte, qu'il vienne,
qu'il ouure les yeux, qu'ils voyent ces peuples crier apres le pain de
la parole de Dieu, & s'il n'est touché de compassion, & s'il ne crie
plus haut que moy, ie me condam[ne]ray à vn perpetuel silence.

    The money with which they will buy their food, wood, bark house,
    and other necessaries, is little beads or tubes of glass, knives,
    awls, blankets, kettles, hatchets, and similar things; this is the
    money they must carry with them. If peace is negotiated between the
    Hurons and Hiroquois, I foresee a splendid opening for the Gospel.
    [33 i.e., 335] We can say then with joy and with sadness, _messis,
    quidem multa operarii vero pauci_, for we shall see few persons
    who understand these languages. I learn that in the 25 or 30
    leagues of country which the Hurons occupy,--others estimate it at
    much less,--there are more than thirty thousand souls. The neutral
    nation is much more populous, the Hiroquois largely so, and the
    Algonquains have a country of very great extent. I would like to
    have now only five or six of our Fathers in each of these nations;
    and yet I would not dare to ask for them, although for one that we
    desire ten would volunteer, all ready to die in these countries.
    But I learn that all we have in France for this mission is little;
    how then shall we take the children, especially those of these
    populous nations, to maintain and instruct them? Alas, must it be
    that the goods of this world are a barrier to the blessings of
    Heaven? Oh, that we had only the crumbs of bread that fall from the
    tables of the rich of the world, to give to these little children!
    I do not [336] complain, I ask nothing from any one whomsoever; but
    I cannot restrain my emotion when I see that dirt (for what else is
    wealth here below?) prevents these people from knowing and adoring
    God. And if any one thinks it strange that I speak in this way, let
    him come, let him open his eyes, let him see these people crying
    for the bread of the word of God; and, if he is not touched with
    compassion, and if he does not cry louder than I do, I will condemn
    myself to perpetual silence.

Le troisiesme d'Aoust Monsieur de Champlain retournant des trois
Riuieres où il estoit allé apres le depart de nos Peres, nous dit
qu'vn truchement François pour la nation Algonquine venant d'auec
les Hurons, auoit rapporté nouuelle que le Pere Brebeuf souffroit
grãdement, que ses Sauuages estoient malades, qu'il ramoit incessamment
pour les soulager: que le Pere Daniel estoit mort de faim, où en grand
danger d'en mourir, à raison que les Sauuages qui l'ont embarqué
quittans le chemin ordinaire où ils auoient faict les chaches [337] de
leurs viures, auoient tiré dans les bois, esperant trouuer vne certaine
nation qui leur dõneroit à manger, mais n'ayant point trouué ce peuple
errant qui s'estoit transporté ailleurs, on conjecture qu'ils sont
tous, Sauuages & François en danger de mort; veu mesmement qu'il n'y a
point de chasse en ce quartier là, & que la pluspart de ces Barbares
sont malades, Dieu soit beny de tout. Ceux qui meurent allants au
martyre, ne laissent pas d'estre martyrs. Quand au Pere Dauost, il se
porte bien; mais les Sauuages qui le menent luy ont desrobé vne partie
de son bagage; i'ay desia dit qu'estre Huron & Larron, ce n'est qu'vne
mesme chose; voila ce qu'a rapporté ce truchement. Les Peres nous
escrirons l'an qui vient, s'il plaist à Dieu, toutes les particularitez
de leur voyage, nous ne sçaurions pas auoir de leurs nouuelles deuant
ce temps-là: si leur petit equipage est perdu ou volé, ils sont pour
beaucoup endurer en ces contrée[s], si esloignées de tout secours.

    On the third of August, Monsieur de Champlain, having returned from
    three Rivers, where he had gone after the departure of our Fathers,
    told us that a French interpreter for the Algonquin nation had come
    from the Hurons and brought the tidings that Father Brebeuf was
    suffering greatly; that his Savages were sick, and that he had to
    paddle continually, to relieve them; that Father Daniel had died
    of starvation, or was in great danger of dying, because the Savages
    who had taken him on board had left the usual route, where they
    had hidden [337] their food, and had turned off into the woods,
    hoping to find a certain tribe who would give them something to
    eat; but, not having found these wandering people, who had gone to
    some other place, they supposed that they all, Savages and French,
    were in danger of death, especially as there is no game in that
    quarter, and as the greater part of these Barbarians are sick.
    God be praised for all. Those who die on the way to martyrdom are
    surely martyrs. As to Father Davost, he is getting along very well,
    but the Savages who are taking him have stolen part of his baggage;
    I have already said that to be a Huron, and to be a Thief, is one
    and the same thing. So much for what this interpreter reported. The
    Fathers will write us next year, please God, all the particulars of
    their journey; but we cannot have news from them before that time.
    If their little outfit is lost or stolen, they will have to endure
    a great deal in those countries, so far from all help.

Le quatrième, Monsieur du Plessis descendit des trois Riuieres comme
ie [338] l'allay saluër, il me dit qu'il nous amenoit vn petit Sauuage
orphelin, nous en faisant present, pour luy seruir de pere; si tost
qu'on aura moyen de recueillir ces pauures enfans, on en pourra auoir
quelque nombre, qui seruiront par apres à la conuersion de leurs
Compatriottes. Il nous dit encore qu'on trauailloit fort & ferme au
lieu nommé les trois Riuieres, si bien que nos François ont maintenant
trois habitations sur le grand fleuue de sainct Laurens, vne à Kebec
fortifiée de nouueau, l'autre à quinze lieuës plus haut dans l'Isle
de saincte Croix, où Monsieur de Champlain a faict bastir le fort de
Richelieu. La troisiéme demeure se bastit aux trois Riuieres, quinze
autres lieuës plus haut, c'est à dire a trente lieuës de Kebec.
Incontinent apres le depart des vaisseaux, le Pere Iacques Buteux & moy
irons là demeurer pour assister nos François, les nouuelles habitations
estant ordinairement dangereuses, ie n'ay pas veu qu'il fut à propos
d'y exposer le Pere Charles Lallemant, ny autres, le Pere Buteux y
vient auec moy [339] pour estudier à la langue.

    On the fourth, Monsieur du Plessis came down from three Rivers.
    As I [338] went to greet him, he told me that he had brought us
    a little orphan Savage, making a present of him to us, to take
    the place of his father. As soon as we shall have the means for
    gathering in these poor children, we shall have a number of them
    who will afterwards serve in the conversion of their Compatriots.
    He also told us that they were working with might and main in the
    place called the three Rivers; so, indeed, our French now have
    three settlements upon the great river saint Lawrence,--one at
    Kebec, newly fortified; another fifteen leagues farther up the
    river, on the Island of sainte Croix, where Monsieur de Champlain
    has had fort Richelieu built;[13] the third colony is being
    established at three Rivers, fifteen leagues still higher up the
    river, that is to say thirty leagues from Kebec. Immediately after
    the departure of the vessels, Father Jacques Buteux and I will go
    there to live, to assist our French. As new settlements are usually
    dangerous, it has not seemed to me proper to expose Father Charles
    Lallemant or others there. Father Buteux goes there with me [339]
    to study the language.

V. R. connoistra maintenant, que la crainte qu'ont eu quelques vns que
l'estranger ne vint vne autre fois rauager le pays, & empescher la
conuersion de ces pauures Barbares n'est pas bien fondée; puis que les
familles s'habituent icy, puis qu'on y bastit des forts & des demeures
en plusieurs endroits, & que Monseigneur le Cardinal fauorise cette
entreprise honorable deuant Dieu, & deuant les hommes. Cet esprit
capable d'animer quatre corps, à ce que i'apprend, void de bien loing,
ie le confesse, mais i'ay quelque creance, qu'il n'attend point de nos
Sauuages qui entendent la parole de Dieu, & les veritez du Ciel par
son entremise, car c'est luy qui nous a honorez de ses cõmandements;
nous renuoyant en ces contrées auec la bien-veillance de Messieurs les
Associez: Ie croy, dis-je, qu'il n'attend point de cette vigne, qu'il
arrouse de ses soings les fruicts qu'elle luy presentera en terre, &
qu'il les goustera vn iour dedans les Cieux. Pleust à Dieu qu'il veist
cinq ou six cens Hurons, hommes [340] grands, forts, & bien faits,
prester l'oreille aux bonnes nouuelles de l'Euangile qu'on leur va
porter cette année: Ie me figure qu'il honoreroit par fois la nouuelle
France d'vn de ses regards, & que cette veuë luy donneroit autant de
contentement, que ces grandes actions dont il remplit l'Europe; car
de procurer que le sang de Iesus-Christ soit appliqué aux ames pour
lesquelles il est respandu, c'est vne gloire peu connuë des hommes,
mais enuiée des grandes intelligences du Ciel & de la terre.

    Your Reverence will now see that the fear some people had that the
    foreigner would again come to ravage the country, and prevent the
    conversion of these poor Barbarians, is not well founded; since
    households have been established here, since forts and dwellings
    are being built in several places, and as Monseigneur the Cardinal
    favors this enterprise, honorable in the eyes of God and of man.
    That mind,--capable of animating four bodies, according to what I
    have heard,--sees far indeed, I confess; but I am of the opinion
    that he does not expect from our Savages, who hear the word of God
    and the truths of Heaven through his agency,--for it is he who has
    honored us with his commands, sending us again into these countries
    under the care of Messieurs the Associates,--I believe, I say,
    that he does not expect from this vine, which he waters with his
    care, the fruits which it will bear for him on earth, and which he
    will enjoy one day in Heaven. God grant that he may see five or
    six hundred Hurons,--large, [340] strong, well-made men,--ready
    to listen to the good news of the Gospel which is being carried
    to them this year. I imagine that he would honor occasionally new
    France by a look, and that this glance would give him as much
    satisfaction as those great deeds with which he is filling Europe;
    but to cause the blood of Jesus Christ to be applied to the souls
    for whom it was shed, is a glory little known among men, but longed
    for by the great powers of Heaven and earth.

Il est temps de sonner la retraitte, les vaisseaux sont prests à
partir, & cependant ie n'ay pas encore releu ny interponctué cette
grãde Relation, qui peut suffir pour trois années: V. R. iugera par
la necessité que i'ay eu d'emprunter la main d'autruy, pour luy
escrire que ie n'ay pas tout le loisir que ie pourrois desirer. Ie ne
sçay cõme cela se fait, que les nouuelles s'escriuent tousiours auec
empressement, aussi n'y recherche-on pas tant de politesse que la
verité & la naïfueté, mon cœur a plus parlé que mes lettres, & n'estoit
la pensée que i'ay, [341] qu'en escriuant à vne personne, ie parle à
plusieurs, il se respandroit bien dauantage.

    It is time to sound the retreat; the vessels are ready to depart,
    and still I have not yet read over nor repunctuated this long
    Relation, which ought to be enough for three years. Your Reverence
    will understand, through the necessity that has obliged me to
    borrow the hand of another to write to you, that I have not all the
    leisure I could desire. I do not know how it happens that news is
    always written in haste. Let no one seek herein elegance, so much
    as truth and simplicity; my heart has spoken more than my lips, and
    were it not for the feeling I have [341] that, in writing to one
    person, I speak to many, it would overflow still more.

Encore ce mot, puisque V. R. nous ayme si tendrement, & que ses soins
nous viennent si puissamment secourir iusques au bout du mõde, dõnez
nous, mon R. P. s'il vous plaist des personnes capables d'apprendre
les langues, nous pensions nous y appliquer, cette année, le Pere
Lallemant, le Pere Buteux & moy, cette nouuelle habitation nous
separe. Qui sçait si le Pere Daniel est encore en vie? & si le Pere
Dauost arriuera auec les Hurons: car ses Sauuages ayans commencé à
le derober, luy pourront bien iouër vn autre plus mauuais traict.
Depuis la mort d'vn pauure miserable François massacré aux Hurons,
on a découuert que ces Barbares auoiẽt fait noyer le R. P. Nicolas
Recolect, tenu pour vn grand homme de bien; tout cecy nous fait voir
qu'il est besoing de tenir icy le plus de Peres qu'on pourra; car si
par exemple le Pere Brebœuf & moy venions à mourir, tout le peu que
nous sçauons de la langue Huronne [342] & Montagnaise se perdroit, &
ainsi ce seroit tousiours à recommencer & à retarder le fruict que
l'on desire recueillir de cette Mission, Dieu suscitera des personnes
qui auront compassion de tant d'ames, secourãs ceux qui les viennent
chercher parmy tant de dangers; c'est en luy que nous remercions tous
V. R. de son affection si cordiale, & de son assistance, la suppliant
tres-humblement de se souuenir à l'Autel & à l'Oratoire de ses enfans,
& de ses subjets, notamment de celuy qui en a plus de besoin; lequel se
dira confidemment ce qu'il est de tout son cœur.

  MON R. PERE.

                  Vostre tres-humble & tres-obeïssant
                   seruiteur en N. S. IESVS-CHRIST.

                                                         PAVL LE IEVNE.

  De la petite Maison de
  N. Dame des Anges,
  en la Nouuelle
  France, ce 7, d'Aoust
  1634.

_V. R. Nous permettera, s'il luy plaist, d'implorer prieres de tous nos
Peres, & de tous nos freres de sa Prouince. Nostre grand secours doit
venir du Ciel._

    One word more. Since Your Reverence loves us so tenderly, and your
    kind care reaches out so effectively to help us, even to the ends
    of the earth, give us, my Reverend Father, if you please, persons
    capable of learning these languages. We intended to apply ourselves
    to this work this year, Father Lallemant, Father Buteux, and I; but
    this new settlement separates us. Who knows whether Father Daniel
    is still living, whether Father Davost will reach the Hurons?
    For, as his Savages have begun to rob him, they may truly play
    a still worse game upon him. Since the death of a poor unhappy
    Frenchman, murdered by the Hurons, it has been discovered that
    these Barbarians caused the drowning of Reverend Father Nicolas,
    Recolect, considered a very worthy man.[14] All this convinces us
    that we must retain here as many of our Fathers as we can; because
    if, for example, Father Brebœuf and I should happen to die, all the
    little we know of the Huron [342] and Montagnais languages would
    be lost; and thus they would always be beginning over again, and
    retarding the fruits that they wish to gather from this Mission.
    God will raise up persons who will have pity upon so many souls,
    and who will succor those who come to seek them in the midst of
    so many dangers. It is he whom we thank for Your Reverence's so
    cordial affection and assistance, very humbly supplicating you
    to remember at the Altar and at the Oratory your children and
    subjects,--especially the one who is most in need of it, who will
    sign himself confidently and from the depths of his heart, what he
    is,

    MY REVEREND FATHER,

                  Your very humble and very obedient
                   servant in Our Lord JESUS CHRIST,

                                                         PAUL LE JEUNE.

    From the little house
    of N. Dame des Anges,
    in New France,
    this 7th of August,
    1634.

    _Your Reverence will permit Us, if you please, to implore the
    prayers of all our Fathers, and of all our brothers of your
    Province. Our great help must come from Heaven._


 Table des Chapitres contenvs en cette Relation.

  Chap.

  I _Des bons deportemens des François. fol._                          3

  II _De la conuersion, du Baptesme & de l'heureuse mort de quelques
  Sauuages. fol._                                                      7

  III _Des moyens de conuertir les Sauuages. fol._                    35

  IV _De la creance des superstitions & des erreurs des Sauuages
  Montagnais. fol._                                                   43

  V _Des choses bonnes qui se trouuent dans les Sauuages. fol._      101

  VI _De leurs vi_[_c_]_es & de leurs imperfections. fol._           109

  VII _Des viandes & autres mets dont mangent les Sauuages & leur
  assaisonnement, & de leurs boissons. fol._                         131

  VIII _De leurs festins. fol._                                      136

  IX _De leur chasse & de leur pescherie. fol._                      148

  X _De leurs habits & de leurs ornements. fol._                     164

  XI _De la langue des Sauuages montagnais. fol._                    174

  XII _De ce qu'il faut souffrir hyuernant auec les Sauuages. fol._  185

  XIII _Contenant vn iournal des choses qui n'ont peu estre couchées sur
  les Chapitres precedens. fol._                                     209

    Table of Chapters contained in this Relation.[15]

    Chap.

    I _On the good conduct of the French. page._                       3

    II _On the conversion, Baptism and happy death of some Savages.
    page._                                                             7

    III _On the means of converting the Savages. page._               35

    IV _On the belief, superstitions, and errors of the Montagnais
    Savages. page._                                                   43

    V _On the good things which are found among the Savages. page._  101

    VI _On their vices and imperfections. page._                     109

    VII _On the meats and other food which the Savages eat, and their
    seasoning, and their beverages. page._                           131

    VIII _On their feasts. page._                                    136

    IX _On their hunting and fishing. page._                         148

    X _On their dress and ornaments. page._                          164

    XI _On the language of the montagnais Savages. page._            174

    XII _On what one must suffer in wintering with the Savages. page._
                                                                     185

    XIII _Containing a journal of things which could not be set down in
    preceding Chapters. page._ 209




                                 XXIV

                        LETTRE DE PAUL LE JEUNE

                        à Cardinal de Richelieu

                         Kebek, Aoust 1, 1635


SOURCE: The original is in the Archives des affaires étrangères, Paris.
We follow a transcript of the copy in the Library of the Dominion
Parliament, Ottawa.




Lettre de Paul Lejeune, de la Cie de Jésus, à Monseigneur le Cardinal.


MONSEIGNEUR,

Très humble salut en celuy qui est le salut de tous les hommes. Je
ne scay pas si je deviens sauvage conversant tous les jours avec les
sauvages, mais je scay bien que ce n'est pas tant la communication
de leur barbarie que le respect que je dois à Votre Grandeur qui m'a
empesché jusques icy de me donner l'honne[u]r de vous escrire. Or je
crains que cette retenue ne me jette dans l'ingratitude veu mesme
qu'il est bien difficile de demeurer tous les jours dans l'estonnement
de vos grandes actions et de vos bienfaits sans que la langue rende
quelque témoignage du sentiment de son cœur. Toute l'Europe, voire tout
l'ancien monde, vous regarde avec admiration. L'Eglise vous chérit et
vous honore comme l'un de ses plus grands princes toute ravie de joie
de voir l'orgueil de ses enemis terrassés par vostre conduite. Toute
la France vous doit sa guérison ayant dissipé le venin qui luy gagnoit
le cœur. hélas! que de malheurs luy seroient arrivés depuis quelques
années si ce poison fut demeuré en sa force au milieu de l'Etat. Les
amis et les alliés de la plus noble couronne de l'univers n'ont pas
assez de paroles pour recognoistre vos bienfaits et ses ennemis n'ont
plus de cœur devant vous. Vous scavez donner la paix et la guerre comme
vous possédez également la bonté et la Justice. La terre est trop
petite pour vos soins. Les mers recognoissent vostre puissance c'est
vous qui alliez la Nelle France à l'ancienne et tous ces peuples qui ne
cognoissent pas encore le vray Dieu commencent à cognoistre et admirer
vostre authorité et jouir des doux fruits de vostre bienveillance.
Je contemple tout cecy avec étonnement, mais je suis ravy quand je
voy vostre esprit sans quitter le soin des grandes affaires prendre
des pensées et des affections si douces et si fortes pour un petit
nombre de personnes logées au bout du monde. Je parle des religieux de
nostre compagnie que vous honorés d'une affection particulière en ces
dernières contrées. Je ne scaurois lire sans admirer vostre bonté la
recommandation que ie garde encore signée de vostre propre main par
laquelle nous prenant soubs vostre protection vous commandiez à ceux
qui suivant vos ordres venoient retirer le pays d'entre les mains des
Anglois de nous traiter favorablement sur peine d'en repondre en leur
propre personne. Il eut fallu avoir un cœur de bronze pour n'avoir
point de sentiment à la veue de cette recommandation qui nous fut
apportée en la Nelle France de vostre part et qui essuia une bonne
partie de la tristesse que nous avions de voir ce païs en la déplorable
estat depuis un si longtems que nos François le possédoient mais il va
tous les jours changeant de face depuis que vous le daignés honorer
de vos soins. Ces Messieurs de la Nvelle Compagnie y ont plus faict
de bien en un an que ceux qui les ont devancés en toute leur vie. Les
familles commencent à s'y multiplier et nous pressent déjà d'ouvrir
quelque escole pour instruire leurs enfans et que nous commencerons
bientost Dieu aidant. Je ne crains qu'un malheur que ces Messieurs qui
font à n'en point mentir de très grandes dépenses comme il appert par
les beaux équipages qu'ils mettent en mer ne perdent ou ne diminuent
quelque chose de ce grand courage qu'ils font maintenant paroistre.
Si par malheur leur traite de pelleteries ne leur succédoit pas
tousjours, Monseigneur, vous êtes tout puissant en ce point comme en
plusieurs autres un seul regard de vos yeux les peut protéger et animer
et secourir encore toutes ces contrées d'ou la France peut tirer un
jour de grands avantages. On scait assez par l'expérience et par la
lecture des historiens et des géographes qu'il sort tous les ans très
grand nombre de personnes de la France se jettant qui de çà qui de là
chez l'estranger pour n'avoir de quoy s'employer dans leur pays. Je me
suis laissé dire et ne l'ay pas entendu qu'avec un grand regret qu'une
bonne partie des artisans qui sont en Espagne sont François. Quoy donc
faut-il que nous donnions des hommes à nos ennemis pour nous faire la
guerre et nous avons icy tant de terres si belles si bonnes où l'on
peut jeter des colonies qui seront fidèles à sa Majesté et à Vostre
Grandeur. Le fils d'un artisan françois nay en Espagne est Espagnol,
naissant en la Nelle France il sera François. Tout gist à emploier
forces hommes à déserter et desfricher les bois pour distribuer la
terre aux familles qu'on fait et qu'on fera passer. Messieurs de la
Compagnie font merveille en ce point mais les frais sont si excessifs
que je ne douterois quasi de leur persévérance s'ils n'estoient appuyés
de Votre Grandeur. Monseigneur vous estes le cœur et l'âme de cette
compagnie et de toute la Nelle France vous pouvez non seullement donner
la vie du corps à une infinité de pauvres artisans françois qui la
vont mendier chez l'étranger faute de terre, mais vous pouvez encore
donner la vie de l'âme à une infinité de peuples barbares qui meurent
tous les jours dans l'esclavage de Satan, faute de prédicateurs de
l'Evangile. Si vostre Grandeur nous continue sa faveur et ces Messieurs
leur bienveillance j'espère qu'aussytost que nous saurons la langue
que vous verrez et gouterés les fruits d'une nouvelle Eglise d'auttant
plus doux et savoureux que ces pauvres barbares sont maintenant dans un
Estat pitoiable. Nous avons desjà dans nos premiers begaimens envoié
quelques âmes au ciel lavées dans le sang de l'agneau. Ce sont des
fruits d'une vigne que vous plantez, Monseigneur, et que vous arrousez
de vos faveurs. Aussi est-il bien raisonable que cette nouvelle Eglise
prenne ses commencemens et ses progrès soubs l'authorité et soubs
l'assistance d'un Prince de l'Eglise, mais je m'égare dans la longueur
de mes discours ne me souvenant pas que parlant aux Grands il faut
plustot tenir du Laconien que de l'Athénien. Je ne tiens ni de l'un
ni de l'autre, je relesve de vostre douceur et de vostre bonté qui me
donne et faict accès auprès de Sa Grandeur et qui me permettera s'il
luy plaist de porter en ce nouveau monde le tiltre et la qualité

                              Monseigneur

                                                 De Vostre très humble
                                                 très obéissant et très
                                                 obligé serviteur en
                                                 nostre Seigneur.
                                                 Paul Lejeune, de la
                                                 Compagnie de Jésus.

A KEBEK en la N'ELLE FRANCE, le 1er Jour d'Aoust 1635.

    Letter from Paul Lejeune, of the Society of Jesus, to Monseigneur
    the Cardinal.


    MONSEIGNEUR,

    My very humble greetings, in him who is the salvation of all men.
    I do not know whether I am becoming savage, by associating every
    day with the savages; but I do know well that it is not so much
    the contact with their barbarism as the respect I owe to Your
    Eminence, which has prevented me until now from giving myself the
    honor of writing to you. Now I fear that this reserve makes me seem
    ungrateful, especially as it is hard to remain from day to day in a
    state of wonder at your great deeds and benefactions, and not allow
    the tongue to give some evidence of the sentiments of the heart.
    All Europe, yes, all the old world regards you with admiration. The
    Church cherishes and honors you as one of its greatest princes,
    full of joy at seeing the arrogance of its enemies crushed by your
    government. All France owes her recovery to you, who dissipated
    the poison which was creeping to her heart. Alas, what misfortunes
    would have befallen her in these past years, if this poison had
    retained its strength in the midst of the State![16] The friends
    and allies of the most noble crown in the universe have not words
    enough to acknowledge your kind deeds, and its enemies no longer
    have courage in your presence. You know when to make both peace and
    war, as you possess equally goodness and Justice. The land is
    too small for your efforts. The seas acknowledge your power, for
    it is you who have joined the New France to the old; and all these
    peoples, who do not yet know the true God, begin to acknowledge
    and admire your authority, and to enjoy the sweet fruits of your
    benevolence. I contemplate all this with astonishment, but I am
    charmed when I see how your mind, without leaving the care of great
    affairs, takes so kind and deep an interest and fondness for a
    small number of people lodged at the ends of the earth. I mean the
    religious of our society, whom you honor with special affection
    in these distant countries. I could not read without wondering
    at your goodness the recommendation which I still keep, signed
    by your own hand,--in which, taking us under your protection,
    you commanded those who, in accordance with your orders, came to
    take the country from the hands of the English, to accord us good
    treatment under penalty of answering for it in their own persons.
    It would have taken a heart of bronze not to feel emotion at the
    sight of this recommendation,[17] which was brought to us in New
    France by your authority, and which largely dispelled our sadness
    in seeing this country in such a deplorable state, after so long a
    time as our French had been in possession of it. But its condition
    goes on changing every day since you have deigned to honor it with
    your interest. These Gentlemen of the New Company have done more
    good here in one year than those who preceded did in all their
    lives. Families are beginning to multiply, and these already urge
    us to open a school for the education of their children, which we
    will begin soon, God helping us. I fear but one misfortune,--that
    these Gentlemen, who have told no untruth about their great
    expenses, which are evident in the fine outfits they put to sea,
    may altogether or partly lose the great courage they now display,
    if unfortunately their trade in peltries should not always succeed.
    Monseigneur, you are all-powerful in this matter, as in many
    others; a single glance of your eyes can protect, animate, and help
    them, and indeed all these countries, from which France can one
    day derive great benefits. It is well known, both from experience
    and from reading historians and geographers, that every year a
    very great number of people leave France, and cast themselves,
    some here, some there, among foreigners, because they have no
    employment in their own country. I have been told, and have heard
    it only with great regret, that a large part of the artisans in
    Spain are Frenchmen. How then! must we give men to our enemies to
    make war upon us, when we have here so many lands, so beautiful and
    good, where colonies can be introduced which will be loyal to His
    Majesty and to Your Eminence? The son of a french artisan born in
    Spain is a Spaniard; but, if he is born in New France, he will be
    a Frenchman. It all lies in employing strong men to cut down and
    clear the woods, so that the land may be distributed among families
    which are here, or will be brought over here. The Gentlemen of
    the Company are doing wonders in this regard; but the outlay is
    so great that I would almost have doubts of their continuing in
    the work, were they not supported by Your Eminence. Monseigneur,
    you are the heart and soul of this company and of all New France.
    You not only can give physical life to an infinite number of
    poor french workmen, who go begging it among strangers for lack
    of land; but you can give spiritual life to a great number of
    barbarous people, who die every day in the slavery of Satan for
    lack of preachers of the Gospel. If Your Eminence continues your
    favors to us, and these Gentlemen their kindness, I hope that, as
    soon as we shall know the language, you will see and taste the
    fruits of a new Church, so much sweeter and more savory as these
    poor barbarians are now in so pitiable a State. We have already,
    in our first stammerings, sent some souls to heaven, bathed in
    the blood of the lamb. These are a few fruits of a vine that you
    are planting, Monseigneur, and that you bedew with your favors.
    Also, it is very reasonable that this new Church should begin and
    progress under the authority and assistance of a Prince of the
    Church. But I am losing myself in the details of my discourse,
    forgetting that, in speaking to the Great, one must imitate the
    Laconian fashion, rather than the Athenian. I am following neither,
    but am simply relying upon your gentleness and goodness, which
    procure and grant me access to Your Eminence, and will permit me,
    if you please, to bear in this new world the title and character,

                             Monseigneur,

                                             Of Your very humble,
                                             very obedient, and greatly
                                             obliged servant in
                                             our Lord,
                                             Paul Lejeune, of the
                                             Society of Jesus.

    KEBEK, NEW FRANCE, the 1st Day of August, 1635.




                                 XXV

                       LE JEUNE'S RELATION, 1635

                    PARIS: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1636


SOURCE: Title-page and text reprinted from the copy of the first issue
(H. 63), in Lenox Library.

Chaps. i.-ii. are given in the present volume; the remainder of the
document will appear in Volume VIII.




                               RELATION
                         DE CE QVI SEST PASSÉ
                                 EN LA
                            NOVVELLE FRANCE
                          +EN L'ANNÉE+ 1635.

                              Enuoyée au
                         +R. PERE PROVINCIAL+
                      de la Compagnie de +IESVS+
                       en la Prouince de France.

           _Par le P. Paul le Ieune de la mesme Compagnie,
                 Superieur de la residence de Kebec._

[Illustration]

                               A PARIS.

                  Chez +SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY+, Imprimeur
                ordinaire du Roy, ruë sainct Iacques,
                             aux Cicognes,

                             M. DC. XXXVI.

                       _AVEC PRIVILEGE DV ROI._


                               RELATION
                           OF WHAT OCCURRED
                                  IN
                              NEW FRANCE
                           IN THE YEAR 1635.

                              Sent to the
                      REVEREND FATHER PROVINCIAL
                       of the Society of +JESUS+
                      in the Province of France.

            _By Father Paul le Jeune of the same Society,
                 Superior of the residence of Quebec._


                                PARIS.

               +SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY+, Printer in ordinary
                   to the King, ruë sainct Jacques,
                      at the Sign of the Storks.

                             M. DC. XXXVI.

                          _BY ROYAL LICENSE._




[iii] Table des Chapitres contenus en ce liure.


  RELATION _de ce qui s'est passé en la Nouuelle France, en l'année
  1635._ Pag.                                                          1

  _De l'estat & l'employ de nostre Compagnie_ en la _Nouuelle France_,
  Ch I.                                                                9

  _De la conuersion & de la mort de quelques Sauuages_, Chap. II.     21

  _Que c'est vn bien pour l'vn & l'autre France, d'enuoyer icy des
  Colonies_, Chap. III.                                               51

  _Ramas de diuerses choses dressé en forme de Iournal._ Chap. IV.    60

  Relation de ce qui s'est passé aux Hurons en l'année 1635.
  _Enuoyée à Kebec au P. le Ieune, par le P. Brebeuf._               113

  [iiii] Relation de quelques particularitez du lieu & des Habitans de
  l'Isle du Cap Breton.
  _Enuoyée par le P. Iulien Perrault de la Compagnie de IESVS, à son
  Prouincial en France 1634. & 35._                                  207

  Diuers Sentimens & aduis des Peres qui sont en la Nouuelle France.
  _TireZ de leurs dernieres lettres de 1635._                        220

    [iii] Table of Chapters contained in this book.


    RELATION _of what occurred in New France in the year 1635._ Pag.   1

    _Of the condition and occupations of our Society in New France._
    Ch. I.                                                             9

    _Of the conversion and of the death of some Savages._ Chap. II.   21

    _How it is a benefit to both old and new France, to send Colonies
    here._ Chap. III.                                                 51

    _A collection of various matters prepared in the form of a
    Journal._ Chap. IV.                                               60

    Relation of what occurred among the Hurons in the year 1635.
    _Sent to Kebec to Father le Jeune by Father Brebeuf._            113

    [iiii] Relation of certain details regarding the Island of Cape
    Breton and its Inhabitants.
    _Sent by Father Julien Perrault of the Society of JESUS, to his
    Provincial in France, in 1634 & 35._                             207

    Various sentiments and opinions of the Fathers who are in New
    France.
    _Taken from their last letters of 1635._                         220




[1] Relation de ce qui s'est passé en la Novvelle France, en l'année
1635.


MON R. PERE,

Dieu soit beny pour vn iamais. C'est à ce coup que la Nouuelle Frãce se
va ressentir des benedictions de l'ancienne, & que l'équité triomphant
de l'iniustice, fera que ces contrées cesseront d'estre ce qu'elles
ont esté depuis tant de siecles; vne forest sans limites; la demeure
de la [2] barbarie; le pays de l'infidelité. Nous commençons à voir
l'ouuerture de quelques campagnes, par les défrichements qu'on fait
en diuers endroits; Les familles qui passent chaque année, changent
la barbarie des Sauuages en la courtoisie naturelle aux François; &
le petit aduancement que nous faisons par nos begayements, nous fait
coniecturer que la foy bannira l'infidelité de son Empire. Bref,
i'espere qu'on verra vn iour ces paroles accomplies dans nos grands
deserts, _Multi filij desertæ, magis quàm eius quæ habet virum_. Il est
bien conuenable que sous le Regne d'vn Roy si sainct, la vertu entre
dans l'vne des grandes Seigneuries de sa Couronne: Que sous la faueur
& la conduite d'vn Prince de l'Eglise, on voye naistre vne nouuelle
Eglise, _quæ extendet palmites suos vsque ad mare, & vsque ad flumen_
[3] _propagines eius_; qui étendra ses pampres iusques à la mer, &
prouignera ses seps du long des riues du premier de tous les fleuues.
Mille raisons nous donnent ces pensées, & nous font entrer dans ces
attentes. Cette entreprise est appuyée de personnes de merite & de
condition, dont la vertu regardée des yeux de toute la France, reçoit
vne approbation generale, & vn applaudissement mesme de la bouche de
nostre grand Roy. Le rebut qu'on a fait de ceux, qui ayans succé le
bien qu'on peut recueillir en ces contrées, les ont laissées sans
peuplades & sans culture, n'ayans pas en tant d'années qu'ils en ont
iouy, fait défricher vn seul arpent de terre: Les grãdes dépenses que
font Messieurs de la Compagnie de la Nouuelle France, soit sur le pays,
soit en leurs équipages; l'affection que nous [4] voyons en plusieurs
personnes de fauoriser ce dessein, les vns de leurs moyens, les autres
par leurs propres trauaux, nous font conclure que Dieu conduit cét
affaire.

    [1] Relation of what occurred in New France, in the year 1635.


    MY REVEREND FATHER,

    May God be forever blessed. Now, at last, New France is about
    to experience the blessings of the mother country; and right,
    triumphing over injustice, will cause these countries to cease
    being what they have been for so many centuries,--boundless
    forests, the abode of [2] barbarism, and the land of infidelity.
    We begin to see some open country, through the clearings that have
    been made in different places. The families who come over every
    year are beginning to change the barbarism of the Savages into the
    courtesy natural to the French; and the slight progress we are
    making, through our stammerings, leads us to conjecture that the
    faith will banish infidelity from its Empire. In short, I hope to
    see, some day, these words fulfilled in our great deserts: _Multi
    filii desertæ, magis quàm eius quæ habet virum._ It is, indeed,
    proper that, in the Reign of so saintly a King, virtue should enter
    one of the great Seigniories of his Crown; that, under the favor
    and leadership of a Prince of the Church, we should see a new
    Church arise, _quæ extendet palmites suos usque ad mare, et usque
    ad flumen_ [3] _propagines eius_, which shall extend its branches
    even to the sea, and shall propagate itself along the shores of
    the chief of all rivers. A thousand considerations suggest these
    thoughts, and arouse in us these expectations. This enterprise is
    supported by persons of merit and rank, whose integrity, viewed by
    the eyes of all France, receives general approbation and praise,
    even from the lips of our great King. The exclusion of those
    who, having drained off the wealth that can be gathered in this
    country, left it without settlers and without cultivation,--not
    having, in all the years they enjoyed it, cleared a single arpent
    of land; the great sums that the Gentlemen of the Company of
    New France are expending, either upon the country or upon their
    establishments;[18] the disposition we [4] see in many persons to
    favor this project, some by their means, others by their personal
    labors: [all these considerations] lead us to conclude that God is
    conducting this enterprise.

Ie ne diray rien du zele de ceux, dont l'ardeur nous échaufe & confond
tout ensemble, dont les secours nous réiouyssent & nous renforcent. Ie
ne parleray non plus des desirs brulans d'vn tres-grand nombre de nos
Peres, qui trouuent l'air de la Nouuelle France vn air du Ciel, puis
qu'on y peut souffrir pour le Ciel, & qu'on y peut ayder les ames à
trouuer le Ciel. Ie passe sous silence quantité d'autres Religieux, qui
ont les mesmes sentiments, & les mesmes volontez. Mais ce qui m'étonne,
c'est qu'vn grand nombre de filles Religieuses, consacrées à nostre
Seigneur, veulent estre de la partie; surmontant la crainte naturelle
[5] à leur sexe, pour venir secourir les pauures filles, & les pauures
femmes des Sauuages. Il y en a tant qui nous écriuent, & de tant de
Monasteres, & de diuers Ordres tres-reformez en l'Eglise; que vous
diriez que c'est à qui se mocquera la premiere des difficultez de la
Mer, des mutineries de l'Ocean, & de la barbarie de ces contrées. On me
mande que la Superieure d'vne Maison tres-reglée, sollicitée de donner
de ses Filles pour fonder vn Conuent de son Ordre en quelque ville
de France, a respondu qu'elle n'auoit point de Filles, sinon pour la
Nouuelle France, & pour l'Angleterre, au cas que Dieu y fist rentrer la
foy Catholique. Vne autre non moins zelée, m'ayant déduit les grandes
deuotions qu'on fait en sa Maison, pour l'heureuse conuersion de ces
Peuples, dit que la Relation [6] de l'an passé, capable d'étonner vn
courage assez fort, non seulement n'a point ébranlé le cœur de ses
Filles, ains au contraire les a tellement animées, que treize d'entre
elles ont signé de leur propre main vn vœu, qu'elles ont fait à Dieu
de passer en la Nouuelle France, pour y exercer les fonctions de leur
Institut, s'il plaist à leurs Superieurs de leur permettre. I'ay receu,
veu, & leu ce vœu auec étonnement. I'en sçay vne autre, qui apres auoir
étably plusieurs Monasteres de son Ordre en France, tiendroit à vne
grande faueur de Dieu, si elle venoit finir ses iours dans vne petite
maisonnette, dediée au seruice des petites Sauuages, qui vont errantes
parmy ces grands bois. A tout cela ie ne dis rien autre chose, sinon
que _Digitus Dei est hîc_, que la main de Dieu conduit cette entreprise.

    I shall say nothing of those whose ardent zeal warms and at the
    same time confounds us, whose help cheers and strengthens us.
    Neither shall I say any more about the burning desire of a great
    number of our Fathers, who find the air of New France the air of
    Heaven, since there they can suffer for Heaven, and there can help
    souls to find Heaven. I pass over in silence many other Religious,
    who have the same sentiments and the same willingness. But what
    surprises me is that many young Nuns, consecrated to our Lord,
    wish to join us,--overcoming the fear natural [5] to their sex, in
    order to come and help the poor girls and poor women among these
    Savages. There are so many of these who write to us, and from
    so many Convents, and from various Orders in the Church, of the
    strictest discipline, that you would say that each one is first to
    laugh at the hardships of the Sea, the riotous waves of the Ocean,
    and the barbarism of these countries. They have written me that
    the Superior of a very well-ordered House, being asked to send
    some Sisters to establish a Convent of her Order in some town of
    France, answered that she had no Sisters except for New France,
    and for England, in case God restored the Catholic faith there.
    Another one, no less zealous, having recounted the great devotions
    that were performed in her House for the happy conversion of
    these Tribes, said that the Relation [6] of last year, capable of
    appalling the stoutest heart, not only has not disheartened these
    Sisters, but on the contrary has so inspired them, that thirteen
    have with their own hands signed a vow to God, to cross over into
    New France, there to exercise the functions of their Order, if
    their Superiors are pleased to allow them. I have received, seen,
    and read this vow with astonishment. I know another one, who, after
    having established several Convents of her Order in France, would
    consider it a great favor of God if she could come and end her days
    in a little home, dedicated to the service of the little Savage
    girls who go wandering through these great forests. To all of which
    I can only say that _Digitus Dei est hîc_, that the hand of God
    guides this enterprise.

[7] Mais il faut que ie donne cét aduis en passant à toutes ces
bonnes Filles, qu'elles se donnent bien de garde de presser leur
depart, qu'elles n'ayent icy vne bonne Maison, bien bastie, & bien
rentée, autrement elles seroient à charge à nos Francois, & feroient
peu de choses pour ces Peuples. Les hommes se tirent bien mieux des
difficultez: mais pour des Religieuses, il leur faut vne bonne Maison,
quelques terres défrichées, & vn bon reuenu pour se põuuoir nourrir; &
soulager la pauureté des femmes & des filles Sauuages.

    [7] But I must give this advice, in passing, to all these good
    Sisters,--that they be very careful not to urge their departure
    until they have here a good House, well built and well endowed;
    otherwise, they would be a burden to our French, and could
    accomplish little for these Peoples. Men can extricate themselves
    much more easily from difficulties; but, as for the Nuns, they must
    have a good House, some cleared land, and a good income upon which
    to live, and relieve the poverty of the wives and daughters of the
    Savages.

Helas mon Dieu! si les excés, si les superfluitez de quelquez Dames de
France s'employoient à cét œuure si sainct; quelle grande benediction
feroient-elles fondre sur leur famille? Quelle gloire en la face des
Anges, d'auoir recueilly le sang du [8] Fils de Dieu, pour l'appliquer
à ces pauures infidelles? Se peut-il faire que les biens de la terre
nous touchent de plus prés que la propre vie? Voila des Vierges tendres
& delicates, toutes prestes à ietter leur vie au hazard sur les ondes
de l'Ocean; de venir chercher de petites ames dans les rigueurs d'vn
air bien plus froid que l'air de la France; de subir des trauaux qui
étonnent des hommes mesmes, & on ne trouuera point quelque braue Dame
qui donne vn Passeport à ces Amazones du grand Dieu, leur dotant vne
Maison, pour loüer & seruir sa diuine Majesté en cét autre monde? Ie ne
sçaurois me persuader que nostre Seigneur n'en dispose quelqu'vne pour
ce sujet.

    Alas, my God! if the waste, the superabundance of some of the
    Ladies of France were employed in this so holy work, what great
    blessings would it bring down upon their families! What glory in
    the sight of the Angels, to have gathered the blood of the [8] Son
    of God, to apply it to these poor infidels! Is it possible that
    earthly possessions are of greater concern to us than life itself?
    Behold these tender and delicate Virgins all ready to hazard their
    lives upon the waves of the Ocean, to come seeking little souls in
    the rigors of an air much colder than that of France, to endure
    hardships at which even men would be appalled; and will not some
    brave Lady be found who will give a Passport to these Amazons of
    the great God, endowing them with a House in which to praise and
    serve his divine Majesty, in this other world? I cannot persuade
    myself that our Lord will not dispose some one to this act.

Mais changeons de discours, & déduisons briéuement le peu que i'ay
à dire pour cette année. Ie diuiseray [9] cette Relation en quatre
Chapitres seulement.

    But let us change the subject, and briefly relate the little I have
    to say for this year. I will divide [9] this Relation into only
    four Chapters.




CHAPITRE I.

DE L'ESTAT, & DE L'EMPLOY DE NOSTRE COMPAGNIE EN LA NOUUELLE FRANCE.


NOVS auons six Residences en la Nouuelle France. La premiere,
commençant par les premieres terres qu'on rencontre venant en ces
pays, se nomme la Residence de Saincte Anne; elle est au Cap Breton.
La seconde la Residence de Sainct Charles, à Miskou. La troisiéme,
que nous allons habiter cette Automne, la Residence de Nostredame
de Recouurance, à Kebec, proche du Fort. La quatriéme, la Residence
de Nostredame des Anges, à vne demie lieuë de Kebec. La cinquiéme,
la Residence de la Conception, aux trois Riuieres. La sixiéme, la
Residence de Sainct Ioseph, [10] à Ihonatiria, aux Hurons; i'espere
que nous en aurons bien-tost vne septiéme au mesme pays, mais dans
vne Bourgade differente d'Ihonatiria. Or comme les Vaisseaux qui
vont au Cap Breton & à Miskou, ne montent point iusques à Kebec,
de là vient que nous n'auons aucune communication auec nos Peres
qui sont és Residences de Saincte Anne, & de Sainct Charles, si ce
n'est par la voye de France: & par consequent il ne faut point nous
adresser ny lettres, ny autres choses pour leur faire tenir, ains les
donner aux Vaisseaux qui vont en ces habitations de nos François. Il
s'ensuit encor que ie ne puis rien dire des choses qui se passent en
ces Residences, pour la distance des lieux, & le peu de commerce
que nous auons auec elles. Toutes ces Residences sont entretenuës
par Messieurs de la Compagnie [11] de la Nouuelle France, qui font
dresser des Forteresses, & des demeures pour nos François en diuers
endroits de ces contrées, excepté la Residence de Nostredame des Anges,
appuyée principalement sur les liberalitez de Monsieur le Marquis de
Gamache. Cette Residence a trois grands desseins pour la gloire de
nostre Seigneur; Le premier, de dresser vn College pour instruire les
enfans des familles qui se vont tous les iours multipliant. Le second,
d'établir vn Seminaire de petits Sauuages, pour les éleuer en la foy
Chrestienne. Le troisiéme, de secourir puissamment la Mission de nos
Peres aux Hurons, & autres Peuples sedentaires. Pour le College,
bien qu'il ne soit pas encor erigé, si est-ce que nous commencerons
dés cette année à enseigner quelques enfans. Toutes choses ont leur
commencement, [12] les plus doctes n'ont sceu autrefois que les
premiers elements de l'Alphabet.

    CHAPTER I.

    OF THE CONDITION AND EMPLOYMENT OF OUR SOCIETY IN NEW FRANCE.


    WE have six Residences in New France. The first, beginning with the
    first land encountered in coming into these countries, is called
    the Residence of Sainte Anne; it is at Cape Breton. The second is
    the Residence of Saint Charles, at Miskou. The third, which we
    are going to occupy this Autumn, the Residence of Nostredame de
    Recouvrance, at Kebec, near the Fort. The fourth, the Residence
    of Nostredame des Anges, half a league from Kebec. The fifth,
    the Residence of the Conception, at the three Rivers. The sixth,
    the Residence of Saint Joseph, [10] at Ihonatiria, among the
    Hurons.[19] I hope that we shall soon have a seventh, in the same
    country, but in a Village other than Ihonatiria. Now, as the
    Vessels which go to Cape Breton and to Miskou do not go up as far
    as Kebec, it thus happens that we have no communication with our
    Fathers who are in the Residences of Sainte Anne and of Saint
    Charles, except by way of France; hence neither letters nor other
    things should be sent to us to hold for them, but they should be
    given to those Vessels which go to these French settlements. It
    follows also that I can say nothing of the things which take place
    in these Residences, on account of their remoteness and the little
    commerce we have with them. All these Residences are maintained
    by the Gentlemen of the Company [11] of New France,--who have had
    Fortresses and dwellings for our French people built in different
    parts of the country,--except the Residence of Nostredame des
    Anges, which is supported principally through the liberality of
    Monsieur le Marquis de Gamache.[20] This Residence has three great
    plans for the glory of our Lord; the first, to erect a College for
    the education of the children of the families, which are every day
    becoming more numerous. The second, to establish a Seminary for the
    little Savages, to rear them in the Christian faith. The third, to
    give powerful aid to the Mission of our Fathers among the Hurons
    and other stationary Tribes. As to the College, although it is
    not yet built, we shall begin this year to teach a few children.
    Everything has its beginning; [12] the most learned once knew only
    the first elements of the Alphabet.

Quant au Seminaire, nous le faisons bastir: il sera pour vn temps en la
Residence de Nostredame des Anges: mais s'il se trouue quelque personne
de pieté qui le veüille fonder, & nourrir de pauures petits barbares,
pour les rendre enfans de Iesus Christ, il le faudra transporter plus
haut; & là les Sauuages ne seront point de difficulté d'amener leurs
enfans. I'en enuoye vn petit à V.R. laquelle s'il luy plaist nous le
renuoyera dans vne couple d'années; il seruira à arrester & instruire
ses petits compatriotes; celuy que i'auois enuoyé, & qu'on nous a
ramené, nous contente fort. Les Sauuages commencent à ouurir les yeux,
& à connoistre que les enfans sont bien instruits auec nous.

    In regard to the Seminary, we are now having one built. For a while
    it will be in the Residence of Nostredame des Anges; but, if some
    pious person be found who wishes to endow it, and to support the
    poor little barbarians that they may be made children of Jesus
    Christ, it will have to be moved farther up the river, to a place
    where the Savages will not object to bring their children. I send a
    little boy to Your Reverence, and, if you please, you will return
    him to us in a couple of years; he will help to retain and teach
    his little compatriots; the one I did send you, and who has been
    returned to us, pleases us greatly. The Savages are beginning to
    open their eyes and to recognize that children who are with us are
    well taught.

[13] Reste pour la Mission des Hurons & d'autres Peuples stables, elle
est de tres-grande importance pour le seruice de nostre Seigneur;
Messieurs de la Compagnie la cherissent & la soulagent: C'est de ces
Peuples que nous attendons de plus grandes conuersions; c'est là où il
faudra enuoyer grand nombre d'ouuriers, si la foy commence à éclairer
ces ames plongées dans les tenebres depuis tant de mille ans. Que si
on ne peut trouuer quelque fondation pour l'entretenir, ie quitterois
quasi volontiers, & le soin d'vn College & d'vn Seminaire, pour la
faire reüssir. Mais des personnes qui ayment mieux que leurs noms
soient écrits au Liure de vie que sur ce papier, nous defendent bien
fort de rien quitter de nos desseins, nous asseurant d'vne verité bien
certaine, que Dieu a plus de force, & plus de volonté [14] de nous
secourir, que nous n'auons de cœur d'entreprendre pour sa gloire.

    [13] Finally, as to the Mission among the Hurons and other
    stationary Tribes, it is of the greatest importance for the service
    of our Lord. The Gentlemen of the Company cherish and assist it.
    It is among those Tribes that we expect the greatest conversions;
    it is there that a great number of laborers must be sent, if the
    faith begins to illumine those souls, so many thousands of years
    plunged in darkness. If some fund cannot be found to maintain it,
    I would almost willingly give up the care both of a College and
    of a Seminary, to make it succeed. But some persons, who prefer
    to have their names written in the Book of life rather than upon
    this paper, positively forbid us to abandon in any wise our plans,
    assuring us of a very certain truth, that God has more strength and
    more willingness [14] to help us than we have courage to undertake
    enterprises for his glory.

Or pour ne m'éloigner de nos Residences, nous exerçons en
icelles toutes les fonctions de Curé ou de Pasteur, n'y en ayant
point d'autres que nous; nous annonçons la parole de Dieu; nous
administrons les Sacrements de Baptesme, de l'Autel, & de Penitence,
de l'Extréme-Onction; nous assistons au Sacrement de Mariage; nous
enterrons & enseuelissons par fois les morts; nous allons visiter les
malades; nous enseignons la Doctrine Chrestienne aux enfans, & comme
ils se vont multipliant par la venuë des familles, nous leur donnerons
bien-tost la premiere teinture des lettres, comme i'ay dit. Que si les
commencemens sont petits, la fin en peut estre grande & bien-heureuse.

    Now not to wander from the subject of our Residences, we exercise
    in these all the functions of Curé or Pastor, as there are no
    others here besides ourselves; we preach the word of God, we
    administer the Sacraments of Baptism, of the Altar and of Penance,
    of Extreme Unction; we assist at the Sacrament of Marriage; at
    times we bury and lay out the dead; we visit the sick; we teach the
    Christian Doctrine to the children, and, as they are becoming more
    numerous through the arrival of families, we shall soon give them
    the elements of letters, as I have said. Thus, if the beginnings
    are small, the end may be great and blessed.

[15] Outre cela vne partie de nous estudie fort & ferme à la langue,
occupation qui sera vn iour d'autant plus vtile, qu'elle est
maintenant épineuse: Nous visitons encor les Sauuages, & par nos
begayements nous tâchons de ietter dans leurs ames quelque petit grain
de la semence Euangelique, qui fructifiera en son temps s'il plaist
à Dieu. Voila nos exercices plus ordinaires, outre les obseruances
de la Religion, qui ne se doiuent iamais obmettre. Pour nos François
ils s'occupent à se fortifier, à bastir, à défricher, à cultiuer la
terre: mais ie ne pretends pas d'écrire tout ce qui se fait en ce pays,
ains seulement ce qui tend au bien de la foy, & de la Religion. Cét
hyuer passé, la maladie de terre ou de scurbut, s'estant iettée dans
la nouuelle habitation des trois Riuieres, où le Pere Buteux [16] &
moy estions allez, nous a donné nouuelle occupation meflée de ioye &
de tristesse. Nous estions marris d'vn costé, de voir souffrir quasi
tous nos pauures François, & d'en voir mourir quelques vns: de l'autre
nous nous réiouyssions de voir des effects tout à fait admirables de
la grace de nostre Seigneur dedans leurs ames; bon nombre des malades
n'ont iamais voulu demander la santé à Dieu, disans ces paroles auec
vne grande resignation; Il est nostre Pere, il sçait mieux ce qui nous
est bon que non pas nous, laissons le faire, sa saincte volonté soit
faite. Ie croy qu'il n'y en a qu'vn seul de ceux qui sont passez en
l'autre vie, qui n'aye fait vne confession generale deuant sa mort.
Comme i'auois grand desir que l'vn d'eux, pour estre vn ieune homme de
fort bonnes mœurs, retournast [17] en santé, ie luy conseillay de faire
vn vœu au glorieux Patriarche S. Ioseph, pour impetrer la deliurance
de son mal, Ie vous obeyray, me fist-il, mais si vous me laissez en ma
liberté, ie prieray seulement le bon S. Ioseph, de m'obtenir de nostre
Seigneur la grace d'accomplir sa tres-saincte volonté. Vne autrefois vn
ieune garçon fort & robuste se pourmenant dans la chambre des malades,
leur demánda ce qu'ils voudroient bien donner pour iouyr d'vne aussi
forte santé que la sienne; l'vn d'eux repartit fort sainctement, Ie
ne voudrois pas détourner la teste d'vn costé pour iouyr de toute la
santé du monde, si bien pour acquiescer au bon plaisir de Dieu. Cette
repartie fit veoir combien la grace operoit fortement dans ceste ame.
Vn autre qui auoit esté heretique, & d'vne vie assez libertine, estonna
[18] tous ses compagnons à la mort: car apres auoir rendu des preuues
de sa croyance, apres s'estre reconcilié auec vne grande douleur de
ses offenses, comme ie luy presentois le saint Viatique, Ie croy en
vous mon Sauueur, disoit-il, ouy ie croy en vous, venez, faites moy
misericorde, vous estes assez puissant pour me pardonner tous mes
pechez: & se sentant affoiblir il nous pressa sur l'heure mesme de
luy donner l'Extreme-Onction, ce que nous fismes; l'ayant receuë auec
beaucoup de sentimens de douleur, il apostrophe tous ses Camarades, &
leur dit, Adieu mes Camarades, Adieu mes compagnõs, il faut partir,
ie vous demande pardon, ie vous crie mercy à tous, ie suis bien marry
d'auoir si mal vescu; mais i'espere que Dieu me fera misericorde, mon
Dieu ayez pitié de moy. Proferant ces paroles il expira. [19] Qu'on
mette la maladie tant qu'on voudra au rang des mal heurs de ceste vie,
ie tiens celle qui a emporté ces ieunes gens, pour l'vne des plus
signalées faueurs, qu'ils ayent iamais receu de la main de Dieu. Pour
conclusion la santé est maintenant par toutes nos habitations, mais non
pas encore la saincteté.

    [15] Besides this, some of us are making an arduous and thorough
    study of the language, an occupation which will some day be so
    much the more useful as it is now difficult. We also visit the
    Savages, and through our stammerings try to cast into their souls
    some little grain of Gospel seed, which will ripen in its time,
    God willing. These are our more ordinary occupations, besides the
    observances of Religion, which must never be omitted. In regard to
    our French people, they are occupied in fortifying, in building,
    in clearing and cultivating the land. However, I do not pretend
    to describe all that takes place in this country, but only that
    which concerns the welfare of the faith and of Religion. This last
    winter, the land disease, or scurvy, appeared in the new settlement
    of the three Rivers, where Father Buteux [16] and I had gone;
    and this gave us a new occupation, which was mixed with joy and
    sadness. On the one hand, we were grieved to see almost all our
    poor Countrymen suffer, and to see some of them die; on the other,
    we rejoiced to see the altogether admirable effects of the grace
    of our Lord within their souls. A great many of the sick men never
    cared to ask God to restore their health, saying these words with
    great resignation: "He is our Father; he knows better than we what
    is good for us; leave it all to him, his holy will be done." I
    believe there was only one of those who passed to the other life,
    who did not make a general confession before his death. As I was
    very anxious that one of them, since he was a young man of very
    good morals, should be restored [17] to health, I advised him to
    make a vow to the glorious Patriarch St. Joseph, to grant him
    deliverance from the disease. "I will obey you," he replied; "but,
    if you leave me free to act as I please, I will merely pray the
    good St. Joseph to obtain for me from our Lord the grace to carry
    out his most holy will." Another time, a young man, very strong and
    robust, walking about in the room of the sick, asked them what
    they would give to enjoy such vigorous health as his; one of them
    answered, very piously, "I would not even turn my head aside to
    enjoy all the health in the world, so readily as I would acquiesce
    in the good pleasure of God." This answer showed how powerfully
    grace was working in this soul. Another who had been a heretic, and
    something of a libertine, astonished [18] all his companions at his
    death; for, after having given proofs of his belief, after having
    made his confession, with great contrition for his offenses, when I
    presented to him the holy Viaticum, "I believe in you, my Savior,"
    said he, "yes, I believe in you; come, be merciful to me; you
    are powerful enough to pardon all my sins," and, feeling himself
    growing weaker, he urged us at that very moment to give him Extreme
    Unction, which we did. Having received it with many expressions of
    grief, he addressed all his Comrades, saying, "Adieu, my Comrades,
    adieu, my companions; I must go; I ask your pardon, I ask pity from
    all of you, I am very sorry to have lived so badly; but I hope that
    God will have mercy upon me; my God, have pity upon me." Uttering
    these words, he expired. [19] One may place sickness as much as
    he pleases in the catalogue of the misfortunes of this life; yet
    I consider that which carried off these young men as one of the
    most signal favors they ever received from the hand of God. In
    conclusion, health prevails throughout all our settlements, but not
    saintliness, as yet.

Ie crains fort que le vice ne se glisse dans ces nouuelles peuplades,
si neantmoins ceux qui tiendront les resnes du gouuernement en main,
sont zelez pour la gloire de nostre bon Dieu, suiuant les desirs & les
intentions de Messieurs les Directeurs & Associez de la Compagnie, il
se dressera icy vne Hierusalem benite de Dieu, composée de Citoyens
destinez pour le Ciel. Il est bien aisé dans vn pays nouueau, où
les familles arriuent toutes disposées à receuoir les loix qu'on
y establira, de [20] bannir les méchantes coustumes de quelques
endroi[t]s de l'ancienne France, & d'en introduire de meilleures. Ces
Messieurs qui s'interessent dauantage dans la cause de Dieu, & dans la
vertu que dans le commerce, n'ont point de vaisseaux pour passer icy
les yurongneries, les ieux & les dissolutions du Carneual, non plus que
les saletez, & les blasphemes: la Nouuelle France ne veut point de ces
habitans de Cedar, & de Babylone, qui ne laisseront pas de s'y glisser,
si ceux qui peuuent tout ne leur font teste; les dissimulations en cet
endroit, & en ces commencemens, sont fort dangereuses, & Dieu demandera
compte des obmissions aussi bien que des fautes commises.

    I fear very much that vice will slip into these new colonies.
    If, however, those who hold the reins of government in hand are
    zealous for the glory of our good God, following the desires and
    intentions of the Honorable Directors and Associates of the
    Company, there will arise here a Jerusalem blessed of God, composed
    of Citizens destined for Heaven. It is very easy in a new country,
    where families arrive who are all prepared to observe the laws that
    will be established there, to [20] banish the wicked customs of
    certain places in old France, and to introduce better ones. These
    Gentlemen, who interest themselves more in the cause of God, and in
    virtue, than in commerce, have no ships to bring over drunkenness,
    gambling, and the dissoluteness of the Carnival, any more than
    uncleanness and blasphemy. New France does not desire those
    inhabitants of Cedar and of Babylon, who will surely slip in here,
    unless opposed by those who have all the power; dissimulation in
    this place and in these beginnings is very dangerous; and God will
    ask an account for duties omitted as well as for faults committed.




[21] CHAPITRE II.

DE LA CONUERSION & DE LA MORT DE QUELQUES SAUUAGES.


VINGT-DEVX sauuages ont esté baptisez ceste année, si nous auions
la cognoissance des langues, ie croy que la foy prendroit de grands
accroissemens: nous n'osons encor confier le baptesme qu'à ceux
que nous voyons en danger de mort, ou à des enfans qui nous sont
asseurez: Car ne pouuant encore plainement instruire ces Barbares, ils
mépriseroîent bien-tost nos saincts Mysteres, s'ils n'en auoient qu'vne
legere cognoissance. Il est bien vray que si ce peuple estoit curieux
de sçauoir, comme sont toutes les nations policées, que quelques-vns
[22] d'entre nous ont vne assez grande cognoissance de leur lãgue, pour
les instruire: mais comme ils sont profession de viure, & non pas de
sçauoir; leur plus grand soucy est de boire & de manger, & non pas de
cognoistre. Quand vous leur parlez de nos veritez, ils vous écoutent
paisiblement; mais au lieu de vous interroguer sur ce sujet, ils se
iettent incontinent sur les moyens de trouuer dequoy viure, monstrans
leur estomach tousiours vuide, & tousiours affamé. Que si on sçauoit
haranguer comme eux, & qu'on se trouuast en leurs assemblées, ie croy
qu'on y seroit bien puissant, la bonté de Dieu sera tout reussir en son
temps: venons à nos Neophytes. Le 16. d'Aoust de l'année passée 1634.
vn peu apres le depart des vaisseaux, ie baptisay à la mort vn ieune
garçon aagé d'enuiron 12. ou 14. ans, les [23] Saunages le nommoient
_Akhikouch_, nous luy auions destiné le nom de Dieudonné. Monsieur du
Plessis Bochard General de la flotte l'auoit amené des trois Riuieres
tout malade, & nous l'auoit donné pour luy sauuer si on pouuoit la vie
du corps, & luy donner celle de l'ame: il n'a vescu chez nous que le
temps necessaire pour estre sommairement instruit.

    [21] CHAPTER II.

    OF THE CONVERSION AND OF THE DEATH OF SOME SAVAGES.


    TWENTY-TWO savages have been baptized this year. If we were
    acquainted with the languages, I believe the faith would be widely
    extended. We dare not yet trust baptism to any except those whom
    we see in danger of death, or to children who are assured to us;
    for, not yet being able to fully instruct these Barbarians, they
    would soon show a contempt for our holy Mysteries, if they had only
    a slight knowledge of them. It is quite true that, if these people
    were as desirous of learning as are all civilized nations, some
    [22] of us have a good enough knowledge of their language to teach
    them. But as they make living, and not knowledge, their profession,
    their greatest anxiety is about eating and drinking, and not about
    learning. When you speak to them of our truths, they listen to you
    patiently; but instead of asking you about the matter, they at
    once turn their thoughts to ways of finding something upon which
    to live, showing their stomachs always empty and always famished.
    Yet if we could make speeches as they do, and if we were present
    in their assemblies, I believe we could accomplish much there. The
    goodness of God will ensure success in all things in his own time;
    let us turn to our Neophytes. On the 16th of August of last year,
    1634, shortly after the departure of our vessels, I baptized, when
    he was dying, a young boy about 12 or 14 years of age. The [23]
    Savages called him _Akhikouch_; we had chosen for him the name
    Dieudonné. Monsieur du Plessis Bochard, Commandant of the fleet,
    had brought him to us from the three Rivers, very sick; and had
    given him to us that we might, if possible, save the life of the
    body, at the same time giving him that of the soul. He lived with
    us only long enough to be hastily instructed.

Le 3. de Nouembre de la mesme année, le Pere Charles l'Allemant baptisa
vn ieune Sauuage aagé d'enuirõ vingt cinq ans, nommé de ceux de sa
nation _Matchonon_, surnommé des François Martin, il receut le nom
de Ioseph en son baptesme. Les iugemens de Dieu sont épouuantables,
ce pauure miserable a fait vne mort horrible. C'est celuy dont ie
parle au Chapitre deuxiesme de la Relation de l'an passé, lequel eust
volontiers [24] diuerty s'il eust peu le bon François Sasousmat de
receuoir la Foy, & qui disputant certain iour contre le Pere Brebeuf,
profera ce blaspheme, qui luy a fait perdre la vie du corps, &
peut-estre de l'ame. Tu nous conte, que c'est par la conduite de ton
Dieu, que nous trouuons dequoy manger, dis luy qu'il m'empesche tant
qu'il pourra de prendre des Castors, & des Elans, & tu verras que ie
ne laisseray pas d'en prẽdre malgré luy. Vn de nos François saisy d'vn
grand zele, entendant ceste impieté, fut tout prest de se ietter sur
luy, & l'auroit bien battu n'eust esté la presence du Pere. Ce pauure
impie n'a onques depuis ce blaspheme, tué ny Castor ny Elan. Il s'en
alla au dessus des trois Riuieres, où la maladie le terrassa. Le Pere
Brebeuf montant aux Hurons l'an passé le rencontra, & le voyant dans
[25] vn estat pitoyable luy demanda combien il auoit tué d'animaux
depuis son blaspheme; le pauure homme demeura tout confus: le Pere
en eut compassion, & luy dit qu'il m'écriroit ce rencontre, & qu'il
se promettoit bien qu'on le secoureroit s'il vouloit demander à Dieu
pardon, & receuoir sa creance; quelque temps apres que i'eu receu
la lettre du Pere, nous nous en allasmes le Pere Buteux & moy en la
nouuelle habitation des trois Riuieres, pour commencer la Residence
de la Conception: nous trouuasmes ce blasphemateur nud comme vn ver,
tout malade, couché sur la terre, n'ayant pour toutes richesses
qu'vne méchante écorce, vne cabane de Sauuages qui estoient là luy
refusant le couuert. Son frere l'auoit amené proche de l'habitation
de nos François, & l'auoit quitté là, [26] nous luy demandasmes s'il
ne recognoissoit pas la vengeance de Dieu, n'ayant peu rien prendre
depuis son impieté, Ie n'ay garde, fit-il, d'auoir peû rien prendre,
car i'ay tousiours esté malade. Mais ne vois tu pas que c'est Dieu
qui t'a chastié par ceste maladie? Peut-estre que tu dis vray, me
respond-il. Ie luy voulu dire que son frere n'auoit point de compassion
de luy, il l'excusa bien à propos. Que veux tu qu'il face, comment me
traisnera-il dans ce bois, où il va chercher sa vie? Mais encor si
ta nation auoit pitié de toy? Que ne dis-tu à ces Sauuages qu'ils te
reçoiuent en leur cabane, ou bien qu'ils te donnent vn peu d'écorce
pour en faire vne petite? Il n'osa iamais leur parler tant ils sont
honteux de s'importuner les vns les autres: mais il me dit tout bas
que ie leur demandasse: ie le fis tout sur l'heure en sa presence:
au [27] commencement ils ne me donnerent aucune response, en fin
vne femme me dit, qu'ils s'en alloient biẽ tost cabaner en vn autre
endroit, & qu'ils n'auoient point trop d'escorce pour eux. Bref ce
mal-heureux voyant que la barque qui nous auoit amené retournoit
à Kebec, me pria de luy faire porter. Car nous ne le pouuiõs pas
loger, nostre maison en ce premier commencement n'estoit que quelques
busches de bois iointes les vnes auprés les autres, enduites par les
ouuertures d'vn peu de terre, & couuertes d'herbes, nous auions en
tout douze pieds en carré pour la Chapelle, & pour nostre demeure,
attendant qu'vn bastiment de charpente qu'on dressoit fust acheué.
Voyant donc qu'il estoit impossible de le secourir, ie prie qu'on le
reçoiue dans la barque, ce qui fut fait; on l'apporte à Kebec, où les
[28] Sauuages le delaisserẽt. Le Pere l'Allemant le voyant abandonné
le fait venir en nostre maison, ce qu'il souhaitoit grandement; Tous
les iours vn de nos Freres le pansoit, & le Pere l'instruisoit pour
le rendre capable du baptesme. Or comme on le iugeoit en danger de
mort le Pere le baptisa, & l'a fait nourrir & panser tout l'hyuer.
Retournant sur le Printemps des trois Riuieres, ie fus bien aise de le
voir, esperant qu'il m'instruiroit en la cognoissance de sa langue, &
que ie luy enseignerois plus à loisir les veritez de nostre creance.
A peine estois-je arriué que son frere suruint, luy bien ioyeux de
voir me demande permission de s'en aller auec luy aux trois Riuieres,
ie l'en détournay le plus qu'il me fut possible, preuoyant bien sa
ruine s'il retournoit parmy les Sauuages: ie luy promets toute [29]
assistance s'il vouloit demeurer: Non, me fit-il, ie desire d'aller
voir la haut mes parens. Or comme ie cognois bien le genie de ces
Barbares, ie luy dis que les Sauuages le ietteroient bientost hors de
leurs cabanes, qu'ils ne luy donneroient gueres à manger, & en fin se
lassans de luy, qu'ils le tueroient. Il se mit à rire, me disant qu'ils
n'en viendroient pas là. Ie le menace que s'il s'en va, que nous ne
le receurons plus iamais; il n'y eut pas moyen de l'arrester. Estant
aux trois Riuieres, le Pere Buteux qui estoit là, luy voulut faire
recognoistre le mal qu'il luy pouuoit arriuer de nous auoir quitté;
il s'en mocqua; il le menaça des iugemens de Dieu, il repartit qu'il
endureroit aussi bien les feux dans l'enfer, qu'il auoit souffert le
froid pendant l'hyuer. Au commencement les Sauuages le tenoient [30]
dans leurs cabanes, mais venans à s'en lasser ils le placẽt dehors, le
voila abbrié du Ciel & d'vne escorce, on ne luy donne plus qu'vn peu
de poisson, & peu souuent: luy se doutãt quasi de ce que ie luy auois
predit; car il n'ignore pas les coustumes de sa nation, dit au Pere
Buteux qui s'en reuenoit faire vn tour à Kebec, Ton frere m'a dit que
si ie sortois de vostre maison, qu'il ne m'y receuroit iamais, i'y
voudrois bien estre maintenant, dis-luy, que s'il m'y veut receuoir,
qu'il en écriue à quelque François, & que ie m'y feray transporter à
la premiere occasion. Le Pere estãt arriué, & m'ayant donné cet aduis,
nous-nous transportasmes incontinent au fort de Kebec pour chercher
quelque occasion de le mander, desirans sauuer ce pauure miserable,
puis qu'il portoit le charactere de Chrestien: mais [31] ô iuste &
épouuantable vengeance du grand Dieu! nous trouuasmes en chemin vn
Montagnais, qui nous dit qu'incontinent apres le depart du Pere Buteux,
vn Sauuage auoit donné vn coup de hache à ce deplorable homme pẽdant la
nuict, qui luy auoit fait voler la ceruelle de la teste. Voila comme il
est passé en l'autre monde.

    On the 3rd of November of the same year, Father Charles l'Allemant
    baptized a young Savage about twenty-five years old, called by the
    people of his nation _Matchonon_, surnamed by the French, Martin;
    at baptism he received the name of Joseph. The judgments of God
    are terrible; this poor wretch met with a horrible death. It was
    of him I spoke in the second Chapter of the Relation of last year.
    He would gladly, [24] if he had been able, have diverted the good
    François Sasousmat from receiving the Faith; and, while one day
    disputing with Father Brebeuf, he uttered this blasphemy, which
    caused him to lose the life of the body and perhaps that of the
    soul: "Thou tellest us that it is through the guidance of thy
    God that we find something to eat; tell him that he may oppose,
    with all his power, my taking Beavers and Elks; and you will see
    that I shall not fail to take them, in spite of him." One of our
    Frenchmen, seized with great zeal, hearing this impiety, was ready
    to leap upon him, and would have beaten him soundly, had it not
    been for the presence of the Father. This poor, impious wretch
    has not, since this blasphemy, killed either Beaver or Elk. He
    went up beyond the three Rivers, where illness prostrated him.
    Father Brebeuf, when he was going up to the Hurons last year,
    encountered him, and seeing him in [25] a pitiful state, asked him
    how much game he had killed since his blasphemy; the poor man was
    covered with confusion. The Father took pity on him, and said that
    he would write to me about this meeting; and that he trusted that,
    if he wished to ask God's forgiveness, and embrace his faith, he
    would be succored. Some time after I had received the Father's
    letter, we, Father Buteux and I, went to the new settlement of
    the three Rivers, to begin the Residence of the Conception. We
    found this blasphemer as naked as a worm, very sick, lying upon
    the ground, his only possession being a wretched piece of bark,--a
    cabin of Savages who were encamped there having refused him
    shelter. His brother had brought him to a place near the French
    settlement, and had left him there. [26] We asked him if he did
    not see that it was the vengeance of God, that he had not captured
    anything since his impious act. "I have not been able," said he,
    "to capture anything, for I have been sick all the time." "But
    dost thou not see that it is God who has punished thee by this
    sickness?" "Perhaps thou sayest the truth," he answered me. I tried
    to tell him that his brother had no pity on him, and he excused him
    very readily,--"What wouldst thou have him do; how will he drag me
    about in the forest where he is going to seek his living?" "But
    thy people, have they no pity on thee? Why dost thou not ask these
    Savages to take thee into their cabin, or else to give thee a small
    piece of bark, to make a little one for thyself?" He did not even
    dare ask them, they are so ashamed to beg from each other; but he
    told me in a low voice to ask them to do it; I did so immediately
    in his presence. At [27] first, they gave me no answer; but
    finally a woman said that they were going elsewhere to camp, and
    they had none too much bark for themselves. In short, this unhappy
    man, seeing that the bark which brought us was returning to Kebec,
    begged me to have him carried there, for we could find no place
    for him; our house in this early stage was only some logs of wood,
    fitted to each other, plastered over the cracks with a little clay,
    and covered with grass; we had in all twelve feet square for the
    Chapel and for our living room, awaiting the completion of a frame
    building which was being constructed. So, realizing that it was
    impossible for us to help him, I begged them to take him in the
    bark, which they did, and carried him to Kebec, where the [28]
    Savages deserted him. Father l'Allemant, seeing him abandoned,
    had him come to our house, the very thing he desired; one of our
    Brothers dressed his sores every day and the Father instructed him,
    in order to prepare him for baptism. Now, as they supposed that
    he was in danger of death, the Father baptized him, and they fed
    and nursed him all winter. When I returned in the Spring from the
    three Rivers, I was very glad to see him, hoping he would instruct
    me in the knowledge of his language, and that I could teach him
    more at leisure the truths of our belief. I had hardly arrived
    when his brother came along, and he [the sick man], overjoyed to
    see him, asked me to let him go with him to the three Rivers; I
    did all I could to dissuade him, foreseeing his certain ruin if he
    returned among the Savages, and promised all [29] assistance if
    he would stay. "No," said he, "I want to go up the river to see
    my relatives." Now, as I know the character of these Barbarians
    very well, I told him that the Savages would soon throw him out
    of their cabins; that they would give him nothing to eat, and, at
    last becoming tired of him, they would kill him. He began to laugh,
    saying to me that they would not go so far as that. I threatened
    that, if he went away, we would not take him back again; but there
    was no way of stopping him. When he reached the three Rivers,
    Father Buteux, who was there, tried to make him see the evil that
    might result from his having left us, but he merely laughed at him;
    the Father threatened him with the judgments of God; he answered
    that he could as well endure the fires in hell as he had borne the
    cold during the winter. At first the Savages kept him [30] in their
    cabins; but, getting tired of him, they put him out, and there he
    lay, under the shelter of the Sky and a piece of bark; they gave
    him only a little fish, and that not often. So he almost began to
    fear what I had predicted for him, as he was not ignorant of the
    customs of his nation. He said to Father Buteux, who was returning
    to Kebec to make a visit, "Thy brother told me that, if I left your
    house, he would never take me back again. I would like very much
    to be there now; tell him that if he will receive me, he may write
    to some Frenchman, and I will have myself taken there at the first
    opportunity." When the Father arrived and reported this to me, we
    immediately betook ourselves to the fort at Kebec, to seek some
    opportunity to send for him, wishing to save this poor wretch since
    he bore the mark of a Christian; but [31] oh, just and terrible
    vengeance of the great God! On our way we met a Montagnais, who
    told us that, immediately after the departure of Father Buteux, a
    Savage had given this wretched man a blow from an axe, during the
    night, which dashed his brains out of his head. So thus he passed
    into the other world.

Le huictiéme du mesme mois de Nouembre Monsieur Giffart baptisa vn
petit enfant sauuage aagé d'enuiron six mois, le croyant si prés de
la mort qu'on n'auroit peu nous appeller, il surueseut encor quelque
temps, sa femme allaictoit ce pauure petit, & en auoit vn soin comme
s'il eust esté son propre enfant. Certaine nuict s'éueillant toute
pleine d'étonnement & de ioye, elle dit à son mary, qu'elle croyoit que
ce petit Ange estoit passé au [32] Ciel: Non, repart-il, ie le viens
tout maintenant de veoir, il vit encore. Ie vous supplie, replique-elle
d'y regarder encore vne fois, ie ne puis croire qu'il ne soit mort,
d'autant que ie viens de voir tout maintenant dans mon sommeil vne
grande troupe d'Anges qui le venoient querir. Ils le visitent donc, &
le trouuent trépassé, bien ioyeux d'auoir aydé à mettre au Ciel vne ame
qui benira Dieu dans toute l'estendue de l'eternité. Le sixiéme iour de
Ianuier de cette année mil six cens trente cinq, le Pere Lallemant laua
des eaux du sainct Baptesme vne petite fille aagée d'enuiron neuf à dix
ans, qu'vne famille Françoise éleue en sa maison: cette enfant ayant
fait prier le Pere de luy donner l'entrée en l'Eglise, l'examina sur sa
croyance, & la voyant suffisamment instruite, cognoissant d'ailleurs
qu'elle [33] n'auoit aucuns parens qui la peussent retirer des mains
de nos François, il en fit vn present au petit Iesus le iour des Roys:
elle a touiours continué depuis à bien faire, fuyant tellement les
Sauuages, qu'on ne luy sçauroit faire parler.

    On the eighth of the same month, November, Monsieur Gissart[8]
    baptized a little savage child, aged about six months, believing
    him so near death that we could not be summoned; yet he lived on
    for some time. His wife nursed this poor little child, and cared
    for it as if it had been her own. One night, awakening full of
    astonishment and joy, she said to her husband that she believed
    this little Angel had gone to [32] Heaven; "No," he replied, "I
    have just now been to see it, and it still lives." "I beg you,"
    she answered, "to go and look again; I cannot believe that it is
    not dead, as I have just seen in my sleep a great troop of Angels
    coming to take it." So they went to see it again, and found that
    it had passed away. They were very glad that they had helped send
    to Heaven a soul that will bless God throughout all eternity. On
    the sixth day of January of this year, one thousand six hundred and
    thirty-five, Father Lallemant applied the waters of holy Baptism to
    a little girl about nine or ten years of age, who is being reared
    in the house of a French family. This child had some one ask the
    Father to admit her into the Church; he examined her in regard
    to her belief, and, seeing her sufficiently instructed, knowing
    besides that she [33] had no relatives who could take her from the
    hands of our French people, he made a present of her to the little
    Jesus on Epiphany; she has continued to do well since then, fleeing
    from the Savages, so that she cannot be induced to speak to them.

Le deuxiesme iour de Feurier la petite Sauuage qu'on porta en France
l'an passé, fut baptisée au Monastere des filles de la Misericorde,
c'est à dire, en l'Hospital de Dieppe: puis qu'elle estoit née en la
Nouuelle France, ie luy donneray place entre ceux de sa patrie, qui
ont esté faits enfans de Dieu ceste année. On l'auoit mise en pension
chez ces bonnes filles. Voicy ce que m'en écrit leur Mere Superieure,
aussi zelée & toute sa maison, pour le salut des pauures Sauuages,
que pas vne autre. Nostre petite Canadienne deceda le iour de la
Purification [34] de nostre Dame, de la petite verole qu'on ne pût
faire sortir, quoy qu'on y apportast tous les remedes possibles: elle
receut le baptesme demie heure auant sa mort, c'est quasi vn miracle
que nous ne fusmes point surprises, à raison que comme elle estoit
robuste pour son aage, elle ne paroissoit point si voisine de la mort
comme elle estoit ses funerailles furent honorées de belles ceremonies,
& de chants d'allegresse au lieu de l'Office des morts, puis que son
decés auoit suiuy de si prés son baptesme. Ceste enfant se faisoit
aimer d'vn chacun, elle estoit fort officieuse, tres-obeyssante, aussi
exacte à ne point entrer aux lieux defendus qu'vne Religieuse; & quand
on luy vouloit faire entrer, soit par mégarde, ou pour faire preuue
de son obeyssance, elle respondoit fort gentilement, Ie n'ay point
permission, [35] la Mere Superieure ne le veut pas. Elle sçauoit desia
plusieurs leçons de son Catechisme, & entendoit beaucoup de la lãgue
Françoise; c'est pourquoy nous luy auions fait conceuoir les trois
Articles principaux de nostre creance. Elle sçauoit fort bien dire que
le Manitou ne valoit rien, qu'elle ne vouloit plus retourner en Canada;
mais qu'elle vouloit estre Chrestienne & baptisée, sçachant bien qu'on
ne pouuoit aller au Ciel sans cela. Nous prenions toutes grand plaisir
en ces discours: pour trancher court, suffit de dire qu'elle taschoit
d'imiter tout le bien qu'elle voyoit faire selon sa capacité. Ce sont
les propres termes de la Reuerende Mere Elizabeth de sainct François
Superieure de cét Hospital, l'vn des mieux reglez de l'Europe; il ne
faut qu'entrer dans la sale des pauures, contempler [36] la modestie
des filles qui les seruent, considerer leur charité dans les plus
fascheuses maladies, ietter les yeux sur la netteté de ceste maison,
pour en sortir tout affectionné, & donner mille loüanges à nostre
Seigneur. Si vn Monastere semblable à celuy-là, estoit en la Nouuelle
France, leur charité feroit plus pour la conuersion des Sauuages, que
toutes nos courses & nos paroles.

    On the second day of February, the little Savage who was taken to
    France last year was baptized in the Convent of the sisters of
    Mercy, that is, in the Hospital of Dieppe; as she was born in New
    France, I will place her among those of her country who have been
    made children of God this year. She was placed as a boarder with
    these good sisters. Here is what the Mother Superior, who with her
    whole house cannot be excelled in zeal for the salvation of the
    poor Savages, has written me about her: "Our little Canadian girl
    died on the day of the Purification [34] of our Lady, of smallpox,
    which could not be cured, although all possible remedies were used;
    she was baptized half an hour before her death, and it was almost
    a miracle that we were not surprised, for she was strong for her
    age, and did not seem to be so near death as she was. Her funeral
    was honored with beautiful ceremonies, and with songs of gladness
    instead of the Service for the dead, as her death followed so
    closely upon her baptism. This child won the love of all; she was
    very obliging, very obedient, and as careful as a Nun not to enter
    forbidden places; and when it was desired to make her enter, either
    through inadvertence or to test her obedience, she answered very
    sweetly, 'I have not permission; [35] the Mother Superior does not
    wish it.' She already knew several of the lessons in her Catechism,
    and understood a great deal of the French language; it was through
    this that we had made her comprehend the three principal Articles
    of our belief. She could say very well that the Manitou was good
    for nothing; that she no longer wished to return to Canada, but
    that she desired to be a Christian and to be baptized, knowing well
    that no one could go to Heaven without that. We all enjoyed these
    talks: in a word, suffice it to say, that she tried to imitate, in
    so far as she was able, all the good that she saw done." These are
    the very words of the Reverend Mother Elizabeth of saint François,
    Superior of this Hospital, one of the best regulated in Europe; it
    is only necessary to enter the hall of the poor patients, to see
    [36] the modesty of the sisters who serve them, to consider their
    kindness in the most annoying cases of sickness, to cast the eyes
    over the cleanliness of this house, to go hence full of affection
    and to offer a thousand praises to our Lord. If a Monastery like
    that were in New France, their charity would do more for the
    conversion of the Savages than all our journeys and our sermons.

Le dix-huictiesme du mesme mois de Feurier, le Pere Buteux & moy
receumes au nombre ches Chrestiens, vne bonne femme Sauuage, qui fut
solemnellement baptisée en nostre Chapelle de la Conception aux trois
Riuieres. Elle s'appelloit _Ouetata Samakheou_, & nous luy donnasmes
le nom d'Anne. Les Sauuages s'en allans l'auoient delaissée auprés
de nostre Habitation toute malade, & couchée sur la terre dure, [37]
d'autres estans suruenus, nous la fismes entrer dans leur Cabane;
ceux-cy décampans apres quelque seiour, nous la logeasmes encore dans
vne autre qui resta seule: mais ceste Cabane s'en voulant aller apres
les autres, nous priasmes les Sauuages de laisser quelques rouleaux
de leur escorce pour faire vn méchant todis à ceste pauure creature;
ils font la sourde oreille. Or comme nous ne pouuuions point faire
entrer ceste femme dans le fort, où il n'y auoit que des hommes, & que
d'ailleurs nous ne la voulions pas voir mourir deuant nos yeux par
la rigueur du froid, n'ayans pas dequoy luy faire vne maison, nous
priasmes nos François d'intimider ces Barbares, si cruels enuers leur
nation; les voyla aussi-tost le pistolet au poing, qui se saisissent
par force de quelques escorces; leur disant que ceste [38] femme
mourroit ou gueriroit bien-tost, & qu'ils reprendroient ce qu'ils luy
auroient presté; cela les fascha fort, mais neantmoins comme ceste
violence estoit raisonnable, l'vn d'eux pour expier leur cruauté,
retourna du bois où ils s'estoient allez cabanner, & luy dressa luy
mesme vne petite cabanne, où tous les iours nous luy portions à manger,
& en suitte nous l'instruisions. Cõiecturez, s'il vous plaist, la
grande necessité qu'il y a icy d'vn Hospital, & quel fruit il pourroit
produire. Trois choses me consolerẽt fort, en luy déduisant les
Articles de nostre creance. La 1. fut que luy voulant faire exercer
quelque acte de douleur de ses pechez pour la disposer au baptesme; ie
luy rapportay le nom de plusieurs offenses, la menaçant du feu d'enfer,
si ayant commis ces crimes, elle n'estoit lauée des eaux Sacramentales;
[39] ceste pauure malade épouuantée, commence à nommer tout haut ses
offenses, disant, Ie n'ay point commis ces pechez que tu dis: mais bien
ceux-là, s'accusant de plusieurs choses bien vergongneuses. Ie luy
dis qu'il suffisoit d'en demander pardon en son cœur sans les nommer,
la Confession n'estant point necessaire qu'apres le Baptesme; elle ne
laissa pas de poursuiure, & d'en crier mercy à celuy qui a tout fait.
En second lieu, luy parlant vn iour de la mort apres son baptesme,
elle se mit à pleurer, se faschant contre moy de ce que ie luy parlois
d'vne chose si horrible; cela m'estonna vn petit, i'estois quasi fasché
de l'auoir baptisée, nous la recommandasmes à nostre Seigneur, qui
luy toucha le cœur: car l'estant retourné voir, elle me fit plusieurs
interrogations: Mon ame, disoit-elle, [40] aura-elle de l'esprit quand
elle sera sortie de mon corps? verra-elle? parlera-elle? ie l'asseuray
qu'en effet elle ne perdroit rien de ces facultez, qu'au contraire
elle les auroit d'vne façon bien plus parfaite, & que si elle croyoit
en Iesus-Christ sans feintise, qu'elle cognoistroit des merueilles, &
iouyroit de tres-grands contentemens. Tu m'as dit que ie resusciteray
quelque iour, seray-ie semblable, me dit-elle, à moy-mesme, à celle que
ie suis maintenant, ou bien à vne autre? C'est toy-mesme, c'est ton
propre corps qui reprendra vie, & qui sera beau comme le iour, si tu
as eu la Foy; sinon il sera horrible, & tout difforme, & destiné aux
flammes eternelles. Que mangera mon ame apres ma mort? Ton ame n'est
point corporelle, elle n'a point besoin des viandes d'icy bas, elle se
repaistra [41] de plaisirs qu'on ne peut conceuoir. Que verray-ie si
ie vay au Ciel? Tu verras ce qui se fait ça bas, la bestise de ceux de
ta nation qui ne veulent pas receuoir la Foy, la beauté & la grandeur
de celuy qui a tout fait, tu le prieras pour moy. Que luy diray-ie,
me repart-elle? Dis luy qu'il me face misericorde, qu'il aye pitié de
moy, & qu'il m'appelle bien-tost pour aller auec luy au Ciel. C'est
donc, fit-elle, vne chose bien bonne d'estre, là haut, puis que tu
voudrois bien mourir pour y aller. Mais peut-estre que ie m'oublieray
de ce que tu me dis. Non, tu ne t'en oublieras point, si tu crois en
verité & sans mensonge. Que fera-on de mon corps quand ie seray morte?
On le mettra dans vn beau cercueil, & tous les François le porteront
auec honneur au lieu où nous enterrons nos morts. Dis moy encore [42]
vn coup, mon ame aura elle de l'esprit quand elle sera sortie de son
corps? Ouy elle en aura, elle verra, elle entendra, elle conceura
fort bien, & parlera d'vne façon plus noble que ne font tes leures.
Escoutant mes réponses, son visage s'alloit espanoüissant. En fin elle
me dit d'vn accent tout gay, _Nitapoueten, nitapoueten_, ie croy, ie
croy, & pour preuue de ma creãce, tu ne me verras iamais craindre
la mort; iusques icy ie tremblois quand tu m'en venois parler; mais
doresnauant ie la souhaitteray pour aller veoir celuy qui a tout fait;
ie luy disois tousiours en mes prieres, gueris moy, tu me peux guerir;
ie luy diray cy-apres, ie ne me soucie plus de la vie, ie suis contente
de mourir pour te veoir. Et en effect le reste du temps qu'elle a vescu
apres ces demandes, ie n'ay iamais remarqué en elle aucun petit indice
[43] de la crainte de la mort. La troisiesme chose qui nous resioüit
fort, fut qu'vn Sauuage nommé _Sakapouan_ la voulut diuertir de nostre
creance, disant que nous estions des conteurs, & qu'il ne falloit pas
nous croire, puis que nous ne sçaurions monstrer ny faire veoir à
personne ce que nous enseignons: ceste pauure Neophyte fortifiée de
l'esprit de Dieu tint bon, & repartit fort bien, qu'elle croyoit que
nous disions la verité, & ainsi elle est morte fort bonne Chrestienne.
Pour le Sauuage qui vouloit mettre obstacle à sa creance, il ne la fit
pas longue, Dieu en tira vne vengeance bien rigoureuse: ce miserable se
trouuoit desia mal, bien-tost apres son impieté il tomba en phrenesie
& mourut insensé. Nous l'auions assez bien instruit, mais les respects
humains qui regnent puissamment [44] parmy ces peuples, l'ont empesché
de professer la Foy. Il nous a dit plusieurs fois, Ie croy bien que
tout ce que vous dites est veritable, mais si ie vous obeï, quãd ie me
trouueray aux festins de mes Compatriotes, tout le monde se mocquera
de moy, Fais sorte, me disoit-il qu'_Outaouau_ (c'est l'vn des grands
discoureurs d'entre les Sauuages) reçoiue la Foy quand il viendra
icy, & pour lors ie ne feray plus aucune difficulté de vous croire.
_Outaouau_ l'a trouué mort & enterré à son retour.

    On the eighteenth of the same month of February, Father Buteux and
    I received among the number of Christians, a good Savage woman, who
    was solemnly baptized in our Chapel of the Conception at the three
    Rivers. She was called _Ouetata Samakheou_, and we gave her the
    name of Anne. When the Savages went away, they left her near our
    Settlement, very sick and lying upon the hard ground; [37] others
    arriving, we had her placed in their Cabin; and when these moved
    away, after a short sojourn, we had her placed in another, the
    only one remaining; as the people of this Cabin wished to follow
    the others, we begged them to leave a few rolls of their bark to
    make a miserable hut for this poor creature; but they turned a deaf
    ear. Now as we could not have this woman taken into the fort, where
    there were only men, and as on the other hand we did not wish to
    see her die before our eyes a victim to the cold, having nothing
    with which to make her a house, we begged our French people to
    intimidate these Barbarians, who were so cruel towards their own
    people. So some of them came at once, pistol in hand, and took
    some of the bark by force, telling them that this [38] woman would
    soon either die or recover, and they would get back what they had
    loaned. They were very angry; but nevertheless, as this violence
    was reasonable, one of them, to atone for their cruelty, returned
    from the woods where he had gone to camp, and himself put up a
    little cabin for her, where every day we carried her food and then
    instructed her. Imagine, if you please, how great is the necessity
    for a Hospital here, and how much fruit it could produce. Three
    things consoled me greatly in expounding to her the Articles of our
    belief; the 1st was, that, wishing to make her perform some act
    of contrition for her sins, in order to prepare her for baptism,
    I called up the names of several offenses, threatening her with
    the fires of hell if, having committed these crimes, she were not
    washed in the waters of the Sacrament; [39] this poor, frightened,
    sick woman began to name her offenses aloud, saying, "I have not
    committed those sins that thou sayest, but I have these," accusing
    herself of several very shameful ones. I told her it would be
    enough for her to ask pardon in her heart without naming them,
    Confession not being necessary except after Baptism; but she did
    not cease, begging for mercy from him who has made all. In the
    second place, speaking with her about death, one day after her
    baptism, she began to cry, being angry at me for speaking to her
    of such a horrible thing; I was somewhat astonished at this, and
    almost sorry that I had baptized her. We recommended her to our
    Lord, who touched her heart; for, having returned to see her, she
    asked me a number of questions: "Will my soul have any [40] sense
    when it leaves my body?" said she. "Will it see? Will it speak?"
    I assured her that indeed it would lose none of these faculties,
    but on the contrary would have them in a much more perfect way;
    and that, if she believed in Jesus Christ without dissembling, she
    would know wonders and would enjoy great consolation. "Thou hast
    told me that I shall come to life again some day; shall I be like
    myself," she said to me, "like what I am now, or like some one
    else?" "It is thyself, it is thy own body which will live again,
    and which will be as beautiful as the day, if thou hast had Faith;
    if not, it will be horrible, all deformed and destined to the
    eternal flames." "What will my soul eat after death?" "Thy soul has
    no body, it has no need of the food here below; it will feast upon
    [41] joys beyond conception." "What shall I see if I go to Heaven?"
    "Thou wilt see what is going on down here,--the foolishness of such
    of thy people as will not receive the Faith, the beauty and the
    grandeur of him who has made all; and thou wilt pray to him for
    me." "What shall I say to him?" she asked. "Tell him to be merciful
    to me, to have pity on me; and to call me soon, to be with him in
    Heaven." "Then," said she, "it is a good thing to be up there,
    since thou wishest to die to go there. But perhaps I shall forget
    what thou tellest me." "No, thou wilt not forget it, if thou dost
    really and truthfully believe." "What will they do with my body
    when I am dead?" "It will be placed in a beautiful coffin, and all
    the French will bear it with honor to the place where we bury our
    dead." "Tell me once [42] more, will my soul have sense when it
    has left my body?" "Yes, it will; it will see, hear, understand
    readily, and will speak in a more noble way than thy lips." While
    listening to my answers, her face began to brighten; and at last
    she exclaimed, joyfully, _Nitapoueten, nitapoueten_, "I believe, I
    believe; and, as a proof of my belief, thou wilt never see me fear
    death; until now I was trembling when thou wert speaking of it to
    me, but from now on I shall wish for it, so that I may go and see
    him who has made all; I was saying always in my prayers 'Make me
    well, thou canst cure me;' but hereafter I shall say to him, 'I do
    not care to live any longer, I am content to die to see thee.'"
    And, in fact, the rest of the time she lived after these questions,
    I never noticed in her the least indication [43] that she was
    afraid to die. The third thing that gladdened us was, that when a
    Savage called _Sakapouan_, wishing to divert her from our belief,
    said that we were story-tellers and she must not believe us, since
    we could not show nor make any one see what we were teaching, this
    poor Neophyte, fortified by the spirit of God, held firm, and
    answered steadfastly that she believed we told the truth. Thus she
    died a very good Christian. As to the Savage who tried to shake
    her faith, he did not do so long, for God drew down upon him a
    most severe revenge; this wretch, who already felt ill, was seized
    with frenzy, soon after his act of impiety, and died a maniac. We
    had taught him well enough; but the fear of what others would say,
    which is a potent factor [44] among these people, prevented him
    from professing the Faith. He said to us several times, "I indeed
    believe that all you say is true; but if I obey you, when I go to
    the feasts of my People, they will all make sport of me." "Arrange
    it," said he to me, "so that _Outaouau_" (this is one of the great
    orators among the Savages) "may receive the Faith when he comes
    here; and after that I will have no more difficulty in believing
    you." _Outaouau_ found him dead and buried at his return.

Le septiesme d'Auril le petit Sauuage que nous auions enuoyé en
France, & que le Pere Lallemant nous ramena, fut fait Chrestien, &
baptisé solemnellement par le mesme Pere. Monsieur de Champlain nostre
Gouuerneur luy donna nom Bonauenture. Tous les matins venant donner
le bon iour au Pere, [45] qui prenoit le soin de l'instruire, il ne
manquoit pas de luy demander le baptesme; il fait maintenant fort
bien Dieu mercy, se rendant fort docile. I'espere qu'il nous seruira
grandement pour nostre Seminaire.

    On the seventh of April, the little Savage whom we had sent to
    France, and whom Father Lallemant brought back to us, was made a
    Christian and solemnly baptized by the same Father. Monsieur de
    Champlain, our Governor, gave him the name Bonaventure. Every day,
    when he came to say good day to the Father, [45] who took care to
    instruct him, he never failed to ask him for baptism; he is doing
    very well now, thank God, and is becoming quite docile. I am hoping
    he will be of great service to us in our Seminary.

Le treiziesme de May ie baptisay le fils de ceste bonne femme, que
i'auois fait Chrestienne & nommé Marie l'an passé, laquelle ie
laissay malade proche de nostre Maison, m'en allant hyuerner aux
trois Riuieres. Sa maladie se rengregeant le Pere Lallemant luy donna
l'Extreme-Onction, & venant à mourir l'enterra solemnellement dans
nostre Cimetiere. Elle laissa pour tout heritage sa maladie à son petit
enfant, qu'vne fieure lente a faict passer au Ciel apres le baptesme;
il portoit en sa langue le nom d'_Aouetitin_, qui luy fut changé au nom
de Pierre.

    On the thirteenth of May, I baptized the son of the good woman whom
    I made a Christian and named Marie last year, and whom I had left
    sick near our House when I went to pass the winter at the three
    Rivers. As she was growing worse, Father Lallemant gave her Extreme
    Unction; and, when she died, buried her solemnly in our Cemetery.
    She left, as her only heritage, her disease to her little child,
    whom a slow fever sent to Heaven after his baptism; in his language
    he bore the name of _Aouetitin_, which was changed to that of
    Pierre.

[46] Le dix-neufiesme d'Aoust le Pere Lallemant a baptisé vne fille
aagée d'enuiron quatre ans; elle est née au païs des Bissiriniens; on
la mene en France pour estre esleuée & instruite en la Foy Chrestienne.

    [46] On the nineteenth of August, Father Lallemant baptized a
    girl about four years old, who was born in the country of the
    Bissiriniens.[21] She is being taken to France to be reared and
    educated in the Christian Faith.

Le reste des personnes faites Chrestiennes depuis que nous n'auons
escrit en France, ont esté baptisées aux païs des Hurons, comme V.R.
pourra voir par la Relation que nos Peres m'ont enuoyée, que ie luy
addresse. Ils ont entre autres conferé ce Sacrement à vn bon homme,
dont le Pere de Nouë qui l'a cogneu en ces païs si esloignez, me parle
en tres-bons termes. Nous auons, dit-il, tousiours creu que cet homme
mourroit Chrestien, & que Dieu luy feroit misericorde; car il estoit
fort porté au bien, il faisoit volontiers l'aumosne secourant ses
Compatriotes, voire mesme nous [47] autres qui estions estrangers.
Retournant de la pesche il nous apportoit tousiours quelque poisson,
non à la façon des autres Sauuages, qui ne donnent que pour auoir le
reciproque, mais gratuitement; il nous venoit visiter vne fois ou deux
la semaine, & apres s'estre entretenu quelque tẽps auec nous, voyant
que nous estions en bonne santé, il s'en alloit tout content. Or comme
il gardoit passablement la Loy que la nature a graué dans le cœur de
tous les hommes, Dieu luy a donné auant son trespas, la cognoissance de
la Loy de son fils.

    The rest of the persons who have been made Christians since we
    have written to France, were baptized in the Huron country, as
    Your Reverence can see by the Relation our Fathers have sent me,
    which I forward to you. Among others, they have conferred this
    Sacrament upon an honest fellow whom Father de Nouë, who knew him
    in that so distant country, recommended to me highly. "We have,"
    said he, "always believed that this man would die a Christian,
    and that God would be merciful to him; for he had a very good
    disposition,--giving alms freely to aid his Countrymen, and even
    to us, [47] who were strangers. When he returned from fishing he
    always brought us some fish, not in the way the other Savages
    did, who give only that they may get something in return, but
    gratuitously; he came to see us once or twice every week, and,
    after having talked for some time with us, seeing that we were in
    good health, he would go away well satisfied." Now as he observed
    fairly well the Law which nature has graven upon the hearts of all
    men, God gave him before his death the knowledge of the Law of his
    son.

Ie rapporteray en ce lieu le chastiment manifeste que Dieu a tiré du
miserable Sorcier, & de son frere, dont i'ay parlé bien amplement dans
la Relation de l'an passé. Ce méchant homme pour me déplaire [48]
s'attaquoit par fois à Dieu comme i'ay dit. Il disoit certain iour aux
Sauuages en ma presence, Ie me suis auiourd'huy bien mocqué de celuy
que la robbe noire nous dit qui a tout fait. Ie ne pûs supporter ce
blaspheme, ie luy dis tout haut, que s'il estoit en France on le feroit
mourir. Au reste qu'il se mocquast de moy tant qu'il voudroit, que ie
le souffrirois: mais qu'il me tueroit & massacreroit plustost, que
d'endurer qu'il se rist de mon Dieu où ie ferois present; qu'il ne
porteroit pas loing ceste impudence, Dieu estant assez puissant pour le
brusler, & le ietter dans les enfers, s'il continuoit ses blasphemes.
Il ne tint iamais plus ces discours deuãt moy; mais en mon absence, il
ne relaschoit rien de ses boufonneries & de ses impietez. Dieu n'a pas
manqué de l'attraper; car l'année n'estoit pas [49] encore expirée,
que le feu s'estant mis en sa cabane, ie ne sçay par quel accident,
il a esté tout grillé, rosty, & miserablement bruslé, à ce que m'ont
rapporté les Sauuages, non sans estonnement.

    I will relate in this place the manifest chastisement which God has
    drawn down upon the wretched Sorcerer and his brother, of whom I
    spoke very fully in the Relation of last year. This wicked man, in
    order to displease me, [48] occasionally made attacks upon God, as
    I have said. One day he said to the Savages in my presence, "I have
    to-day made a great deal of sport of the one whom the black robe
    tells us has made all things." I could not stand this blasphemy,
    and told him aloud that, if he were in France, they would put him
    to death; furthermore, that he might sneer at me as much as he
    pleased and I would endure it, but that he might better kill and
    murder me than to expect me to suffer him to mock my God when I
    was present; that he would not continue much longer with this
    impertinence, for God was powerful enough to burn and cast him into
    hell, if he kept on with his blasphemies. He never again spoke
    in this way before me, but in my absence he did not in the least
    refrain from his scoffing and impious speeches. God did not fail to
    strike him; for the year had not [49] yet expired, when his cabin
    took fire, I know not how, and he was dreadfully scorched, roasted
    and burned, as it was related to me by the Savages, not without
    wonder.

Ils m'ont dit encor que Mestigoü lequel i'auois pris pour mon hoste
a esté noyé; i'aurois bien plus souhaitté que Dieu leur eust touché
le cœur; i'ay esté marry particulierement de mon hoste; car il auoit
de bonnes inclinations; mais s'estant mocqué en quelque compagnie de
Sauuages des prieres que ie leur auois fait faire en nostre extremité,
il a esté enueloppé dans la mesme vengeance, tombant dans vne maladie
qui luy fit perdre l'esprit, si bien qu'il couroit çà & là tout nud
comme vn fol; s'estant trouué de basse mer sur le bord du grand fleuue,
la marée montante l'a etouffé [50] dans ses eaux.

    They told me also, that Mestigoü, whom I had taken for my host,
    was drowned. I would much rather God had touched their hearts;
    I have been particularly grieved about my host, for he had good
    inclinations; but having sneered, in company with some of the
    Savages, at the prayers I had made them say in the time of our
    great need, he was involved in the same vengeance. Falling ill of
    a disease which made him lose his reason, so that he ran hither
    and thither naked, like a madman, he found himself upon the shore
    of the great river, at low tide; and, when the tide arose, he was
    smothered [50] in the waters.

Quasi tous ceux qui estoient dans la cabanne où le Sorcier m'a assez
mal traité, font morts qui d'vn costé, qui de l'autre, & tous d'vne
mort deplorable. Il n'y a que trois iours qu'on m'a amené le fils du
Sorcier pour le mettre dans vn Seminaire que nous voulons commencer;
i'auois grand desir de le prendre, & de luy faire autant de bien, que
son pere m'a fait de mal; mais comme il a les escroüelles d'vne façon
fort horrible auprés de l'oreille, la crainte que nous auons en qu'il
ne donnast ce mal aux petits garçons, que nous tenons en nostre Maison,
nous l'a fait éconduire. Monsieur Gand, homme tout a fait charitable,
fait penser & pense luy-mesme cét enfant; s'il guerit nous le mettrons
en nostre Seminaire.

    Almost all of those who were in the cabin where the Sorcerer
    treated me so badly, have died, some here, some there, and all
    by a lamentable death. Only three days ago they brought me the
    Sorcerer's son, to have him put in a Seminary we intend to
    establish; I was very anxious to take him, and to do him as much
    good as his father had done me evil; but, as he has a most horrible
    scrofulous affection near the ear, we were afraid he would give the
    disease to the little boys we have in our House, and so we refused
    him. Monsieur Gand,[22] a very charitable man, has this child's
    sores dressed and dresses them himself; if he recovers, we will
    place him in our Seminary.

Quant à l'Apostat, il nous est venu [51] voir, faisãt mine de se
vouloir recõcilier à l'Eglise; nous luy auons demandé quelques preuues
de sa bonne volõté; sçauoir est qu'il nous vint voir non dans la
famine des Sauuages, qui luy fait rechercher les François, mais dans
leur abondance: que s'il retourne en ce temps-là, nous le receurons &
retiendrons quelques mois auant que de luy donner l'entrée de l'Eglise.

    As to the Apostate, he came [51] to see us, pretending that he
    wished to be reconciled to the Church; we demanded some proof of
    his good will; namely, that he should come to see us, not when
    the Savages were having a famine, which forced him to seek the
    French, but in the time of their abundance; if he returns then, we
    will receive him, and keep him several months before giving him
    permission to enter the Church.




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL VII


XXIII

See Volume VI. for particulars of this document.


XXIV

The original of Le Jeune's letter to Cardinal Richelieu, dated at
Quebec, August 1, 1635, is in the Archives of Foreign Affairs, at
Paris. We follow a transcript of the document, in the library of the
Dominion Parliament, Ottawa. So far as we are aware, this is its first
publication.


XXV

As will be seen from the Preface to the present volume, this document,
which for convenience is designated by bibliographers as Le Jeune's
_Relation_ of 1635, is, like most of the Cramoisys, a composite. It is
often referred to as "H. 63," because described in Harrisse's _Notes_,
no. 63.

For the text of this document, we have had recourse to a copy in the
Lenox Library.

_Collation:_ Title, with verso blank, 1 l.; "Table des Chapitres," pp.
(2); Relation signed by Le Jeune and eighteen of his confrères, pp.
1-112; Brébeuf's Huron Relation, pp. 113-206; Perrault's Relation of
Cape Breton, pp. 207-219; "Divers Sentimens," pp. 220-246; "Extraict du
Priuilege du Roy," with the "Approbation" on the verso, 1 l. There is
no misnumeration.

The (civil) Privilege for this volume is dated January 12, 1636, and
the (ecclesiastical) Approbation January 15, 1635. This apparent
discrepancy arises from difference in the calendar: the civil
authorities were using the present calendar; whereas the officers of
the church were still clinging to the old ecclesiastical year, which
began in March. The Approbation of the Jesuit provincial was granted
three days after the granting of the royal Privilege.

Another edition of this _Relation_ appears in the octavo volume
published at Avignon, also in 1636, and containing the _Relations_
for 1634 and 1635 conjunctively. The volume is described in the
Bibliographical Data for document XXIII., in Volume VI., p. 321, of the
present series.

There are at least two issues of the Paris edition. We note the
following differences:

                                  |
  FIRST ISSUE.                    |SECOND ISSUE.
                                  |
                                  |
  P. 82, reads: _Miriuan          |P. 82, reads. _Mirinan oukachigakhi
  oukachigakhi nimitchiminon._    |nimitchiminan_.
                                  |
  P. 90, reads: On l'appelle Rat  |P. 90, reads: On l'appelle Rat
  musqué, pource qu'en effect les |musqué, pource qu'en effect vne
  testicules pris au Printemps    |partie de son corps prise au
  sentent le musc, en autre temps |Printemps sent le musc, en autre
  ils n'ont point d'odeur.        |temps elle n'a point d'odeur.
                                  |
  P. 91, the first paragraph ends |P. 91, the first paragraph ends
  with: "coste de l'Acadie."      |with: "coste de l'Acadie à Mr le
                                  |Com. de Razilly."

The Avignon edition follows the wording of the first Paris issue,
though it deviates somewhat in the matter of paragraphing; _cf._,
_e.g._, pp. 127 and 199 of the Paris edition with pp. 345 (mispaged
245) and 388 of the Avignon edition.

The Quebec reprint (1858) follows the text of the second Paris issue.

The only copy of the Avignon edition, known to us, is in the Lenox
Library. Copies of the Paris edition are in the following libraries:
Lenox (two issues), Harvard, Riggs (Georgetown University), Brown,
British Museum, and Bibliothèque Nationale. Copies have been sold or
priced as follows: Leclerq (1878), no. 778, 140 francs; O'Callaghan
(1882), no. 1214, $35--it had cost him $32.50 in gold; Barlow (1889),
no. 1275, $12.50; Dufossé, of Paris, priced (1891-1893) at 300 and 400
francs.




NOTES TO VOL. VII

(_Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages of
English text._)


1 (p. 15).--_Matachias_: ornaments of shell, beads, etc.; see vol. ii.,
_note_ 17.

2 (p. 31).--Cf. vol. ii., page 67, where Plaisance is called
_Præsentis_ by the natives.

3 (p. 39).--_Mille-pertuis_: literally, "a thousand holes," referring
to the appearance of transparent points in the leaves, caused by cells
filled with volatile oil; a name applied to the genus _Hypericum_.

4 (p. 171).--Concerning these Iroquois prisoners, see Le Jeune's
_Relation_ of 1632 (vol. v., of this series, pp. 27-31, 45-49).

5 (p. 209).--This was the Hébert-Couillard family. Hébert (see vol.
ii., _note_ 80) bore the title of Sieur de l'Espinay (or L'Epinay), to
which, upon his death (1627), his son-in-law Couillard succeeded.

6 (p. 211).--The Moulin Baude River, in Saguenay county, Que., enters
the St. Lawrence four miles below Tadoussac. It is noted for the fine
quarry of white statuary marble near its mouth.

7 (p. 211).--For sketch of Lalemant, see vol. iv., _note_ 20. The lay
brother, Jean Liégeois, was long a useful member of the mission; he had
charge of the construction of the college at Quebec, and also erected
at Three Rivers the house and chapel occupied by the mission there.
He was several times sent to France on the business of the mission.
He was slain by the Iroquois, May 29, 1655, while superintending the
construction of a fort near Sillery, for the defence of the native
converts there resident.

8 (p. 213).--See sketch of Giffard in vol. vi., _note_ 8. Ferland says
(_Cours d'Histoire_, vol. i., pp. 265-267): "This edifice [Champlain's
chapel, built in 1633] was not long adequate for the French population,
which was every year increased by the arrival of new colonists; and in
a short time it became necessary to make a considerable enlargement of
the building.... The return of the French to Canada had produced such
a movement in the maritime provinces of Western France, and especially
in Normandy. From all sides came offers of aid; pious persons sent
charitable gifts, either for the missions, or for the instruction
of the French and the savages. In many communities, nuns offered
themselves to nurse the sick, or to educate young girls; some even
were pledged to this work by vows. Christian families, desiring to
seek peace in the solitudes of the new world, asked for information
as to the advantages that Canada could offer them. This interest was
aroused by the relations that the Jesuits sent in 1632 and 1633. These
being published, and disseminated in Paris and the provinces, had drawn
public attention to the colony. From Dieppe, from Rouen, from Honfleur,
and from Cherbourg, went forth many young men to seek their fortunes on
the shores of the St. Lawrence; many heads of families followed them;
and soon the movement spread to Perche, to Beauce, and to the Isle of
France. To render emigration easier, associations were formed. One of
the most successful was established, at Mortagne, in 1634, under the
direction of Sieur Robert Giffard."

9 (p. 213).--For sketch of Buteux, see vol. vi., _note_ 5.

10 (p. 213).--This paragraph occurs, in the text we follow, on page
327, after the paragraph ending, "apres avoir cruellement massacré
les autres." But in the second (Paris) issue, and in those of Quebec
and Avignon, it is found as here given. The latter arrangement is
undoubtedly correct, for St. John Baptist's day occurred on June 24,
not on July 24.

11 (p. 213).--For sketch of Brébeuf, see vol. iv., _note_ 30; of Daniel
and Davost, vol. v., _notes_ 31, 32; of the foundation of Three Rivers
settlement, vol. iv., _note_ 24.

12 (p. 215).--For sketch of Louis Amantacha, see vol. v., _note_ 20.

13 (p. 229).--Concerning this Sainte Croix Island, see vol. ii., _note_
66.

14 (p. 233).--The Frenchman murdered by the Hurons was Étienne Brulé
(see vol. v., _note_ 37). Concerning Nicolas Viel, see vol. iv., _note_
25.

15 (p. 235).--This Table of Chapters is not in the first issue; we copy
it from the second issue (see Bibliographical Data, vol. vi., doc.
xxiii).

16 (p. 239).--This "poison" was the Huguenot or "reformed" faith. The
third Huguenot war had ended with the surrender of La Rochelle, Oct.
29, 1628. The edict of Nismes (July, 1629) was one of amnesty and
pacification; and under Richelieu's administration, until his death
(Dec. 4, 1642), the Huguenots were fairly sheltered and prosperous.
Richelieu had said to the Protestant ministers of Montauban, upon the
capitulation of that city: "I shall make no discrimination between
the King's subjects, save as to their loyalty. This loyalty being
henceforth common to the adherents of both religions, I shall help both
equally, and with the same affection." Baird says that the cardinal was
honest in this declaration, and that his treatment of the Protestants
was, on the whole, tolerably impartial. Still, they were, since
their defeat, deprived of all political and military power; and court
influences were often unfavorable and even hostile to them. Numerous
restrictions were laid upon their assemblies, the functions of their
pastors, and the erection or restoration of their churches,--in some
cases nullifying the provisions of the edict of Nismes. It is doubtless
these restrictions for which Le Jeune commends Richelieu. The condition
of the Huguenots at this time, and Richelieu's policy toward them, are
discussed at length in Baird's _Huguenots and the Revocation_ (N. Y.,
1895), vol. i., pp. 343-359. A detailed account of the war above
referred to (in which Charles I. of England at first assisted the
Huguenots), with the text of the edict of Nismes, is given in _Merc.
François_, vol. xv. (1629), pp. 227-565.

17 (p. 241).--_This recommendation_ was the "passport" given to the
Jesuits by Richelieu (see vol. v., _note_ 2).

18 (p. 257).--Le Jeune's expectations were somewhat too sanguine. The
Company of New France (see vol. iv., _note_ 21) was expending enormous
sums on its Canadian enterprise; but these were directed more to the
extension of its own commerce than to the development of the country.
The reasons for its policy are thus concisely explained by Faillon
(_Col. Fr._, vol. i., pp. 333, 334): "Unfortunately, this Company,
although numbering over one hundred members, taken from the magistrates
and wealthy merchants of the Kingdom, had only about 300,000 livres of
capital,--each of the members being obliged to put in 3,000 livres.
These funds were moreover, diminished not only by the losses that the
company suffered at the hands of the English, in its first equipment,
but by the indemnity demanded by De Caen for the abandonment of his
pretensions to New France. But, as most of these Associates were
unacquainted with business, there was formed, within the company
itself, another and private company, which took charge of the trade,
and established a fund of 100,000 francs for its own interests. Thus
Champlain put 3,000 livres into the funds of the general company, and
800 livres into those of the other. This active association was obliged
to pay the salary of the Governor, and furnish him with provisions; to
support garrisons in the country, and furnish all military supplies;
and to be responsible for keeping the storehouses in repair. In order
to cover its expenses, it had exclusive possession of the trade in
peltries, which had been transferred to it by the larger company, on
condition that the surplus of profits should belong to the general
association. The result was that the entire management of affairs was
in the hands of merchants, who became by this arrangement the prime
movers of all the company's operations; and it was difficult for them
to enter into views so pure and disinterested as those that the other
Associates had entertained in its formation." Cf. _Merc. François_,
vol. xix., pp. 837, 838.

19 (p. 263).--Information regarding the establishment of these missions
(excepting that at Miscou), has been given in notes to preceding
volumes.--See vol. iv., _notes_ 20 (N. D. de Récouvrance), 24 (Three
Rivers), 30 (Ihonatiria), 46 (Ste. Anne); and vol. vi., _note_ 7 (N. D.
des Anges). At the end of the present _Relation_ (1635), Le Jeune gives
Perrault's description of the island and people of Cape Breton. The
mission of St. Charles was established for the benefit of the Frenchmen
who occupied the important post of Miscou, an island at the entrance of
the Bay of Chaleurs, much frequented by fishermen. Turgis and Du Marché
were sent thither in 1634; the latter returned to Quebec at the end of
a year, but Turgis remained until his death, May 4, 1637.

20 (p. 265).--For account of Marquis de Gamache, see vol vi., _note_
9. The other missions were supported by the Company of New France, in
accordance with the terms granted it by the royal edict; see _Merc.
François_, vol. xiv. (1628), p. 237.

21 (p. 297).--_Bissiriniens_: the Nipissings, also called by the French
"Nation des Sorciers" (see vol. v., _note_ 19).

22 (p. 303).--François Derré (or De Ré), sieur de Gand; one of the
Hundred Associates, and commissary general of the company as early as
1635. In 1637, having obtained certain lands adjoining those granted to
the Jesuits at Sillery, he donated them to the mission; in 1640, he had
charge of the notarial record-office. His death occurred in May, 1641.


Transcriber's Note.

Variable spelling and hyphenation have been retained. Minor punctuation
inconsistencies have been silently repaired.


Corrections.

The first line indicates the original, the second the correction.

p. 312:

  (see vol. v., _note_ 18)
  (see vol. v., _note_ 19)







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JESUIT RELATIONS AND ALLIED DOCUMENTS, VOL. 7: QUEBEC, HURONS, CAPE BRETON, 1634-1635 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


