The Project Gutenberg eBook of Chambers's Journal of Popular Literature, Science, and Art, fifth series, no. 149, vol. III, November 6, 1886
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Chambers's Journal of Popular Literature, Science, and Art, fifth series, no. 149, vol. III, November 6, 1886

Author: Various

Release date: February 23, 2025 [eBook #75449]

Language: English

Original publication: Edinburgh: William and Robert Chambers, 1853

Credits: Susan Skinner, Eric Hutton and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHAMBERS'S JOURNAL OF POPULAR LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART, FIFTH SERIES, NO. 149, VOL. III, NOVEMBER 6, 1886 ***





[Illustration:

CHAMBERS’S JOURNAL

OF

POPULAR

LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART

Fifth Series

ESTABLISHED BY WILLIAM AND ROBERT CHAMBERS, 1832

CONDUCTED BY R. CHAMBERS (SECUNDUS)

NO. 149.—VOL. III.      SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 1886.      PRICE 1½_d._]




NOTES ON THE NEW HEBRIDES.


There is a wide contrast between the Hebrides of Scotland and the New
Hebrides of the Western Pacific; but both have come into a good deal of
prominence of late—the one in connection with the crofters, the other
in connection with the French. It is of the New Hebrides we propose to
say something.

The group of islands forming part of Melanesia to which the name of
New Hebrides has been given extends for about seven hundred miles. The
most northern of the group is about one hundred miles from the Santa
Cruz Islands, and the most southern about two hundred miles from New
Caledonia. Espiritu Santo is the largest and most northerly of the
group, and is about seventy-five miles long by forty miles broad. The
next largest island is called Mallicolo, and is fifty-six miles long
by twenty miles broad. The entire land area of the group may be taken
as about five thousand square miles; and the population of the whole
group has been estimated variously from fifty thousand to two hundred
thousand. But whatever the total population, the peoples probably
sprung from one original stock, although they have drifted far apart
in the matter of language. There are said to be no fewer than thirty
different languages in the New Hebridean group—all having a certain
grammatical likeness, but quite unintelligible to the other islanders.
The difference is not merely such as exists between Scotch, Irish, and
Welsh Gaelic; it is a more marked division of tongues.

The inhabitants vary nearly as much as their languages. Although
distinctly Papuan, there are traits and traces of Polynesian
intermixture and even of separate Polynesian settlement. Thus, on
Vaté, the men are taller, fairer, and better-looking than those on
some of the other islands, the more generally prevailing type being
one of extreme ugliness and short stature. They all are, or have
been, cannibals; but on Aneityum they are now supposed to be all
Christianised.

Aneityum, or Anateum, or Anatom—for it is spelt in all three ways—is
within two hundred miles of the nearest point in New Caledonia, and
within five hundred miles of Fiji. It has a spacious, well-sheltered
harbour, which is easy of access, and is throughout well wooded and
watered. The general character of the island is mountainous; and there
is an agreeable diversity of hill and valley, the mountains being
intersected by deep ravines, and cultivated spots alternating with
barren tracts. The principal wealth of this island is in its timber,
of which the kauri pine appears to be the chief; but there is also a
good deal of valuable sandal-wood. Some years ago, an attempt was made
to establish a whale-fishery off the shores of Aneityum; but we have
not heard with what result. The length of this island is about fourteen
miles, and its breadth about eight. The climate, although damp, is not
disagreeable, and is not marked by great variations. The thermometer
seldom goes below sixty-two degrees, and never below fifty-eight
degrees; but, on the other hand, it never goes above ninety-four
degrees, and seldom above eighty-nine degrees in the shade.

Aneityum deserves especial mention because the whole population is
understood now to profess Christianity. That population in 1865 was
stated by Mr Brenchley to be two thousand two hundred, and it has not
probably increased much, if any, since then. Previous to 1850, the
natives of Aneityum were as degraded and savage as on any island of
the Pacific; but two missionaries who settled there about the date
mentioned began to work a steady and continuous change.

The Aneityum people do not live in villages, but separately in the
midst of their cultivated patches, which are divided into districts,
each containing about sixty. The government is in the hands of chiefs,
of whom there are three principal, each having a number of petty chiefs
under them. But their power appears limited.

Aneityum, like the other islands of the New Hebrides, is of volcanic
origin, and it is surrounded by coral reefs. No minerals have been
found; and in this connection it is worthy of remark that Australians
insist that there is a much closer natural affinity between the New
Hebrides and Fiji than there is between the New Hebrides and New
Caledonia, which is an island rich in minerals. Mr Brenchley enumerates
the principal indigenous products of Aneityum as bread-fruit, banana,
cocoa-nut, horse-chestnut, sago-palm, another species of palm bearing
small nuts, sugar-cane, taro—the staple article of food—yams in
small quantities, sweet-potatoes, and arrowroot. Of fruits, &c.,
introduced, the orange, lime, lemon, citron, pine-apple, custard-apple,
papaw-apple, melons, and pumpkins, have succeeded. The cotton plant
had also been introduced, and promised well; and French beans were
grown for the Sydney market. There are more than a hundred species of
ferns on the island, and more than a hundred species of fish in the
waters surrounding it. But the fish are not all edible, and besides
being different from, are inferior to those found in the northern
hemisphere. The birds are not very numerous; but butterflies and
insects abound, in the case of the latter the list being lengthened by
the importation of fleas by Europeans. Among themselves, the natives
barter fishing-baskets, nets, sleeping-mats, hand-baskets, pigs, fowls,
taro, and cocoa-nuts. With foreigners, they barter pigs, fowls, taro,
bananas, cocoa-nuts, sugar-cane, &c., for European clothing, hatchets,
knives, fish-hooks, and so forth. Their weapons are spears, clubs, bows
and arrows—the spears being rude and very crooked.

Of Tanna, another of the southern division of the group, many
interesting notes have been left by Mr Brenchley and Dr Turner. It is
about forty or fifty miles from Aneityum, and has a somewhat narrow
anchorage, called Port Resolution Bay. On the west side of this bay
there is a large and preternaturally active volcano, which pulsates
in a regular sequence of eruptions at intervals of five, seven, or
ten minutes, night and day, all the year round. The regularity of the
eruptions is supposed to be caused by the influx of water into the
volcano from a lake which lies at its base. Tanna is nearly circular,
and between thirty-five and forty miles across. It is covered with
lofty hills, bright with verdure.

Mr Brenchley stated the population at fifteen to twenty thousand; but
Dr Turner placed it at only ten or twelve thousand; and Turner, who
resided for some months on the island, is likely to be nearer the mark.
The people are of middle stature, and of a copper colour naturally,
although some of them are as black as New Hollanders, through
artificial dyeing of their skins. They are rather better-looking than
average Papuans, but make themselves hideous with red paint. The men
frizzle their hair, which is oftener light-brown than black in colour;
the women wear the hair short, but ‘laid out in a forest of little
erect curls about an inch and a half long.’ They pierce the septum of
the nose, and insert horizontally a small piece of wood; and in their
ears they wear huge ornaments of tortoise-shell. They do not tattoo.
The women wear long girdles, hanging to the knee, made of the dried
fibre of banana stalks; and the men wear an unsightly waistcloth of
matting. Their weapons are clubs, bows and arrows, and spears, with
which they are very expert, and they always work and sleep with their
weapons by their sides. They are, in fact—or were, when Dr Turner lived
among them—a race of warriors, for the tribes were incessantly at war
with each other. ‘We were never able,’ says Dr Turner, ‘to extend our
journeys above four miles from our dwelling at Port Resolution. At such
distances we came to boundaries which were never passed, and beyond
which the people spoke a different dialect. At one of these boundaries,
actual war would be going on; at another, kidnapping and cooking each
other; and at another, all might be peace, but, by mutual consent, they
had no dealings with each other.... When visiting the volcano one day,
the natives told us about a battle in which one party which was pursued
ran right into the crater, and there fought for a while on the downward
slope inside the cup!’

The climate of Tanna is damp for four months of the year, when fever
and ague are common; but it is agreeable during the remainder of the
year; and the average annual temperature is about eighty-six degrees.
The soil, on account of the volcanic origin, is extremely fertile, and
there are a number of boiling springs.

Erromango, to the north of Tanna, is celebrated for its massacres of
missionaries and white settlers, and it was here that Mr Williams was
murdered many years ago. This island is covered with dense vegetation
down to the very water’s edge. It contains a great deal of fine timber,
such as sandal-wood, kauri pine, &c. The population was estimated at
about five thousand by both Mr Brenchley and Dr Turner. The people
are very much like the Tannese, but are without any settled villages
or considerable chiefs. The Erromangan women tattoo the upper part of
their bodies, and wear leaf-girdles hanging from waist to heel; but the
men prefer nudity. Neither infanticide nor euthanasia seems to prevail
here, but the sick are not particularly well cared for. Dr Turner
traced a belief in witchcraft and some belief in a future state. The
spirits of the dead are supposed to go eastward, and some are thought
to roam about in the bush.

Vaté or Sandwich Island, still to the north, is another interesting
member of the group. It has attracted many Australians and others, who
have attempted settlements, but not, we believe, with success as yet.
Dr Turner calls it a ‘lovely island’—although, whether it compares with
the island of Aurora, one of the most northerly of the group, which Mr
Walter Coote says is a perfect earthly paradise, we cannot tell. Vaté,
at anyrate, is very lovely, and seems to be of coral formation. Its
size is about one hundred miles in circumference, and its population
perhaps, ten thousand—although Dr Turner said twelve thousand. There
is no general king, but a large number of petty chiefs. The people are
more fully clothed than those of the other islands we have referred
to; they do not tattoo—they only paint the face in war; they wear
trinkets and armlets; and they live in regular villages. There are
several dialects, but not such diversity as in Tanna. They do not
fight so much as the Tannese; but have clubs, spears, and poisoned
arrows. Infanticide, unfortunately, is prevalent, and seems to be
the consequence of the practice of the women having to do all the
plantation and other hard work.

In Vaté, they have no idols, and they say that the human race sprang
from stones and the earth. The men of the stones were _Natamoli
nefat_, and the men of the earth _Natamoli natana_. The native name
of the island is Efat or Stone—which has been corrupted into Vaté.
The principal god is Supu, who created Vaté and everything on it;
and when a person dies, he is supposed to be taken away by Supu.
Ancestor-worship is also practised, and the aged were often buried
alive at their own request.

The island of Vaté is high above the sea, of an irregular outline,
and distinguished by some fine bold features. ‘We could see,’ says Mr
Brenchley, ‘high mountains, whose summits seemed clad with verdure,
while the thick woods towards their base formed, as it were, a girdle
which spread downwards as far as the beach.’ Ashore, he saw high
reed-grass, wild sugar-canes ten feet high, and vast plantations of
banana and cocoa-nut. The soil is of remarkable fertility; but the
island is subject to frequent shocks of earthquake, sometimes very
violent. The climate is damp, but not unhealthy. Of the natives, we
have read differing accounts, one describing them as among the best,
and another as among the worst of New Hebridean aborigines, with a
remarkably developed and insatiable craving for human flesh. The happy
mean is probably near the truth, that is to say, they are neither
better nor worse than the rest of their race, and are very much as the
visitor makes them.




BY ORDER OF THE LEAGUE.

BY FRED. M. WHITE.


IN TWENTY CHAPTERS.—CHAP. XII.

Coolly, as if the whole transaction had been a little light recreation,
and untroubled in conscience, as if the fatal card had fallen to
Maxwell by pure chance, instead of base trickery, Le Gautier turned his
steps in the direction of Fitzroy Square. It was a matter of supreme
indifference to him now whether Maxwell obeyed the dictum of the League
or not; indeed, flat rebellion would have suited his purpose better,
for in that case he would be all the sooner rid of; and there was just
a chance that the affair with Visci might end favourably; whereas,
on the other hand, a refusal would end fatally for the rash man who
defied the League. Men can face open danger; it is the uncertainty, the
blind groping in the dark, that wears body and mind out, unstrings the
nerves, and sometimes unseats reason. Better fight with fearful odds,
than walk out with the shadow of the sword hanging over one night and
day. The inestimable Frenchman had seen what defiance to the League
generally came to; and as he reviewed his rosy prospects, his bright
thoughts lent additional flavour to his cigarette. Nevertheless, his
heart beat a trifle faster as he pulled the bell at the quiet house in
Ventnor Street. Adventures of this sort were nothing novel to him; but
he had something more at stake here than the fortunes of the little
blind boy and the light intrigue he looked for. Miss St Jean was in,
he found; and he was shown up to her room, where he sat noting the
apartment—the open piano, and the shaded waxlights, shining softly—just
the proper amount of light to note charms by, and just dim enough to
unite confidences. As he noted these things, he smiled, for Le Gautier
was a connoisseur in the graceful art of love-making, and boasted
that he could read women as scholars can expound abstruse passages of
the earlier classics, or think they can, which pleases them equally.
In such like case, the Frenchman was about to fall into a similar
error, never dreaming that the artistically arranged room with its
shaded lights was a trap to catch his soul. He waited impatiently for
the coming fair one, knowing full well that she wished to create an
impression. If such was her intention, she succeeded beyond expectation.

With her magnificent hair piled up upon her small shapely head, and its
glossy blackness relieved only by a single diamond star, shining like a
planet on the bosom of the midnight sky, with a radiant smile upon her
face, she came towards him. She was dressed in some light shimmering
material, cut low upon the shoulders; and round the corsage was a
wreath of deep red roses, a crimson ribbon round the neck, from which
depended a diamond cross. She came forward murmuring a few well-chosen
words, and sank into a chair, waiting for Le Gautier to recover.

He had need of time to recover his scattered senses, for, man of the
world as he was, and acquainted with beauty as he was, he had never
seen anything like this before. But he was not the sort to be long
taken aback; he raised his eyes to hers with a mute homage which was
more eloquent than words. He began to feel at home; the dazzling
loveliness threw a spell upon him, the delicious mystery was to his
liking; and he was tête-à-tête.

‘I began to think I had failed to interest you sufficiently last
night,’ Isodore commenced, waving her fan slowly before her face. ‘I
began to imagine you were not coming to take pity on my loneliness.’

‘How could you dream such a thing?’ Le Gautier replied in his most
languishing voice. His pulses began to beat at these last words. ‘Did
I not promise to come? I should have been here long since, but sordid
claims of business detained me from your side.’

‘It must have been pressing business,’ Isodore laughed archly. ‘And
pray, what throne are you going to rock to its foundations now?’

Had Le Gautier been a trifle less vain, he would have been on his guard
when the conversation took so personal a turn; but he was flattered;
the question betokened an interest in himself. ‘How would it interest
you?’ he asked.

‘How do you know that it would not? Remember, that though I am bound by
no oath, I am one of you. Anything connected with the League, anything
connected with yourself, cannot fail to interest me.’

The words ran through Le Gautier’s frame like quicksilver. He was
impulsive and passionate; these few minutes had almost sufficed to seal
his thraldom. He began to lose his head. ‘You flatter me,’ he said
joyously. ‘Our business to-night was short; we only had to choose an
avenging angel.’

‘For Visci, I suppose?’ Isodore observed with some faint show of
interest. ‘Poor man! And upon whom did the choice fall?’

‘A new member, curiously enough. I do not know if you are acquainted
with him: his name is Maxwell.’

‘May he prove as true to the cause as—as you are. I have never had the
fortune to be present on one of these occasions. How do you manage it?
Do you draw lots, or do you settle it with dice?’

‘On this occasion, no. We have a much fairer plan than that. We take
a pack of cards; they are counted, to see if they are correct; then
each man present shuffles them; a particular one represents the fatal
number, and the president of the assembly deals them out. Whoever the
chosen one falls to has to do the task in hand.’

‘That, I suppose, must be fair, unless there is a conjurer presiding,’
Isodore observed reflectively.—‘Who was the president to-night?’

‘I myself. I took my chance with the others, you must understand.’

Isodore did not reply, as she sat there waving her fan backwards and
forwards before her face. Le Gautier fancied that for a moment a smile
of bitter contempt flashed out from her eyes; but he dismissed the
idea, for, when she dropped the fan again, her face was clear and
smiling.

‘I am wearying you,’ she said, ‘by my silly questions. A woman who asks
questions should not be allowed in society; she should be shut away
from her fellow-creatures, as a thing to be avoided. I am no talker
myself, at least not in the sense men mean.—Shall I play to you?’

Le Gautier would have asked nothing better than to sit there feasting
his eyes upon her matchless beauty; but now he assented eagerly to
the suggestion. Music is an accomplishment which forces flirtation;
besides which, he could stand close to her side, turning over the
leaves with opportunities which a quiet conversation never furnishes.
Taking him at his word, she sat down at the instrument and commenced
to play. It might have been brilliant or despicably bad, opera or
oratorio, anything to the listener; he was far too deeply engrossed in
the player to have any sense alive to the music. Perfectly collected,
she did not fail to note this, and when she had finished, she looked
up in his passionate face with a glance melting and tender, yet wholly
womanly. It took all Le Gautier’s self-command to restrain himself
from snatching her to his heart in his madness and covering the dark
face with kisses. He was reckless now, too far gone to disguise his
admiration, and she knew it. With one final crash upon the keys she
rose from her seat, confronting him.

‘Do not leave off yet,’ he urged, and saying this, he laid his hand
upon her arm. She started, trembling, as if some deadly thing had stung
her. To her it was a sting; to him, the evidence of awaking passion,
and he, poor fool, felt his heart beat faster. She sat down again,
panting a little, as from some inward emotion. ‘As you please,’ she
said. ‘Shall I sing to you?’

‘Sweeter than the voice of the nightingales to me!’ he exclaimed
passionately. ‘Yes, do sing. I shall close my eyes, and fancy myself in
paradise.’

‘Your imagination must be a powerful one.—Do you know this?’

Isodore took a piece of music from the stand, a simple Italian air,
and placed it in his hands. He turned over the leaves carelessly,
and returned it to her with a gesture of denial. There was a curious
smile upon her lips as she sat down to sing, a smile that puzzled and
bewildered him.

‘Do you not know it?’ she asked, when the last chords died away.

‘Now you have sung it, I think I do. It is a sentimental sort of thing,
do you not think? A little girl I used to know near Rome sang it to me.
She, I remember, used to imagine it was my favourite song. She was one
of the romantic schoolgirls, Miss St Jean, and the eyes she used to
make at me when she sang it are something to be remembered.’

Isodore turned her back sharply and searched among the music. If he
could only have seen the bitter scorn in the face then—scorn partly for
him, and wholly for herself. But again she steeled herself.

‘I daresay you gave her some cause, Monsieur Le Gautier,’ she said.
‘You men of the world, flitting from place to place, think nothing of
breaking a country heart or two. You may not mean it, perhaps, but so
it is.’

‘Hearts do not break so easily,’ Le Gautier replied lightly. ‘Perhaps I
did give the child some cause, as you say. _Pardieu!_ a man tied down
in a country village must amuse himself, and a little unsophisticated
human nature is a pleasant chance. She was a little spitfire, I
remember, and when I left, could not see the matter in a reasonable
light. There is still some bitter vengeance awaiting me, if I am to
believe her words.’

‘Then you had best beware. A woman’s heart is a dangerous plaything,’
Isodore replied. ‘Do you never feel sorry, never experience a pang
of conscience after such a thing as that? Surely, at times you must
regret?’

‘I have heard of such a thing as conscience,’ Le Gautier put in airily;
‘but I must have been born before they came into fashion. No, Miss St
Jean, I cannot afford to indulge in luxuries.’

‘And the League takes up so much of your time. And that reminds me. We
have said nothing yet about your insignia. I may tell you now that it
is not yet in my hands; but I shall obtain it for you. How bold, how
reckless you were that night, and yet I do not wonder! At times, the
sense of restraint must bear heavy upon a man of spirit.’

‘Thank you, from the bottom of my heart,’ Le Gautier fervently
exclaimed. ‘You are too good to me.—Yes,’ he continued, ‘there are
times when I feel the burden sorely—times like the present, let us say,
when I have a foretaste of happier things. If I had you by my side, I
could defy the world.’

Isodore looked at him and laughed, her wonderful magnetic smile making
her eyes aglow and full of dazzling tints.

‘That could not be,’ she said. ‘I would have no divided attentions; I
would have a man’s whole heart, or nothing. I have too long been alone
in the world not to realise what a full meed of affection means.’

‘You should have all mine!’ Le Gautier cried, carried away by the
torrent of his passions. ‘No longer should the League bind me. I would
be free, if it cost ten thousand lives! No chains should hold me then,
for, by heaven, I would not hesitate to betray it!’

‘Hush, hush!’ Isodore exclaimed in a startled whisper. ‘You do not
understand what you are saying. You do not comprehend the meaning of
your words. Would you betray the Brotherhood?’

‘Ay, if you but say the word—ten thousand Brotherhoods.’

‘I am not bound by solemn oath like you,’ Isodore replied sadly; ‘and
at times I think it could never do good. It is too dark and mysterious
and too violent to my taste; but you are bound in honour.’

‘But suppose I was to come to you and say I was free?’ Le Gautier asked
hoarsely. ‘To tell you that my hands were no longer fettered—what words
would you have to say to me then—Marie?’ He hesitated before he uttered
the last word, dwelling upon it in an accent of the deepest tenderness.
Apparently, Isodore did not notice, for her eyes were sad, her thoughts
evidently far away.

‘I do not know what I should say to you—in time.’

‘Your words are like new life to me,’ Le Gautier exclaimed; ‘they give
me hope and strength, and in my undertaking I shall succeed.’

‘You will do nothing rash, nothing headstrong, without telling me.
Let me know when you are coming to see me again, and we will talk the
matter over; but I fear, without treachery, you never can be free.’

‘Anything to be my own master!’ he retorted fervently.—‘Good-night,
and remember that any step I may take will be for you.’ With a long
lingering pressure of the hand and many burning glances, he was gone.

Isodore heard his retreating footsteps echoing down the stairs, and
thence along the silent street. The mask fell from her face; she
clenched her hands, and her countenance was crossed with a hundred
angry passions. Valerie entering at that moment, looked at her with
something like fear.

‘Sit down, Valerie,’ Isodore whispered hoarsely, in a voice like the
tones of one in great pain, as she walked impatiently about the room,
her hands twisted together convulsively. ‘Do not be afraid; I shall be
better presently. I feel as if I want to scream, or do some desperate
thing to-night. He has been here, Valerie; how I sustained myself, I
cannot tell.’

‘Did he recognise you?’ Valerie asked timidly.

‘Recognise me? No, indeed! He spoke about the old days by the Mattio
woods, the old times when we were together, and laughed at me for a
romantic schoolgirl. I nearly stabbed him then. There is treachery
afloat; his plan is prospering. As I told you it would be, Maxwell is
chosen for the Roman mission; but he will never do the deed, for I
shall warn Visci myself. And he was my bro——Visci’s friend!’

‘But what are you going to do now?’ Valerie asked.

‘He is a traitor. He is going to betray the League, and I am going
to be his confidant. I saw it in his face. I wonder how I bear it—I
wonder I do not die! What would they say if they saw Isodore now?—Come,
Valerie, come and hold me tightly in your arms—tighter still. If I do
not have a little pity, my poor heart will break.’

       *       *       *       *       *

Long and earnestly did Salvarini and Maxwell sit in the latter’s studio
discussing the events of the evening, till the fire had burnt down
to ashes and the clock in the neighbouring steeple struck three. It
was settled that Maxwell should go to Rome, though with what ulterior
object they did not decide. Time was in his favour, the lapse of a
month or so in the commission being a matter of little object to the
League. They preferred that vengeance should be deferred for a time,
and that the blow might be struck when it was least expected, when
the victim was just beginning to imagine himself safe and the matter
forgotten.

‘I suppose I had better lose no time in going?’ Maxwell observed, when
they had discussed the matter thoroughly. ‘Time and distance are no
objects to me, or money either.’

‘As to your time of departure, I should say as soon as possible,’
Salvarini replied; ‘and as to money, the League finds that.’

‘I would not touch a penny of it, Luigi—no, not if I was starving. I
could not soil my fingers with their blood-money.—What do you say to my
starting on Monday night? I could get to Rome by Thursday morning at
the latest.—And yet, to what good? I almost feel inclined to refuse,
and bid them do their worst.’

‘For heaven’s sake, do not!’ Salvarini implored. ‘Such a thing is worse
than folly. If you assume a readiness to fulfil your undertaking,
something may turn up in your favour.’ Maxwell gazed moodily in the
dead ashes, and cursed the hot-headed haste which had placed him in
that awful position. Like every right-minded man, he shrank with horror
from such a cowardly crime.

‘You will never attain your ends,’ he said. ‘Your cause is a noble one;
but true liberty, perfect freedom, turns against cold-blooded murder;
for call it what you will, it is nothing else.’

‘You are right, my friend,’ Salvarini mournfully replied. ‘No good can
come of it; and when reprisals come, as they must, they shall be swift
and terrible.—But Frederick,’ he continued, laying his hand on the
other’s shoulder, ‘do not blame me too deeply, for I will lay down my
own life cheerfully before harm shall come to you.’

Maxwell was not aware that Sir Geoffrey Charteris was a member of the
League, as Le Gautier had taken care to keep them apart, so far as
business matters were concerned, only allowing the baronet to attend
such meetings as were perfectly harmless in their general character,
and calculated to inspire him with admiration of the philanthropic
schemes and self-denying usefulness of the Brotherhood; nor was it the
Frenchman’s intention to admit him any deeper into its secrets; indeed,
his admission only formed part of the scheme by which the baronet, and
through him his daughter, should be entirely in the Frenchman’s power.
The cards were sorted, and, once Maxwell was out of the way, the game
was ready to be played. All this the artist did not know.

With a heavy heart and a foreboding of coming evil, he made the simple
preparations for his journey. He had delayed to the last the task of
informing Enid of his departure, partly from a distaste of alarming
her, and partly out of fear. It would look more natural, he thought,
to break it suddenly, merely saying he had been called to Rome on
pressing business, and that his absence would not be a prolonged one.
Till Saturday, he put this off, and then, bracing up his nerves, he
got into his cab, and was driven off rapidly in the direction of
Grosvenor Square. He was roused from his meditations by a shock and a
crash, the sound of broken glass, the sight of two plunging horses on
the ground—roused by being shot forward violently, by the shouts of
the crowd, and above all, by the piercing scream of a woman’s voice.
Scrambling out as best he could, he rose to his feet and looked around.
His cab had come violently in collision with another in the centre of
Piccadilly. A woman had attempted to cross hurriedly; and the two cabs
had swerved suddenly, coming together sharply, but not too late to save
the woman, who was lying there, in the centre of an eager, excited
crowd, perfectly unconscious, the blood streaming down her white face,
and staining her light summer dress. A doctor had raised her a little,
and was trying to force some brandy between the clenched teeth, as
Maxwell pushed his way through the crowd.

‘Nothing very serious,’ he said, in answer to Maxwell’s question.
‘She is simply stunned by the blow, and has sustained, I should say,
a simple fracture of the right arm. She must be moved from here at
once.—If you will call a cab, I will take her to a hospital.’

‘No, no!’ Maxwell cried, moved to pity by the pale fair face and slight
girlish figure. ‘I am mainly responsible for the accident, and you must
allow me to be the best judge. My cab, you see, is almost uninjured;
put her in there, and I will tell you where to drive.’

They lifted the unconscious girl and placed her tenderly on the seat.
There were warm hearts and sympathetic hands there, as you may notice
on such occasions as these, and there was a look of feeling in every
face as the cab drove slowly away.

‘Go on to Grosvenor Square,’ Maxwell instructed his man. ‘Drive slowly
up New Bond Street. We shall be there as soon as you.’

They arrived at Sir Geoffrey’s house together, considerably astonishing
the footman, as, without ceremony, they carried the sufferer in.
Alarmed by strange voices and the shrieks of the servants, who had come
up at the first alarm, Enid made her appearance to demand the meaning
of this unseemly noise; but directly she heard the cause, as coherently
as Maxwell could tell her, her face changed, and she became at once all
tenderness and womanly sympathy.

‘I knew you would not mind, darling,’ he whispered gratefully. ‘I
hardly knew what to do, and it was partly my fault.’

‘You did quite right. Of course I do not mind. Fred, what do you take
me for?’ She knelt down beside the injured woman there in the hall, in
the presence of all the servants, and helped to carry her up the stairs.

Lucrece looked on for a moment, and then a startled look came in her
face. ‘Ah!’ she exclaimed, ‘I know that face—it is Linda Despard.’

Enid heard these words, but did not heed them at the time. They carried
the girl into one of the rooms and laid her on the bed. At a sign
from the doctor, the room was cleared, with the exception of Enid and
Lucrece, and the medical man proceeded to look to the broken limb. It
was only a very simple fracture, he said. The gravest danger was from
the shock to the system and the wound upon the forehead. Presently,
they got her comfortably in bed, breathing regularly, and apparently
asleep. The good-natured doctor, waving aside all thanks, left the
room, promising to call again later in the day.




FOUNDLING QUOTATIONS.


Quotations play no small part in conversation and general literature.
There are some which we know must inevitably be made under certain
circumstances. It is almost impossible, for instance, for the
conventional novelist, when he wants to convey to his readers the fact
that his heroine’s nose is of a particular order—which, formerly,
through our lack of invention, we could only describe by a somewhat
ungraceful term—to avoid quoting Lord Tennyson’s description of the
feature as it graced Lynette’s fair face—‘Tip-tilted like the petal of
a flower.’ We feel sure that it must come; and there is now, happily,
no occasion for a young lady in the position of one of Miss Braddon’s
earlier heroines, when listening to a detailed description of her
appearance, to interrupt the speaker, as he is about to mention the
characteristics of her nose, with a beseeching, ‘Please, don’t say
_pug_!’

And then, does anybody ever expect to read a description of a certain
celebrated Scotch ruin, without being told that

    If thou wouldst view fair Melrose aright,
    Go visit it by the pale moonlight?

or to get through an account of the ancient gladiatorial games at Rome
without coming across the line,

    Butchered to make a Roman holiday?

You know, perhaps, what praise Mark Twain took to himself because he
did _not_ quote this line. ‘If any man has a right,’ he says, ‘to feel
proud of himself and satisfied, surely it is I; for I have written
about the Coliseum, and the gladiators, the martyrs, and the lions, and
yet have never used the phrase, “Butchered to make a Roman holiday.”
I am the only free white man of mature age who has accomplished
this since Byron originated the expression.’ This little piece of
self-congratulation rather reminds one of the lady who was accused of
never being able to write a letter without adding a P.S. At last, she
managed to write one without the usual addition; but when she saw what
she had succeeded in doing, she wrote: ‘P.S.—At last, you see, I have
written a letter without a P.S.’ And so, though Mark Twain managed to
steer clear of the hackneyed quotation in the body of his account, he
could not help running against it in a P.S.

Then we have all the multitude of Shaksperean quotations which are
sure to be heard in their accustomed places, many of which, indeed,
have become—to quote again—such ‘household words,’ that to very many
people they do not appear to be quotations at all, but merely every-day
expressions, of the same order as ‘A fine day’ or ‘A biting wind.’

Again, when we read of some cheerful fireside scene, when the curtains
are drawn closely against the winter wind that is roaring round the
house, and the logs are crackling and spitting in the grate, and the
urn is hissing and steaming upon the table, don’t we know that a
reference to the ‘cup which cheers but not inebriates’ is certainly
coming? This, by the way, is a line that is almost invariably
incorrectly quoted, and it is the usual and incorrect form that we have
given. We shall leave our readers to turn up the line for themselves,
and see what the correct form is, and then, perhaps, the trouble they
will thereby have had will serve to impress it upon their minds, and
prevent them again quoting it incorrectly.

But it was not with the intention of talking about these well-known
and every-day quotations from Tennyson, Scott, Byron, Shakspeare, and
Cowper that we thought of writing this paper. We want to talk about a
few quotations, quite as well known as those to which we have already
alluded, which have been so bandied about that all trace, or nearly
all trace, of their original parish and paternity has been lost; and,
though they are as familiar to us as the most hackneyed phrases from
our best known poets, no one can say with certainty by whom they were
first spoken or written.

A good many wagers have been made as to the source of the well-known
and much-quoted couplet:

    He that fights and runs away,
    May live to fight another day.

The popular belief is that they are to be found in Butler’s _Hudibras_.
But the pages of that poem may be turned over and over again, and the
lines will not be found in them. We may as well say at once that they
cannot be found anywhere in the exact form in which they are usually
quoted. The late Mr James Yeowell, formerly sub-editor of _Notes
and Queries_, once thought that he had discovered their author in
Oliver Goldsmith, as a couplet, varying very slightly from the form
we have given, occurs in _The Art of Poetry on a New Plan_, which was
compiled by Newbery—the children’s publisher—more than a century ago,
and revised and enlarged by Goldsmith. But the lines are to be found
in a book that was published some thirteen years before _The Art of
Poetry_, namely, Ray’s _History of the Rebellion_. There they appear as
a quotation, and no hint is given as to the source from which they are
taken. Ray gives them as follows (first edition, 1749, page 54):

    He that fights and runs away,
    May turn and fight another day.

Though this is the earliest appearance in print of the exact words, or
almost the exact words, in which the quotation is now usually given,
it is by no means the earliest appearance of a similar thought. Even
as far back as Demosthenes we find it. It appears, too, in Scarron, in
his _Virgile Travesti_, if we remember rightly. And now we must confess
that the still prevailing belief that the lines occur in _Hudibras_
is not entirely without a _raison d’être_, and it is not impossible
that Ray may have thought he was quoting Butler, preserving some hazy
and indistinct recollection of lines read long ago, and putting their
meaning, perhaps quite unwittingly and unconsciously, into a new and
unauthorised form. This, however, is mere conjecture. The lines, as
they appear in _Hudibras_ (part iii. canto iii., lines 243, 244), are
as follows:

    For those that fly, may fight again,
    Which he can never do that’s slain.

We may just add that Collet, in his _Relics of Literature_, says that
the couplet occurs in a small volume of miscellaneous poems by Sir John
Mennis, written in the reign of Charles II. With this book, however, we
are unacquainted, and cannot, therefore, discuss the appearance of the
foundling lines in it, or what claims its author may have to be their
legitimate parent.

All readers of Tennyson—and who that reads at all is not numbered
amongst them?—know well the opening stanza of _In Memoriam_:

    I held it truth, with him who sings
      To one clear harp in divers tones,
      That men may rise on stepping-stones
    Of their dead selves to higher things.

These lines contain another quotation of the order we have designated
as ‘Foundling Quotations.’ Who is the singer, ‘to one clear harp in
divers tones,’ to whom Lord Tennyson refers? Passages from Seneca and
from St Augustine (Bishop of Hippo) have been suggested as inspiring
the poet when he penned the lines; but neither Seneca nor St Augustine
can be said to _sing_ ‘to one clear harp in divers tones.’ Perhaps
the most reasonable hypothesis is that Lord Tennyson had in his mind
Longfellow’s beautiful poem of _St Augustine’s Ladder_, the opening
lines of which are:

    Saint Augustine! well hast thou said,
      That of our vices we can frame
    A ladder, if we will but tread
      Beneath our feet each deed of shame!

and the closing ones:

    Nor deem the irrevocable Past
      As wholly wasted, wholly vain,
    If, rising on its wrecks, at last
      To something nobler we attain.

The question, however, though Lord Tennyson is still alive, is one
that is not likely ever to be clearly solved; for we have very good
authority for saying that he has himself quite forgotten of what poet
or verses he was thinking when he composed the first stanza of _In
Memoriam_.

The equally well-known

                      This is truth the poet sings,
    That a sorrow’s crown of sorrow is remembering happier things,

in _Locksley Hall_, refers, of course, to the line in Dante’s _Inferno_.

The trite ‘Not lost, but gone before,’ might alone provide
subject-matter for a fairly long essay. Like the other quotations
which we are discussing, it can be definitely assigned to no author.
The thought can be traced back as far as the time of Antiphanes, a
portion of whose eleventh ‘fragment,’ Cumberland has translated, fairly
literally, as follows:

    Your lost friends are not dead, but gone before,
    Advanced a stage or two upon that road
    Which you must travel, in the steps they trod.

Seneca, in his ninety-ninth Epistle, says: ‘Quem putas periisse,
præmissus est’ (He whom you think dead has been sent on before); and he
also has: ‘Non amittuntur, sed præmittuntur’ (They are not lost, but
are sent on before), which corresponds very closely with the popular
form of the quotation. Cicero has the remark that ‘Friends, though
absent, are still present;’ and it is very probable that it is to this
phrase of Cicero that we are really indebted for the modern, ‘Not lost,
but gone before.’ We may note that Rogers, in his _Human Life_, has,
‘Not dead, but gone before.’

Then there is the somewhat similar, ‘Though lost to sight, to memory
dear,’ which no one has succeeded in satisfactorily tracing to its
original source. It was said, some years ago, that the line was to be
found in a poem published in a journal whose name was given as _The
Greenwich Magazine_, in 1701, and written by one Ruthven Jenkyns. The
words formed the refrain of each stanza of the poem. We give one of
them as a sample:

    Sweetheart, good-bye! the fluttering sail
    Is spread to waft me far from thee;
    And soon before the fav’ring gale
    My ship shall bound upon the sea.
    Perchance all desolate and forlorn,
    These eyes shall miss thee many a year,
    But unforgotten every charm—
    Though lost to sight, to memory dear.

Mr Bartlett, however, in the last edition of his _Dictionary of
Quotations_, has demolished this story of Mr Ruthven Jenkyns; and the
line is still unclaimed and fatherless. Probably, as in the case of the
last mentioned, ‘Not lost, but gone before,’ its germ is to be found in
an expression of Cicero.

There is a Latin line familiar to all of us, ‘Tempora mutantur, nos et
mutamur in illis’ (The times change, and we change with them), which
we are frequently hearing and seeing. This is a much-abused line;
probably there is none more so; and we do not think we shall be guilty
of exaggeration if we say that it is misquoted ten times for every time
it is correctly cited. The positions of the _nos_ and the _et_ are
usually interchanged; the result being, of course, a false quantity;
for the line is a hexameter. Now, who first wrote this line? The answer
must be, as in the cases of all our other ‘Foundling Quotations,’ that
we do not know. But in this particular instance we may venture to be
a little more certain and definite in our remarks concerning its
pedigree than we have dared to be in previous ones. There can be little
doubt that the line is a corruption of one to be found in the _Delitiæ
Poetarum Germanorum_ (vol. i. page 685), amongst the poems of Matthias
Borbonius, who considers it a saying of Lotharius I., who flourished,
as the phrase goes, about 830 A.D. We give the correct form of the line
in question, and the one which follows it:

    Omnia mutantur, nos et mutamur in illis;
    Illa vices quasdem res habet, illa suas.

There is another foundling Latin line, almost as frequently quoted as
the one we have just been discussing, namely, ‘Quos Deus vult perdere,
prius dementat’ (Whom the gods would destroy, they first madden).
Concerning this there is a note in the fifth chapter of the eighth
volume of Mr Croker’s edition of Boswell’s _Life of Johnson_, in which
it is said to be a translation from a Greek iambic of Euripides, which
is quoted; but no such line is to be found amongst the writings of
Euripides. Words, however, expressing the same sentiment are to be
found in a fragment of Athenagoras; and it is most likely that the
Latin phrase now so commonly quoted is merely a translation from this
writer’s Greek, though by whom it was first made we cannot say. The
same sentiment has been expressed more than once in English poetry.

Dryden, in the third part of _The Hind and the Panther_, has:

    For those whom God to ruin has designed,
    He fits for fate, and first destroys their mind.

And Butler writes in _Hudibras_ (part iii. canto ii., lines 565, 566):

    Like men condemned to thunder-bolts,
    Who, ere the blow, become mere dolts.

Further consideration will probably bring to the reader’s mind other
examples of these ‘Foundling Quotations’ which have won for themselves
an imperishable existence; though their authors, whose names these
few-syllabled sentences might have kept alive for ever, if they were
only linked the one with the other, are now utterly unknown and
forgotten. Any one who can succeed in discovering the real authorship
of the quotations we have been considering will win for himself the
credit of having solved problems which have long and persistently
baffled the most curious and diligent research.




MISS MASTERMAN’S DISCOVERY.


IN TWO CHAPTERS.—CHAP. I.

Miss Phœbe Masterman was a spinster over whose head some fifty summers
had flown—with, it may be presumed, incredible swiftness to herself.
She was very comfortably situated with regard to this world’s goods,
having inherited ample means from her father, a native of Durham, who
had made a considerable fortune as a coal-merchant. At the time of her
father’s death, she was thirty-five; and as she had no near relative
in whom to interest herself, she established an Orphanage for twelve
girls at Bradborough, a market-town in the north of England, within two
miles of the coast. Brought up in the strictest conformity with Miss
Masterman’s peculiar views, dressed with the most rigid simplicity,
fed on the plainest fare, taught to look upon the mildest forms of
recreation as vanity and vexation of spirit, these fortunate orphans,
one would think, could hardly fail to become virtuous and happy; yet,
inconceivable as it may appear, there were legends that orphans had
been seen with red eyes and countenances expressive of anything but
content; there was even a dark rumour to the effect that one of them
had been heard to declare that if she only had the opportunity she
would gladly commit a crime, that she might be sent to prison, and so
escape from the thraldom of Miss Masterman!

But even this ingratitude and depravity paled before that of the Rev.
Shanghan Lambe, incumbent of the little church of St Mary’s. Now, Miss
Masterman had built that church for the good of the district, and the
living was in her own gift. Yet Mr Lambe, entirely ignoring the latter
fact, had had the hardihood to baptise an orphan in Miss Masterman’s
absence without previously obtaining the permission of that lady;
upon which the indignant lady declared that unless he promised not to
interfere with her orphans, she would withdraw all her subscriptions
and leave him to find his own income. Nor was this all. There were
other reasons to make Mr Lambe pause before quarrelling with Miss
Masterman. Before he was appointed to St Mary’s, he had been only a
poor curate with a stipend of fifty pounds a year, which munificent
income he had found totally inadequate to his wants and those of an
aged mother who was dependent on him; consequently, he had entered upon
his duties at Bradborough shackled with small debts to the amount of a
hundred pounds.

Miss Masterman, who made a point of inquiring into every one’s affairs,
soon became aware of this, and as want of generosity was by no means to
be numbered among her failings, she rightly judged that it would not
be reasonable to expect a man to give his mind to his work if he were
weighed down by other cares; so, in an evil hour for himself, poor Mr
Lambe accepted from the lady a sum of money sufficient to defray his
debts—a sum for which, as he soon found, he would have to pay compound
interest in the way of blind obedience to Miss Masterman’s behests. Not
a funeral could be performed, not a marriage could be solemnised, not
an infant could be baptised, without Miss Masterman’s permission; and
it was even asserted by some that Miss Masterman selected the texts for
the poor man’s sermons! The only oasis in his desert was the annual
departure of Miss Masterman for change of air; then, and then only,
did Mr Lambe breathe in peace. For a brief period, he felt that he was
really master of himself. He could sit down and smoke his pipe without
fear that his sitting-room door would be rudely flung open by an
imperious female of fierce aspect, who would lecture him on his sinful
extravagance in the use of tobacco, when he couldn’t pay his debts.

One bright August morning, Miss Masterman was seated at her breakfast
table, and having concluded her meal, had taken up the morning paper
and was studying the advertisements, holding the paper at arm’s-length
with an air of grim combativeness, as if she were prepared to give
battle to any or all the advertisers who did not offer exactly what she
sought. Suddenly, she pounced upon the following: ‘A Home is offered in
a Country Rectory by a Rector and his family for two or three months
to a Single Lady needing change of air. House, with large grounds,
conservatories, pony-carriage, beautiful scenery.—Address, Rector,
_Clerical Times Office_.’

‘That will do,’ said Miss Masterman to herself; and, with her usual
promptitude, she sat down then and there and wrote to the advertiser,
asking particulars as to terms, &c. And in due course she received
an answer so perfectly satisfactory in every respect, that the end
of the month found her comfortably installed in the charming rectory
of Sunnydale, in the county of Hampshire, in the family of the Rev.
Stephen Draycott, rector of Sunnydale.

The rector’s family, besides himself and his wife, consisted of two
sons and two daughters, all grown up, with the exception of Master
Hubert, a boy of ten years old, who was endowed with such a remarkable
fund of animal spirits that he was the terror of the neighbourhood;
and from the first moment of Miss Masterman’s arrival, he became the
special _bête noire_ of that lady. With all the other members of the
family, Miss Masterman was much pleased. The rector himself was a
polished and dignified person, and by the extreme, if rather laboured,
courtesy of his manners, he endeavoured to tone down the somewhat
exuberant spirits of the rest of his family. Mrs Draycott was a gentle,
refined matron, with a sweet, though rather weary face, and was simply
adored by her husband and children. The two daughters, Adela and
Magdalen, were charming girls, full of fun, and very popular with their
two brothers, of whom the senior, Clive, was aged nineteen.

To the young people, Miss Masterman’s arrival was little short of
a calamity; they were so much in the habit of freely stating their
opinions on all subjects without restraint, that the presence of a
stranger appeared to them an unmitigated bore. It was in vain that
their mother reminded them that the handsome sum paid by Miss Masterman
for her board would be a very desirable addition to the family
exchequer. At a sort of cabinet council held after she had retired to
her room the first night after her arrival, Master Hubert expressed, in
schoolboy slang, his conviction that she was a ‘ghastly old crumpet;’ a
nickname which she retained until a servant one day brought in a letter
which, she said, was addressed to ‘Miss Pobe Masterman;’ from which
moment, Miss Masterman went by the name of ‘Pobe’ till the end of her
visit—a piece of irreverence of which that lady happily remained quite
unconscious.

By the time Miss Masterman had settled down in her new abode, the
principal ladies of the parish came to call upon her; and as some of
them were not only rich but very highly connected, Miss Masterman
greatly appreciated their kind attentions. Among them was a Lady
O’Leary, an Irish widow, with whom Miss Masterman soon struck up a
great intimacy. Lady O’Leary was generally believed to be a person
of large fortune; but as this supposition was based entirely on her
own representations with regard to property in Ireland, there were
some sceptical spirits who declined to believe in it as an established
fact. Lady O’Leary shared three furnished rooms with a Miss Moone, who
lived with her as companion; and it soon became quite an institution
for Miss Masterman to take tea with her two or three times a week at
least. On these occasions, the two ladies—for Miss Moone discreetly
withdrew when Lady O’Leary had visitors—discussed all the affairs
of the parish, until, by degrees, they got upon such thoroughly
confidential terms, that before long they had imparted to each other
their joint conviction that the general moral tone of the parish was
lamentably low, and that it was doubtless owing in a great measure to
the deplorably frivolous conduct of the family at the rectory; for Miss
Masterman had discovered, to her amazement and horror, that the rector
not only permitted his daughters to read Shakspeare, but even gave them
direct encouragement to do so. Nor was this all; he actually was in the
habit, once a year, of taking all his children up to London to see the
pantomime at Drury Lane!

Among the more frequent visitors at the rectory was a Mrs Penrose, an
exceedingly pretty young widow, who had recently taken a small house
in the village, where she lived very quietly with an old servant,
who appeared greatly attached to her mistress. The widow, who was
apparently not more than five-and-twenty, was a charming brunette, with
sparkling black eyes, and hair like waves of shining brown satin; and
her sweet face and animated manners made her generally very popular
in the village, where she visited the poor and assisted the rector in
various parochial works of charity. Especially was she a favourite at
the rectory, not only with Mr and Mrs Draycott, but with the young
people, her presence in the family circle invariably giving rise to
so much hilarity, that even the rector was attracted by the general
merriment, and would leave his study to come and sit with his family,
and allow himself to join in their mirth at Mrs Penrose’s lively
sallies. Indeed, he had even been heard to declare, in Miss Masterman’s
hearing, to that lady’s unspeakable disgust, that when he was fagged
and worried with the necessary work of a parish, a few minutes of Mrs
Penrose’s cheerful society acted on his mind like a tonic.

Miss Masterman, from the first, had taken an extraordinary antipathy to
Mrs Penrose, who appeared to her to be everything that a widow ought
not to be! Her bright face and unflagging spirits were a constant
offence to the elder lady, though she had often been told that the late
Captain Penrose was such a worthless man that his early death, brought
about entirely by his own excesses, could be nothing but an intense
relief to his young widow, who was now enjoying the reaction, after
five years of married misery. Miss Masterman’s dislike to Mrs Penrose
was fully shared by her friend Lady O’Leary; and they both agreed that
the widow was in all probability a designing adventuress, and deplored
the infatuation which evidently blinded the rector as to her real
character, for, as Lady O’Leary observed: ‘Though it was given out that
Mrs Penrose was the particular friend of _Mrs_ Draycott, the rector’s
partiality was obvious!’

Miss Masterman had been at Sunnydale for six weeks, when one morning
she received a letter from her housekeeper, informing her that Mr Lambe
had taken upon himself to remark that the orphans were looking pale and
jaded, and that he was going to take them all to spend a day at the
seaside. Miss Masterman, on reading this letter, felt most indignant,
and at once wrote to Mr Lambe to forbid the proposed excursion; and
after enumerating the many obligations under which she had laid him—not
forgetting the hundred pounds she had lent him—she concluded by
expressing her surprise that he should presume to interfere with her
special protégées in any way whatever.

To this Mr Lambe replied that he was ‘extremely sorry if he had
offended Miss Masterman; that he had imagined that she would be pleased
for the orphans to have the treat, particularly as some of them
looked far from well; but that, having promised the children, it was
impossible for him to break his word, particularly as he had ordered a
van for their conveyance and made all the necessary arrangements for
the trip; he therefore trusted that Miss Masterman would forgive him if
he still kept his promise to his little friends.’

Furious at this unexpected opposition to her will, Miss Masterman at
once went in search of Mrs Draycott to inform her that it was necessary
for her to go home for a week or ten days on business of importance.
Finding that Mrs Draycott was not at home, she repaired to the rector’s
study, and after knocking at the door, and being told to enter, she
informed Mr Draycott of her intentions. Saying that she must write home
at once, she was about to withdraw, when Mr Draycott courteously asked
her if she would not write in the study, to save time, as he was just
going out. Miss Masterman thanked him; and as soon as he had gone, sat
down and wrote to her housekeeper to say that she would be at home the
following day without fail. Having finished her letter, she was about
to leave the room, when she observed a note in a lady’s handwriting,
which had apparently slipped out of the blotting-pad on to the floor.
She picked it up, and was about to return it to its place, when the
signature, ‘Florence Penrose,’ caught her eye. ‘What can that frivolous
being have to say to the rector?’ thought Miss Masterman; and feeling
that her curiosity was too strong to be resisted, she unfolded the
note, and read the following words:

    MY DEAR FRIEND—I have just received the diamonds, which are exactly
    what I wanted. The baby’s cloak and hood will do very well. I have
    now nearly all that I require. My only terror is, lest our secret
    should be discovered.—In great haste. Yours, as ever,

                                                       FLORENCE PENROSE.

    _P.S._—I hope you won’t forget to supply me with plenty of flowers.

Here was a discovery! For a few moments Miss Masterman sat motionless
with horror; her head was in a whirl, and she had to collect her
thoughts before she could make up her mind what to do. The first
definite idea that occurred to her was to secure the note; the next
was, to show it to Lady O’Leary and to discuss with her what was to be
done. As soon, therefore, as she had completed all her arrangements
for her journey on the morrow, she repaired to her friend’s lodgings;
and after Lady O’Leary had fairly exhausted all the expletives that
even her extensive Irish vocabulary could supply, to express her
horror and detestation of the conduct of the rector and Mrs Penrose,
the two ladies laid their heads together, and seriously discussed the
advisability of writing to the bishop of the diocese and sending him
the incriminating letter. However, they finally decided to do nothing
before Miss Masterman’s return to Sunnydale; and in the meantime,
Lady O’Leary undertook to be on the watch, and to keep her friend _au
courant_ as to what was going on in the parish.

It was late that evening when Miss Masterman returned to the rectory,
and by going up directly to her room, she avoided meeting the rector.
The next morning she pleaded headache as an excuse for having her
breakfast sent up to her; and did not come down until, from her window,
she had seen Mr Draycott leave the house, knowing he would be away for
some hours. He left a polite message with his wife, regretting that he
had not been able to say good-bye in person to Miss Masterman.

‘The wily hypocrite!’ thought that lady. ‘He little thinks that his
guilt is no secret to me. But such atrocity shall not go unpunished!’

When she took leave of Mrs Draycott, she astonished that lady by
holding her hand for some moments as she gazed mournfully into her
face; then, with a final commiserating glance, the worthy spinster
hurried into her fly. As she drove away, she leant forward and waved
her hand to the assembled family with such effusion, that Mrs Draycott
exclaimed: ‘Dear me, I fear I have done Miss Masterman injustice. I had
no idea that she possessed so much feeling as she showed just now. One
would really think she was going for good, instead of only ten days!’

‘No such luck,’ cried the irrepressible Hubert. ‘But, at all events, we
have got rid of her for a week at least; so now, we’ll enjoy ourselves,
and forget all about “Pobe” till she turns up again!’—a resolution
which the young gentleman did not fail to keep most faithfully.

In the meantime, Miss Masterman was busily employed at Bradborough in
quelling orphans and other myrmidons, and reducing things in general
to complete subjection to her will; but with regard to Mr Lambe, she
found her task more difficult than she expected. In fact, the worm had
turned; and on her summoning him to her presence and opening the vials
of her wrath on his devoted head, he calmly but firmly announced his
intention of sending his resignation to his bishop; which took Miss
Masterman so completely by surprise, that, in her bewilderment, she
actually asked him to reconsider his decision. But though she even
went so far as to give her consent to the orphans having their coveted
treat, Mr Lambe’s determination was not to be shaken.

The following week flew swiftly away; a good deal of correspondence
devolved upon Miss Masterman through having to think of a successor to
Mr Lambe, and the lady of the manor was very much worried. At last,
however, everything was settled, and Miss Masterman began to think of
returning to Sunnydale, where, as she felt, fresh anxieties and most
painful duties awaited her.




POPULAR LEGAL FALLACIES.[1]

BY AN EXPERIENCED PRACTITIONER.


_DEEDS OF GIFT AND WILLS.—I._

One of the most universally believed fallacies is that it is better to
make a deed of gift than a will for the disposal of property. Nothing
can be more dangerous than this delusion, as we have often had occasion
to observe in the course of our experience. A deed of gift—pure and
simple—is a document under seal evidencing the fact that certain
property specified therein has been absolutely given by the donor to
the donee, without any reservation for the benefit of the former,
or any power for him to revoke the gift or resume possession of the
property in any circumstances. If the deed contains a condition that
the donor shall have the enjoyment of the property during his life, and
that he shall have a right to recall the gift thereby made, and dispose
of the property in some other way, then the document is to all intents
and purposes a will; and if it is only executed and attested as an
ordinary deed, it is altogether void, in consequence of non-compliance
with the directions contained in the Wills Act, 1837, which very
properly requires more precautions against fraud and forgery in the
case of a will than in the case of a deed. We say ‘very properly,’
because the will does not take effect during the lifetime of the
testator; and therefore the greatest safeguard is removed by his death
before the document can be acted upon or its authenticity be likely to
be questioned. This is a common oversight. The deed is prepared and
duly stamped; and in consequence of the insertion of the powers alluded
to above, it proves to be utterly useless, when, after the decease of
the donor, his property is claimed by his heir-at-law and next of kin
because of his having died intestate. It may occasion some surprise
that any solicitor will prepare a deed which he knows cannot stand
the test of litigation; but this is not altogether the fault of the
profession. In many cases, the danger is pointed out; but if the donor
is determined to dispose of his own property in his own way, who can
gainsay him? If he cannot get what he requires in one office, he will
go to another; and we have several times lost clients in consequence
of our refusal to prepare such a deed; all our arguments being met by
the reply that there would be no duties to pay to the government if
the deed were executed; a complete fallacy in many cases, as we have
afterwards had occasion to know, when we have seen what followed the
decease of the misguided donor.

On the other hand, if there is a genuine gift, and possession is
given in accordance with the deed, what then? One case which came
under our notice may illustrate the danger against which we have
frequently protested in vain. A retired merchant invested the whole
of his savings in a freehold estate which would produce sufficient
annual income to supply all his wants and leave a good margin for
future accumulations. Being a widower, in somewhat infirm health,
he took up his residence in the house of his younger son, the elder
being an irreclaimable reprobate. Unfortunately, the wife of this
younger son was an artful and avaricious woman, whose sole reason for
consenting to the arrangement as to residence was the hope of future
gain. The old gentleman had an insurmountable objection to making a
will—not an uncommon weakness—as it reminded him too forcibly of the
time when he would have to leave his fine estate and go over to the
great majority. At length, after urgent and repeated representations
as to the risk of his estate being sold by his dissipated heir-at-law
in case of his dying intestate, he was persuaded to execute a deed
of gift to his younger son, to whom at the same time he handed the
title-deeds relating to the estate. Soon afterwards, a quarrel arose
between the donor and his daughter-in-law; and the latter persuaded her
husband—whose moral principles were as weak as those of his brother,
though in a different way—to sell the estate, and then turn his father
out of his house. After his ignominious dismissal, the poor old
gentleman went to the house of a nephew, who soon tired of supporting
him; and eventually he was obliged to go into the workhouse, altogether
neglected to the time of his death by all his relatives, except his
graceless elder son; and alas! he could not assist his aged parent, as
he was himself almost destitute. This may appear to be an extreme case;
but it is not a solitary one, although it is one of the worst of those
which have come under our own observation.

This brief narrative may serve as an introduction to the explanation
of one remarkable peculiarity in the practical working of a deed of
gift of real estate. Personal property may of course be sold, and
the sale completed by delivery of the goods or other chattels to the
purchaser; but actual possession of land is no clue to the ownership
thereof, the title being evidenced by deeds in the general way, the
exceptions being those cases in which land has descended to the heir in
consequence of the intestacy of the former owner; and also those cases
in which long-continued possession has given an impregnable title to a
person who was originally a mere trespasser, or at the most a tenant
whose landlord has been lost sight of. When the freehold estate above
mentioned was given away and the gift was evidenced by deed and actual
possession, the donor lost the power of again giving it away either by
deed or by his will. But he might have sold the property if he could
have found a purchaser willing to complete without actual possession
of the title-deeds; which, however, he might afterwards have recovered
from the holder thereof; the reason for this being, that where there
are two inconsistent titles, both derived from the same person, but
one depending upon an actual sale and payment by the purchaser of the
price agreed upon, while the other rests upon no better foundation
than a mere voluntary act on the part of the donor, the title of the
purchaser will prevail, because of the valuable consideration which he
has paid; while the other person has paid nothing. On the other hand,
if the donee, before he is dispossessed or his title superseded by a
conveyance for value, were to sell the property, and if the sale were
completed and the purchase-money paid, the donor would have lost his
right to sell. Having placed the donee in a position to make a good
title to the property, he must take the consequences of his own folly.
We once had the pleasure of saving for the benefit of the vendor the
value of an estate which he had previously given away; greatly to the
astonishment of the donee, who supposed himself to be safely possessed
of the whole estate.

It will be understood that our remarks have no application to marriage
settlements or similar documents in which extensive though limited
powers of appointment are generally reserved to the settler, the power
extending over the whole estate or a specified part thereof; while the
persons to be the beneficiaries are strictly defined; and powers are
also given to him to direct the payment of portions to his younger
children, and to charge them upon the estate which is comprised in the
settlement. This is the legitimate way in which a landed proprietor
can provide for his family; and the only serious objection which has
ever been made thereto is that it has a tendency to perpetuate the
descent of the estates, instead of their distribution and subdivision
into smaller properties. But these documents are beyond the scope of
this paper. What we strongly object to are voluntary deeds of gift,
which are generally made for the purpose of avoiding the payment of
legacy and succession duty, but lead too frequently to disastrous
consequences. They are beneficial to the legal profession, often
leading to costly and harassing litigation; but to the intended
recipients of the bounty of the donor, and sometimes to the donor
himself, they are in a corresponding degree injurious.

Attention may here be called to the provisions of the Customs and
Inland Revenue Act, 1881, on the subject of voluntary gifts of personal
property made for the purpose of avoiding the payment of the duties
accruing due on the death of the owner of personal estate. By this
Act, duty is payable at the like rates as the ordinary probate duty
on voluntary gifts which may have been made by any person dying after
1st June 1881, whether such gift may have been made in contemplation
of approaching death or otherwise, if the donor has not lived three
calendar months afterwards; or by voluntarily causing property to be
transferred to or vested in himself and some other person jointly, so
as to give such other person benefit of survivorship; or by deed or
other instrument not taking effect as a will, whereby an interest
is reserved to the donor for life, or whereby he may have reserved
to himself the right, by the exercise of any power, to reclaim the
absolute interest in such property. This enactment removes the last
argument in favour of deeds of gift, for they do not now have the
effect of avoiding the payment of probate duty; and in any event, since
19th May 1853, succession duty has always been payable in respect of
the benefit acquired by the successor by reason of the decease of his
predecessor in title. The case of a voluntary settlement in respect of
which the stamp duty has been paid is provided for by a direction that
on production of such deed duly stamped, the stamp duty thereon may be
returned. Personal estate includes leasehold property.

With respect to wills, the position is very different. Every man who
has any property of any kind ought to make a will, especially if he
desires his property to be distributed in any way different from the
mode prescribed by law in case of his intestacy. Many cases occur in
which the neglect to make a will is not only foolish but positively
wrong. A husband has a duty to perform towards his wife which cannot be
omitted without culpability; and the same may be said of the duty of a
parent to his children. As to the former, there is a danger which is
often unsuspected by the owner of real estate. The law provides that
on the death of such a person intestate, leaving a widow, she shall
be entitled to dower out of such estate; that is to say, one-third of
the rents thereof during the remainder of her life; but this right to
dower is subject to any disposition which the owner of the estate may
have made thereof, or any charges which he may have created thereon.
In England, there is no inalienable share of property which the widow
and children can claim, even as against the devisee, as is the case in
Scotland. But there is a power to bar the right of the widow to her
dower by means of a declaration to that effect in the conveyance to
a purchaser, or in any deed subsequently executed by him relating to
the property. It must be observed that the declaration in bar of dower
is not necessary for the purpose of creating charges upon the estate,
because dower is expressly made subject to such charges. But if the
declaration has been inserted in the conveyance—without the knowledge
of the purchaser—his widow will have no claim to any provision out of
such estate unless it shall be made for her by the will of her husband,
who, in ignorance of the necessity for making a will, dies intestate,
thus leaving his widow dependent upon his heir-at-law; in numerous
cases, a distant relative, who is not disposed to acknowledge that the
widow of his predecessor has any claim upon him.

Again, as to his children, the possessor of real estate ought not to
forget that in the case of freehold property it will descend upon
his eldest son as heir-at-law; thus leaving his younger sons and his
daughters unprovided for except as to their respective shares of his
personal estate, which may be of small value, or even insufficient
for the payment of his debts. If the property should be copyhold, it
would descend to the customary heir, who might be the eldest son, the
youngest son, or all the sons as tenants in common in equal undivided
shares; but in any event, the daughters would remain unprovided for.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] It should be understood that this series of articles deals
mainly with English as apart from Scotch law.




A DEAD SHOT.

AN INCIDENT IN 1801.


The following singular story is perhaps worth putting on record because
the narrative is strictly true.

In the year 1801, a fine old Jacobean house, known as Chatford House,
situated on the borders of Devon and Somerset, was in the occupation
of a Mr Edward Leggett, a wealthy farmer, and his two sons. The
house, like many of its class, had originally been built so that
its ground-plan formed the letter [Illustration: E], a centre, with
projecting doorway, and two wings; but one wing had been taken down
altogether, as well as a portion of the other, so that the ground-plan
became thereby altered and took this form, [Illustration: E with
the top bar removed], the centre doorway remaining untouched. This
should be remembered, in order to understand the circumstances of
the principal incident of the narrative. Over the projecting doorway
was a room which went by the name of the ‘Oratory,’ probably on
account of its large projecting bay window, which gave it somewhat
of an ecclesiastical appearance, and from this window a view could
be obtained on all sides. The small part of the wing which was left
standing was used as storerooms, and access from the outside was gained
by a small door, which had been injudiciously opened in the corner, or
angle, when the alterations were made.

Mr Leggett possessed a large quantity of very fine old massive
silver-plate, which was placed in one of the storerooms, strongly
secured and locked, in the remains of the wing referred to. It was
supposed that he had also a considerable sum of money locked up with
the plate, as banking was not so common in remote country-places in
those days.

Now it happened that, on the 23d of April 1801, Mr Leggett and his
two sons had to attend a neighbouring cattle fair, and had proposed
to sleep in the town, instead of returning home the same night; but,
a good customer having arranged to complete a purchase early the next
morning, Mr Leggett’s eldest son, George, came back to Chatford very
late and went quietly to bed; but the worry of the fair, and anxiety
about to-morrow’s purchase, prevented him sleeping. His bedroom was
at the end of the house, close to the store wing, and just above
the little door in the angle already mentioned. Whilst restlessly
tossing about from side to side, young Leggett heard the house clock
strike two, and just after became aware of a peculiar grating noise,
apparently under his window. To jump up and cautiously and silently
open the casement was the work of a minute. It was a cloudy moonlight
night, just light enough to show objects imperfectly, but enough for
George Leggett to observe the figures of two men close to the little
door in the angle immediately below, on which they were apparently
operating with some cutting tool, which had produced the grating noise
he had heard. George, who was a young man of great intelligence,
quick judgment, and ready resource, instantly comprehending the
situation, took his measures accordingly. He happened to be a member
of the county yeomanry cavalry; and catching up his carabine and
some ball cartridges, he silently left his room, and proceeding down
the corridor—loading his carabine as he went along—soon reached the
‘Oratory’ room over the porch, whence he could see straight down on to
the little door, which was then right in front of him. Silently opening
the casement, he made a careful survey of the position, which a passing
ray of moonlight enabled him to take in at a glance.

At the little white-painted door were the two men, whose dark figures
were well thrown up by so light a background. One was stooping
or kneeling, and the other was standing close behind him, their
backs, of course, being turned towards their observer. Putting his
carabine on full-cock and laying it carefully on the window-sill,
after a deliberate aim, Leggett pressed the trigger. A loud shriek
and a stifled cry followed, then all was still. Leggett stood
intently watching the spot for several moments; but profound silence
prevailed—not a sound was heard, not a movement was perceptible. The
only other man in the house was the groom, who was quickly roused; and
lanterns having been procured, he and Leggett repaired to the spot, and
were not a little staggered to find both burglars lying dead. The hand
of one of them still grasped a very large steel centre-bit, with which
he had been operating on the door. Subsequent surgical investigation
showed that the bullet had struck the back of the first man, passing
through his heart, and had then entered the head of the man who was
stooping or kneeling in front of him, just behind the ear, lodging
in the brain. The bodies were at once removed in-doors; and at the
inquest, held the next day, the following particulars were elicited:

By the side of the dead men was found a leather travelling portmanteau,
containing a highly finished and elaborate set of housebreaking tools,
together with a piece of candle and a preparation of phosphorus for
obtaining a light, as it is needless to say that lucifer matches were
unknown in 1801, their place being supplied by the old-fashioned flint
and steel and tinder-box, articles not available for burglars’ use.
Each man was armed with a brace of pocket pistols, loaded and primed;
and one of them carried a formidable-looking dagger, fitted into the
breast of his coat; clearly showing that these ruffians were prepared
to offer a desperate resistance, if interrupted or molested. They were
both well dressed, and had quite the appearance of gentlemen. Each
possessed a good watch and seals, and carried a well-filled purse. One
only had a pocket-book, containing many papers, chiefly relating to
money matters and betting transactions; but only one letter, which,
however, proved of immense importance in throwing light on the lives
and characters of the deceased burglars, and in telling the story of
the attempted robbery. The letter was directed to ‘Mr John Bellamy,’
at an address in Shoreditch, London, and was dated from Roxburn, the
name of a large neighbouring farm, and bore the initials ‘J. P.,’
which, with the writing, were at once recognised at the inquest as
those of ‘James Palmer,’ the managing bailiff at Roxburn Farm, a clever
and unscrupulous fellow, without any regard for truth or principle,
well known in those parts, but a man whom nobody liked and everybody
distrusted. This communication was in these few but significant words:
‘The 23d will do best; coast clear, no fear, all straight.—J. P.’

This letter, with the tools and a full report of the whole case, was
at once sent to Bow Street, London, and an investigation made by the
‘Bow Street runners’—the detectives of those days—for there were then
no regular ‘police,’ as we now understand the term. On searching the
premises in Shoreditch, indicated in the letter, where John Bellamy
lived, it was discovered that the supposed John Bellamy was no other
than ‘Jack Rolfe,’ one of the most successful professional burglars
of that day; and the authorities hesitated not to express their
satisfaction that his career had been so cleverly cut short.

An immense quantity of stolen property, of almost every description,
was found at Rolfe’s lodgings in Shoreditch; and what was more
important—as regards the present narrative at least—a correspondence
extending over three or four years between Mr James Palmer of Roxburn
Farm and the arch-burglar John Bellamy, alias Jack Rolfe himself, by
which it appeared that this robbery had been planned and arranged by
Palmer, who had supplied Rolfe with the fullest information as to
Mr Leggett’s plate and money, as well as a neatly drawn plan of the
premises, which was found amongst the papers. Palmer had also arranged
the date of the robbery for the 23d of April, as he had discovered
that Mr Leggett and his two sons intended to sleep out that night. Nor
was this all; for only a few weeks previously, the rascal had had the
effrontery to invite Rolfe to pay him a visit at Roxburn, under colour
of his being a personal friend, which invitation Rolfe had readily
accepted; and one of the witnesses at the inquest well remembered
his coming, and at once recognised him in one of the dead men—he of
the centre-bit. Rolfe was described as a quiet, pleasant, and rather
gentlemanly man.

Not far from Mr Leggett’s gate, a light cart and pony were found
tethered early in the morning of the attempted robbery. The cart had
been hired from a neighbouring market-town to convey the thieves to
the scene of operations, and to bring them back with—as they fondly
anticipated—a sackful of rich plunder. They had been staying a day or
two at this inn as commercial travellers, calling themselves brothers,
and giving the name of Sutton.

On the evidence afforded by the correspondence found in Shoreditch,
Palmer was apprehended; and further investigation brought out the fact
that the notorious Jack Rolfe was not only his friend, correspondent,
and accomplice, but his own brother also, Rolfe being merely an ‘alias’
for his real name of Palmer. The two men were very much alike both in
face and figure; and it came out in evidence that they belonged to a
family of burglars and sharpers. One brother had been transported for
life for robbery and violence; another was then in prison for fraud
and theft; James had just been apprehended; and John had been shot
dead whilst plying his trade. James appeared to have been the only
member who had held a respectable position—that of manager of Roxburn
Farm, and he could not keep away from dishonest practices. It was also
further discovered that Palmer had been an accomplice in two or three
mysterious burglaries which had been perpetrated in the neighbourhood
during the two or three previous years, in which the thieves had
displayed an accurate knowledge—even to minute details—of the premises
attacked, the habits of the inmates, and the drawers or closets where
valuables were kept. All this was due to the planning and arranging of
the brother James, who could at his leisure quietly take his measures
on the spot; which were then carefully communicated to his brother
John, who ultimately became the willing executant. Palmer was shortly
after brought to trial, convicted, and sentenced to fourteen years’
transportation.

The verdict of the coroner’s jury was ‘justifiable homicide;’ for in
those days of desperate and well-armed burglars, the shooting of one
or two of these gentry, whilst in the act of plying their nefarious
calling, was considered not only a clever but a meritorious action.




THE EVIDENCE OF THE SENSES.


The senses are the witnesses which bring in evidence from the outer
world, without which that world would for us have no existence at
all; but the mind sits aloft on the judgment-seat and forms its
conclusions from the evidence laid before it; and these conclusions
are for the most part wonderfully correct; for, though the testimony
of one sense alone might lead the mind to form an erroneous opinion,
this can be rectified by discovering what one or more of the other
senses have to say on the same subject. When, however—as sometimes
happens under peculiar circumstances—the evidence of one sense only is
available, the mind may very readily arrive at a false conclusion. As
an instance of this may be cited what is often observed by surgeons in
cases of hip-joint disease. The patient, usually a child, complains
of severe pain in the knee, which, however, has not, so far as can be
ascertained, been injured in any way. Very likely, the pain is severe
enough to prevent sleep at night, so that there can be no doubt about
its existence, and it may perhaps have been almost continuous for some
time past. Now, in such a case the surgeon will have a shrewd suspicion
of what is really amiss, and very often will at once proceed to examine
the hip. This he will do, too, in spite of assurances on the part of
the parents that the patient always complains of the knee and of that
joint only. He does not doubt that the pain feels as if it was in the
knee, but he strongly suspects, nevertheless, that the disease is in
the hip; and this often proves to be the case. This is an instance of
what is called ‘referred sensation.’ The nerve which conveys sensation
from the knee also sends a branch to the hip-joint, and it is this
anatomical fact which explains the phenomenon. It might be expected
that even if the pain was not felt solely in the hip, it would at least
be always felt there as well as in the knee. This, however, though
sometimes the case, is by no means always so. In this instance, the
patient comes not unnaturally to the conclusion that where he feels
the pain, there the cause of the pain must of necessity be situated.
He would be quite ready to declare that there was nothing the matter
with his hip, for he cannot see into the joint and discover the disease
there. He has, in fact, to depend upon the evidence of one sense only,
and the conclusion based upon the evidence of the single sensation of
pain, is false.

Another instance in which the testimony of one sense alone may lead
to a false conclusion as to the whereabouts of the cause of a pain is
found in what often takes place after the amputation of a limb. Most
people are aware that after part of a limb has been removed by the
surgeon’s knife, the patient may still feel as though his arm or leg,
as the case may be, was entire, may feel much pain in the foot when the
leg has been amputated far above the ankle. Here, in recovering from
the effects of the anæsthetic, were it not for the additional evidence
of his eyesight, the patient might well doubt whether his limb had been
removed at all. The amusing story, in Marryat’s _Jacob Faithful_, of
the old sailor who, having two wooden legs, was accustomed at times
to wrap them up in flannel on account of the rheumatic pains which he
said he felt in them, is not so very extravagant after all. It is not,
however, altogether correct, as it represents the man feeling these
pains in his legs _long_ after they had been amputated. As a matter of
fact, the false impression passes off before very long. The explanation
given by physiologists is as follows: The severed nerve in the stump
is irritated and gives rise to pain; and inasmuch as irritation to
this nerve-trunk has hitherto been always caused by irritation of its
ultimate filaments distributed to the foot and leg, the mind continues
for some time to believe that the sensation still proceeds from thence.

We may glance at another and very similar instance of referred
sensations occurring also in surgical practice. Amongst the rarer
operations of what is termed plastic, and, by Sir James Paget,
‘decorative’ surgery is that by which a new nose is formed by calling
in the aid of the tissue of other parts of the body. This has been
done by bringing a flap of skin cut from the forehead down over the
nasal bones. The flap retains its connection with the deeper tissues
at a point between the eyes by means of a small pedicle, and thus its
blood-vessels and nerves are not all severed. This flap is not simply
pulled down from the forehead—it is twisted at the pedicle, so that
the raw surface lies on the bones of the nose. Now, for some time
after this operation has been performed, any irritation in the nose is
referred by the mind to that part of the forehead from which the flap
of skin was taken; and therefore, if a fly crawls over the patient’s
nose, it appears to him to be creeping across his forehead. Before the
operation, whenever the nerve-ends in the flap were irritated, it was
caused by something touching the forehead, and it is some time before
the mind ceases to refer such irritation to that part of the face.

Leaving, now, the domain of surgery, we may notice two simple
experiments mentioned by physiologists, which all can perform for
themselves. They both prove that conclusions formed upon the evidence
of the sense of touch alone may be quite incorrect. By crossing the
second finger over the first, and then placing a marble between the
tips of the fingers, we get a sensation that leads us to suppose that
there must be two marbles instead of one only. This is because two
points in the fingers are touched simultaneously, which in the ordinary
position could only be touched at the same moment by two marbles.
Judging, then, from the sense of touch alone, the mind infers that
there are two round hard substances beneath the finger-tips; but the
evidence of eyesight and the knowledge that we have placed but one
marble in position, corrects the misapprehension. Again, if we take a
pair of compasses the points of which are not sufficiently sharp to
prick the skin, and separating the extremities rather more than an inch
from one another, draw them across the cheek transversely from a little
in front of one ear to the lips, we shall be tempted to think, from
the evidence of touch alone, that the points are becoming more widely
separated. By measuring the distance between the two points afterwards,
we can assure ourselves that this has not been so; but whilst the
compasses were being drawn along the cheek, and still more when they
had reached the lips, the impression that the distance between the
points increased was very strong. This delusion is said to depend upon
the fact, that some parts of the cutaneous covering of the body are
much more plentifully supplied with nerves than others. It is stated
that the mind probably forms its idea of the distance between two
points on the skin which are irritated in any way—as, for instance, by
the points of a pair of compasses touching the surface—by the number of
nerve-endings lying between these two points which remain unirritated.
Thus, if there be fewer unirritated nerve-endings lying between the
two points of the compasses when placed on the cheek, than there are
when they are placed at the lips, the mind will infer that the distance
between these points is smaller in the former position than in the
latter.




THE STATE’S NEGLECT OF DENTISTRY.


The machinery of the State is so vast that it may well be imperfect
here and there. It frequently falls to the lot of individuals to
point out how the tide of progress has left details in a condition
of inefficiency. We note a recent instance of this. In August last,
at the annual meeting of the British Dental Association, Mr George
Cunningham, one of its members, drew attention to the backwardness of
the practice of dentistry in the various departments of the State.
The substance of his case amounted to this: In the army and navy,
unskilled practitioners wielded uncouth and inefficient instruments
in following antiquated and unscientific methods; while the police
force and the employees of the India and Post offices by no means
derived the full advantages of this department of medical science. Mr
Cunningham was bold enough to include the inmates of prisons among
those whose interests were neglected; and of course the principle
of the humane treatment of criminals is already conceded in the
appointment of jail chaplains and surgeons. We need not enter here into
the voluminous details with which Mr Cunningham substantiated his case.
The broad conclusions he would seem to draw are these: that the medical
practitioner employed by the State should possess a more thorough
knowledge of dentistry; that, where necessary, the services of the
completely trained and qualified dentist should be secured; and that
full resort should be had to the remedial resources of dental science.
Seeing the suffering caused by diseases of the teeth, and the subtle
and intimate connection existing between dental and other maladies, we
trust Mr Cunningham’s paper may receive the consideration it would seem
to deserve.




THE BOARD OF TRADE JOURNAL.


Persons wishing to keep up their information on subjects connected with
trade and changes in foreign tariffs may do so by consulting the _Board
of Trade Journal_, the first numbers of which have just been issued.
An attempt is also made in this journal to give the public information
as to trade movements abroad, from the communications of the different
consuls and colonial governors. Some of the periodical statistical
returns of the Board of Trade will also be included from time to time.
Such a journal deserves the support of all merchants and manufacturers
at all interested in our foreign trade. Formerly, the commercial
Reports from Her Majesty’s representatives abroad did not see the
light for months, or perhaps a year, after they were received; now,
these have some chance of being really useful to persons interested in
foreign trade and to the community at large.




LOVE’S SEASONS.


    Love came to my heart with the earliest swallow,
      The lark’s blithe matins and breath of Spring;
    With hyacinth-bell and with budding sallow,
      And all the promise the year could bring.

    Love dwelt in my heart while the Summer roses
      Poured forth their incense on every hand;
    And from wood and meadow and garden-closes
      The sweet bird-voices made glad the land.

    Love grew in my heart to its full fruition
      When Autumn lavished her gifts untold,
    And answered earth’s myriad-voiced petition
      With orchard-treasure and harvest-gold.

    Love waned in my heart when the snows were shaken
      From Winter’s hand o’er the rose’s bed;
    And never again shall my soul awaken
      At Hope’s glad summons—for Love lies dead.

            W. P. W.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed and Published by W. & R. CHAMBERS, 47 Paternoster Row, LONDON,
and 339 High Street, EDINBURGH.

       *       *       *       *       *

_All Rights Reserved._





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHAMBERS'S JOURNAL OF POPULAR LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART, FIFTH SERIES, NO. 149, VOL. III, NOVEMBER 6, 1886 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


