The Project Gutenberg eBook of The English Secretary; or, Methode of Writing Epistles and Letters (1599)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The English Secretary; or, Methode of Writing Epistles and Letters (1599)

Author: active 1575-1595 Angel Day

Release date: April 23, 2021 [eBook #65147]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Greg Lindahl, Robert Tonsing, Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ENGLISH SECRETARY; OR, METHODE OF WRITING EPISTLES AND LETTERS (1599) ***

                                  THE
                                ENGLISH
                             _SECRETARY_,
                                  OR
                        _Methode_ of writing of
                       _Epistles_ and _Letters_:

                                 WITH
              A declaration of such _Tropes_, _Figures_,
                and _Schemes_, as either vsually or for
                  ornament sake are therin required.

                    Also the parts and office of a
                             _Secretarie_,

                       Deuided into two bookes.

             Now newly reuised and in many parts corrected
                             and amended:

                             By Angel Day.

                              _AT LONDON_
               Printed by _P. S._ for _C. Burbie_ and are
                 to be sold at his shop, at the Royall
                           Exchange.  1599.




                    To the right Honorable, Edward
            _de_ Vere, _Earle of_ Oxenford, _Vicount_ Bul-
             becke, _Lord_ Standford _and of_ Badlesmere,
                    and Lord great Chamberlaine of
                              _England_.


It is now a fewe yeares passed (Right Honourable, & my very good Lord)
since emboldned by your faour, this booke rudely digested, and then
roughly deliuered, I did in the very nonage thereof recōmend vnto your
Patronage. And howbeit at that time, very little therin appeared worthy
so honourable acceptance: yet pleased it your L. the same should then
passe vnder your fauourable countenance.

To answer so great bountie therein shewed, I haue naught but my simple
acknowledgement: and in signification of the will I haue to do vnto
your Lordship any acceptable seruice, no other matter in shew, then
a fresh renouation of the selfe same title by an other presentment,
howbeit in far more orderly manner then formerly was deliuered.

Your Lordship may please of your owne ennobled condition to well
dooing, in pardoning the presumption of the former, to vouchsafe your
liking to this latter, wherein (notwithstanding the title all one)
yet shall you finde the worke both in order, habit and shape, to be
diuersly chaunged.

To excuse the defecte of the one, or enlarge my paines taken in
publishing the other, were on either part needlesse: seeing my desire
in both, hath principally sorted to one self meaning: If your L. find
ought herein answerable to your iudgmēt, it is inough: and the vsers
shall thereby (I hope) finde more cause to be satisfied. The wisest of
all ages, haue not at one instant collected their experience: _Plato_
in his first original was nothing so diuine: _Socrates_ in his cradle
had no taste of his after wisdome: _Hercules_ past many yeres ere he
grew famed by his labors, & onely vse and practize enableth vnto the
greatest perfection.

This being so, It will, I trust, seeme in me a matter the more
pardonable, to haue aduentured as I did the formost of this purposed
labor, regarding that by a reuew of the same it hath now receiued some
shape and proportion. Such as it is I humblie recommend as before, vnto
your honorable liking. And for my selfe do remaine, alwaies

                              _By your honorable L. to be commanded_,

                                               Angel Day.




                     To the learned and courteous
                        _Readers in generall_.


Gentlemen, _When I do begin first to speake vnto you in this action,
me thinks, you doe espie in me the parts of an ill_ Scholler, _who in
all his dooinges, is forced to craue pardon, but hardly findeth the way
that may purchase vnto him selfe the benefite of such a pardon._

_In reformation, two notable instances are held the which as I conceiue
do craue allowance, though no prerogatiue in wel doing, and these are
for a man to finde his defect, and secondly to haue a will to amend it._

_I will assure you, though I be not gratious, I would be loath to seeme
gracelesse and this benefite I will haue to gaine your allowance, that
I will blush for mine errors, where I fault in abilitie, I will shew
you my will: And when in all I cannot cleare me from your censures, yet
shall your courteous forbearance be in me no waies misprised._

_I haue to foretime as now still trauelled with the gardener, who
first throweth vp his earth on a rude heape, the scattereth it, after
smootheth it, next squareth it, & lastly bringeth it into knots and
workmanship, before which you know, there are many weeds, loose
hearbes, grasses, sticks, and rubbish to be picked vp & thrown out:
And then and not before beginneth his worke to drawe towards the
perfection._

_As he so I, at the first threw vp this groundwork in a heape, and
onely did scatter it: after, and hether vnto I haue endeuored to
smooth and to square it, picking out thereof many thinges which lay to
too much disordered. It onely now wanteth to be labored on by a more
curious workmanship, but because it is my garden plat, & my prouision
is too small to perfect on a sodaine so spacious a ground worke, I
will temporize with those duties, which either by time may in me be
supported or by a greater hability in others may happilie hereafter be
performed._

_Now because it is in all omissions the greatest omission not to bee
thankefull for courtesies, I will acknowledge that as you haue hitherto
benignly delt with me in the suruey of these labours, so haue you bound
mee the more vnto you by your fauourable censures. And yet if after
this continued trauell vnto this present, you either in mine or in
the printers escapes find any thing blame worthy, couer it I pray you
as before you haue done with the vaile of your courtesie. The copies
before this, haue bene I confesse erroniously many wayes deliuered, and
this by the blottings and interlinings had in the former amendements
hath peraduenter also his escapes or mistakings: If any be, they are
fewe I hope, and therefore the more easie to be tollerated. Onely
correct where fault is, and the printer and I shalbe beholding vnto
you._

_Hauing thus performed for my selfe what vnto your worthines stoode
meete to be considered, giue mee now leaue I pray you, touching the
order and course in this |Methode| hereafter obserued, to say somthing
to them which therby are to take any benefit or profite. In which
case, the learner is circumspectly with himselfe to consider, the
seuerall rules in the particular chapters preceeding the orders of
those |Epistles|, in such sort as afterwards they are distinguished, &
therein see, what to the better ordering and principall direction, of
whatsoeuer hee shall take in hand to write, is there (for his better
instruction) enioyned. By diligent animaduersion wherof, he shall the
better vnderstand the seuerall natures and properties, that in the
parts of euery |Epistle|, are ordinarily to be required, besides the
vse of them in their seueral places, and what force they beare, being
so sorted out, according to their speciall purposes and directions._

_Next, for the better inducement and leading him into a plaine and
perfect platforme of this |Methode| following, & to the intent he may
as neere as may be, or as his capacitie (at leastwise) may any waies
reach vnto, knowe (skilfully, & not by rote) how or in what sort he
shall happen to doe either well or ill, I haue first (in a preamble
or intermixed discourse, either preceeding or interchangeably passing,
before or with the kindes of euery sorte of |Epistles|) declared the
properties and vse of those |Epistles|, vpon what parts and places,
they and euery of them doo consist, with what vehemencie or lesse
application they are to bee inforced or quallified, so that he who
seemeth to haue least knowledge at all (be it that he haue perseuerance
to conceiue or to distinguish the parts he seeth there laid out before
his eyes) may with great facilitie, attaine to whatsoeuer, herein
prescribed, or by the circumstance thereof intended to be in any sort
deliuered._

_To the greater ornament whereof, I haue applied a number of |Figures,
Schemes|, and |Tropes| in the margent of euery |Epistle|, euen with
the places where they are vsed. And at the end of this worke, haue set
them altogither, and therein explaned to the Learners view, and for his
readier vse, their particular natures and qualities, to the end that
they who (being vnlearned,& hauing a pretie conceit of inuention of
themselues) haue heretofore vnknowing done well, may see how with skill
and discretion hereafter to pursue the same, & the ignorant also hereof
whose reach hath not been so ample as others, may be thereby informed
what vnto well doing is most consonant and agreeing._

_Now, for the readier finding of those |Epistles|, as each of their
kindes are suted forth in sundrie |Examples|: Peruse but the head of
euery page and there you shall find what in the same page is contained,
|viz.| Where the |Epistles| be, you shall haue them noted in their
kindes, as Epistles |Hortatorie|, |Dehortatorie|, |Swasorie|, or
|Disswasorie|, &c. And likewise in the admixtions, you shall finde
|Places| or |Parts Hortatorie|, |Commendatorie|, |Petitorie|, &c. as
they fall out to be handled._

_This booke thus shewing these parts before remembred, I haue termed
as you see by the name of |The Secretorie|, being in the consideration
thereof nothing ignorant what great perfection is to be required in
such a one, by whose title the same is deliuered, neither supposing the
matter herein contained to appeare so sufficient, as perfectly thereby
to enable what in the same function is to bee required, but because
the orderly writing of Letters, being a principall part belonging to
a |Secretorie|, is by the |Method|: hereof deliuered to any Learners
capacitie whereout the Scholler or any other that is vnfurnished of the
knowledge thereof, may gather ayde and furtherance, I haue therefore
endeuored to tearme it by the name of |Secretarie|._

_These with my willing minde, and desire of well doing herein, I doo
present to the generall and friendly regarde of all, wishing that in
courtesie they repute of my trauels, as formost of all other things,
I therein respected their benefites. In affoording whereof, they
shall doo no more then belongeth to good mindes, and encourage me by
whatsoeuer other meanes hereafter, to gratifie their fauours._




                              The English
                              Secretorie.


            Of an Epistle, the commodities and vse thereof.
                               Chap. 1.

=Forasmuch as we haue herein endeuoured to lay downe a platforme or
method for writing of Epistles. It shall not be amisse, that following
the order of all other writers, wee first define vnto you what an
Epistle is. An Epistle therefore, is that which vsually we in our
vulgar, doe tearms a Letter, and for the respectes thereof is called
the messenger, or familiar speach of the absent, for that therein
is discouered whatsoeuer the minde wisheth in such cases to haue
deliuered. The diuersities of Epistles are manifold, as wherof ensueth
a platforme to euerie motion, being in truth so infinite as are yᵉ
imaginations of each ones fantasie, seeing the declaration of euerie
letter, is no more then what the minde willeth in all occasions to
be perfourmed, and according to such instigations wherewith at that
instant men are fed when they write, taketh his formall substance,
whether it be to require, counsel, exhort, command, informie, commend,
entreat, aduertise, gratulate, or whatsoeuer other purpose therein
pretended, as cause and matter maie fall out to be required. The
antiquity is as ancient as the benefite that therof ensueth is great,
whereof onlie those that are sufficientlie enabled with the qualitie,
can giue the greatest testimonie. Needelesse were it for me to commend
the vse, when aswell by the authorities of a number the best learned,
who to aduance the efficacie thereof, haue in sundrie languages
prescribed rules and methods for the same, as of others besides, whose
most excellent writings of Epistles are at this present extant, it is
most plentifully aduanced. And although pregnant wit ensuing by nature
was the foremost cause that first bred the inuention of Letters, and
that euery one naturally can speake, or in some sort or other set down
their meaning: yet Art preuailing in the cause, and by cunning skill
marshalling euery thing in his due order, place and proportion, how
much more the same is then beautified, adorned, and as it were in a new
shape transmuted by such kind of knowledge, the difference that dailie
appeareth may yeeld proofe sufficient.=




             What is chiefelie to be respected in framing
                     of an Epistle.    _Chap. 2._


=Forasmuch as by the necessarie vse of Letters before laid downe,
a commendable maner of writing and framing the same hath bene
already remembred: It shall not bee amisse, that in this Chapter
we now endeuour to answere the purpose therein pretended. For the
manifestation whereof, I haue thought good to drawe vnto your
consideration certaine principall points, which thereunto are
speciallie to be required: first, |Aptnes of words| and |sentences|,
respecting that they be neate and choiselie picked, and orderly
handled: next, |Breuity of speach|, according in matter and
circumstance fitlie to be framed: lastly, |Comlines in deliuerance|,
concerning the person and cause, whereupon the direction is grounded.=

=The first, being |Aptnesse of wordes and sentences|, consisteth in
choice and good tearmes, in skilful and proper application of them
according to their true meanings, in wel sorting and fitting them, to
their seuerall purposes. |Choise| and good tearmes, are in words vsual,
and plain for the matter in deliuerie, not improper nor new coined,
nor too olde, as hauing not of long time before bene vsed. |Skilfull
application| is, when in their setting down they haue either their true
& proper signification for deliuery, or else by a more delicate or
pleasant inuenton may be caried conceitedly. |Well sorting & fitting
them|, resteth in the matter in handling, that therein be a concordance
with their applications, whereof may ensue a due construction, and no
disorderlie mistaking.=

=The next, being |Breuity of speach|, is not as some vndiscreetlie
haue imagined, that which consisteth in fewnes of lines, & shortnes
of roome in shew of a side of paper, but breuitie of matter, wherein
scope sufficient remaining for the necessary demonstration and
deliuerie of any needfull occasion, men are barred from friuolous
circumstances, and inioined therin to abhorre all maner of tediousnes:
For which cause some haue beene of opinion, that continuance of matter
ought not to be vsed in an |Epistle|, for that it thereby looseth the
shew of an |Epistle|, and taketh vpon it the habit of an Oration: Yet
of such sort are in this method sundry Epistles, the titles wherof
are, |Hortatorie|, |Dehortatorie|, |Laudatorie|, |Vituperatorie|,
|Suasorie|, |Petitorie|, |Monitorie|, |Accusatorie|, |Excusatorie|,
|Consolatorie|, |Inuectiue| and such like, whose speciall vses do of
necessitie admit such scope as in euerie ordinarie Epistle is not
found, and though they beare in them many |Oratorie| parts, yet lose
they not at all for that, neither name nor habit of an |Epistle|. The
tolleration and ordinarie vse of which, both examples of many learned,
and common custome hath warranted. And therfore, when to be briefe
it is herein inioyned, it is alwayes thereby to be intended, that a
man with onelie necessarie speeches may bee permitted to deliuer his
meaning, neither is it without the limits of breuitie, when aptlie and
at full the same shall be in this sort reported.=

=And for the better declaration, howe farre the conceit hereof may be
induced only in writing of Letters, I will first limit what may be
accounted necessarie therein, and afterwards endeuour to lay downe,
howe contrarie thereunto, men (aswell in the vse, as in neglecting
thereof) haue heretofore erred. Necessarie speeches, I do account
whatsoeuer is set downe, for the plaine and open deliuerie of euerie
occasion, to the intent the minde of the writer, and what he pursueth
may aptly and in good and ready sort be conceiued. The repugnancie
hereof is when either with too much curtalling our arguments, in
conceit to auoyde tediousnes, or with too manie or ouer often
repetitions, neuer thinking to haue spokē sufficiently, either to
induce remembrance, or put forward our meaning, we abbreuiate or
amplifie our Epistles. And when some others also, of a conceit more
curious than necessarie, striuing to excell in varietie of sentences,
and copie of words, coyned all of one sute, thinke therfore in paining
themselues to write more than needeth, to be counted more eloquent.
These falling out to bee imperfections, as each of them are in truth to
bee blamed, so where the defect remaineth, are they (for well writing)
with studie to be amended.=

=The third and last nowe being |Comelinesse in deliuerance touching the
person and cause|, séemeth to bee tied vnto two seuerall respects: that
is, to the reputation of the partie to whome wee write, his condition,
age, honour, and disposition, and to the fitnes of the matter whereof
we take vpon vs to write: for as it is most decent that in the matter
we make choice of, we giue vnto euerie cause his proper and orderly
effect: so is it euery way as conuenient to afford a like _Decorum_ of
those to whome our letters are directed.=

=The reputation of each partie, is measured according to his dignitie
or worthinesse, whereby hee beareth reckoning and place before vs.
The condition, by the age or maner of liuing, wherein resteth either
grauitie or youthfulnesse. The humour by the disposition, as whether
desirous to be reuerenced, fawned on, or with plaine termes vsed. By
this reason, the methode or stile of our letters falleth out diuerslie
to be considered: in one sort we frame them to olde men, in an other
sort to young men, one way to sad and graue persons, another to light
and yong fellowes: one platforme to Courtiers, another to Philosophers.
To great and notable personages, with a dutie speciall, appropriate
to their calling: To our betters, alwayes with submission: To our
inferiours, benignly and fauourably: To our friends, louinglie: To our
enemies sharplie and nippinglie. Thus farre as touching the person, and
now for the cause.=

=In this point it séemeth that the matter of euerie writing should
still be measureed according to the writers apparance, credit or
worthines, that the validity thereof should be answerable to the one
or the others greatnes, or goodnesse: that the intendment be sound,
lawfull, and to no euill purposes: that it containe not base, filthie,
or scurrile matter, vnbeséeming a direction so worthie. Then that
euerie thing to bee written of should bee deliuered according to his
proper qualitie: Termes more officious than beséeming, are vnfitting:
not sufficientlie to consider of each reputation, were ouer homelie. A
matter of grauitie is to bee deliuered with waight: a matter of sorrowe
should be reported with griefe: a matter of pastime, to be discoursed
with pleasure: a matter of folly, intermingled with laughter. Now
contrariwise, to a person sorrowfull to write of iests, to talke
learnedly to a clowne, to salute an olde man with childish fantasies:
in cases of waight, to aduance trifles: were altogither as improper as
peeuish, and more absurd than fitteth to be tollerated in anie skilfull
vsage.=

[Sidenote: Words improper and impugning the sense.]

[Sidenote: Errors commō to the learned, as well as to the vnlearned.]

=And because I haue taken vpon me some distinguishments of writing,
wherein I speciallie stand vpon choise and meete termes and spéeches,
with proper applications: I thinke it not amisse to set down vnto you
some shew of the contrarie inurements, wherby you may with the greater
discretion conceiue the error thereof, the which I haue sometimes
noted in other mens writings; And first, of vnséemly applications:
as for example: one that sometimes intended not a litle of his owne
inuention, tooke vpon him to write a loue letter to a woman of verie
meane reckoning, in which, after he had drawne (God |Cupid| by the
name of the blinded boy) by those parts of fauor that neuer were in
her, and shewed himselfe much passionat for the loue he ought to her,
he concludeth the meatter in this sort. |Thus crauing your lawfull
beneuolence, in not mee reiecting, your answere comfortable and not
intollerable, &c.| The woman not accustomed to such hote intertainment,
and rather bluntlie before time pursued, then daintilie intreated,
beganne here vpon (forsooth) to waxe coy, and to intende great matter
of her self, and vaunting her fauour at a higher rate then he belike
séemed afterwarde willing to become a purchaser of, remained as she
was, and himselfe at his more profitable studies. The conclusion of his
letter was verie improper, insomuch as requiring liking by the name of
|Beneuolence|, hee both misprised his owne demand, and séemed to induce
a word more sounding to a charitable reliefe, or curteous contribution
of money, then to anie such purpose as he meant it. Besides, |your
answere comfortable, and not intollerable|. If these had passed in
a iest, it had béene more conuenient, but vsed |bona fide|, it was
too bad, especiallie respecting the partie what she was, from whome
one would haue supposed that such a one as himself, could neuer haue
receiued (but by too much tolleration) any discontentment at all. This
errour we see is not onelie common to the vnlearned, for as well this
one, who in his profession (as I was informed by him that shewed me the
letter) was well reputed of, but also some of the forwarder sort, onlie
by affectation of words, which they haue vsed, haue béene misliked,
and yet learned ynough. Among which a Doctor of Physicke long since,
intending to be verie eloquent in words, and such as euery Carter
should not conceiue of, began an Epistle to a booke by him published in
this sort: wherein secondly appeareth this errour of old improper or
new coyned termes, and this was the forme.=

[Sidenote: A ridiculous maner of writing.]

[Sidenote: Vrbanitie and exasperate vnproperlie placed.]

Egregious Doctours and Maisters of the eximious and Archane Science of
Physicke, of your Vrbanitie exasperate not your selues agaynst mee, for
making of this little volume of Physicke. Considering that my pretence
is for an vtilitie and a Common-wealth. And this not onelie, but also I
doe it for no detriment, but for a preferment of your laudable Science,
that euerie man should esteeme, repute, and regarde the excellent
facultie. And also you to bee extolled and highlie preferred, that
hath and dooth studie, practise and labour this saide Archane Science,
to the which none inartious persons, can nor shall attaine to the
knowledge: yet notwithstanding fooles and insipient persons, yea and
manie the which doth think themselues wise (the which in this facultie
be fooles indeed) will enterprise to smatter, &c. =Was there euer seene
from a learned man a more preposterous & confused kind of writing,
farced with so many and such odde coyned tearmes in so little vttering?
But surely, the man did it of a great conceite, for as appeareth by
the course of all his Epistle following, his wittes were so pestered
with an angrie mislike of the bad demeanor of some vnlearned vsers of
his science (as he thought with himselfe) that euerie botcher should
not be able to vent him, but hee should bee a man of some reach at
least that should finde him. Neuerthelesse howe wise so euer stood
his imaginations: this one thing doe I knowe, that diuerse to whome
I haue shewed the booke haue verie heartilie laughed in perusing the
parts of his writing. For these |egregious|, |eximious|, |vrbanitie|,
and |exasperate|, although the wordes be in some sort tollerable,
yet because anie of them are amongst vs verie rarelie vsed, and in
this writing two of them especially very vnproperly placed, the maner
thereof soundeth (in mine opinion) nothing pleasant. Insomuch as
|exasperate| is properly to set him in a farther rage, that is alreadie
furiously bent in a thing, and besides, by the action of another man
then himselfe who as it were of a resolute will and meaning, would goe
about to procure it, so that it maie be well saide, |hee did exasperate
his furies the more, by inducing such a speach, or such an acte:| but
it cannot bee so properlie deliuered to saie, |exasperate not your
selfe for such a thing|, especiallie when I am not therewith so much as
in anie mislike alreadie, which no man canne at anie time bee, without
he first knowe an occasion: your |Vrbanitie| likewise being deriued
of the Latine worde |Vrbanus|, which is ciuile, courteous, gentle,
modest, or well ruled, as men commonlie are in Cities and places of
good gouernement, whereof that worde taketh his originall, the worde
is not common amongst vs, nor so apt to the sense as if hee had saide,
|your curtesie, your modestie|, and so it might run thus, |Let not your
curtesies be agreeued against me|, or, |Let it not be offensiue to your
modesty, that for the benefite of a great manie, I haue published this
volume of Physicke|. The grounde was verie good, for his intendment
was, that the cause belonged to a common wealth, wherein if anie
particular commoditie seemed to be lessened, wise men and such as were
more studious of their Countries good, then of their owne peculiar
gaine, ought not to be offended. Then saith he: |And this not only, but
also I doe it for no detriment, &c.| What confused deliuerance is this?
How much more orderlie thus, which soundeth also more to his meaning.
|And this also respected, in that I doe it not for anie detriment vnto
you, but for a preferment of your laudable science|. Then his comming
in with |arcane science, inartious fooles and insipient persons|, had
it not beene lesse improper, if hee had saide |profounde science,
and vnskilfull or vnlearned|, for |inartious|, and to haue contented
himselfe with his |fooles|, without adding to the same |insipient
persons|. Lastlie he proceedeth: |And many the which dooth thinke
themselues wise (the which in this facultie are fooles indeede) will
enterprise, &c.| Here is |the which| and |the which|, a phrase neuer
with vs accustomed, nor with anie good writer in his time (which was
not manie yeares since) the sence whereof might in this sort more
plainelie bee deliuered. |And many who in their owne opinion doe seeme
verie wise (but therein are in truth verie fooles) will enterprise,
&c.| But of this ynough, for that I thinke it nowe high time to proceed
to the rest, these two exemples being sufficient to admonish the
learner, of the congruitie of his speaches and sentences, with good
phrases that bee most agreeing to the meaning, and not improperlie, to
be deliuered, whereby he shall auoid the like errour, and absurditie
in conueiance hereby expressed, and already so much reprehended.=




          Of the habite and parts of an Epistle.    _Cap. 3._


[Sidenote: Character of an Epistle generall.]

[Sidenote: Epistles distinguished into generall and speciall.]

[Sidenote: Letters general are familar.]

[Sidenote: Letters special.]

[Sidenote: Difference of stile.]

=Seeing an Epistle hath chieflie his definition herof, in that it
is tearmed the familiar and mutuall talke of one absent friende to
another: it seemeth the Character thereof, shoulde according thereunto
bee simple, plaine, and of the lowest and meanest stile, vtterlie
deuoid of anie shadow of hie and loftie speaches: yet neuerthelesse,
for so much as in the argument of a great manie of them (whose
seuerall distinctions hereafter shall appeare) is required (as I said
before) a more high and loftie deliuerance, partaking manie waies
with that kinde accustomed in Orations, and is therefore accordinglie
to be necessarilie furnished with the pointes thereunto incident: we
will for the present, sort all kinde of Epistles onelie into these
two maner of differences, the one part whereof shall be said to be
general, and the other speciall. Under this title of generall shall bee
comprehended all such, as either for fashions sake, custome, dutie,
curtesie, or other familiaritie do ordinarilie passe from one part to
another, rather of a pleasant conceit, or some other more district or
seuere motion, then of anie extraordinarie cause, forme, or substance
in either of them contained. Such are those as whome either long
acquaintance, or ancient familiaritie, haue caused enterchangeablie to
haue performed: or fatherly reuerence, and seruile dutie haue bound, by
graue authoritie ouer children, kindred or seruants, accustomablie to
be continued. These, for the common and ordinarie matter in euerie of
them vsed, being vtterly exempt from anie waight or grauitie at all,
are rightlie tearmed by the name of familiar letters. They nowe that
be speciall are such, the matter of whome (as I said before) doe admit
both higher stile, and more orderlie deliuerance, according to the
waight of the argument, in anie of them to bee handled: and for this
cause are tearmed speciall, as bearing in them a resolute purpose and
intendment seriouslie to discourse vpon, to answere, mittigate or auoid
any certain matter or causes, importing the present affairs whereupon
the direction is framed. Of them also are certaine diuisions, learnedly
by skilfull Authours, that heretofore haue beene distinguished, the
titles whereof I doe omit, in another place then this more opportune to
be hereafter remembred. These as they are from the others manie waies
estranged in their seuerall argumentes: so vnto the conueiance and
expressing of their causes appertaineth both other order, and diuers
partes in them (then in the residue) more fullie to be considered. In
whose composition, that there maie be a platforme gathered of a more
certaine proceeding, we wil as others haue thought meet, distinguish
their seuerall parts as they fall out to be borrowed in an oration.=

[Sidenote: Inuention.]

[Sidenote: Disposition.]

[Sidenote: Eloquution.]

[Sidenote: Helps to Inuention and Eloquution.]

=In such kind therefore of Epistles, rightly and with good skil to be
handled, the learner shal vnderstand, that there are three things, by
meanes whereof, for the needfull expressing and orderlie deliuerie of
anie matter whatsoeuer, he must of necessitie be furnished. |Inuention|
first, wherein plentifullie is searched and considered, what kind of
matter, how much varietie of sentences, what sorts of figures, how
many similitudes, what approbations, diminutions, insinuations and
circumstances are presentlie needefull, or furthering to the matter in
handling. Then, |Disposition|, whereby is orderlie, cunninglie, and
perfectlie laid downe and disposed, euerie matter and cause in his due
order, proportion and place. Thirdlie, |Eloquution|, whose efficacie in
speaches, neate, pure and elegant, is in the other Chapter vnder aptnes
of words sufficientlie alreadie described. The first and the last of
these three, as they are greatlie put forwarde by nature, which in some
being farre more curious of imitation and studie of the best, then in
other some, whose will and conceit alike, doe (by a verie instinct)
affect and couet far more baser purposes: so besides the furtherance
continuallie atchieued by often vse of reading, shall herein be
greatlie holpen, in that for the selfe same purpose, and to the intent
the learner maie as well in his natiue tongue, know the right vse
of figures and Tropes heretofore neuer by him vnderstoode, as also
discerne and vse them, out of others and in his own writings. I haue
at the latter end of this booke, gathered together all such Figures,
Schemes and Tropes hereunto needefull and conuenient, and there haue by
sundrie familiar examples expressed their vses and seuerall effects.
In diligent conceit and aduerting whereof, the vse vnto the practiser
shall in short time bee founde greatlie auaileable, by the benefit
thereby attained.=

[Sidenote: Stile of Epistles.]

[Sidenote: Sublime.]

[Sidenote: Humile.]

[Sidenote: Mediocre.]

=Now in as much as |Eloquution| is annexed vnto the stile, which
euermore is also tied to the argument and substance of euerie Epistle:
it is to be regarded what stile maie generallie bee deemed meetest for
the common habit, wherein each of them maie ordinarilie be published.
In the recording whereof, we do find thrée sorts, especiallie in all
kinds of writing and speaking, to haue bene generallie commended.
_Sublime_, the highest and stateliest maner, and loftiest deliuerance
of anie thing that maie bee, expressing the heroicall and mightie
actions of Kinges, Princes, and other honourable personages, the stile
whereof is said to be tragicall swelling in choice, and those the most
haughtiest tearmes, commended, described, amplified and preferred also
by Orators, which manie excellent Figures and places of Rhetorique.
_Humile_, the lowest comicall, and most simple of all others, the
matter whereof is the meanest subiect of anie argument that maie be,
entermedling in common causes, aduertisements and mutuall affectes
of euerie one, the stile whereof sweepeth euen the very grounde it
selfe, and is fittest appropriate to our familiar Letters, for that
in such familiar causes and maners, the same is solely frequented, in
which neuertheless is _Sua faceties et elegantia quædam_ his certaine
kind of elegancie, pleasant and neat conueiance, not altogether to be
sequestred from that kinde of deliuerance. _Mediocre_, a meane betwixt
high and lowe, vehement and slender, too much and too little, as we
saie, in which are expressed histories, Declamations, Comentaries, and
other intermingled actions, not of anie in particular, but of all in
generall, this stile of all others maie be adapted vnto these speciall
kinds of Epistles.=

[Sidenote: Skilfull vse of writing.]

[Sidenote: Parts of an Epistle.]

[Sidenote: Exordium.]

[Sidenote: Narratio & Propositio.]

[Sidenote: Confirmatiō.]

[Sidenote: Confutatiō.]

[Sidenote: Peroratiō.]

=Thus then it followeth, that whether we write familiarlie, or
waightilie, we must endeuour as neere as maie bee that each be
perfourmed skilfullie, for that to neither of them maie want learning,
without the knowledge whereof, what ornament can there be at all of
this expected elegancie. The particularities whereof included in these
two titles |Inuention| and |Eloquution|, both Nature and Skill do
put forward as we daily see by a double instruction. This therfore
sufficing for those twain, let vs see what parts are supplied in an
Epistle, succéeding in the other also, and ayding to |Disposition|.
The first place is |Exordium|, a beginning or introduction to the
matter to be written of, which is not always after one sort or fashion,
but in diuerse maners: as sometimes by preamble, wherein either for our
selues, or the cause we write of, or in respect of him, for or to whom
we write, wee studie to win fauor or allowance of the matter, sometimes
by insinuation, wherin couertly, either in respect that the matter
requireth long debatement or that mislike may bee alreadie grounded
in him to whom we direct our letters, we seeke by cunning reasons to
shewe that the case so requiring is tollerable: or in the other, that
rather equity then selfe opinion must and ought chieflie to be weighed.
Sometimes by a similitude, wherein by manifesting the like of that we
take in hand to haue bene commenced, tollerated, or equally censured,
wee intend the same, or lesse force in our selues, at their hands
to bee borne withall or accepted, and diuerse other wayes besides,
as in the Epistles following shall be tendred. Then |Narratio|, or
|Propositio|, each seruing to one effect, wherein is declared or
proponed, in the one by plaine tearmes, in the other by inference,
or comparison, the verie substance of the matter whatsoeuer to be
handled. Then |Confirmatio|, wherein are amplified or suggested many
reasons, for the aggrauating or proof of any matter in question. After
|Confutatio|, whereby is diminished, disproued or auoided, whatsoeuer
to bee supposed, obiected or aggrauated. Lastlie, |Peroratio|, in which
after a briefe recapitulation of that which hath beene vrged, the
occasions thereof are immediatelie concluded. These are not altogither
at all times vsed, but some or the most of them as occasion serueth,
either admitted or reiected: besides which, others also are sometimes
remembred. The vse whereof as in sundrie Epistles they may be deemed
necessarie, shall in their seuerall examples hereafter perused, appeare
more euidentlie and largely.=




         Of certaine contents generally incident to all maner
                      of Epistles.    _Chap. 4._


[Sidenote: Maner of salutations.]

[Sidenote: Epithets.]

=In writing of Epistles, four especiall contents are alwaies
continuallie incident. The manner of Salutation, an order of taking
leaue or farewell, the Subscription, and the outwarde direction.
Salutations of auncient time were woont to bee fixed, _Quasi omen
faustum_, a signe or inuiting to good hap, in the front or vpper part
of the letter: so did the auncient |Romanes|, and in like manner after
their examples doo at this daie some other nations. But seldome or
neuer (especiallie of the learned and most curious writers) is the
same in our English directions, at any time accustomed. Onelie this,
where letters are directed from one or more of the Councell to an
inferiour Magistrate or person, or from some noble man to such, whom
hee intertaineth not in any estate of societie or equall familiaritie,
the maner of commendations (which with vs is retained for an order
of Salutation or gréeting) runneth lightlie in the beginning of the
Letter, and customablie is deliuered in this forme. |After our heartie
commendations vnto your L.| if it bee from a number of the Counsell
to a Noble man, or otherwise in the singular number vnto an inferiour
person, as thus. |After my heartie commendations vnto you|. But
otherwise writing seriouslie to anie man, the greeting if it be to one
far our better is turned, to an acknowledgment of some kind of dutie,
or reuerent account, and that most commonly at the end of the Letter,
which likewise in equalitie falleth out in such place to be mentioned.
And being in familiarities is to no place tied, but beginning, middle,
or ending of the Letter, all is one, as séemeth most consonant to the
vaine & disposition of the partie, and these also at all times not
deliuered in the selfe worde of gréeting or commendations, but by
diuerse |Epithets|, and fine conueiances, as falleth out to the matter
of the Epistle, and the conditions of the partie to be handled. This
being at the end of the Letter, there shall immediatelie follow the
order of farewell, which ioyning so hard thereupon as it doeth, wee
will put them both in one example of wordes and |Epithets|, togither
with the subscriptions, for the easier instruction of the learner, and
his better remembrance, referring the notes of euerie of them to their
places, where afterwards they are vsed in their seuerall Letters.=




            Diuerse orders of greetings, farewels and sub-
                       scriptions.    _Cap. 5_.


[Sidenote: Greetings of humilitie or acknowledgment of dutie.]

[Sidenote: Greetings familiar.]

=Acknowledging my selfe deepelie bounde vnto your L. for manie sundrie
fauours: I doe remaine in all humble reuerrence. Finding my selfe manie
wayes beholding vnto your exceeding courtesies, I ende. Remembring
howe much I am indebted vnto your L. for your sundrie benefites: I
conferre the regard thereof to my present imaginations, and doe beseech
thereof at your honourable handes an euerlasting continuance. All
humble loyaltie and seruice protested vnto your honorable calling, I
rest nowe and perpetuallie your L. &c. Fearing in speeches, neuer with
sufficiencie to manifest the conceit I haue of your most honourable
fauours: I solace my selfe with the remembrance, and humblie leaue your
L. to your woonted perseuerance. Praying the Almightie to haue your
L. euermore in his gratious protection, I humblie take my leaue. Your
worship in this, besides manie other occasions hauing perpetuallie
bound mee, how can I but rest such, as you haue expected and shall
euer find me. Eftsoones recording my bounden seruice vnto your worship
and my good Ladie, I remaine as euer before. Not forgetting howe manie
wayes I am charged, in dutifull remembrance towards you, I rest as
I haue protested. More grieued at my mishap and disabilitie, then
wanting either will or liking to doe seruice vnto you: I affix my selfe
euermore vpon the acceptance of your woonted cuʳtesie, and humblie
there withall do take my leaue: Commending the safetie and good estate
of your worship to the Almighties protection, I rest in all dutifull
regard to the same. Rather desirous to shewe my selfe thankful, then
otherwise able in like sort to giue you any requital, I continue, &c.
Binding my self by all possible indeuors, neuer to be fréed from the
charge of so excéeding benefites, I wish I might as I would, be vnto
you in verie deed, &c. Wishing vnto you and yours, as much happinesse,
as my selfe am clogged with carefulnesse, I surcease. Desiring vnto you
no worse successe in these and all other your laudable endeuors, then
my selfe haue eftsoones craued in performance of my chiefest trauels,
I recommend you to the tuition of the Almightie. Not forgetting our
accustomed gréetings and interchangeable welwishings, my hastie Letter
taketh ende. Weighing howe much you are alreadie busied, and not
willing to keepe you further occupied, I ende my long and tedious
discourse, beeing in nothing exempted from woonted salutations, and
accustomed kind of greetings. Thinke not though my haste be such, but
that I remember (notwithstanding all this breuitie) how greatlie I
stand charged both to you and yours, to whome, and all the rest to you
knowne I eftsoones commend me. Reioycing not a little at the health of
you and all other our friends, I hartily bid you fare well. Reiocing
my self on your wel-wishing, and the hope I haue to be returned in
safetie I commend my hap to fortune, and our gouernement to the
Almightie. Rendring vnto you as manie thankes, as I conceiued comfort
of your good intreatings, I leaue to detaine you. Omitting what else
to bee amplified in these or anie other occasions I expect your happie
returne, and in hope thereof doe bid you farewell. Knowing howe well I
loue you, the lesse ceremonies I néede to vse in greeting you, onlie
you shall remember to your parents in most hartie maner to commend mee.
Salute I praie you your friendes in my name, and thinke in my best and
serious wishes I neuer forget you. My father willed me in his behalfe
to salute you, and all the rest of your acquaintance here do most
hartilie greete you. Forget not in what sort I haue heretofore receiued
you, and thinke in the selfe same maner I do still intertaine you. My
gréetings to our friend R. let not bee vnremembred, and deeme that in
all my vowes I haue (vnto you all) most heartilie wished. I had almost
let slip my commendations vnto your brother, which for anie thing I
would not had bene forgotten, vpon whom, as of greatest choic, I will
make my reposing.=

=The liking I haue to N. maketh mee here to remember him whose good
demeanour as your own, I haue in chiefest reckoning. My gréetings and
paper haue all one ende togither, onelie our friendship indissoluble
can neuer be forgotten.=

=Thinke how exceedinglie I haue alwaies well wished vnto you, and
accordinglie thereunto measure the rest of mine affections towards
you. Haste compelleth mee to ende sooner than I would, wherin
notwithstanding I can neuer omit sufficientlie to gréete you, eftsoones
recognizing as behooueth, your especall good liking towards me, &c.=

=Innummerable of these and such like might be imagined both in
greetings and farewels, the course whereof beeing furnished with such
varietie as it is, I haue left the residue vnto the conceit of the
learner, accounting the plentie herein set down, for anie studious
follower to be alreadie sufficient.=

[Sidenote: Subscriptions.]

=And now to the Subscriptions, the diuersities whereof are (as best
they may be allotted in sence) to either of these to bee placed,
forwarned alwaies vnto the vnskilfull herein, that writing to anie
person of account, by howe much the more excellent hee is in calling
from him in whose behalfe the Letter is framed, by so much the lower,
shall the subscription thereunto belonging, in any wise be placed.=

=And if the state of honour of him to whome the Letter shall be
directed doe require so much, the verie lowest margent of paper shall
do no more but beare it, so be it the space bee seemelie for the name,
and the roome fairre inough to comprehend it, which Subscriptions in
all sortes to be handled shall passe in this or the like order or
substance.=

[Sidenote: Maner and varietie of subscriptions.]

=Your L. most deuoted and loyallie affected. Your Honours most assured
in whatsoeuer seruices. Your L. in whatsoeuer to be commanded. The most
affectionate vnto your L. of all others. Hee that hath vowed to liue
and die in your Honourable seruice. Your L. most faithfull and obedient
Sonne. Your La. louing and obedient Daughter. Who but by your L. is
onelie to be commaunded. Whose heart is your Honours, and his life by
your L. to be disposed. He that liueth not but for your worship, and
to doe you seruice. Whose regard stretcheth vnto your Worship more
then vnto anie others. He that vnto your worship hath vowed to become
most assured. Whome none haue euer bound so much, as the deserts of
your L. Your L. in all humblenes. Your Honours euer to be commaunded.
At your worships command. Your La. most bounden and affectionate. At
your honourable direction. Alwaies attendant vpon your L. pleasure.
Your worships in all good account. Yours euer louing and most assured.
To none so much as your selfe. Hee that in all accounts tendereth your
welfare. Whome by your onelie curtesie you haue conuinced. The same
which I accept from you, and not otherwise. Such as I am, or as you
wish to finde me. He that in his liking is onlie yours. Whome you
haue euer knowne, but neuer prooued. Whose liking onelie accounteth of
your worthinesse. Such as you haue euer founde me, and not otherwise.
Yours in what soeuer to bee imploied. More chary of your welfare, then
carefull of himselfe. Yours as you like to haue me. Yours faithfull
and euer assured. Yours or not his owne. He who found you, but neuer
knew you. He that once fauoured you, but sithence hath vowed neuer to
regarde you. Whose liking by your ingratitude hath beene quenched. In
whose account you once were, but now abandoned. Who once wished to
loue, but could neuer hate thee. Whom thy deserts haue made an enemie.
Whom hereby you may win, (if you list) for euer to become a friend.
To each one louing, but to the most charie. Whose heart shall faile
in any thing, sooner then in conceit towardes thee. Hée, whose in
loialtie thou didst protest to be. Who liueth not but to pursue thee.
Who euer looked on, but neuer loued thee. The same as you left me.
Such as you saw when you departed from me. The same and none other,
which I haue euer seemed to be. Whose worde hath bounde him, and faith
shall assure him. Yours most affectionate. Yours deuoted till death.
Yours while life swaieth within me. Yours as far forth as anie others.
&c. with manie other applications, whose |Epithets| are infinite, and
rather vpon the cause suggested then otherwise, to bee euermore added,
altered, or conceiued. These and the others may only suffice for the
present purpose, referring what else to be expected, to the regarde of
a more curious or delicate inuention.=

[Sidenote: Acknowledgemēt of duty in the Exordium.]

=And herein I thought good to aduertise the learner, that sometimes
it falleth out, that this acknowledgement of dutie, mentioned in the
beginning of the greetings and farewels, is in diuers Letters expressed
in the foremost part, and the |Exordium| thereupon framed: (for that
the same in truth is one of the parts thereunto belonging effected in
the person or condition of him to whom we write) which to doe, if in
his writing also the same maie be deemed necessarie, he maie then vse
some other order of farewell or taking leaue, either by imitation of
others, or if hee thinke meete, what herein else prescribed, consonant
and agreeing to the state and reputation of the same partie to whome
hee writeth. Now then shall followe the directions, which on the
outside of euerie Letter (the same being made vp and sealed) are
alwaies fired, and commonlie are termed by the name of Superscriptions.=




            Of Superscriptions and Directions.    _Cap. 6._


[Sidenote: Superscriptions and directions of the Romanes.]

=Among the auncient Romanes, when learning first grewe vnto skilfull
perfecton, and men first deuised excellentlie to write, then there
began to be extant in memorie, diuers formes of writing immediatlie, by
the name and title of Epistles, to be published to the posterity. In
the directions whereof, animated as I thinke with the vertues of their
parents, and accounting it (as in truth it was then so reputed) to be a
great honour vnto them, to be intituled with the name of the principall
author of their families, they sought no farther stile of magnificence,
but (were his parentage neuer so statelie or honorable) being therewith
contented, did onlie vpon such regard intitle their directions. For who
that hath bin but ordinarilie acquainted with the histories of their
actes, but knoweth and hath read, with what reuerence, those times
(greedy of vertue,) entertained the honorable desertes of such, as for
the common-wealth, and publicke aduancement of the state, had either
aduenturouslie hazarded, or couragiouslie lost a fraile, vncertaine, or
transitorie life, to the intent to purchase vnto their country quiet,
honour, or victorie, and to themselues and posteritie, eternized fame
and euer flourishing glorie. Neither was their country vnkind vnto them
herein, which for their sakes, and for the reuerend regarde of their
vertues, haue compensed the loue which to their parents they could not
shewe, to their children and succession in manie degrées after them.=

=Such were the families of the |Gracchi|, |Fabij|, |Cornelij|,
|Hortentij|, |Horatij|, |Metelli|, |Amilij|, |Scipiones| and
|Fabritij|. Whereby I coniecture that the custome hereof, by such
emulation adorned, became afterwardes a dignitie, and so succeeded in
honour to euerie posteritie.=

=These |Romans| therefore, vsed onlie, in the front of their letters
to write first their owne names, titles adoptiue, and surnames, after
that, his to whom they wrote, and lastlie their salutation or maner
of greetings: giuing also like aditions vnto the other as to him
belonged, whether it were by familie, office, or some other dignitie.
And this was the forme. |M. T. Cicero. M. Varoni. Sal. dicit,| or |C.
Cæsar: Comelio Balbo salutem dicit|. But that custome according to
the antiquity of the time, is long since worne out, and these dates
and seasons haue induced vnto vs for euerie estate of calling, a more
statelie reuerence according to the dignitie and worthines of the same.=

=The reuerend maiesty of Emperours, Kings and Princes, being aduāced
with a more excellency and supreame magnificence. The names of Dukes,
Marquises, Earles, barons and other magistrates, with more solemne and
honourable titles.=

[Sidenote: Diuersity of Estates.]

=The offices of estate and places most noble, amplified with larger
honours, and names accordant to their seuerall dignities.=

=And albeit few are the number, that herein shall be occasioned to
occupy their pen, but (knoweth on almost euerie daie) maie vnderstand
the formall application of euerie personages honour or worship: yet in
so much as all sortes are not perfectlie skilled, nor euerie man liueth
in place so conuenient to vnderstand it, and that it hath beene parcell
of a prescribed order so to doe, by those that haue written the like
methode, I will set downe so manie examples of estates for directions,
as to the matter and purpose hereof maie be adiudged conuenient,
beginning from the highest that are or haue beene latelie accustomed
in our common wealth (the soueraign Maiestie excepted) vnto the meaner
and most ordinary bred, and in present practise amongst vs. And first,
with the dignitie of Archbishop, to whom in this sort we frame our
direction.=

[Sidenote: Directions to an Archbishop. Bishop. Duke.]

[Sidenote: L. Chancellor. L. Treasurer. Earles and in office.]

[Sidenote: Lords knights of the priuie councell.]

=To the most reuerend Father in God, the L. Archbishop of Canturburie,
or York, Primate of England, and Metropolitane his verie good grace.
To the right reuerende Father in God, and my verie good Lorde, the
L. Bishop of London. To the high and mightie Prince, L. Duke of B.
his most noble grace. To the right honourable and my especiall good
L. the Lorde Chauncellor, or Lord high Treasurer of England. To the
right Honorable the Lorde Marquese of W. To the right Honourable the
Earle of E. Lorde Lieutenant for her maiestie in the, &c. To the right
Honourable the Earle of H. Lorde President of her Maiesties most
honorable Councell established in the North. To the right Honorable,
and my singular good L. the lorde B. one of the lords of her highnes
most honourable priuy Councell. To the right honorable sir W. M.
knight, Chancellour of the Exchequer, and of her Maiesties most
honorable priuy Councel. To the right honorable and my singular good
Lord and father, or ladie mother, the Earle or Countesse of N. To the
right honourable and my verie good ladie, the ladie A. Countesse of W.
To the most noble ladie and Paragon of all vertue, the ladie M. H. To
the right vertuous ladie endued with all singularitie, the ladie F. D.
To the most noble and towardlie yong Gentleman G. T. esquire, if hee be
a noble mans sonne vnder the degrée of a Baron. To the right honourable
sir W. S. knight, L. Maior of the citie of L. To the right worshipfull
W. L. esquire, one of the Iudges of her Maiesties court of common
Pleas. To the right worshipfull and my singular good ladie mother, the
Ladie D. H. To my verie good father, W. C. Marchant of the citie of B.
To the right worshipfull his especiall good maister, M. R. Marchant and
Alderman of L. To my seruant R. D. at C. &c.=

=Other examples besides these were needelesse to set downe, for that if
any alteration at all happen herein, it is by reason of familiaritie,
addition of offices, or change of titles. Onlie let herewith be noted,
that when Letters doe passe from some number of the Counsell, or from
any Lord of the same, to a noble man or knight, these directions of
honour and worship are seldome vsed. But rather thus. To our verie
good L. sir W. R. knight, lord Deputie of Ireland. To our verie good
L. the L. Maior of the citie of L. and to our verie louing friends W.
C. and R. P. Aldermen of the same. To my verie good lord, the L. T.
H. To my verie louing friend, sir. T. P. knight. To our verie louing
friends sir R. S. knight, _Custos rotulorum_ of her Maiesties Count. of
B. and R. W. and S. P. esquires, Iustices of peace of the same Shire.
The like directions also are vsed of an Earle, to any of these estates
to him inferiour in calling, and of a Baron to a Iustice of peace, but
commonlie they will adde the title of worship.=




       The diuisions of Letters and vnder what titles all sortes
                of Epistles are contained.    _Cap 7._


=Albeit the diuersitie of Epistles are (as I saide before) as manifold
as are the sundrie occurrents, or rather imaginations of mens
fantasies: yet for so much as it seemeth pertinent vnto this Method
to induce their varieties vnto some particular titles, by such meanes
the rather to bring the learner into a speciall forme, whereby for his
necessitie or present turne to applie the same. I haue thought good
in imitation of the best and most learned iudgements of our time, to
drawe the sundrie parts thereof, vnder foure especiall heads, that is
to saie: |Demonstratiue|, |Deliberatiue|, |Iudiciall|, and |Familiar
Letters|. And howbeit the rules prescribed vnto either of these, maie
vnder their seuerall heads séeme to be particularlie allotted, yet are
they in nature so neerelie conioyned togither, as hardlie shall you in
anie of the first three fall into their particular distinctions, but
lightlie in one sort or other, you shall run into the natures of the
others.=

=For proofe whereof, and this to open more plainlie, let vs first
lay downe their properties in seuerall, and then sée by association
each with other how néerlie they do participate in their qualities.
You shall then vnderstande that this |Demonstratiue| kinde, hath the
name of a declaration, deliuerie or shewing of some one thing or
other, the distinctions of the Epistles thereunder contained, are
|Descriptorie|, in which bee described the manners and conuersations
of men, all vertues, vices and qualities both of bodie and mind.
Honorable chalenges, combats, entertainmēts, attempts, orders of common
weales, gouermnents, and estates, countries, cities, hilles, valleies,
fields, prospects, buildings and walkes, with their pleasures and
scituations. |Laudatorie|, wherein is speciallie praysed anie thing,
and |Vituperatorie|, in which is misliked or condemned whatsoeuer maie
be thought worthie either to bee abhorred or dispraysed.=

=The |Deliberatiue| is so named, of the large comprehension it
hath of sundry causes and matters, being not almost tied to any
particular occasion or purpose: His distinctions are |Hortatorie|, and
|Dehortatorie|: |Swasorie| and |Disswasorie|, not much vnlike together
in their orders and properties: the natures of the first being to
exhort, counsell, aduise, or perswade to anie thing, of the other, to
withdraw, disswade or reduce to another meaning. |Conciliatorie|, which
serueth in acquiring of friendship of acquaintance. |Reconciliatorie|,
in reconcilement of kinred, friends, or other persons. |Petitorie|, in
suing for, or crauing of anie thing. |Commendatorie|, in preferring
the seruices, persons or good qualities, of anie one. |Consolatorie|,
in comforting at times of troubles, sorrowe, or mishaps. |Monitorie|,
in forewarning, admonishing, or counselling from mischiefs.
|Reprehensorie|, in reprehending or correcting of errours and
behauiours. |Amatorie|, in matters of louing.=

=The |Iudiciall| is so called, in that it comprehendeth matters
lawfull, vnlawfull, or questionable to be handled: The distinctions
thereof are, |Accusatorie|, containing matter of accusation.
|Excusatorie|, which is occupied in excusing. |Expostulatorie|, in
reasoning of causes. |Purgatorie|, in clearing or auoydance of thinges
charged. |Defensorie|, in defence of the action. |Exprobatorie|, in
reproching or obtruding of benefites vpon cause of vnthankfulnes.
|Deprecatorie|, in praying of pardon of a thing committed, and
|Inuectiue|, inueighing agaynst ill natures, qualities, occasions or
persons.=

=Now the distinctions of these heades being thus laide open by
particular titles, we will see how neere in writing they concurre or
fall in, each with others. True is it, (as shall be séene in some
examples hereafter following) that touching the first head beeing
|Demonstratiue|, it sometimes falleth out in causes of aduertisement,
or relation of thinges made, that the title |Descriptorie| is
manie times meerlie in it selfe handled, without entring into anie
other particular addition or occasion, but in the other titles of
|Laudatorie| and |Vituperatorie|, not so. For how can I either praise
or discommend anie thing, without falling into a |Description| of those
persons, things or qualities, which I disallow or commend. Againe, for
the |Deliberatiue| kinde in |Hortatorie|, |Dehortatorie|, |Swasorie|
and |Disswasorie|, |Commendatorie|, |Monitorie| or |Reprehensorie|,
how can I exhort, counsell, aduise, withdraw, commend, admonish or
reprehende, if therein I set not forth what is woorthie or vnfit,
what to be praysed, estéemed, disallowed, or eschued: which can not
bee, without of necessitie I fall into the partes |Descriptorie|,
|Laudatorie| and |Vituperatorie|. Likewise in matters |Consolatorie|,
|Conciliatorie| & |Reconciliatorie|, howe I maie comfort seeke friends,
or reconcile, if the partes |Hortatorie| and |Swasorie|, be absent.
So also for the iudiciall, if either I accuse, excuse, expostulate,
defende, reproach, intreate, or inueigh, it must be done with the
laying out of vices, and aduauncement of vertues, in manifesting what
is good, and setting forth what is euill, neither of which, can be
without matter |Descriptorie|, |Laudatorie|, and |Vituperatorie|. By
all which it appeareth, that (howbeit these seuerall titles stand
thus diuided) yet are the matters of the same diuerslie wrapped
togither, and the precepts seruing to the one, must of necessitie
by a like conueyance be drawne into an obseruation with the other:
notwithstanding for ease of the learner, and to the end he may with
more readines find out what best fitteth and beseemeth the cause hee
hath in handling, they bee thus drawne forth as you see into so many
particular distinctions.=

=Touching nowe our |Familiar Letters|, they also are to bee drawne
vnder their seuerall titles, as |Narratorie|, and |Nunciatorie|,
somewhat falling into the demonstratiue kind before remembred,
wherein we expresse and declare to those farre from vs, the matters
or newes presentlie in hand amongst vs: |Gratulatorie|, wherein wee
reioyce each with others of the good happes of fortune betiding vs.
|Remuneratorie|, being a gratefull relation of cortesies, benefites
or good turnes receiued. |Iocatorie|, wherewith by a pleasant and
swéete kinde of deliuerie of some pretie conceit or iest, the minde is
recreated. |Obiurgatorie|, in which wee rebuke the ill demeanours of
our children, seruants, kindred, or acquaintance. |Mandatorie|, whereby
wee commit expreslie our affaires to such as we haue authoritie, either
to commaunde or intreate to be dispatched. To these and the others
before mentioned are manie Epistles |Responsorie|, the titles whereof
cannot be certaine, but examples and occasions plentifull: all which
I referre to their peculiar places each one, as they are suted forth
to be in their kindes deliuered. And now will we passe vnto the other
hereafter to bee obserued in deliuerie of Examples, accordant vnto the
seuerall titles of all these forenamed Epistles, and first of Epistles
|Descriptorie|.




             Of Epistles meerely Descriptory and the parts
                        thereof.    _Chap. 8._


[Sidenote: Parts in Epistle Descriptory.]

[Sidenote: Comparison of the writer and painter.]

[Sidenote: Painter.]

[Sidenote: Writer.]

[Sidenote: Ptolemy and other writers, _de situ orbis_.]

[Sidenote: Virgil in his Aenidos.]

[Sidenote: Ouidii Metamorphoseos.]

[Sidenote: Example.]

=Forsomuch as in Descriptions, are (as I saide before) onelie declared
and set foorth at large, the maner, order, state, gouernment,
proportion goodnesse or value of anie thing: the Epistles consisting
solie thereof, be commonlie without addition at all, either of praise
or mislike, or anie other intendment, in respect whereof they might
in anie one iote varie from that title of |Descriptorie|. The force
hereof besides the |Exordium|, comprehendeth chieflie a |narration|,
throughout, in which is contained (by laying out the seuerall parts
thereof) a perfect and plain demonstration or description of any
thing: In these sortes of Epistles, the excellency of the writer, and
painter concurreth in one, who the more that each of them studieth by
perfection, to touch al things to the quick, by so much the more neerer
doe they both aspire to that exquisit kind of cunning, that in each of
these differences, is absolutely to be required. The curious painter in
drawing a perfect peece of |Lantskip|, presenteth many things vnto the
eie, the conceit whereof is maruellous: for with great admiration we
do there séeme to behold, the most pleasant and goodlie vallies: Woods
hie and decked with statelie trées (some tops whereof the wind seemeth
to wreath and turne at one side) then goodly riuers, hie waies and
walkes, large situate & high climing hils and mountains, far prospects
of Cities, steeples, and Towers, ships sayling on seas, and waues blown
vp aloft, the element cleere, faire and temperate, with some shining
beames shadowing and spreading ouer all these, wherein seemeth the
delight so rare, and climate so perfect, as verie desire prouoketh a
man to gaze of it, as a thing in present life, and most certaine viewe.
And do I praie you, our excellent writers degenerate at all from anie
part of these? Doeth not the learned |Cosmographer| in acquainting vs
with the vnknowne delights, scituation, plenty and riches of Countries
which we neuer sawe, nor happilie maie euer approch vnto, rauish vs
oftentimes, and bring in contempt the pleasures of our owne soyle:
and manie times a huge woonder, of the vnheard secrets neuer before
reported of, the incredible operations of diuers thinges, and state
so high and magnificent, such as the verie description and liuelie
deliuery whereof, maketh vs beleeue that our eies do almost witnes
the same, and that our verie sences are partakers of euerie delicacie
in them contained. But omitting the wight hereof, consisting in these
worlds of such strange accompt, with that fine inuention doeth |Virgil|
manie times in his |Aeneidos|, and with howe much varietie describe
vnto vs the tides of the morning? Howe greatlie in his first booke doth
he amuse the reader, with the lamentable shipwracke, and euen then
(as it were) appearing surges, and intollerable turmoils vpon the sea
happening to |Aeneas|? What darknesse, what tempestes, what rising and
deepest fall of waues againe, what winds, what mingling of heauen and
earth together doth hee there relate? Then after, his arriuall on shore
and presenting to Queene |Dido|, howe is the destruction of |Troy| in
the person of |Aeneas| to her described? In the fourth booke likewise,
what an excellent description maketh he of |Fame|? How he sheweth the
banquet by the |Queene| to |Aeneas| made, and how liuelie is the state
and magnificence thereof deliuered? Innumerable of these, both from
him and the |Transformed shapes of Ouid| coulde I here recorde, the
excellencie of each being such, as by the forceable vtterance thereof
bréedeth as great delight as astonishment vnto the curious searcher of
the same. And in as much as I haue vndertaken to conduct the learner by
example, howe to behaue himselfe in some sort herein, we will proceed
with our |Epistles Descriptory|, the first wherof following, maie seeme
to bee sent from a traueller to a friend of his in England, the mater
whereof ensueth.=


        An example of a latter Descriptory, wherein is particu-
         _larly described an ancient City, by laying down the
                       seuerall parts thereof._

[Sidenote: _Exordium_ Or a charge giuen, and promise made.]

[Sidenote: Narratio.]

[Sidenote: Scituation.]

[Sidenote: Buildings.]

[Sidenote: Deckings.]

[Sidenote: Streets.]

[Sidenote: Gouernment]

[Sidenote: Habit of the people.]

[Sidenote: Conclusō]

My good Vncle, the remembrance of your charge giuen me, & my promise to
you made at my departure out of _England_, bindeth me (at my nowe being
in quiet, and with good leasure setled in _Germany_) that I should
returne vnto you againe, my accustomed and dutifull regard, in sort
as I haue euer endeuoured my selfe to do vnto you. It may then please
you, that remaining with my L. the Duke but a fewe daies at _Geneua_,
wee hasted thence to a Citie, called _Noremberge_, being imperiall,
scituate in the high partes of _Germany_, where sithence wee haue
almost continually remained. And albeit I could somewhat write vnto
you of our passages through diuers places of the Country, yet insomuch
as there is no part thereof so memorable as this citie wherein we now
remaine, the description thereof at this present may solie content
you. The Citie therefore, as it seemeth is most ancient, and as many
doe suppose and affirme, at that time when the Country was first in
subiection to the Empire of _Rome_, was builded by _Nero_ the Emperour,
and of him taketh his name, as _Noremberghe_, in signification _Neros
berghe_, and so much the rather doth it appeare, by sundry auncient
monumentes therein yet remaining. The Citie (besides that it is
situate in a most delicate and pleasant soyle, wooded and watered most
plentifully on euerie side, with goodlie Trees, faire and delicate
Riuers and springes,) is both of great strength in the walles of the
same, and plentifully builded with high and statelie Towers on euerie
part. The edificies of the Citie are rare, and of most sumptuous and
statelie appearaunce, insomuch that there is no one house in any rowe
that exceedeth another in height, but all of them builded leuell, by a
verie Geometricall proportion. The insides are not more polished with
riches and ornamentes of great beauty, then the outsides with brauerie,
the verie fronts of all which, aswell of rich as poore, are most
curiously embossed in a hard kinde of substance (such I thinke as is
our plaster of Paris) with artificiall and liuely pictures, conteining
histories of diuers memorable, and strange effectes, and that with
such wonderfull excellency, as any waies may bee conceiued. The cost
hereof is continually maintayned, repaired, enlarged, and preserued,
by a generall contribution of the most worthy and honourable of the
Citie. Besides, the colours so fresh, so braue, and delicate laide
in oyle, for defence against weather, wherewith they are beautified
and set forth, are verie straunge. The streetes are wide, faire, and
excellentlie well paued. The stone they vse for the most part is
marble, white, gray, and blacke, whereof is great plentie, besides
other kindes, which verie wonderfully they cut and square in diuers
small proportions artificiallie pointed and shaped. The houses are not
high, but backwarde builte, and inwardelie large. This Citie retaineth
yet the auncient gouernement of the _Romanes_, for at this instant they
haue their _Consuls_, _Tribunes_, _Senators_, _Pretors_, _Quæstors_,
_Aediles_ and other interchangeable offices, as sometimes had _Rome_,
beeing in her greatest prosperitie. The attire also alike to their
dignities of all sortes of honourable personages, accustomed to their
callinges. Plaine are their habites for the most part, and nothing
sumptuous, retaining still one, and the selfe same ancient fashion. The
constitution of their bodies as wel men as women, are faire, cleare,
and of sounde complexion. Frugall in diet and expence, and nothing
prodigall. My L. the Duke is here of great sway, and entertained with
honorable accompt. Thus much haue I thought good to aduertise you in
discharge of my debt and your desire, attending by the returne of
this messenger the newes of your good health. To whom & al other our
friends, in sound and good affection I eftsoones do recommend me. At
_Noremberghe_ this of, &c.


             _Another example wherein the state of a Coun-
                       trey is soly described._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._ Of their accustomed friendship.]

[Sidenote: Narratiō. Pleasant ayre vnfrequented.]

[Sidenote: _In voluntary abstinence._]

[Sidenote: Hard feeding.]

[Sidenote: Ill lodging.]

[Sidenote: Danger.]

I doubt not N. but that thy hart longeth, and mind is yet vnquieted,
because of my suddaine departure from thee, and ignorance of my estate
and present being, whereof that thy desires may nowe at full be
resolued: know my good N. that not hauing beene scarce sixe moneths
from thee, I did long since perceiue my selfe to bee out of England,
and that it may appeare vnto thee, that I haue iust cause so to say,
thou shalt somewhat vnderstande by mee the state of this Countrey.
Wee liue heere in a soile delicate I must confesse for the ayre, and
pleasant for the situation: with good leasure (I must tell thee) may
we here attend our deuotions, as hauing no care wherewith to encumber
vs, but the needlesse search of that whereof wee neuer find likelihood
to annoy vs. As vncompelled by seuere decrees and interdictions, we
limit vnto ourselues an abstinence, thou mightst think we do it of
zeale, but in truth it is of want, wherein we haue more fasting daies
by a great manie then ability to beare them. Our conuersation is with
elements, with waters, with fieldes, with trees, with valleyes, with
hilles, with beasts, in the general vse whereof, wee find nothing
else but their proper shapes. And if by chaunce any other sorts of
creatures do appeare, they are naked shapes formed as men and women,
fierce, sauage, wilde, not capable of anie our reasons, nor we of their
speeches. Our foode is rootes, dried fishes, berries, and I knowe not
what other harsh kind of fruits, and sometime foules, besides a kind
of graine growing in great cods wherby we somtimes obtain (though
not the naturall) yet some vse of bread, vnlike to that you eat, in
taste, goodnes, or propertie. Our lodgings and places of repose are
caues, entrenched in the ground, the earth our beds, and clothes our
couerings. And these also hard as they are, enioy wee not in quiet,
but being awaited of the naked multitude (whose policies insinuate by
nature are farre greater then their strength) wee are faine by much
industrie to preuent them: into whose hands if any of vs doe chaunce
to fall, our dead carkasses in hastie morsels are conueied into their
intrailes. Hereby iudging of our estate, thou mayest accordinglie
deeme of our pleasures. The next message that thou shalt attend from
mee, shall bee my speedie returne, the seas and windes being not lesse
fauourable then they were at my going forth. Meane while recommend
my selfe to thy wel-wishing, and our safeties to God, I ende as thou
knowest, this of, &c.


              _An example wherein the death of a nobleman
                         is onelie described._

[Sidenote: Exordium. Of the cause it selfe.]

[Sidenote: Narratiō.]

[Sidenote: Sudden sickenesse.]

[Sidenote: Declaration of his speeches.]

[Sidenote: Mislike of the world.]

[Sidenote: Certain notice and liking of death.]

The decease (good Madame) of my Lorde your brother, hath occasioned
vnto your Lad. the sight of these Letters, wherein I haue rather
acquited my selfe of that whereunto by your honourable commaunde I was
enioyned, then anie wayes satisfied the griefe that by my selfe among
manie others, for his losse is intirelie conceyued. The manner whereof
may please you nowe to bee informed of, which was thus. On Tuesday
beeing the thirteenth of this instant, hauing as it then seemed vnto
his L. and others, beene reasonablie well recouered from the woonted
force of his long consuming disease, beeing importuned by the dispatch
of some present affayres, as otherwise to haue some conference with
her Maiestie, hee went from his house of B. to the Court, where all
that day hee remained, and returned againe at night, not for all this,
finding himselfe at all disquieted at the least motion of anie the
pangs wherewith before time hee had so often been vexed. The most part
of that night hee was verie well reposed. Towardes morning the next
daie, he beganne somewhat to be agreeued, but nothing as accustomed: in
which state the most part of that day hee continued. At night againe
hauing eaten some small pittance to supper, towardes nine of the clocke
hee beganne most vehementlie to bee passioned, till which time wee
all had verie good expectation of his health and recouerie, which his
L. perceyuing, after hee had beene a while set vp in his bedde, hee
sayde, I knowe my good friends and faithfull louing seruaunts, that the
great zeale and loue you doo beare vnto mee, is a vehement occasion
to kindle in you a desire of wel-wishing, and intendment of assured
safetie towardes mee, wherein I haue more cause to thanke your good
willes, then meane thereby to imagine the force of my disease to bee
lesse then long since I expected, and exceedinglie in my selfe haue
euer doubted, what wordes of comfort, protraction and delayes so euer,
haue by the Physitions to the contrarie beene vsed. One great and
exceeding comfort vnto mee is, that liuing, I euer loyallie demeaned
my selfe: and dying, I shall depart this worlde in her Maiesties good
grace, and especiall fauour. Next vnto that, the loue of you my dearest
friendes and entirelie beloued seruants and followers, whose hearts I
knowe doe pursue mee, and whose affections euen to the last gaspe of
death I am perswaded to bee euer firme and fixed towardes mee. Your
desires are, I knowe, that I shoulde liue, according vnto which the
least mitigation that may bee of my griefe, you measure by & by to the
hope of amendment, which is not so. For that in all the comfortable
speeches, that sundrie times I haue receiued from you, my selfe to
whome the inwarde effects thereof haue beene found most forcible, haue
euer mistrusted, and by manie probable circumstances adiudged the
contrarie. Long time endure I cannot, this knowe I well, happelie a
daie, two or three, I may yet bee conuersant among you, for my disease,
that standeth assured (the messenger whereof continuallie knocketh
at the doore of my imaginations, readie euerie houre to assault my
heart, and to carrie away with him the spoyles of a dying carkasse)
will not permit I shall long time trauell in this sort among you. And
for my selfe, stand ye all assertained, that hauing long since poyzed
in equall ballance, the long continuance of a fraile, wretched, and
trauelled life, the most part whereof is caryed away in sleepe,
sorrowe, griefe sickenesse, daunger, and the residue also neuer freed
of care and all maner of disquiet, with the hope of an euerlasting ioy,
happines, rest peace, and immortall residence: I finde no reason whie I
should at all affect the toyle of such earthlie tediousnesse. Insomuch
as hauing liued nowe almost threescore and thirteene yeares, and borne
my selfe (honourablie I trust) in all mine actions and seruices, and
further in the progression of my ripest yeares, yea in this verie
instant more then at anie other time am regarded of my Prince, and
esteemed of my Countrey, and among my Peeres reputed in the highest
degree of my fidelitie: I shall nowe die as becommeth my person,
woorthilie and honourablie. Bee you therefore recomforted I pray you,
as I am, and thinke that for all the loue you haue ought me, the
seruices you haue done mee, or tender care you doe yet in my heauiest
pangs beare vnto mee, the chiefest content you can doe vnto mee, is
that you bee satified herein with mee. That beeing verelie resolued
in my soule, of all that I haue here sayde vnto you, and hauing
ordered mine actions, and prepared my selfe thereto accordinglie, I
doe willinglie and with a right contented mind, leaue this transitorie
world so replenished as it is, with so manie grieuous casualties, &
hartilie do giue my bodie to his naturall course, and my soule into the
handes of the mightie Creator, for euer in his glorie (I trust) to bee
eternized. This speech ended, hee continued till after midnight, at
which time hee had about two houres slumber, and so beganne his paine
to encrease againe. In which till Wednesday following, almost in one
state, hee for the most part remained, oftentimes accustoming himselfe
with those that were about him to prayer, manie times, recording to
himselfe the goodnesse of God, and his mercies to him remembred, and
that with such zeale and intire regarde of his hoped repose, as that
it still seemed and was euidentlie apparant howe muche hee longed and
thirsted for the same. In fine, drawing by little and little towardes
an ende, euen in the verie last pang, ioyning his handes vp to heauen,
his heart and eyes thitherwarde fixed, hee recommended eftsoones
himselfe to the mercie of his Redeemer, and on Thursday last about
two in the morning died, to the lamentable griefe of all that were
about him, who heartily sorrowing his losse, were forced to shed teares
aboundantly. The day of the funerall is not yet certaine, but the same
is intended verie honorablie. Recommending my selfe vnto your La. in
all humblenesse, I take my leaue. At our sorrowfull house of B, this
of, &c.




               Of Epistles Laudatorie and Vituperatorie.
                              _Chap. 9._


[Sidenote: Praise of the person.]

[Sidenote: 1]

[Sidenote: 2]

[Sidenote: 3]

[Sidenote: 4]

[Sidenote: 5]

[Sidenote: 6]

=Nowe followeth it next, that after these Letters, meere |Descriptorie|
as you see, we doe treate of the other two partes appertaining also to
this forme, which are |Laudatorie| and |Vituperatorie|, the vse whereof
either solelie or intermixed in any other kind of Epistles, shal of one
or more of these causes take their originall, that is to say, of the
_Person_, _deeds_ or _thing_ it selfe to bee commended, misliked or
dispraysed. The _person_ of anie one is to be preferred or disabled, by
his birth, descent, shewe, or abilitie. Secondlie, by his childhoode,
or good education from his infancie. Thirdlie, of his youth, in which
he is either conuersant in studies of honest life, seriously giuen to
the knowledge of letters, affecting alwayes vnto laudable exercises,
temperat and sober in demeanour, or otherwise accounted dissolute
and wanton, vnhappilie led to the search of whatsoeuer mischiefes,
affectionate to the most basest conditions and practises, not tied to
anie order, but wholie pursuing an vncontroulled libertie. Fourthlie,
of his manly yeares being frequented with ciuill gouernment, or liuing
altogether without account. Priuately and publikely in all manlie
actions demeaned, or by apparant loosenes in each place discredited.
Fiftlie, of his olde age, the course whereof is with ancient grauitie
continued, or by al kind of euils most hainously misprised, whose
siluer haires are shining in vertuous happines, or miserable estate
drowned in lothsomnes. Sixtly, in his ende or departure out of this
world, agreeing to the saying of _Solon_, No man may be counted happie
before his death|. For that in the expectatiō or attaining therof, as
at no time more in all the life of a man, then chiefly appeareth, his
vertue, constancy, strength & worthinesse, or otherwise his imbecility,
ouerthrow, shame and ignominious filthines. Besides all these, many
likelihoods are often taken either to the praise or dispraise of the
|person|, by occasion of the nation or soile from whence he came, where
hee was borne or trained. From the generall condition or application
of himselfe or of the people thereof, by the habite, constitution of
the bodie, complexion, looks, fame, or other circumstances thereunto
incident, by the actiuitie, strength, swiftnes, nimblenes, fauor
or beauty of the body. By the gifts of fortune, as honor, wealth,
worship, reputation and kindred. And forasmuch as these demonstrations
of persons are wholy occupied either in praise or dispraise of their
conditions or behauiours: the chiefest part hereof shall also consist
in |Narration|, without peraduenture it falleth out in the life of
anie one to haue some one or mo things hapned or of them supposed,
ill beseeming or vnworthy their reputation, which either by defence,
excusation, or |Confutation| must bee coloured, diminished, or cleerely
auoided. Examples whereof do follow according to their particular
occasions: and thus much for the _Persons_.

[Sidenote: Of the deeds.]

=In commendation or vituperation of the déeds of any one, we shall
weigh with our selues what notable actions haue bin, wherein he or she
haue honorably or worthily behaued themselues, or by perpetual infamy
therof haue deserued in each posteritie for euer to be contemned.
Touching things likewise by themselues to bee extolled or disabled,
they are euer measured by the consonance and agréement they haue either
with reputation or dignitie.=

[Sidenote: Honest which is tied to vertue.]

=The goodnesse or badnes, excellencie or basenesse of any thing, is
gathered from the places of _Honestum_, _Inhonesty_, vnder which is
comprehended what is iust or vniust, godlie or wicked, direct or
indirect, worthy or to be dispraised. Honest is alwaies linked to
vertue. For whatsoeuer is either vertue it selfe, or affined with
vertue or deriued from vertue, or conducing to vertue, is absolutelie
declared honest.=

[Sidenote: Honest, what it is.]

=The distinguishment of these falleth out to be sorted into foure
principall excellencies, that is, |Prudence|, |Iustice|, |fortitude|
and |Temperance|, it is therefore to be intended, that not onelie
deedes and actions, but also thinges themselues are solelie of these,
and for these either praised or debased. Whatsoeuer then by sounde
and wholesome perswasion tendeth either to the embracing of the good,
or shunning of the euill. Whatsoeuer includeth either fidelitie, true
friendship, equitie, obedience or gratitude. Whatsoeuer conduceth to
true pietie to God, thy Countrie, Parents, children, and friends.
Whatsoeuer appertaineth to the seueritie of the law, to the admonishing
of the wicked, and to the remuneration and defence of the well
deserued. Whatsoeuer tendeth to a tolleration or patient forebearance
of euils, to longanimitie, entring into hazard and dangers for
conscience, for thy countrey, kindred or friends. Whatsoeuer concerneth
chastitie, sobrietie or frugalitie, and seemely moderation in all
thinges, that in each of these is adiudged honest and none others.=

[Sidenote: Vnhonest.]

=The contrarie hereof, which is _Inhonestum_, includeth likewise
whatsoeuer is not vertue, or is estranged from vertue, hindering
to vertue, or in nothing furthering towards vertue, whatsoeuer is
pertinent to follie, iniustic, pusillanimitie, or excesse, whatsoeuer
by the euill therein committed is exempted from praise. Whatsoeuer
carieth perswasion to mischiefe & seducement from the good. Whatsoeuer
appertaineth to infedilitie, falshood, treason, disobedience, slander,
or ingratitude. Whatsoeuer withdraweth from naturall regard and loue
of thy Countrie, parents, children and friends. Whatsoeuer impugneth
the wholesome lawes and estate of euerie common-wealth, tendeth to
a notorious example of euill, hindereth or blemisheth any others
good deseruing. Whatsoeuer enforceth reuengement vpon euerie small
offence, hath in it no meane of sufferance, or forbearance at all,
entertaineth a lawlesse libertie of conscience to perpetrate or yéeld
to any vnlawfull action, or to become iniurious to thy Country, state
or calling. Whatsoeuer is furthering to a dissolute liuing, vnbrideled
lust, couetous tenacitie, prodegality, or detestable excesse. These and
such like, as confounders of all ciuilitie and humane gouernment, are
confirmed to be vnhonest.=

[Sidenote: _Laus ab honesto._]

[Sidenote: _Ab æquo._]

[Sidenote: _A necessitate._]

[Sidenote: _Ab vtiltiate._]

[Sidenote: _A difficili._]

=Now these deedes, actions or thinges are by manie |Oratory| partes
to bee handled, or commended, according to the matters or occasions
whereout their praises are deriued, and because examples are the best
I might sort out diuers: as of |Dauid|, I coulde commend his combate
against |Goliah|, first _ab honesto_, in that he being the seruant
of god fought against a blasphemer, also in his Princes quarell &
defence of his countrey: _ab æquo_, because it is meet and conuenient,
that in causes so perillous, the strength of each one be applied. _A
necessitate_, insomuch as thereon depended the sauegard of the Prince
and people. _Ab vtilitate_, for that he killing such an enemie, brought
to their owne country peace and quiet, and also draue the other part
in subiection to his king and people. _A difficili_, because the
vndertaking thereof was so much the more waighty, by howe much himselfe
was as it were an infant agaynst a mightie giant, vnarmed against
him that was armed, vnfurnished against him that had al maner of
complements of warre: weake, where the other was strong: besides that
the terrour of his chalenge and hugenes of stature had before daunted
the armie, & put them all out of conceit, in so much that the doubt was
so generall, as no man dared to vndertake the quarell. Besides, herein
is praised of bodily force, his |Actiuitie|, and courage: of |Vertues|,
his woonderfull |Magnanimitie|, who by couragious desire durst to
vndertake the same: also his affiance in |Iustice|, and equitie of
the cause: His |Pietie| to God, his Prince and countrey: Lastly, his
|Fidelitie|, whose life was not spared when each one drew backe for
feare to be brought in hazard. And as to this action of |Dauid|, I haue
vsed all these |Oratorie| parts, so in causes of sway and gouernment,
a man might by the like parts and places be praised for his great
wisdome, whereby in handling of some notable action in ambassage or
consultation, he hath onely by graue aduise, industrie, discreete
search, perswasion or circumspection, compassed weightie matters to the
common weale, or thence auoyded huge and imminent dangers: |Cicero| in
the coniuration of |Catiline|, beeing a mightie enemie agaynst his owne
Citie of |Rome|, might herein be an excellent patterne, who without
stirring the people at all, without any maner of bodilie resistance or
force of armes, without passing by any priuate or indirect means, did
by the sole matter of his |wisedome, =waightines of spéech, forcible
reasons, enforcements, rebukes, and perswasions driue him cleane out
of the Citie, and being expulsed (to the common peace, tranquilitie
and surety of the same Citie) did afterwarde by like demeanour,
industrie, and circumspection, so preuent his purposes, so circumuent
his policies, so turne him vpside downe, as he dared not, he could
not, he shamed to perpetrate what so often hee had sworne, and so many
wayes intended: in which action of |Ciceroes|, all these |Oratorie|
parts are in like maner included. So likewise, for some one rare &
singular point of |Iustice| another might be extolled, as beside common
expectation exercising the same. A president hereof might bee the L.
chiefe |Iustice| of Englande in the time of King |Henrie| the fourth,
who was so streictlie bent to the obseruation of iustice, as hauing one
of the Princes seruants arraigned before him at the Kings Bench barre,
for a fellon, and beeing one that the young Prince greatlie (at that
time of his youth) fauoured. The prince came to the barre, and at the
Iudges hands required his seruant; who answered that he was the King
his fathers prisoner, and stoode there vpon his triall by lawe for
his offences, that he could not in iustice, nor would (by his pardon)
deliuer him without his triall. The Prince mooued with such deniall,
stroke the Iudge on the face, and woulde by force haue withdrawne
the prisoner. The Iudge withstoode him, and aduertising him mildlie
of the offence he had done to the seate and place wherin he sate of
iustice, in such sort to strike him, stoutlie commanded him to Warde,
whereunto (uppon such admonition) the Prince obeyed, and accordinglie
remayned in durance, attending the aduertisement and knowledge of
his fathers pleasure. Here might bee a great contention, whether the
worthie Iudge in his equall administration and execution of iustice,
without feare, whereon stoode the hazard of his owne life, beeing vpon
him that was in succession to become his soueraigne Lord, were more to
be commended: or the Prince, in his subiection, and of all other most
singular obedience, more highly to bee extolled: the one daring to doe
what was lawfull vpon whatsoeuer hazard, the other humbling himselfe to
authoritie which he might easilie haue impugned: and yet both actions
such, as by many excellent Oratorie parts séeme fit to be inlarged. For
no doubt there was as much vertue in the ones obedience, as there was
excellency in the others sentence.=

=And as these, so the honor, worship, or wealth of anie man, his deedes
of charitie, either in |Erection|, |conuersion| or |repayring| of any
thing, whereby the common wealth is benefited, vertue furthered, or the
néedy prouided for, might bee in like sort aduanced.=

=Finallie, |Wisdome|, |Iustice|, |Bountie|, |Liberalitie|, |Curtesie|,
|Chastitie|, might each of them as things by themselues, & of
themselues without the person of any one be alike commended. Whereof
I think it néedlesse to amplifie any further, seeing by the examples
hereafter set downe, the learner may sufficientlie bee enabled in
whatsoeuer, for those causes he shall vndertake to proceed vpon.=


    _An example of a laudatorie epistle soly touching the person._

[Sidenote: _Exordium_, by insinuation.]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Hyperbole._]

[Sidenote: _Procatalepsis._]

[Sidenote: _Epitheton._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Anadiplosis._]

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Hypotiposis._]

[Sidenote: Praise of the Prince in generall.]

[Sidenote: _Epitheton._]

[Sidenote: _Metanoia._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Præteritio._]

[Sidenote: Parenthesis.]

[Sidenote: Parabola.]

[Sidenote: _Metapora._]

[Sidenote: _Antimetabole._]

[Sidenote: _Periphrasis._]

The feruent loue, and entire zeale and regarde, wherewith your L. euen
in these tender and as yet vnripened yeares, seemeth to pursue the
vertues and honourable worthinesse of the most renowned and famous, and
the reuerend account, wherewith in your most secret imaginations you
haue euer admired, & as it were emulated their highest progressions:
hath mooued me in recordation thereof (and the rather to deliuer
vnto your L. the verye true image and liuely counterfeit indeede, of
vnblemished honour, adorned with all princely and most surpassing
noblenes) to propose vnto your view, a paragon so peerlesse, and of
so rare and excellent performaunce, as whereof no hystorie hath the
semblable, no region the match, nor any worlde hereafter may eftsoones
be supposed to produce the like. You shall not neede my L. to ransacke
volumes, to search out the liues of the most honoured _Scipio_, amongst
the Romanes, nor out of Greece to fetche _Themistocles_ or _Alcibiades_
from Lacedemon or Athens. Let _Haniball_ rest with his predecessors,
who sometimes by vnbearded fortune did honor to mightie Carthage, and
(before them all) Achilles and Hector, that made the fall of Troy
so famous: And come wee into our owne Countrey, the land wherein
our selues inhabite, the soyle to vs natiue, and of all others most
deerest, and see you here my L. a Prince of so rare and incomparable
worthinesse, as your selfe will confesse throughout all the course of
his life, to haue beene of all others the moste happie and vertuous.
_Edwarde_, my L. young _Edward_ (so helde in his fathers life) vnder
whose raigne he died in Englande, surnamed for his noted excellencie,
sometymes the _blacke Prince_. This is hee on whome Nature, Fortune
and Vertue, to the intent to yeelde some apparaunt shewe of theyr
woonderfull and mightie operations, had aboue all others so especially
enriched with all kinde of wished and most exquisite perfections, as
in that present season, in which the delicacie of his aspiring minde
reste vnto himselfe the highest branch of honour from out her loftie
seate of dignity, it was denied to any other whatsoeuer, to exceede?
nay, but so much as to become partaker with so rare a patterne of the
like fruites of vertue and neuer dying glory. And to the ende (in
rehearsing some fewe of the many particularities of such sounde and
vncorrupted maiestie) the radiant shining beames resiant in so high
a personage, may with more facilitie the sooner bee discouered: wee
will first beginne with his originall and foremost infancie, that
by deducing from thence his complementes of princelie excellencie,
euen in the verie mouth of his entombed graue, his bones may not bee
reposed without an immortall recordation, and the fame of his vertue
celebrated by an endlesse memorie. Needlesse were it my L. that I
shoulde tell you of this statelie Prince, that hee were sonne and
heire in succession, to the most mightie and most renowmed _Edward_
the thirde, king of this noble realme of _England_, the most regarded
vertues and inuincible chiualrie of whome, beeing then euerie where so
surpassing, and of such redoubted force, as (were it not such memorable
issue had sprong out of his Kingly loynes, as wherewith the states of
the mightie were daunted, and Europe made to woonder) might hitherto
haue remained of-fame compotent ynough, to haue bene compared vnto the
mightiest: but that I may rather imparte vnto you, that as golde, in
the riches and glorie of it selfe, beareth price and value with the
most precious, yet hauing annexed vnto his proportion, a Diamonde of
inestimable beautie, valour and goodnesse, becommeth thereby farre more
excellent then before, more shining and glorious: so this soueraigne
and puissant Monarch (admirable no doubt by himselfe) yet hauing
thus tied vnto the sunne-shine of his happie raigne, the obscurer
and eclipsing glorie of all other nations, the verie Loadstarre and
direction of all other Tropheis, the Sunne it selfe of worthinesse, and
absolute concluder of euerie honourable enterprise: howe coulde it bee
but that this prerogatiue of his must of force exceede, and goe beyonde
all others, when himselfe, by the verie chaire of honours selfe was
so farre aduaunced aboue any others? And albeit the high and kingly
worthinesse of so statelie offspring and parentage, might no question
in sundry sortes, yeelde greate and mightie glorie to the issue: yet
that it might not bee alleadged that in taking vppon vs to commende the
personage of one, wee shoulde intimate the soueraigntie of the other,
as it were by a defect of praise sufficient, to supply the wante of our
owne, and that the honourable reputation of another cannot fitly bee
saide to bee this mans worthinesse, without by the braunch of his owne
deserte, hee hadde in his owne proper right most effectually caried
the same. Vnderstand you then of him, that which all men deeme most
princely and honourable, and there is none, were it the stoutest enemie
that euer liued, but will most highlie commende. This Prince, my L. who
euen from the verie cradle seemed to bee addicted to the knowledge,
and feare of God, and verie pietie of a sincere and Christian religion
(besides that hee was naturally so well formed and instructed in good
documentes as anie might bee) became in those verie tender yeares
also, so apte vnto learning, as the match or like of him therein, was
seldome or neuer in those dayes any where found, and in these times
also may not easily bee hearde of. Insomuch as of those that then knewe
him verie well, it certainely is deliuered, that beeing but the age of
twelue yeares, his vnderstanding and knowledge in the Latine tongue,
was so perfect, his progression in the Greeke so excellent, his skill
and deliuerie of forraigne languages so woonderfull, his _P_rincelie
towardnesse in all thinges so rare and so plentiful, as many times
mooued all the regarders to admire him, but founde none of all his
associates in the same exercises, that were able to follow him.

[Sidenote: Of his adolescence.]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Parenthesis._]

[Sidenote: _Meiosis._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Epanodus._ His mans estate.]

[Sidenote: His outward actions.]

[Sidenote: His inward vertues.]

[Sidenote: _Hypotiposis._]

[Sidenote: His bounty & great humility.]

[Sidenote: His modestie.]

[Sidenote: _Parenthesis._]

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

[Sidenote: Parenthesis.]

[Sidenote: Merismus.]

[Sidenote: Allegoria.]

[Sidenote: Confirmatiō.]

[Sidenote: Hypotiposis.]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

[Sidenote: _Emphasis._]

[Sidenote: _Antipophora._]

[Sidenote: _Commoratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Confutatiō._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: Praise of his death.]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Ecphonesis._]

[Sidenote: _Articulus._]

Nowe if wee shall come to his riper yeares, and howe therein hee
profited in the towardlie exercise and vse of armes, beeseeming a
Prince of so high and exspected admiration, what coulde bee wished
in anie one that in him was not fullie accomplished. So comelie, and
with such vncontrouled dexteritie coulde hee sitte, ride and gouerne
his horse, so couragiously, and with such nobilitie coulde hee welde
and vse any weapon, either at tilte, barriers or turney, with such
high and woonderfull direction, ordered hee all his complementes to
either of these belonging, as did well manifest the magnanimitie and
worthinesse of his minde, and what manner a one hee woulde afterwardes
become toward the beautifying of his countrie. A more plaine and
euident demonstration whereof, did at any one time in nothinge so
much appeare as euen then, when hee was yet in his minoritie. For
when there was remaining as then, no signe or token at all of manlie
shewe in his face (beeing neuer the lesse of stature seemelie and
tall, and of goodlie constitution in his bodie, well beseeming the
yeares hee then caried) also attendante on the mightie King his father
in the warres of Fraunce: what thinges did hee there perfourme? what
weightie enterprises, and those beyonde all expectation would hee
vndertake, in honour of his royall progenie: was it not too straunge,
that beeing in comparison of yeares, as it were a childe, deuoide of
so confirmed and auncient graffed experience as beseemed the warres,
hee vndertooke notwithstanding at eighteene yeares of age, with halfe
his fathers power (by a most couragious desire of an euerthirsting
glorie, with condition and charge either there to eternize his death
by an euerlasting memorie, or backe to returne againe with triumphant
gained victorie) to ioine with the whole and mightie power of Fraunce,
and all the Chiualrie thereof, where (to his immortall and surpassing
high renowne) hee attained vppon them by the high permission of God, a
most memorable Tropheie? But why dwell I in these slender discourses
(small God knowes in respect of those mightie conquestes by him
afterwards atchieued) in deteining you from the sweete and ardente
remembrance of the rest? If he being yet sequestred in years from
any ripenes at all, when it was thē to be supposed he most needed
gouernmente, coulde by such stately and inuincible valour, so moderate
his great and waightiest actions, as to become at that verie instant
so redoubted and famous: what might we deem of him afterward, being
once perfectly established in all kinde of manly directions, but that
of necessity he should by manie degrees exceed and go beyond the
formost shewe of all his excellencies, and the greatest expectation
that might be of all his progressions? & so vndoubtedly he did. For
being once attained to mans estate hee grewe immediatly to become a
Prince. sage, discreet, politike & wise, in all his actiōs of rare &
singular circūspectiō and prouidence, benigne: & of all others most
fauourable and courteous: fortunate, and euer inuincible in the warres,
liberall to his followers, and of a high replenished bountie to euerie
one, a verie Patrone and defender of innocents, absolutelye fauouring
alwayes the right, Magnanimious as touching his estate and the high and
waightie enterprises he tooke in hande, exceedinglie feared abroad,
woonderfullie beloued at home, mixing alwayes the enterchangeable
exercise of Armes, with continuall studie of learning. Of such rare
modestie and temperance as is maruellous: In so much as the King his
father beeing here in England, when in the great fight of _Poictiers_,
hee had discomfited and ouerthrowne in one day three mightie battels
of the French, and taken in the last of them king _Iohn_ and his sonne
prisoners: he was not puffed vp at all with the honour of so statelie
and triumphant victorie, neither grewe he insolent vpon the same, but
entertayned the King and his sonne in his owne Tent so honourablie,
and therewithall with so great nobilitie and surpassing courtesie, as
that hee neglected not to serue them himselfe at Supper, and seemed
verely at that season in all things, to haue beene reputed in his owne
intendment, as if hee had neuer beene conquerour. The shewe whereof,
so much increased his incomparable bountie: and so mightilie honoured
the estate of his victorie, as that the King then confessed, that to
become the prisoner of such a one, it could bee no disparagement vnto
so mightie a soueraigne as himselfe, seeing that hee was by the force
of that onely ouerthrowe, made companion of the greatest Nobilitie
that euer hee sawe. Manie Honourable partes could I here inferre vnto
you of him (infallible arguements of his incredible modestie) for
long after this, when this mightie Prince had atchieued so manie and
waightie honours throughout all Fraunce, as that the regard thereof
made his name a terrour, and his becke a commaunde to compell theyr
Soueraigntie vnto his fathers obedience: he was required by _Don
Petro_, king of Castile, to helpe him agaynst _Henrie_ his bastard
brother, who had then expulsed him vnlawfully; and vsurped vpon his
kingdome. Whereupon hauing by the couragious endeuour of him selfe,
and his Knightes, and by their sole and onely prowesse, brought downe
the vsurper, and driuen him cleane out of the Countrey, (albeit his
strength was such, and the admirable fauour of the people so greate, as
might easilye haue inuited him there, to the wearing of a crowne) hee
neuerthelesse of a high and noble disposition, holding it _farre more
honourable to make a king then to be a king_, so farre foorth declared
his temperance at that verie instant (not commonlie happening vnto
euerie one, especially in causes of a kingdome) as that hee vtterlie
abstained so much as to beare an appetite or liking therunto, howbeit
good occasiō was therunto ministred by the breach of _Don Petro_ in
paiment of his souldiors: but to his immortall renowne, placed and
restored therin againe the true & lawful inheritour of the same setling
him (according as was intended) in his crowne and kingdome. Could there
my L. in any one haue appeared greater arguments of Magnanimitie,
Iustice, and Temperaunce, then was remaining in this Prince? And yet
if continuall happinesse in all worldly attempts, if neuer ceasing and
eternized famous victories, if the commendation and honour done vnto
him of his mightiest enemies, if strength and glorie of his countrey,
and honoured titles of his victorious father, if confirmed leagues
of diuers mightie Princes, Confederates and Alies, if feruent and
of all others the moste principall and ardent loue of his Knightes,
subiects and followers, if all or anie of these might anie wayes haue
induced him to the breach of eyther of these vertues, what wanted
to the furtheraunce thereof, that in and vppon him, was not alwayes
attendant and (as it were) continuallie powred. Was hee not then wedded
to honour, euen in his formost Cradle? Did not _Fortune_ immediately
acknowledge him, and confesse that he was her darling? Seemed _vertue_
euer prowde, but in his greatest perfection? Grew _Fame_ at any time
so impatient as euen then, when (as the most conuenient harbour of
all her worthinesse) she sought out his dwelling? Agreed they not
all with one voice to abandon the statelinesse of all others, onelie
to bee resiant with him whome they helde most charie of all others?
Witnesse among manie other his more then ordinarie attemptes, the
three battels (then which no one thing throughout the worlde before
or since became of more greater remembraunce) by him in his moste
youngest yeares, so miraculouslie foughten, the one of which was at
_Cressay_ agaynst the French, when he was but eighteene yeares of age
(as you haue before remembred.) the second at _Poictiers_, where died
the King of _Bohemia_, and King _Iohn_ of Fraunce became his prisoner:
the thirde against the bastard _Henrie_, for the kingdome of Castile,
where in one whole intire fight the same _Henry_ bearing a mightie
hoste, was by meere surpassing valour and moste woorthie prowesse of
this Prince discomfited, and by maine force thereof expulsed his
Seignorie. All which exploytes, and manie more besides, celebrating
thereby his eternall prayses, when he had with greater glorie, then
well may bee conceyued, furnished and finished to the aduauncement of
his immortall dignitie: See death, dispightfull death, who ioyning
with the malignitie of the wicked world, hatefull alwayes to vertue,
and satisfying euer to malicious enuie, bereft the vnwoorthie earth
of his most worthie life. But howe? Not as falleth out to euerie
common creature, deuoyde of after memorie: for why? the soueraigne
commaunder of earth and skyes, allowed it otherwise: neither beseemeth
such stately patternes of honoured _vertue_, whose spirites caried
with greater efficacie of aspiring eternitie, then those whose duller
conceytes are adapted to more terrene and grosse validities, shoulde
bee exempted their perpetuitie. And albeit in all the progression
of the wished life of this mightie Prince, anie one thing was neuer
founde contrarying, blemishing, or in one sort or other impugning his
honour (one sole imposition or taxe contraried in his gouernement of
_Gascoigne_ excepted) yet in the highest estate of happinesse wherein
hee alwayes liued, was hee neuer more happie or glorious, then euen
in his verie death. Insomuch as hee then dyed, at which time in most
honour and highest, toppe of all prosperitie, hee was principallie
established and chieflie florishing: at that instant in which the
type of his excellencie was in no one tytle or iote obscured: at that
verie season when in the whole course and practise of his life, hauing
still addicted himselfe to sounde out the incertaine and momentarie
pleasures of the worlde, he had by perfect tryall found out the small
validitie and little affiaunce that was to bee reposed in transitorie
and fading glorie of the same. Euen then, when in the exchaunge of the
eternall habitation (the incomprehensible ioyes whereof no eye hath
seene, eare hath heard, nor tongue can expresse,) hee best knewe howe
to leaue this wretched life, and to compasse the sweete and wholesome
meditation of the other. He died (my L.) as hee euer liued, vertuouslie
and honourablie, the determination of whose deceasing corps, was
preparation to newe ioyes: and commutation of momentarie pleasures, an
assurance of euer flourishing gladnesse. Thus, see you (my good L.)
before your eyes, the most certaine and assured counterfeite of verie
true Nobilitie, furnished in the discouerie of such a one, whose
personage beeing in no kinde of excellencie inferiour, to that in the
highest degree may bee of any other imagined: deserueth by so much the
more of all honourable estates accordingly to be embraced. Great is
the ornament of prayse, and precious the renowne that longeth to such
vertue: the Diamond glimpse whereof equalleth in beautie the fairest,
and dimmeth by the verie shadowe thereof the glittering pompe of the
mightiest. Beautie, strength, comelinesse fadeth, yea, the worlde
decayeth, pleasure vanisheth, and the verie face of heauen it selfe
perisheth: Onlie sacred _vertue_ is immortall, she neuer dieth, euer
quickeneth, absolutely triumpheth, and ouer all other earthly monuments
euen out of the deepest graue for euer flourisheth. Liue therefore
my L. vertuouslie, and die wheresoeuer and whensoeuer, yet howsoeuer
honourablie. My paper burthened with his long discourse, desirous
rather to recreate then toyle your L. enforceth an ende. Recommending
my humble duetie in whatsoeuer to your honourable acceptance.

=The respects of this |Epistle| argued in the personage of so noble a
Prince, haue caried in the matter thereof, the very shew of the highest
and chiefest vertues, whereupon all commendation may bee principallie
gathered. The next hereunto shall be |Vituperatorie| also touching
the person. Wherein as wee haue in the other, sought by all occasions
and circumstances therunto incident, what to the furtherance of such
requisite commendation might be alledged: so will we herein imagin vpon
what groundes or respects the occasions of dispraise, may as farre
forth otherwise in anie other qualitie be remembred.=


          _An example of an Epistle vituperatorie, concerning
                           also the person._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._ Of the cause mouing admiration.]

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Paradoxon._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

[Sidenote: _Paradoxon._]

[Sidenote: His Parents.]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria. Epanodis._]

[Sidenote: _Antiphrasis._]

[Sidenote: _Apostrophe._]

[Sidenote: His childhood.]

[Sidenote: _Ecphonesis._]

[Sidenote: _Omoioteleton._]

[Sidenote: _Adolescencie._]

[Sidenote: _Sinathrismus._]

[Sidenote: _Parison._]

[Sidenote: _Brachiologia._]

[Sidenote: _Ironia._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Epiheton._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: His youth and age.]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

[Sidenote: _Antipophora._]

[Sidenote: _Transitiō._]

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

[Sidenote: _Hypotyposis._]

[Sidenote: His inordinarie sicknes.]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._ His death.]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

Sir, the straungenesse of an accident happening of late amongst vs,
hath occasioned at this instaunt, this discourse to come vnto your
handes. There was, if you remember, at your last beeng with mee in
the Countrey, a man of great abilitie, dwelling about a mile from me,
his name was B. and if I faile not of memorie therein, wee had once
at a dinner together sitting (by occasion of a pleasaunt Gentleman
then beeing in our companie) greate speaches of him: the man I knowe
is not cleane out of your conceite, and therefore I will cease in
further speaches at this presente to reuoke him. What generall hate the
people bare him, and howe ill hee deserued from his first conuersing
among them, you haue not (I am sure) forgotten, in so much as he was
called the _Hell_ of the world, the _Plague_ of a common-weale, the
_Mischiefe_ of men, and the _Bondslaue_ of the deuill. And no maruaile,
for what iniurie mighte bee conceiued, that was not by him imagined?
what euill coulde there bee that hee shunned to practise? What
mercilesse dealing that hee woulde not proffer? What apparant wrong
that hee ceased to inferre? What execrable extortion that hee cared not
to committe? What villanie so damnable that he durste not put forwarde?
O God, it is incredible to thinke, and vnpossible to bee surmised,
howe greate, howe forcible, howe manifolde, howe mischieuous, howe
insufferable, howe detestable hath beene the originall, progression,
continuation, and determination of his most wicked and shamelesse life,
and were it not that by the incessant outcries, continuall cursinges,
and horrible denuntiations of the innumerable multitude of those, whome
in his life time hee yoked, whome with his actions he feared, whom
with the weighte of his endelesse wealth, hee poized downe, that they
durste not then whisper in secrete, what nowe they openlie discouer,
whereby the force of his wickednesse being then secrete, became not as
nowe so open and apparant. I durste not me thinkes of my selfe so much
as surmize but the one halfe of that, wherein he became so notorious,
so rare and vnused are the euils, wherein hee seemed so throughly to
bee fleshed. I haue woondered sithence with my selfe many times: what
soyle it might bee, or what constellation so furious, as effected
their operations in production of so bad and vile a creature, at the
time when hee was first put forwarde with liuing into the worlde: In
the search whereof I haue beene the lesse astonied, in so much as
thereby I haue growne into some particular knowledge of his originall
and parentes. His sire I haue vnderstoode was a villaine by birth, by
nature, by soyle, by discente, by education, by practise, by studie, by
experience: his damme the common sinke of euerie rakehels filthinesse:
the one of whome (after innumerable offences committed, whereby
hee deserued a thousande deathes) was at the last for a detestable
and notorius crime burned peecemeale vppon a stage in Holland, and
the other (after sundrie consuming and filthie diseases, neuer able
to rid her) was in like manner hanged aliue in chaines for a most
horrible murder in England. Expect you not then, that the procreation
and generation of such an issue, must by argumente of the Parentes
condition, sorte to some notable purpose: you doe I know, and in
trueth howe coulde it otherwise bee likely. Nowe if hereby wee shoulde
conceiue of his education, and howe his childehoode past away beeing
fostered vp as hee was, from one place to another, without any certaine
abiding, but onely _Cœlum omnibus commune_, the common habitation of
the worlde. We must no doubte suppose that he sawe much, knewe much,
practised much, ouerpassed much, and was glutted with verie much. And
surely if I shoulde giue credite to some whome I durst beleeue, that
knewe him euen then when hee was not much more then a childe, the
verie yeares he lastly bare, gaue not more assured testimonie of what
hee nowe was, then the season in which he then passed, did yeelde an
inuiolable approbation, what in time following he would become, for
euen thē; what rapine, what theft, what iniurie, what slaunder, what
lying, what enuie, what malice, what desperate boldnesse, and daring
to enter into any mischiefe, was in him throughly planted? There was
not (by reporte) any one thinge whereby a man might afterwarde bee
coniectured to become infamous, but was in him fully replenished.
Credite mee, I coniecture so manifoldly of the sequell of his actions,
as when I vnderstande what hee was so ripely, I maruaile that hee
liued thus long so wickedly. But shall I turne here from, to his
Adolescencie, and shew what therein I haue hearde? Truely it passeth
all capacitie to be censured: and it is too much to bee thought vppon.
His pride, his bouldnes, his shameles countenance, his lookes, his
gesture, his shew, his liuing, his conuersation, his companie, his
hauntes shewed still what hee was: There was no rake-hell, no ruffian,
no knaue, no villaine, no cogging raskall, no hatefull companion, no
robber on high waies, no priuy pilferer, but his hande was in with him,
and that hee was a copesmate for him, no brothell house but he haunted,
no odde corner but hee knewe, no cutter, but hee was a sharer with,
no person so lasciuious, abiect, vilde, or dissolute, but hee would
bee a copartner with. Yet after all these trades, hauntes, sharinges,
and partakings, hee became at last to serue an olde miser, aged for
his yeares and miserable for his couetousnes. This wretched olde man
(as each one fancieth as hee liketh) conceiued so much of the odde
youth, that hee took him into his seruice, where, with badde attire,
and thredbare diet, hee liued with him a prettie season, somewhat more
then quarter maister. In the ende (by whose thefte God knowes) the man
had a chist broken vp, and a little coyne and plate stolne, where with
(becomming desperate) it was deliuered hee hung himselfe for griefe,
and beeing nowe deade, lefte no issue or other heire, to succeede his
wretchednesse and double barred hoorde, but B. his man, who being a
strong lubber, was by this time growne a sturdie knaue, and would
needes bee counted a man, and thereupon hee became owner and intruder
to his maisters pelfe, wretchednes and miserie. To reckon to you since,
howe hee came into the countrie here, beecame a purchaser, howe hee
hath spente his youth, passed his olde age, what bribery, extortion,
wrong, crueltie, rapine, mischiefe, and all kinde of villanie, hee
hath bolstered, perpetrated, followed: what infidelitie, falshoode,
reuenge, priuy guile, treacherie, betraying the innocent, beating downe
the poore, fatherlesse and widowes: howe much euill hee hath done and
what litle good he hath deserued, what shoulde I clogge my selfe with
the remembrance, or trouble you with the rehearsall. It is too much, I
am not able, I cannot, nay, it were vnpossible to perfourme it. What
resteth then, but that I hasten to the scope which in my foremost
purpose was intended, that hauing deliuered his shamefull life, I
doe reporte vnto you his shamelesse and vnaccustomed death. See then
the incomprehensible power and iustice of God, see the weight of his
measure, see the woonderfull demonstration of his secrete iudgement,
howe of a carelesse life ensueth a cankered death: of a wilfull liuing
a wretched ending: of such money misers so manifolde miseries; as
whereof I sigh to thinke, and grieue to remember. The man somewhat
before his sicknesse grew into an extreame numnesse, in so much as hee
that neuer lusted to helpe others, was not nowe able to helpe himselfe,
nor any cared to relieue him: afterwardes fretting and fuming with him
selfe as it seemed, that not withstanding his greate masse of money,
and huge heape of wealth, none could bee entreated with prayers, or
hiered with guiftes, so much as to meddle with him, he grew into such
a frensie, and consequently, into so ranck a madnes, that hee sate
swearing and blaspheming, crying, cursing, and banning, and that most
execrable, his lookes were grimme, furious and chaunged, his face
terrible, his sight fiery and pearcing, they that sawe him feared, and
they that heard of it durst not come nigh him. In conclusion, some that
pittied him more then his deseruing, and grieued to see that, they
coulde not redresse in him, caused a companie to watch him, others to
prouide warme brothes, and in conclusion vsed all meanes possible to
comforte him. But what can man doe to preuent the secret determination
of the almightie? For loe whilst all men lefte him, and each one stoode
in doubt of him, a companie of rattes vpon a sudden possest his house,
his tables, his chymnies, his chambers, yea his verie bed and his
lodging, vpon which & about which, they were so bold, as in the sight
of the beholders they durst appeare and come before them, and beeing
stroken, aboade, and were killed, and others come in their places:
What shall I say, the sight became so vncouth, as all men shunned,
ech one feared, and none durst abide it; whereupon the miser beeing
lefte alone, thus pittifully died. The stench of his corpes admitted
neither day-light nor companie wherein to bee buried. Two onely that
were the conueyers of him, sickened vehemently, and one of them dyed,
the other is yet scarcely recouered. The matter hereof seemed vnto me
so straunge, and therewithall so opportune to warne vs of our actions,
considering how seuerely God punisheth when hee is once bent to
correction, as I coulde not but deeply consider of it, weighing with
my self that such as was his life, such was his death, the one beeing
hated of manie, the other not to be tolerated of any. The circumstance
whereof, referring herewith to your deep consideration, I doe bid you
hartily farewell.




                      _Of Epistles deliberatiue.
                              Chap. 10._


=The next vnto these laste of this |Demonstratiue| kinds are nowe the
|Deliberatiue|, the first titles whereof in order suted forth, appeare
to bee |Hortatorie|, |Dehortatorie|, |Swasorie|, and |Disswasorie|.
These beeing as I saide before, neerlie affined together (sauing
onelie that the |Hortatorie| and |Dehortatorie| are a little more
vehement, stirring and pricking then the others, yet both consisting
in well aduising and counselling, the one by necessitie, the other
as an inducement to thinges laudable and worthie) neede therefore in
all seeming but one maner of direction in them to be followed. You
shall then vnderstand that the seuerall partes in either of these
|Hortatorie| or |Swasorie|, to be considered, doe principally stand
vppon a diuersitie of affections, which nature as it seemeth, hath from
the beginning ordained, to bee as it were stirrings or prouocations
within vs, thereby to propose a direct and most readie waie vnto
|Vertue|, or to terrifie by like degrees, or withdrawe vs from the
pursuing of vices.=

=The motions or effects herein frequented, may bee said to bee either
of praise or mislike, of hope or reward, or feare of euill to folow,
of loue to well doing, or of hate vnto badnes, of emulation of others
praise, glory, or reputation, of expectation thereon depending, of
examples or of intreatie. By laying out of all or either of these, as
occasion shall serue, consisteth the efficacie of all exhortation or
aduising, pulling backe or disswading. Now how the qualities of these,
or any other in generall touching the propertie they haue with |Vertue|
or |Vice|, may for any turne be allotted: I must as well for this
|Deliberatiue| kind ensuing, as for all other titles whatsoeuer, the
same hereafter requiring, wholy referre the learner to the places in
the chapter preceeding the Epistles |Laudatorie| and |Vituperatorie| in
all things to be directed.=

=As touching these particularities, which wee haue tearmed |Motions|
and |affects|, let vs consider if you will in seuerall, and see what
efficacie by distinguishment of all their properties & partes they may
beare in this writing. |Praise| (no doubt) in matter of exhortation
or stirring vp to well doing is of most singular force, and so
questionlesse is |Mislike|, when generallie it may bee drawne from a
regarded conceite of the greatest and woorthiest, to the withdrawing
from euill. For if we shall but enter into, or consider of our owne
common passages: what is it I pray you that preferreth or disalloweth,
giueth grace or disableth the actions and endeuours of men, but the
speciall allowance or mislike that is euery where had of them? Is
it not account alone that giueth encouragement vnto |Vertue|? Is
|Vertue| so fullie aduaunced in anie thing as in the estimate prayse
and reputation, that is attributed vnto her? No surelie. And this by
insight had into the verie woorst and lowest sort of men shall you
find, that there is hardlie anie lyuing of so base and contemptible a
spirite, but that by |Prayse| and commendation, hee may bee drawne vppe
to some liking of well dooing. And howebeit the issues of mens actions
doe at anie time seeme to bee spotted with euill, yet desire they at
the least wise for their reckoning sake, that they might bee esteemed
as good.=

=By this appeareth the singularitie of thinges excellent, in so much as
nothing is, or séemeth rightlie prayse-woorthie, but what is accounted
good, so little reputation haue the perpetratours of euilles, as
that of necessitie they are compelled to seeke credite, by falselie
attributing vnto themselues the name of good. Howe much more then true
|Prayse| and |Mislike| of thinges woorthie, or to bee despysed, may by
all lykelihoode bee auailable with those of good spirite, to drawe them
to |Vertues|.

=To applie nowe this prayse in exhorting or counsailing anie one, it
behooueth wee first conceyue what disposition, habiliments, or other
matter of value are in him whome wee haue to deale with, furthering
or conuenient to such a purpose, whereunto wee woulde exhort or
perswade him, and the likelihoode of the same, greatlie to put foorth
or commende: or if before time he haue behaued himselfe anie wayes
well, we shall incourage him in praysing of that alreadie done; and in
shewing that the more excellent the thing is, the more difficult it is
to bee attained, for _Difficilia quæ pulchra_, and yet the difficultie
not so great as the prayse, glorie and recordation thereof, shall
thereby afterwards be returned honourable.=

=Likewise, if the state of the partie doe serue thereunto, it shall
not bee amisse to put him in minde of his parentage, or that fayling,
of his Fortune, Vertue, Nobilitie of minde, Wit, towardnesse, his
great expectation, abilitie, age, and Discretion, all of them no lesse
requiring, but this with great modeste to be deliuered, least in
séeming to preferre the certaintie of those vertues which are of good
account to be in him, we doe not palpably gloze with the partie, and
as it were seeke to drawe from his person, or account, the things that
neuer came neare him.=

=Now as |Prayse|, and the laudable estimate of euerie good action,
together with the iust mislike of thinges euill, spurreth and eggeth
forward to great purposes, so verie much thereunto preuaileth this
other of |Hope|, not that which of a seruile and base humour or
condition ensueth, which expecteth nothing that is frustrate of gain,
and performeth all endeuours by expectation of reward, but that
vertuous kinde of |Hope|, which enableth to the perfection and absolute
summe of all worthinesse, and whose limit is honour, reputation,
estimate and account: A like Companion whereunto is |Loue|, beeing
a zealous affectation of thinges singular, which |Loue| produceth
likewise in it selfe, not a mislike onelie, but a burning |Hate| of
things vile, contemptible, and vnbeseeming.=

=As these in themselues doe each particularlie thrust forwards to
goodnes, so many times |Feare|, or doubt of inconuenience that may
ensue, terrifieth or disswadeth from euils. |Commiseration| of the
lamentable estate of any one, prouoketh also sometimes to pittie, and
disturneth in like sort manie times from reuenge. |Expectatiō|, as wel
of |Loue| as of |Hate|, of good opinion as mislike in compassing of
any thing is not the least. |Shame| & ignomie of the action also, the
dependance whereof is oftentimes occasion sufficient of well doing, and
hindrance alike, and withdrawing from euill purposes. But aboue all is
the spur of |Emulation|, whose force gathered by a certaine kind of
|Enuie|, of others proceedings kindleth flames of regarde to aspire vnto
the like, but not that sluggish and execrable enuie bred of most wicked
and detestable malice, which when it selfe cannot, nor is able to doe
any thing worthie, snatcheth and continuallie gnaweth on the deserts
of others, but that generous and noble kind of enuie which discreete
|Nature| and vertue haue insinuated in our mindes, emulating by a
feruent desire to compasse, or possibly to go beyond what mightily by
others hath béene performed.=

=The authoritie of |Example| is also very weightie, giuing warrant to
any vertuous imitation that may be prescribed, and lastly requests and
intreatie which euer more preuaileth according to the writers credit or
grauity. These being sufficently considered, we will nowe according to
such like directions, endeuour to suite foorth vnto you some particular
examples.=


              _An Example of an Epistle Exhortatorie for
                       the attaining of vertue._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

[Sidenote: _Insinuatiō._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Meiosis._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Hypotyposis._]

[Sidenote: _Antipophora._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._ Praise of the person.]

[Sidenote: _Paræmia._]

[Sidenote: _Exhortatiō._]

[Sidenote: _Confirmatiō._]

[Sidenote: _Antipophora._]

[Sidenote: _Ab æquo._]

[Sidenote: praise of his ancestors.]

[Sidenote: _A necessitate._]

[Sidenote: Of expectation.]

[Sidenote: Of loue and hate.]

[Sidenote: _Hyberbole._]

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

[Sidenote: entreatie.]

I haue manie times desired with my selfe (good Cosin) to obtaine some
necessarie meanes, whereby to manyfest the greate good will I doe
owe vnto you, and in some sorte or other to giue you to vnderstande,
howe much and howe greatly I haue tendred those good partes, that
manie times I haue seene and prooued to bee in you. And for as much
as _Fortune_ hath denied vnto mee the estate, reputation and wealth,
that manie haue gained, and the most doe couet, whereby I cannot if I
woulde, bestowe vppon you such riches and treasures as might breede
content vnto others: I am determmined to imparte vnto you, that, which
vnto your present condition seemeth most requisite, and wherewith vse
and common experience hath heretofore inured mee, in steede of wealth
to giue you wordes, in steede of golde, good, for riches, reason, and
in lue of liuing, to affoord you a louing and constant hearte. And
whereas I am enfourmed, that contrarie to the expectation of some
(who ouer peremptorily haue heretofore deemed of these your young
yeares to be laden with loosenesse, and led forwarde by libertie) you
haue of your selfe, and of your owne motion and free will, obtained
license and allowance of your father to go to _Cambridge_, in minde to
giue your selfe whollie to studie, and the sole fruition of learning,
I mused with my selfe whether I might more commende the motion, or
attende your perseuerance in the action that thereby you haue taken
in hande, in so much as the memorie of the one cannot bee for the
worthinesse more permanent, thē the glorie of the other, to your
euerlasting commendation, will appeare to be most excellent. It is
reported of the mightie _Alexander of Macedon_, that he was a King,
that he was puissant, that he was warlike, that hee was famous, that
he was a Conqueror, and that hee subdued the whole worlde: but when
he came to himselfe, to the conuincing of his owne appetite, to rule
reason by the square of right he became a meacocke, a childe, an
infant, what should I say? he was no bodie. Howe much greater then
hee was, hadde the woorthie Prince appeared, if as in the conquest
of sundrie mightie kinges, regions and prouinces, so in all other
thinges tending to the suppression of his owne peculiar affectes, he
had bene no lesse or fullie so much as _Alexander_. _Scipio_, the most
renowned amongst the Romanes, and for his sundrie great exploites in
_Affrica_, surnamed _Affricanus_, we doe reade, atchieued many valiant
and incomparable victories, and were it but that sole battell which
hee fought (when _Rome_ was nowe at wracke, her Nobilitie spoyled,
and her glorie trode vnder foote, readie almost vppon any reasonable
condition to bee deliuered into the handes of the enemie) in which hee
then freed his citie, repulsed _Haniball_ by a mightie ouerthrowe,
and thereby daunted so farre foorth his pride for euer, as expelled
from him all hope thence forwarde, at anie time else to become a
Conquerour: It coulde not otherwise bee saide without question, but
herein, yea in this onelie action, hee deserued eternall memorie: But
was hee herein, thinke you, and for this onely matter throughout all
the prouinces recounted so famous? No assuredlie. It was also his
rare and most singular vertues otherwise, that fullie perfected and
polished the glorie thereof. It was his rare _Temperance_, _Modestie_,
_Continencie_, and _Sobrietie_, wherein with woonderfull admiration
hee exceedinglie flourished, and became extolled aboue all others.
This was it, wherein more then Alexander hee became regarded and
famous. The conquestes that by this meanes hee daylie made of himselfe,
returned more glorie to Rome, more firme faith and reuerence, then
the forcible progression of all other his fattall ouerthrowes and
victories: of so greate and woonderfull reputation is Vertue to all
her followers. This beeing so, how can I then say, but in this your
action, you haue of your selfe right wel begun, how can I think, but
aboue many others you haue therein verie well deserued? Wherein shoulde
I augmente your praise if not in that which you haue heereby so well
performed, the force, operation, and effect of all which, hath onely
consisted in subduing your owne appetite? Great commendation haue
you won I must needes confesse, and more then with common worthines
haue you in this thinge demeaned your selfe, but (my good Cosen) it
is not ynough to haue well begun in a matter, without also therein
you doe vse perseuerance. _Hanniball_ knew well how to subdue, but he
knew not howe to entertaine his victories. As you haue alreadie in
this your resolution gotten great good liking, so behooueth both for
the preseruation of what alreadie woone, and to induce a perpetuall
increase to the same, that you doe euermore frequente and by earnest
and zealous prosecution seeke still to entertaine the fruits thereof.
Proceede then a Gods name, and goe on with good lucke in your
enterprise, the more harder and greater you finde the difficulty in
attaining to _vertue_, the more vehemente shall bee your glorie, and
the more honourable the reputation that thereby is pursued. For, what
hath a man of all that may be left vnto him in this worlde, whereof to
vaunt himselfe, but the memorie of that wherein he hath most worthily
trauailed. The rich reape possessions, which when themselues are once
passed away, are immediately distributed to others. The pleasures of
the worlde are momentarie, and after wee are once deade wee perceiue
them no more. Worship, honour and dignitie, perisheth euen in the verie
selfe remembrance. The reuenues of the mightie, when life is once fled,
are no more to be tendred. Shall wee then for a number of fruitelesse
vanities, (the regarde whereof doeth neuer last longer, then whilest
wee are in present vse of them) neglect the search of that which is of
all others most permanent? No surely. So behooueth not such as your
selfe, that of your auncestours haue had so many good encouragements,
beseemeth not the remembrance of their excellencies in you alone to
bee perished. Tis _vertue_, beleeue me, that procureth _Fame_, and
soly _Fame_ that makes men immortall. All other meanes are feeble as
the originall from whence they are deriued is vncertaine. At leaste
wise, it shall many other waies stande you greatly vppon, to continue
this course, in so much as by the æmulation of the vertues of others,
you shall thereunto be constrained, besides the loue and regarde
that all men haue borne, and euer doe beare to the remembrance of
vertue, the expectation of your entirely fauouring and carefull louing
friendes, who with greate longing doe attende the prosequution of your
woorthinesse, the ill conceite, malice and spite that some haue hadde
towardes you, whereby to ouerthrowe the good opinion of your father,
who with greater greedinesse than Woolues themselues, with more enuie
than the Crocodile, and farre more poyson than the serpent, doe lie in
waite but onely to hearken after the newes of your declination, and the
dissolued purpose of your good intention. Finally, my dearest and best
fauoured kinsman, I doe adiure you, pray you, and as earnestly as I
can beeseech you, by the verie pure and entire loue of vertue, whereof
you nowe shall become partaker, by the immortall fame thereunto onely
awarded, by the care you are bounde and ought to haue of your selfe,
by all the kindred that hath tied vs in affinitie together, by all the
loues and possible entreatie that I can, you doe persist, continue and
remaine firme in this your intended purpose. In pursuite whereof you
shall minister vnto your friendes ioy and comforte, to your enemies
shame and reproch, to your selfe praise and eternall regarde, and to
all sortes of your acquaintance occasion to admire you. Preferring many
times my care and earnest affection towards you, with my manifolde
greetings vnto your good selfe. I doe bid you farewell. &c.




                       Of Epistles Responsorie.
                              _Chap. 11._


=For asmuch as the knowledge of letters |Responsorie| are as méete to
bee vnderstoode in the ordinarie occasions hereof as any others: I
deeme it not amisse amongst the passages of these seuerall titles of
Epistles to sorte you foorth also of them some particular Examples,
the better in their disposition to enable yᵉ learner as occasion
may serue. Touching which, it is to bee vnderstoode that the matter
of euerie answere taketh his originall of a letter precéeding, and
dependeth principally on the parts thereof. The ordering whereof
(except in Letters |Excusatorie| or |Defensorie|) is wholy exempted,
the course in those other letters prescribed, and the obseruation in
these, is principally to consider on what partes the letter which ought
to be answered consisteth or is chiefly grounded. Those, howebeit it
behooueth we doe fully answere, yet shall you not (as some ignorant
of weldoing haue done) recite in your answere the whole circumstance
of the matter charged, |verbatim| in a manner as it is written
before you, for that woulde bréede tediousnesse, besides a ridiculous
disorder by such meanes frequented, but you shall (if néede so vrge)
capitulate the principall partes of euerie seuerall matter charged,
and thereupon frame you to answere the points, in sorte as before you,
shall be deliuered. Or sometimes not needing any rehersall at all, if
the pointes be but fewe, you shall answere onely as the matter you haue
in hande is to bée deliuered. Or otherwise in this sorte: |Touching
the pointes in your Letter to bee answered: for the first I say, or it
is thus or thus, &c. In the second, it is so or so. For the thirde,
in this manner or that. Touching the fourth, &c.| And so answere the
partes by their number. By which meanes you shall both drawe your
selfe to a breuitie therein, and become far more pithie in the matters
you haue to write of then otherwise can be expressed. And this béeing
sufficient for all matters hereafter, touching these |Responsorie|
kindes, we will nowe for the first Example set you downe an answere to
the epistle precéeding.=


            _An example Responsorie to the last Epistle be-
                           fore remembred._

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

[Sidenote: _Dichologia._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

The regard of your exceeding good will, and weight of your aduise and
good exhortations (my verie good Cosen) haue mooued me many times to
thinke on you, and to thank you for the same, I take no litle comfort
of your great good liking of my determination, and that the endeuour
therof beareth so forcible allowance at your handes, as to reckon the
same in so hie and great accompte, as you doe. I did (I confesse) erre
a while, but howe? as a young man, I went astraie I graunt, but not
with perseuerance, for I reclaimed my selfe ere I fell, and stoode
vpright ere by ouer much weight I slided too far in my purposes,
_Errare est humanum, sed persistere belluinum_. The course I haue
taken in hand as it was estranged from the opinion of many: so in
the prosecutiō thereof, I hope to vse such pursuit, as willingly by
declination therein, I meane not to become offensiue to any. Feare you
not sir, the account is alreadie set downe, for notwithstanding my
greene yeares must yet of force continue their note of imbecilitie:
This prerogatiue yet remaineth, that I may as I liste adapt my opinion
to grauitie. You shall (good Coosen) doe mee a great pleasure, if as I
am partner of your loue and entyre affection, so I may sometymes bee
partaker with you of those exercises and sweet pleasures, wherewith
your studie is frequented: I meane that with some discourses of yours
you will nowe and then remember mee. By expectation whereof, you shall
often prouoke mee to aunswere you. Thus assuring my selfe of that I
neuer yet distrusted at your handes, your zeale and fidelitie towardes
mee; I regarde you as faithfull as I haue euer found you, and so will
alwayes account of you, &c.


   _An example of an Epistle hortatorie, to the studie of learning._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Insinuatiō._]

[Sidenote: _Propositiō._]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Procatalepsis._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

[Sidenote: _Paradigma._]

[Sidenote: _Commoratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Ab honesto._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Synathrismus._]

[Sidenote: _Anthesis._]

[Sidenote: _Etiologia._]

[Sidenote: _Epanodis._]

[Sidenote: _Paramologia._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: Dignitie and zeale of others.]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: By example.]

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

It is no little pleasure vnto me, to consider with my selfe my good N.
the great trauaile, cost, and paine, dayly employed by your dearest
beloued parents, to induce vnto you the precious, and of all other most
delicate and sweete pleasure of learning: the value whereof, is without
all estimate, and the comfort therein conceiued, in no wise to bee
comprehended: the louing regarde of whome, and the most lamentable want
of the other, when I doe see you either with some ill fauouring aspect
not to incline vnto, or with some more then straunge or vnused tearmes
not to account of, I cannot but greeue with my heart, respecting the
linke whereby I stand charged to either of you, in so great apparance
as I doe to behold the same. True it is, that you are a Gent. that you
are heire apparant to large and verie great possessions, that you are
(for the yeares you beare) of comely and goodly personage, that you are
in all things well accomplished, and euerie way as beseemeth: but yet
when I behold this fauour, this comlinesse, these accomplishments, and
know you to bee a Gent. and thinke vpon your large ensuing reuenues
and possessions, me thinkes there should yet be an ornament of all
these, and a thing of farre more goodly shewe, and more surpassing
value wanting to the same, that might if it were well entertained ad
more glorie vnto all the others, then the waight of the rest were euer
able to purchase. For suppose that all these complements of yours are
of large price, and verie necessarie, as they are indeede, and such
wherewith the state of man is greatly beautified, yet are they all but
thinges pertinent vnto the bodie, by force whereof (setting onelie
our shape aside) wee doe communicate in euerie thing with beastes,
for with them wee liue, wee mooue, wee go, wee eate, and enioie the
sensuall appetite of inward or outward abilities. _B_ut by the benefit
of learning, of knowledge, of skill, wee make difference of things, and
are onely thereby in our selues distinguished from beastes. And if man
which is the principal worke of God, was from the beginning a chosen
creature indued aboue any others, and therefore poynted to excell and
go beyond all others, howe much more needefull shall it bee for euerye
one according to such appoyntment to preferre and put forwarde the vse
thereof vnto his owne profite. And seeing as well by the ordinance
of God, as common vse of reason, whereby we are gouerned and ledde,
euerie man is induced to propose vnto himselfe the exercise of thinges
that are good and honest, and that the same also among these, which
maketh a man nearest to his Creatour in perfection, is of all others
the moste to bee desired: howe much auaylable then and importaunt is
it to euerie man to bee frequented with learning, the vse whereof
freeth him of common ignoraunce, and maketh him capable of the high and
loftie mysteries. And if in anie studie whatsoeuer, the reputation of
honest and good is to bee sought for, what I pray you then learning,
may bee iudged more honest, which hauing with it a certaine kinde of
diuine and sacred originall, hath from the beginning of the worlde,
beene with all men in greatest price and estimation. What may bee
deemed more good then that which from verie Asses and blockes, and (if
it were lawfull to say) from bruite men and beastes also themselues
maketh distinction, and without the which, there were left vnto vs from
such, no place at all of difference. What then that can bee sayde to
bee more honest, which draweth a man vppe to the diuine contemplation
of the sacred Maiestie, to the knowledge of high and heauenly thinges,
of woorthie and honourable vertues, and beeing sequestred by the wante
thereof, hee becommeth no otherwise than as a hogge, still groueling
on the earth, searching onely wherewith to fill his bellie, neglecting
in the meane time the expectation or regarde of any other statelie or
eternall Soueraintie. Nowe therefore, if the vse of learning, as the
thinge of greatest accompt and most woorthie, is heere sette downe to
bee so generallie, commended to all sortes of men, howe much more
consonant and agreeing is it then to the reputation of a Gentleman, who
by what distaunce so euer hee is measured in capacitie, minde, order,
state and gouernment from anie other common or ordinarie person, by
so much the more ought hee in all endeuours to aspyre and seek to goe
beyond them. For whereas all other men in their seuerall vocations are
for the most parte, as it were withdrawne from the speciall notice and
eye-marke of all publique administration and gouernement: the Gentl.
contrariwise, the more woorthie and noble that hee is in calling, the
more neerer is hee to that aduauncement whereunto by nothing so much as
learning hee is enabled to bee preferred. For what profitable member
can hee bee in such a place, whose ignoraunce is farre greater then his
witte, and whose knowledge is lesse then the least of that, whereof
hee ought to take notice and experience. And seeing learning is of all
other thinges, a store-house so plentifull and precious, as whereof
the wiseman maketh his treasure, the poore man his riches, and the
wealthy one his pastime and pleasure, shall the Gentleman who in all
other thinges, by Nature striueth to bee excellent, bee in the greatest
action of all others so carelesse and negligent? Admit that you will
heere alledge the tediousnesse of studie, and a certaine impossibilitie
almost to attaine thereunto, I must aunswere vnto you againe, that
this commeth not of the labour thereof, which to those that willingly
aspire to the delicate taste of the same, yeeldeth great facilitie with
pleasure to bee receyued: but to a slouthfull and sluggish endeuour and
disposition. Far be it therefore (good Sir) that you beeing a Gentleman
in all other thinges so towardly, and the sonne of such a one as you
are, shoulde with the touch of so great a blemish, bee so throughly
stained. So woorthie a discente as whereof you are deriued, such
infancie and child-hoode wherein so worthily you haue beene trained,
so great loue and charge of parents wherewithe you may bee animated,
doe inuite you farre otherwise, and to a more excellent purpose. Let
the sweete and yet vnknowne delight thereof prouoke you, the praise and
commendation solye to vertue appropriate and belonging, once prick you
forward, the honour and aduancement thereby continually happening egge
you. And if none of all these preuaile, yet the riches and rewarde
farre greater then anie earthly treasure, which are therunto incident,
tie you to a desire thereof. Thinke of the worthines of those, who
by howe much the more noble they were in birth, by so much the more
zealouslie they haue trauelled, not shunning any labour, sweate,
tediousnesse, scorning, yea bondage it selfe, whereby to compasse vnto
themselues the glorie and rewardes annexed to the dignitie heereof.
And if no other remembrance may be sufficient to establish you, regard
yet your liuing father and grandfather, the one of whom neglecting his
ease and quiet at home, trauailed all Fraunce, Germanie, and Italie,
to the intent to attaine vnto the greatnesse of that whereunto you are
so hardly perswaded. Neither thinke I that you in whome all other good
actions do so plentifully flow, wil herein alone with a little labour
be terrified: Wherefore my good N. I eftsoones entreate you againe, and
againe, by all the loue you haue ought to your name, fame, parentage
and stocke, and by all the expectation that in them, or anie of them,
is of your happinesse conceiued, you will proceede in this purpose: the
weight whereof besides the commoditie and pleasure redounding to your
selfe, shall vnto your parents and all others returne most comfortable
and pleasing. All which recommending to your courteous consideration to
bee entertained, I doe herewith take my leaue, &c.


     _An other example Hortatorie, wherein an honourable Gentleman
       is egged forward in the profession of Armes, and seruice
                      of his Prince and Country._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

Sithence the time of my little abode heere in London being scarce
twentie dayes, vnderstanding of the being in town of my La. your
mother, I repaired thereupon to her presence to visite her: there did I
receiue notice of your being in Ireland, and that vpon your honourable
behauiour, and good seruice there done: The L. D. did not onely
testifie the same by his owne hand-writing vnto diuers of the priuie
Counsell, but also in especiall letters besides commended the weight
thereof, vnto the regard of her most excellent Maiestie.

[Sidenote: _Insinuatio_ by praise of the action.]

[Sidenote: _Parenthesis._]

[Sidenote: _Epitheton._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

I did not a little reioyce to see that in such young yeares wherein
commonlie falleth out a contempt of all excellencies, and a
fantasticall desyre of counterfeyte vanities, you coulde (besides the
common trade and custome of the worlde) addict your selfe wholie vnto
so weightie and honourable an exercise, as by laboursome trauaile in
the seruice and honour of your Prince and countrie, to put forwarde
your selfe so timely. Credite mee, it is not a little pleasing vnto mee
to thinke thereon, neither standeth my affection so slender vnto your
fathers off-spring, but that I must euer holde the reputation of their
weldoing, an aduauncemente to my imaginations, and the sounde of their
good successe the verie harmonie of mine inwarde soule.

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

It is no newe thing I confesse, euen in these dayes to see a Gentleman
honourablie descended as your selfe, and of like worthie education, to
attaine vnto learning, to become practised in Armes, to put forward
themselues in seruice, but to continue with resolution, to performe it
with labour, to atchieue it with valour, to beare it with honour, here
is the excellencie, this is the rarenesse, hence springeth the noueltie.

[Sidenote: _Hypotyposis._ vertue hath three entrances.]

[Sidenote: Fortitude.]

[Sidenote: Magnanimitie.]

[Sidenote: Longanimitie.]

_Vertue_ retaining yet her ancient Maiestie, though not pursued as
in olde time, with such woonted vehemencie, hath three entraunces,
leading directly vnto her beautifull passage, by the portes whereof,
whosoeuer is desirous to attaine her, in her purest and most glorious
estate, must of necessitie enter. First, _Fortitude_, whereby hee must
be enabled to endure whatsoeuer labour and trauell to be imposed,
accounting nothing difficult, to the end and sweet rewarde whereof her
excellencie is appropriate. Next, _Magnanimitie_, which by a vehement
and haughtie desire, reacheth vnto thinges most excellent & of highest
and stateliest value, not regarding the hard, tough, & maine force of
the passage, with what pursuit soeuer it must bee followed, so be it
by such meanes it may be wonne, and the glorie thereunto due, may at
last be attained: the reach wherof, tending to the last end and scope
of al his determinatiōs, sweetneth all maner of trauel, and induceth
therewithal a contempt of whatsoeuer lesse valued or hindering, to
the worthines of the same. Then _Longanimity_, enabling by greate
constancie with rare and accustomed patience, to awaite and endure the
end, neuer giuing ouer vpon whatsoeuer assaults, til the determined
scope be by all kind of industry fullie and perfectly furnished.

[Sidenote: _Etiologia._]

For this cause, the most renowmed parte of _vertue_ is saide to bee
excellent, for that manie doe contemplate her a far off, but few or
none at all doe almost come so nigh her, as perfectly to see and
discerne her, in so much as some, nothing regarding the singularitie of
that, whose sweetnesse they neuer tasted of, become forcelesse of the
pursuit of so diuine an excellencie: and some other fauouring a litle
the daintines thereof, yet ouer-reached with the tediousnes of the
enterprise, and hindered by the opposition of a thousand vanities, are
so astonished in the first onset, as being therewith ouercome, doe by
and by giue ouer their purposes.

[Sidenote: Adhortation to vertue.]

Now therefore my C. if you will bee a right fauourer of _vertue_
indeede, it behooueth that by these possibilities you doe (as a
faithful regarder of her diuine & sacred essence) only seeke to pursue
her, and that with such and none other respectes, and to no other ende
and purpose, but for the sole fruition of her stately and immortall
deitie.

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

The time now calleth you forth, your Countrie and soyle wherein you
were borne and nourished inuiteth you, your praise alreadie gotten, and
hope of renowne euer after to followe, perswade you, the honour of your
house and parentage constraineth you, yea euerie of these solie and
altogether doe exhort and commaund you, that becomming the selfe same
you vowed, and they long since haue looked for, you doe nowe shewe your
selfe such as was promised, and wherein the expectation first conceiued
of you, may in no wise bee frustrated.

[Sidenote: _Clymax._]

[Sidenote: _Antistrophe._]

Consider I pray you, that the rewarde of _vertue is honour_, the
guerdon of _honour_, _Fame_, the scope of _Fame_, _Eternity_, the
seat of _eternity_, immortall and euerlasting glory. In liuing in the
seruice of your Prince and countrie, the profession you haue taken in
hand is honourable, the charge honourable, the purpose honourable, and
the ende and successe thereof must needes be honourable: behooueth then
that your continuance therein and your owne deserts be also deemed
honourable.

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Commoratio._]

Thinke when you tooke vpon you to beare Armes, you then receiued the
full cognizance of _Vertue_, you were entertained with _honour_, you
became apprentise to _fame_, and it was assured (that beeing with
loyaltie demeaned) you shoulde at length receiue the rewarde of euer
flourishing glorie. It is (beleeue me) no small matter, that being
a particular member, you are put foorth as a piller, vpon the prop
whereof reposeth one parte of the weight of the common-weale, that
the ioyes of your whole countrie are fixed vpon your wel-doing, that
in pursuite hereof your priuate cause is not your owne, (the secrete
reuenge whereof may happelie turn to an infamed mischiefe) but the
cause of the _common good_, the publike matter of al, and that where
the scope is of all others most famous and honoured.

[Sidenote: Of right and meet.]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

Being entertained in a sorte as you are, you shoulde highly wrong the
opinion of a greate manie, in drawing backe from that wherein you haue
beene alreadie so worthilie behaued, and in becomming lesse than that
whereunto in your cradle you were at the beginning so principally
ordained: for vnseemelie were it that you shoulde not haue beene
hereunto at the first committed, vnlawfull not to haue persisted, and
dishonourable (in due sorte) not to see it accomplished.

[Sidenote: Of example. _Paradigma._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

[Sidenote: _Paradigma._]

[Sidenote: _Prosopopœia._]

Proceede then my C. in that whereunto your vertue, your Parentage,
your soile, and your fidelitie haue called you, thinke what, how much,
and how greatlie it importeth you, that hauing had so manie of your
auncestours since their first originall, who haue beene deemed so
woorthie, it fitteth not your selfe alone (in so important actions,
concerning especially the honour of your prince and countrie) to bee
founde otherwise then equall vnto them in the highest qualitie. So
and in such maner, and by such kind of meanes haue the most auncient
and renowned worthies of the world be come to be tearmed honored,
and mightie. So _Epaminondas_ and _Alcibiades_ among the _Grecians_,
_Æmilius Paulus_, _Fabii and Scipiones_ among the Romanes, haue bin
deemed most statelie. For such cause the acts of your predecessors &
nobilitie of your deceased father haue bin registred with the most
worthy. O so sweetly might sound from out his breathing ghost vnto your
liuing eare, that excellent verse of _Virgill_.

    _Disce puer virtutem ex me verumque laborem,_
    _Fortunam ex aliis._
    =Learne vertue (Child) of me and labours true,=
    =But |Fortunes| chaunce, from others do pursue.=

[Sidenote: His Parents.]

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Dialysis._]

[Sidenote: _Anthypophora._]

The signification whereof, what other thinge may it else importe,
but that betweene them who beeing neuer eternized by anie memorable
action, as hauing confounded their liues with obscuritie, and such as
neuer were borne, there resteth in maner no difference at all. _Ardua
virtutis est via._ T’is labours force that maketh way vnto _Vertue_:
great matters vnto the furtherance of her are but easie, the meaner,
trifles; the lowest of no value. To ouercome others by vertue is a
thinge most honourable, but in pursuite thereof to bee conuinced of
any other, is a thinge most vituperable: You are nowe brought by
Fortune into a straight passage, whereby of necessitie you must either
by reputation of most excelling worthinesse finish the iourney, or
recreant and discomfited, confesse the vttermost of your imbecilitie.
But what doe I conferre vnto your viewe, the notes of such and so
manie doubtes and hazardes, knowing a minde insinuate in your selfe
by nature, that coulde neuer so much as thinke or imagine of thinges
contemptible, or of anie vile or seruile qualitie at all? truelie for
no woorse meane, nor to anie other ende or purpose, but thereby to egge
you forwarde by all kinde of possibilities, to the encrease of your
highest woorthinesse, that by howe much the more you shall goe about to
excell any others, by so much the more greater you may be commended and
extolled aboue others.

[Sidenote: _Parœmia._]

Ease and securitie, are two pernicious enemies of euer flourishing
glorie, and industrie preuenteth all circumuention, which either by
slouth or negligence may bee imposed: the victorie is not any others,
but your owne, nor the honour to any other appertaining but vnto your
selfe. Bee therefore such in continuance, as may fullie bee answerable
to each part of your noblenesse, and God who is the creator of all
thinges, and fauourer of each worthie enterprise, blesse your endeuours
with the sustentation of _Vertue_, which is euer permanent. At B. this
of &c.


                    _An Epistle Swasorie, wherein a
                        Gentlewoman is counsel-
                           led to mariage._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Insinuatiō._]

[Sidenote: _Parenthesis._]

The extreame griefe wherein my selfe was a partaker with you, of the
death of your late husbande, woulde not suffer mee (good Mistresse E.)
at my last beeing with you, to deliuer what then I thought meete for
your estate, & sithence I haue more at large considered vppon to bee
for your profite. And albeit your selfe are, I knowe of discretion
sufficient, and the number of your friendes of regarde compotent,
both to consider and counsell, what vnto your present affayres may
bee deemed most correspondent: yet may it not bee ill accepted, if
my selfe of a great manie, that haue wyshed well to your person, and
fauoured euermore your good condition, doe heerein also among the
rest, put forwarde my meaning, and perswade you thereby vnto that,
which (though not alreadie may bee fitting to your instant lyking) yet
to your present behoofe may returne no question of soundest and best
consideration.

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

And first, I deeme it not impertinent to referre vnto your knowledge
what I haue throughly conceyued with my selfe of your beeing, _viz._
that you are a widowe, a Gentlewoman of verie worshipfull parentage
and discent, the wife before time of a Gentleman of as good reputation
as liuing, as good alliaunce as credite, that you are knowne to bee
modest, discreete, wise and well gouerned, that you are and ought to
bee warie in your actions, and such as whereof the babling multitude
may reape no aduauntage, and finallie that by reason of the ouerhastie
determination of his life (whose continuaunce might haue ridde you of
innumerable cares) you are pestred with some troubles, the most part
of your liuing in suspence, and that whereof you deeme your selfe
most assured, hanging vppon so manie hazardes, as hitherto remayneth
doubtfull, in what sort you shall compasse it, or with what liking to
your selfe you may happily ouerpasse the same.

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

Touching the first, I warne you not that according to your present
estate, you do minde what you are, what you haue bin, of whom you are
discended, and in what sort you may best prouide with warinesse, to
deale for all these: but drawing to the latter, and weighing on what
tearmes you stande, howe hardly you are bestead, howe slender meanes
to auoid it, I repute him not the worst wel-willer, that coulde aduise
you with contentment and litle hazard, in what sort you might best
endeuour in all effectes to aunswere it. It is reported vnto mee, that
by the procurement of some, fauouring your aduauncement, there is nowe
profered vnto your lyking a young Gentleman, vertuous, discreete, and
well ordered, the sonne and heyre of a worshipfull Knight, on the
choyce and regarde of whose Parents, dependeth the best assuraunce of
your whole portion, in whose condition and behauiour, albeit you finde
no one thing to bee reprehended, yet disclaime you to bee married, you
will heare of no suters, there must bee in your presence no speech at
all of lyking, and you meane not so soone forsooth to set forwarde for
a husband.

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Commoratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Parenthesis._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Procatalepsis._]

[Sidenote: _Vtilitie._]

[Sidenote: Necessitie.]

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

The course you doe take herein, seemeth in my opinion verie euill,
insomuch as contrarie to that, which both your yeares, your estate,
your liuing and present occasions doe require, you forciblie are
endeuoured to make so vndiscreete and setled a resistance: Whie La. doe
you thinke it profiteth at all, the deceased ghost of him that loued
you (a young Gentlewoman as you are, scarce exceeding twentie yeares)
to liue thus solitarie? Hangeth the censuring of your modestie, and
acceptaunce of that which your best friendes doe wish for, and the
wisest doe allowe of, on the tatling humours of common supposes? if it
bee deemed once fit for you to marry againe, and that vpon the warie
and circumspect choyse thereof dependeth a manner of necessitie, and
that nowe, before anie one of yours almost suspected it, the plenty of
that might bee charily wished for, is layde alreadie into your bosome,
behooueth the respect of a little time, which (beeing sooner or later,
so it bee perfourmed with modestie and aunswered with discretion)
mattereth not at all to detaine you so much, as thereby you are not
able to see into your owne profite? Is it not, I pray you, a purpose
honest that is tendered? Is it not a matter lawfull to bee accepted?
Is it a thing vnmeete for your present yeares at this instant to
be reputed? Nay, is it not all in all whatsoeuer, that in the best
sort as the case now standeth, may vnto you be offered? Why then
abstaine you the entertainment of your owne good? Why drawe you thus
backeward from your owne aduauncement? Why cease you to accept that,
whereunto in the ende you must by meere force bee compelled? If you
will beleeue mee in any thing, or doe suppose the waight of my credite
to be auaylable vnto you in ought, I would aduise you in other sort,
considering that by declyning from a selfe-opinion of that whereunto
without anie manifest reason you are induced, you shall doe most good
vnto your selfe, and giue occasion to them that loue you, to thinke
that by so doing, their good counselles haue happely preuailed with you
and wrought such aduauncemente vnto you, I haue thought with my selfe
many times sithence the death of your husbād, howe much imported the
vnsetled reach of your liuing to be renued in match with one of good
calling: see nowe God and Fortune more fauouring your hap, then your
selfe, your owne wel doing, haue sente you such a one, as of whome you
might vaunt, and iustly in all thinges be occasioned to accompt of. It
now appertaineth that either by fond self-wil, or too much vnkindnes,
you shake not off from you the foremost occasion of your succeeding
happines. I reck not what of the cōmon sort (more of ignorance then
wit) may insuppose of the hastie conclusion be in secret alleadged,
their errours like their fancies, are as incertaine as peeuish. Be you
onely herein perswaded, to what most of all beseemeth you, and think
that both in the waightines, and regard attributed to his and your
own worthines, you can for the present frame your selfe to nothing,
that to your estate may returne so cōmodious, whereunto though no
other matter at all enioyned you, it were sufficient that so forced
a necessitie constraineth you, to which the regard of your selfe and
your owne good fortune willeth to obey. Longer coulde I debate vnto you
the greate liking of many, conceiued of the partie, to the deliuerie
whereof by the report of your neerest kinsmen, I doe solie refer you,
onelie studying in this, and whatsoeuer els I may, by all indeuours
to pleasure you, whereof praying you to be most assured, I doe in all
curtesie leaue to detaine you. At B. this of, &c.


          _Another Example of an Epistle Swasorie perswading
                  the carefull acceptance and regard
                           of one brother to
                               another._

[Sidenote: _Exordium_, by insinuation.]

The sounde and entire familiaritie wherewith your parents in their
life time sometimes entertained me, and the neerenes of neighbourhoode
twixte both our friendes and long education wherein iointly we haue
conuersed together, mooueth mee at this instant somewhat to write vnto
you in respect of the reputation credit, and accompt that in the worlde
you nowe beare, and also the rather to win you to the regarde of that,
which to the estate of your presente being, and worthinesse of your
parents, might be found meetest and conuenient.

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

It is giuen me to vnderstand of a younger brother you haue here in
London, who at the time of your fathers death beeing committed to your
charge, is for the defaulte of maintenaunce, badly inured, woorse
trained, and most perillously by all kinde of likelihood (through such
sufferaunce) in the loosnesse of his liuing alreadie hazarded.

[Sidenote: _Liptote._]

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Parabola._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

I woondered not a little when I hearde it, and so much the more was
the matter troublesome vnto mee, in that respecting it was not tolde
in secrete, it seemed by the lookes and gestures of the whole companie
that heard it, your good demeanor thereby was very hardly censured,
for that standing in such case of credite as you doe, your wealth so
aboundant, and your parentes so well accompted of, you woulde in this
sort, and in that place of all others suffer him to wander carelesse,
whome you ought to the contrarie to haue constrained, by any possible
carefulnes. How ill beseeming it is both to you & yours, that it
shoulde so fall out, you may by supposes coniecture. For my parte,
it grieued mee when I heard it, and I was not quiet till I found
conuenient time to aduertise you of it. And if my opinion may at all
preuaile with you, you shoulde quickly call him home from hence, and
see him more better to be prouided for, and more worthily trained.
Consider I pray you, the life hee taketh in hand, befitteth not such
a one, whose originall was so honest, is ill beseeming the younger
brother of your selfe, vnwoorthie his birth or name of a Gentleman, and
altogether repugnant to the qualitie of your behauior or the greatnesse
of your liuing. You are to remember that hee is yet verie greene, nowe
pliable to whatsoeuer may bee impressed in him, as chafed waxe apte
to receiue anie figure, like vnto a newe vessell to bee seasoned with
whatsoeuer liquor, what hee now taketh taste and sauour of, that hee
holdeth, what habite you nowe cast vpon him, the same shadow he lightly
beareth. Great cause haue you therfore now to be warie how and in what
sort he liueth.

[Sidenote: _Congeries._]

[Sidenote: _Emphasis._]

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

Your industrie, your brotherlie care, your loue, your especiall regarde
and kindnesse it is, that must bee ayding in this, you and none but
you are the man on whome hee relieth, you are to prouide for him,
and it is your selfe that must answere for him. Think that _nature_,
_loue_, _dutie_ yea verie _piety_ bindeth you vnto him, who hath none
other left to depend on, but such as by possibilitie your self may
become vnto him. In the consideration of which let (I pray you) my
wordes become thus much regarded vnto you, that herein as in all other
things you performe that beseemeth you. Longer could I occupie my selfe
to trauell in this action with you, but that I deem it (more then
impertinent) any further therein to require you. Greeting your selfe
manie times in my name, I bid you therefore farewell. From my house in
B. this of, &c.




       _Of Epistles Dehortatorie, and Disswasorie.    Chap. 12._


=Vnnecessary were it to wade further in either of these titles
|hortatorie| or |Swasorie|, the examples alreadie laide downe being
for them sufficient, wherfore we will now passe vnto the contraries
of these, being |Dehortatorie| and |disswasorie|. The partes and
places |exhorting| or |perswading| hauing as you sée bene drawne from
the qualities of praise, fortified in diuers sortes, as well by the
_person_, by the _action_, as by the _thing_ it selfe, where vnder was
comprehended what might be called _honest_ or good: So these on the
contrarie parte pulling backe or disswading, shall by the vnhonestie
of the action or thing as before hath bin said, and by the indignitie,
vniustnes, wickednes, insufferablenes, hate, mislike, contempt, or
hazard of danger, reputation or good name that thereof ensueth, be
euermore measured.=

=In the handling whereof it is tolerable, by all sortes of arguments,
to infer and obiect any thinge to the diminution or defacing of that
which we go about to impugne. Yea, if need be, to inuert the good
also that in such a person may be supposed vnto a worser sence. As if
in dehorting or disswading a man from infidelity towards his country
I might first touching the action tender vnto him, how |vnnatural|
the cause is he taketh in hand, being against his natiue soile: how
|vnhonest|, by laying out the quality of the offence, how |vniust|, in
respect that it is against his allegiance to his Prince, how |impious|,
in that it retaineth no piety, turneth to the disturbance of a quiet
state, & bréedeth the subuersion of al peaceable gouernment, how
|insufferable|, by reason that good and wholesome lawes are thereby
infringed, all sortes of honest and good men wronged, and consequently
the common wealth by such meanes topsie turuie turned.=

=For the |Person| if he were at any time of worth I might shewe then
the |indignitie|, or ill beséeming of such a thinge vnto him, for that
actions of such kinde are alwaies vnto the noble and best endued mindes
vtterly repugning. And so thereupon if in him there was euer reputed
any wisdome, I might diuert it now vnto follie, his |Fortitude|, I
might challenge to be |Temeritie|, his |moderation| crueltie, his
|stoutnes arrogancie|, his |haughtines pride|, his |Freedome loosnes|,
and consequently, for euerie other |vertue| induce or lay downe vnto
him a contrarie |vice|, respecting that by committing of actions so
|vile & contemptible|, all properties whatsoeuer of former esteemed
worthines doe vtterly loose the partes they haue of |good|, and
immideately are disturned there withall vnto euill.=

=And as in Epistles |Exhorting| or |Perswading|, the intended vertue of
goodnesse of euerie thing is more amplie set foorth by the |opposite
euil|: So in these of |withdrawing| or |disswading| the intended
|euil| by the |opposite good|, is euer made more |hatefull|. Besides,
as there bee some thinges that are expresly good in themselues or
expresly euil, so are there some thinges that for themselues are helde
indifferent. In these, to perswade or withdrawe, there is a prettie
skill to be vsed, in which the discretion of the writer may not passe
vncommended, wherof (for so much as to a learner they may happely passe
vnregarded) I entende in this chapter to affoorde some application. For
in thinges alwaies knowne to be of themselues either good or euill,
there is no great cunning to make a shew of them as they are: but of
things which either by times, by liking, by place, by allowance, by
conuersation may be deemed good or bad, to be commended or disalowed,
in the setting foorth thereof appeareth both skill and discretion.=

=For example, that mariage is a thinge much to be preferred, and to
the increase of man of so greate necessitie, as without which there
could bée no orderlie estate or societie, no man I am sure will denie
mée. And to a man vnwilling to enter thereinto, I might (with intent to
drawe him to a liking thereof) besides a number of necessarie causes
to be alleadged, as the decay of his house, the continuance of a
solitary, loose or bad kind of liuing, the end of his wealth and name
together hauing no issue to succéede him, infer also as much pertinent
to such a perswasion the sacred solemnization thereof in Paradise,
first by the |eternall Wisdome| himselfe thought méet and appointed,
then his pleasure to inioine the same to the worlds increase, then
the care that naturally we haue of issue to succéed vs, the indignity
for a man of value not to haue respect therof, the loue likewise &
mutuall societie betwixt man & wife, being of such mightie efficacie,
as wherunto no liking is to be compared, the swéet pleasures, cares &
delights, interchangeably passing betwéene them, each dearly affying?
them selues in the others contentment, solace or pleasing, the ioy of
procreation, when there shall be a childe produced, whose infancie
tatling with a pleasant lisping sound, shall become an incredible
delight to the parents hearing, with sundrie other like inforcements
and suggestions, all which might certainlie shewe and declare the same
to be as it is a matter of much woorth, and sufficientlie set forth
vnto the partie why it ought to be embraced.=

=Now, as the same is out of all doubt not onelie tollerable, as I
said before, but by the necessitie thereof among many thinges held to
be praise worthy: so in another place, & to another person might I
againe find as much occasion for matter, why the selfe same marriage
should be alike dispraised, as (not reckoning the age of man or woman,
which many times more of dotage then discretion pursueth the same)
there might be opposed thereagainst the swéetnes of libertie, the vse
wherof (nothing more) conduceth principally vnto the estate & life of
man, who naturally coueteth vnrestrained & without controlment to do
that him liketh, the benefit wherof enioying, he may ride, go, walke,
rest, eat, drinke, studie, recreate, solace, and whersoeuer, and in
whatsoeuer companie pleaseth him best, vse the conceit thereof to his
owne appetite.=

=Now, hauing a wife (suppose she haue all the perfections you will
giue her) yet is the delicacie hereof bereft a man: for being once
married, hee thenceforth is no more vnto himselfe, but vnto her, for
her pleasure, to her choyce, at her liking, with her contentment, must
he then order his humours, his houres, his gestures, his companies, his
iourneys, his recreations, and what els he before time might fréelie
haue vsed, his owne liking is quenched, his libertie restrained, and
yet the losse hereof a heauen to that which followeth, if by great
good fortune he bee not the better matched, For imagin the woman
chosen, do prooue a scolde, wayward, self-willed, malicious, frowning,
or suspitious, what a hell is hee then driuen into, whose serpentine
and more then Adderlike disposition shall be such as would terrifie a
thousande Diuelles. If she bee wanton, dissolute, lewde, or loose in
liuing, howe on the other side shall he then be turmoyled: what is it
that she will not presume vpon, & dare to hazarde? how infamous shall
her life then become to his liuing? how little will shee esteeme of
him, in respect of the large account she holdeth of many others? If
she be proude, then may she be vnsupportable: if her wit be more then
his, then arrogant: if she be foolish, then a mocking stocke: if she be
faire, then a spectacle to gaze on: if foule, then a simpring puppet
to wonder on: if shee be rich, presumptuous: if poore, then happilie
odious. But being what shee may bee, or touching her owne person the
best she can bee, what intollerable charge bringeth shee with her, what
cost of apparel, what care of diet, what houshold of seruants, what
expence for attendance, what prouision for children; what furniture for
house, what daily, continual & neuer ceasing cark & toile for her &
hers: in conclusion, what one discommoditie may be reckoned, that with
her or for her is not in short space a thousande times hazarded?=

=Thus doe you see how out of one selfe thing both praise and dispraise
by admittance may be gathered. A like thereunto may be added in the
vsage of wine. To a crazed man of weak disposition, or such a one
whose constitution of bodie for Phisicks sake should require it, I
might, to perswade him to the vse thereof, vrge the necessarie meane,
the goodnesse, propertie, vertue and wholesomnesse of the same, the
operation, howe it recreateth, driueth away heauinesse from the minde,
prouoketh appetite, comforteth, and many wayes (moderatelie taken)
helpeth and relieueth. But now to disswade againe the intermedling
therewith, what might bee imagined that coulde not bee rehearsed: by
manifesting the hurt and manifold inconueniences thereby ensuing, as
that it causeth drunkennes, dulleth the wits, making ill digestion,
ingendreth superfluities, weakneth the spirits, hurteth the braine,
driueth a man to forget himselfe, enforceth to commit that which
many times is filthie and often vnbeseeming, of a reasonable
creature frameth a beast, discouereth counsels, causeth slaughters,
and consequentlie ladeth both the bodie and minde with a thousand
mischiefes, impediments and diseases.=

=As of these twain, so might I stand vpon many others the like, which
for breuitie I omit, holding these applications sufficient for the
present intendment: adding herewithall, that the exhorter, perswader
or withdrawer from any thing, ought touching things indifferent,
specially to haue before his eyes the reputation of the partie to whome
he writeth, considering that some things are lesse meete in one person
then in another, and that which well fitteth and agreeth with the state
or condition of some one, is altogether vnmeet and disagréeing in the
behauiour of another. To consider in like sort this old adage, _ne quid
nimis_, whereby in reprouing the vse of any thing he may prefer the
_moderation_, and inueigh against the _nimium_. Finally, to respect,
that of sundry indifferent occasions not the vse, but the abuse is it
which ought to bee reprehended. These beeing admitted, wee will come to
the |Examples| of both kindes aswell |Dehortatorie| as |Disswasorie|,
and see what therein may be tendred.=


   _An example of an Epistle dehortatorie, wherein a noble Gentleman
             is withdrawne from infidelitie or rebellion._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: By insinuation.]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

My good G. my faithfull louing Countriman, and dearest of account
(whilome all and either of these vnto me, so bee it the frowning
heauens and dispiteful wicked fate had not harboured the contrarie)
what shall I write vnto thee, or by what tearmes may I now salute thee?
Erst woonted were my letters to pursue thee, carelesse in any cost,
and familiarly and boldly to regard thee, now blushing at thy vncouth
hap, and carefull of they carelesse vsage, they cannot without griefe
approch thee, nor once without sorrowe intentiuely behold thee.

[Sidenote: _Ecphonesis._]

Alas, my G. what furie hath ledde thee, what madnes hath bewitched
thee, what hatefull destinie hath pursued thee, that beeing such as
thou wert, on whome Nature and the heauens as it seemed, had powred all
their giftes moste plentifullie, thou wouldest yet be ledde to deface
so many partes of excellencie, with one hatefull, ignominious and
shamefull blott, of wicked, and most heynous treacherie.

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Ecphonesis._]

[Sidenote: _Sinathrismus._]

Diddest thou for this cause take vppon thee the profession of Armes, to
become iniurious to thy Countrey, to bereaue men of their patrimonie,
to bee a destroyer of vnitie, a patterne of infidelitie, the dishonour
of thy familie, and consequently to thy selfe and dearest soile, a
professed and open enemie? Ah happie in all other things, but in this
sole enterprize, in the broaching whereof thou wast put forwarde to bee
made the onelie vnhappie, behooueth with such ingratitude to rewarde
the first Authour of thy familie? Was this the ende of thy birth, thy
parents, education, thy estate, thy wealth, thy possibilitie, to become
a Traytour to thy Prince, and rebell to thy Countrey? No, no, my G.
vilde and too ill beseeming is the drift that hath so ouertaken thee,
and ignorant was he of that became thee, that first thereunto perswaded
thee.

[Sidenote: _Dialogismus._]

When thou liest armed in the fields and (mustering thy ranks in the day
time) beholdest and lookest around about thy Countrey, thinkest thou
not then with thy selfe, in this soyle was I borne, within this land
lieth my patrimonie, heere had I first sucke, and sithence haue the
fruits thereof nourished me, and could I then become so ingratefull
and vnkinde, as for all these benefits to destroy thee? Not so, nor in
such maner haue the vertuous in field beene accounted so woorthie, not
for this cause in such actions, haue men beene said to beare themselues
honourably. _Coriolanus_, thou wast conuinced by the view of the Citie
and mothers intreatie, and shall I vnhappie man for all this, persist
in this crueltie?

[Sidenote: _Anthypophora._]

[Sidenote: _Epanodus._]

[Sidenote: _Paradigma._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Paradigma._]

[Sidenote: _Etiologia._]

Iustlie and by great occasion credit me, mightest thou thus complaine
of so great an iniurie, and all this being so true, as nothing more
true; can it be said in prosecuting the same, thou maist be freed frō
infamie? What I pray thee hath made men famous, and canonized their
memorie, was it not their munificence and valiant demerits in and for
the good of their country? For in what one thing are we more likened
vnto God himselfe, then in the worthines of our minds, the resolutions
whereof, ought in no wise to be stained with such hatefull obloquie?
The Asse runneth through fire for the safegard of her issue and shall
the valiant man then become negligent to the ayde of his Countrey? Howe
farre more waightilie shall hee bee accused, who not onelie giueth no
ayde at all to his Countrey, but also is therunto an inconsiderate and
most cruell enemie? Howe carelesse are such men of their fame, and howe
vnlike of all others to those memorable woorthies, the precious regard
whereof, vnto them hath beene such, as then goods, possessions, riches,
kingdomes, yea life it selfe hath beene helde most dearest. Peruse but
the auncient hystories of _Rome_, and looke there of _Mutius Scæuola_,
the most inuincible Romane, with what confidence hee went solie into
the Tent of _Prosenna_, his and their Countryes capitall enemie, in
minde onelie to destroie him. The good _Furius Camillus_, who after
manie high and honourable seruices by him done to the Common-wealth of
Rome, was by his owne Citizens vniustlie banished: howe farre off was
hee thinke you, from this your opinion? For the Galles whom before he
had expulsed, hauing in the time of this his banishment assieged the
Citie of Rome, and beeing then verie likely to haue distressed the
same, insomuch as they had alreadie forraged, burnt and destroyed the
whole Countrey round about, hee more sorrowfull at the likely ruine
of his Citie, then grieued at his owne banishment, (mooued thereunto
of verie pietie to his natiue soyle and Countrey) entred counsell
with the _Ardeats_, and by his wisedome, policie, and great manhood,
so perswaded those people, that in feare of their mishap, they were
content to leuie a mightie armie vnder his conduct, wherewith hee not
onely put backe the enemie, but therewith so mightilie pursued them,
as by such meanes he vtterly freed and set at libertie his Citie and
Conntrey.

[Sidenote: _Transitiō._]

[Sidenote: _Parison._]

[Sidenote: _Emphasis._]

[Sidenote: _Periphrasis._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Dialogismus._]

[Sidenote: _Epizeuxis._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Ecphonesis._]

[Sidenote: _Aporia._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Prosopopœia._]

What neede wee search abroade for such forraine examples, and why draw
wee not home into our owne soyle of England? What Chronicle shall euer
remaine, or what English Hystorie shall euer bee extant, that shall
not euerlastinglie report, the deserued fame of that right woorthie
and verie noble indeede, Sir _William Walwoorth_, Knight, once Lord
Maior of London, the remembraunce whereof (to his perpetuall prayse,
and endlesse confusion of others, who not onely abstaine the putting in
vre of such his memorable vertue, but which is woorse, doe endeuour by
cruell force to tender violence vnto their Sacred Prince and Countrey)
shall yet flourish for euer. Ill doe you example vnto your selfe, or
thinke on the woorthinesse of that good man, who in the time of King
_Richard_ the seconde, when with a most suddaine and strange kinde
of Rebellion the King was troubled, the Realme pestered, and the
strongest of the Kinges subiectes greatlie feared: euen at that time
when the proude fawtour and Captaine of the rebellious and rascallie
multitude, durst hatefullie and most vndutifullie to bearde the King
in his owne presence, and each man shunned to impugne the contrarie.
This valiant, this good, this right noble and woorthie Citizen,
standing by, when the wicked and presumptuous varlet, with so little
reuerence approached the King, and remembring the seruices of manie
worthie men, that by an honourable aduenture and hazarde of their liues
had to their eternall memorie, before time freed their Countrey with
libertie, grieuing that with so high an abuse his soueraigne Lorde
beeing yet as it were a childe, shoulde there in his hearing, bee so
farre amated, couragiouslie stept vnto the Rebell, and taking him by
the gorge, proude varlet (quoth hee) that darest thus contemptouslie
demeane thy selfe vnto thy King and Soueraigne, foule death betide
thee, and shame quicklie consume thee: Whie, aunswered the villaine
in greate disdaine, is it thou that greeuest at that I haue sayde?
Greeue, replyed the stoute couragious Citizen, yea, euen I, I it is
that greeue at thee, and happilie shoulde thinke my selfe accurst,
if thou shouldest escape from mee vnreuenged, wherewith drawing more
closelie vnto him, hee pulled him from his horse by maine force, and
stabbed him to the heart with his dagger. The destruction of whom,
bredde such confusion vnto all the residue of his headstrong armie, and
sight whereof kindeled so great a furie in the residue of the Kings
companie, (who for that present vpon speciall considerations, was there
attended on but meanelie) that the whole rebellious route were by such
meanes euer after discomfited vtterlie: wherewith before that instaunt
the whole Realme had lyke to haue beene turned topsie turuie. Hee and
such as hee laboured not by ambitious pride to arrogate vnto themselues
a lawlesse extremitie, but studyed of meere loue and entire zeale, how
and which way they might performe best seruice to their Prince and
Conntrey. O more then ordinarie affection, and feruencie of high and
statelie woorthinesse, in the regarde whereof, life was not sweete vnto
these men, whose liuing might not redounde to become (for their dearest
soyle) to bee honoured and famous. What then may I say my G. of that
by thee, and thy copartners taken in hande, whether will you be driuen,
what shall become of you, how doe ye behaue your selues, who may
receiue you, in whose inward conceites (not the pietie and regard of
anie of theese) no nor so much as one sparke of their loialtie, coulde
so deepelie bee impressed, as whereby to withdrawe you from these
vnnaturall broiles? What haue you found in your deare prince? what in
your louing countrie? what in this citie? what to anie one of al your
selues in particularitie, that might in such hatefull maner incite you,
& by occasion whereof you should thrust your selues into so great an
enormitie? Beleeue me, & it shal verilie be auowed, the successe hereof
will returne vnto you none other in the ende then the verie reward
of infamie. I haue knowne thee, beeing far lesse in yeares then at
this instant, to haue bene able to rule thy selfe, and with plausible
moderation to bee indued in all things, couldest thou then beeing a
childe performe this in thy selfe, and beeing nowe a man art not able
to endure it? There be I know about thee, that will perswade that all
that thou doest herein is vertue, that herein thou hast great wisdom,
much fortitude, and notable moderation, that the action is haughtie,
the occasion libertie, and the end glorie. But how greatlie they doe
erre in so saying, let this saying of good _Camillus_ stand for you
and vs indifferentlie, whose notable speach sprung vp from those his
inuiolable vertues, spared not this, to affirme in presence of all the
Senate vnto the people. Let others (quoth hee) deeme it a thinge euill
and reprochfull at anie time to bee founde faultie, in not yeelding
ready succors and aid to their country: _Camillus_ for his part is
& shal be of that resolute determination, that it is & ought to be
reputed for euermore a thing detestable and vild, and of all other the
most hatefull and replenished with all execrable miserie. How thinketh
then your gentle mind, of the action by this time. Is it (suppose you)
anie vertue that thereunto preferreth you? _Camillus_ iudged that it
was not reprochfull, but villanous and detestable, so much as to bee
founde failing in ought to his countrie, and may it then bee thought a
thinge honest to become a persecutor of your countrie?

[Sidenote: _Orismus._]

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

[Sidenote: Loue.]

[Sidenote: Hate.]

[Sidenote: Feare.]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

It is not _Fortitude_, but _Temeritie_, that conducteth your
enterprises, for _Fortitude_ aspireth to far more noble and statelier
purposes. The action and determination, you preferre therein is not
(as fondlie by you is conceaued) _honour_, but _haughtines_, not
_libertie_, but _loosenes_, not _vertue_, but _viciousnes_: why then
continue you in this sorte togethers, vpon so wicked and diuelish a
purpose? Why returnest not thou rather to thy self my G. & hauing
long before striued to emulate the praise of others by an vnstained
gentilitie, wipe nowe quickly off this foule blemish from thee, and
couering the filthinesse thereof by a most incomparable fidelitie,
become once againe like vnto thy self. At the least wise, if the loue
of thy coūtrie, fidelitie towards thy prince, the example of Vertue
her selfe and so many her famous and renowned followers (then which
no one thinge on earth ought more to allure a man) may not herewith
conuince thee, let yet the execrable and immortall hate, that all
good men beare to the practise of such kind of crueltie, the feare
of euer harbouring shame, and erected ignomie, and neuer after hope
(thy credite once consumed) againe to recouer thee, let these I say
constrain thee. Whilst there is yet but one craze or slender flaw in
the touchstone of thy reputation, peece it vp, & new flourish again
by a greater excellēcie, the square of thy workmanship. A fewe daies
are to bee passed in which there is yet time, fame wounded in life
may once bee restored, if death doe preuente thee, thy shame and
destruction is for euer shrowded. The next newes I hear from thee, may
make thee fortunate, or me for thee alwaies vnhappie. My longing would
bee satisfied of this from which I dehort thee. If onelie herein thou
condiscende vnto mee, my selfe am thine, and to none so much as thy
selfe absolutely, I loue thee, I require thee, I pray thee, and pray
for thee, that thou maist as I wish, and wouldest as I bid, bee for,
and to mee. Farewell if thou doest well.


                 An Example of a disswasorie Epistle,
                 _wherin one is disswaded from fruit-
                 les vanities, to more learned & pro-
                           fitable studies_.

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

I receiued on Saturday last a letter from your Vncle, wherein amongst
sundrie other matters I was aduertised, that leauing your former
learned studies, whereunto with greate cost and charge of your
parents, you had bene trained, you haue giuen your selfe wholie to
certaine thinges, the regarde whereof albeit in their moderate vses, I
cannot discommende, yet in respecte of your former intendmentes, I can
tearme them none other then meere follies, and verie fruitles vanities.

It is reported with vs for certaine, that you are become an excellent
good dauncer, that you are growne prettilie skilled on instrumentes,
whereon you play reasonablie, that you spende the time limitted for
more profite in the Vniuersitie, in making of songes and exquisite
fine ditties, that you are verie fitlie seated for wantonnesse, and
worthilie behaued in all kind of curious conueyances.

[Sidenote: _concession._]

[Sidenote: _Parison._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

I woulde for mine owne parte nothing at all mislike what herein you
haue in some sorte frequented, weighing indeede that as they may bee
in sorte entertained, those qualities doe not ill beseeme a Gentleman,
but are in their kinde verie fit and commendable to anie youthfull
reckoning: yet studying them as you doe by them selues, inuring your
selfe whollie to their delighte, abandoning what else might best honour
and beautifie their woorthinesse, in respect of the sole propertie
of them selues and their owne peculiar goodnesse, I say that in such
regarde they are vanities, trifles, thinges of no momente, and in each
sounde opinion to bee helde of farre lesse value and iudgement.

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

The intendment of your going to the Vniuersitie was for _learning_
sake, to become an excellent scholler, not an exquisite dauncer, a
Maister of Arte not an artlesse maister, a good Rhetorician, not a
conceited Musitian: your Vncles care, was by vilefying his wealth vnto
you, (the weight whereof by imminent perilles wee see daylie perish
before our eies) to purchase for you the endowment of a farre more
greater and assured treasure, and that is by knowledge to teach you
to discerne trifles, to procure in you a minde to despise trifles,
that leauing small riches to inherit, you your selfe might gather
possessions whereby to enrich you.

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Parison._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

You then are farre misconceiued, to relinquish the hoped reckoning of
that you came for, to applie your selfe to that which fewe doe accompt
of, and the wisest woulde neuer sweate for, you shall therefore vppon
better aduise endeuour if you doe well, to returne your conceite to
a far more better purpose. You shall call to minde that all studies
whatsoeuer, by how much the more excellent ech one appeareth before
the other, by so much the more assured are they in their kinde, and
aboue all the residue, with far greater estimate to bee preferred:
if so? then must you graunt me that no one thing vpon earth (then
_learning_, then precious and high esteemed _skill_, then aboue all
earthly things whatsoeuer, heauenlie _science_) is of so great and
surpassing excellence. To lay out vnto you herein, howe much glorious
is her shining hue aboue all others, howe sugred her plantes, howe
daintie her fruits, howe delicate her pleasures, howe incomparable her
high and statelie reach, how she participateth the skies, the element,
the venerable search and knowledge of high and sacred mysteries: I
need not, you know it, you haue felt & tasted of it. But to shewe howe
much you misprise the force of her vertue, howe ill conceiued, and far
wandring, you are from the due esteeme of her glorie, to make loue to
her handmaides, to professe liking to her seruantes, to become sole
entertainer of her vassals: hereon resteth the iniurie, this is it I
complaine of vnto you.

[Sidenote: _congeries._]

[Sidenote: _Parenthesis._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

And if either the sum and type of honestie placed in the weight of
the action, the necessitie, meetnes, and worthines, the vtility and
benefits seuen hundred fold compensing the trauel, may (as earthly
things haue often power to mooue one, aboue things of far higher
estimation) induce you to her most dearest and precious fruition,
search then the fauor of these your louing mistresses, and (seemlie I
grant you may find them) but neuer shall they proue either so wealthy
or beautifull. What then should let you to returne to this glorious
Ladie? Will you because you are an earthlie substance, followe the
common reason of euerie earthlie creature? _humum sapere & alta
spernere_? or saying that the appetites of the one are much pleasanter
for the time, or far lesse tedious then the other, welde your opinion
by a peeuish conceite of ease, to become a creditor to wantonnes?

[Sidenote: _Meiosis._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

These imaginations as they are meerelie bad, so are they ten times
woorse in the pursuite, then they are sweete in the foremost thought.
Peeuish were it, simplie for you to stande vppon these vanities,
thinges wherein children haue delight, and young weaklinges doe roue at
cunninglie: you must suppose and harpe vpon the end that must succeede
vnto your trauaile, and finding the reache thereof pursue it with
feruencie: Such actions as these doe onelie beseeme men, and heerein
alone shall you shewe your selfe such as you may desire to bee, and
your friends doe heartilie wish you to prooue. Alexander restlesse in
the day tyme, gaped for worldles, but in the night season was rocked a
sleepe by the _Muses_, the pleasure hereof appeased his day labours,
and the content of this gaue rest to his trauels.

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

Too much impertinent were it for me to hale you on with arguments,
who onelie go about to perswade you with warrantise: Neither thinke I
in the ende you will declare your selfe otherwise, then euer I haue
expected of you. Much more could I infer, that might greatlie induce
you to that whereunto your owne willingnesse must in the ende, of
necessitie conduce you. Onely, if in the weight hereof my perswasions
may something preuaile: I shall not forget in any woorthie part
thereof, at all times to commend you. In which reposing my selfe for
the present, I ende: this of, &c.


  _An other example disswasorie, wherein the partie is by diuers rea-
          sons disswaded from entring into an action in appa-
                        rance verie dangerous._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Propositiō._]

[Sidenote: _Aporia._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

I haue (good brother) receiued your letters, dated the eight day of
this instant, which were with as great diligence as celeritie, conueied
to my handes, and by the fidelitie of the bearer haue vnderstoode to
the vttermost what you willed, and both of that and your letter haue
at large considered. It seemeth therin vnto mee, that whether through
ignorance of your owne good, or inconsiderate rashnesse of youth, or
voluntarie intrusion of your selfe into your owne harmes, I knowe not,
but the matter and action mentioned and inforced by the whole course
of your letter, is altogither to be misliked, and for the extremitie
thereof to bee by all reason vtterly condemned, as whereunto you
ought not to condescende, much lesse to bee seene in publique to bee
a fauourer of, or, which is more, to appeare to bee, the onelie man
through whose follie and immoderate rashnesse, the same is solie to be
accomplished.

[Sidenote: _Ecphonesis._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

O good God! what blindnes is it that leadeth you? what sencelesse furie
that bewitcheth you? What matter of euill that pursueth you? By the
intollerable force whereof, without anie fore-sight at all, either of
the goodnesse or ilnesse of the action, the lawlesse prosecution, the
matter of your owne reputation, the daunger of lawe wherein you are
intruded, the difficultie whereby it must be attained, the vnhonest
sollicitation of your friends, to so great a hazard, the discommoditie
that thereon is attendant, and perill euerie way that in the execution
cannot be auoyded: you will notwithstanding all this forget your selfe
so much, as in the accomplishment of a purpose so farre different from
the nature (I will not say of a Gentleman) but of an honest man, go
about to put in proofe what in the ende must of necessitie returne to
your owne confusion.

[Sidenote: _Procatalepsis._]

[Sidenote: _Antipophora._]

[Sidenote: _Orismus._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Etiologia._]

But you will say it is loue, and extreame lyking that compelleth you
to so forcible an action, as without the obtaining whereof you are no
bodie, you cannot liue. Loue say you? Alas, what loue tearme you this,
that is laden with so manie disordered motions, call you this loue?
Nay rather call it madnesse, for loue is measured by no extremitie,
but in the honest and vertuous encrease thereof, where not by a
harebraine furie, but by a discreete and moderate ascention men by
degrees doe climbe vnto that, the sweete and pleasant force whereof
neuer participateth anie occasion of such vnreasonable badnesse. Why
brother, doe you loue her whome you haue sued for, and because by
desert you cannot attaine her, will you vndertake thereupon to bereaue
her by force? Howe vnhonest I pray you is the purpose of so great a
wrong? Howe vnfit to bee put forwarde in the meaner sort of men? How
intollerable in a Gentleman? For if in the account of things vnhonest,
any action whatsoeuer may appeare to be vile, what then this I pray you
may bee deemed more dishonest, more bad, or more vile?

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

And if it be punished extreamly by the lawe, the taking away of a mans
goods against his will, what may he deserue that bereaueth the person
of anie one, being also a Gentlewoman, such as to whome all humanitie
forbiddeth to proffer wrong, and to the honourable entertainment of
whome, is appropriate onely the nobilitie of a Gentleman, nay, in what
sort may such a one bee censured in the reputation of all honest men,
that in sort so violent, goeth about to rauish her, not onlie offering
iniurie therein to her person, but also to her fame, reputation and
offspring.

[Sidenote: _Anthypophora._]

[Sidenote: _Concessiō._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Asindeton._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Procatalepsis._]

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

Thinke you that the intendment heereof can returne credite to your
lyuing? Thinke you that by deliuerie of such fruites you may bee
reputed a Gentleman? No beleeue mee, it cannot bee, but according
to the vnwoorthinesse thereof, it rather shall giue occasion to all
that shall heare or vnderstande of it, to accuse, blame, mislike, and
vtterlie to condemne you. But what if no manner of suppose at all of
dishonestie were left therein, whereby to discourage and withdrawe you
from the action, imagining that the purpose thereof were helde meete
and honourable, and that to euerie one that could winne his choyce by
anie force he might, it were lawfull without discredite or anie censure
of law by what meanes soeuer, to compasse the same, do you thinke it
a matter sleight and easie for you to performe it? No, no sir, you
reckon too wide, you goe beyond the Moone, you are too much deceyued.
Know you not the Gentlewoman is worthilie descended, that she hath
parents, brethren, vncles, and friendes to keepe her, to rescue her, to
defend her? Why sir, is there no more to say, but you will haue her?
You must haue her? and by maine force you will take her? You deale
with no children I can tell you, nor weakelings as you account of,
but men wise, valiaunt, well reputed, and of sound gouernment: who by
so much the more iust and right, the occasion is of their defence, by
so much the sooner will they, and are able to preuaile against you. I
recke not that you haue courage sufficient, that you are hardie, bolde,
and aduenturous (the vse whereof being imployed to good and laudable
purposes, were I confesse much more effectuall) but herein how euer
the case standeth, I see nothing so likelie as an impossibilitie, in
somuch as if you be delighted to become infamous, and in the memorie of
a shamelesse life to hazard your selfe to a shamefull death, then may
you enter into it: once this I knowe, that her can you neuer finde so
slenderlie accompanied, that with small force you can carie her, but
within a moment alwayes, there will not bee wanting a number that shall
bicker for her, from whose insight, you are altogither vnable, if her
selfe consented thereunto, to conuey her.

[Sidenote: _Concessiō._]

[Sidenote: _Congeries._]

[Sidenote: _Epanodis._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

But graunting vnto your wilfull imagination, as much in all things as
you can desire, suppose you might winne her, conuey her, keepe her,
and that the daunger of lawe limited at all no hazarde thereunto, (the
contrarie whereof you well knowe, being guerdoned with no woorse then
losse of life) doe but yet againe returne to your selfe, and call to
minde your birth, your familie, your profession, your maner of liuing:
your birth by your parents who were worshipfull, your stocke by the
reputation yet helde of the same: your profession, which is Armes: your
liuing, a Gentleman. Is it then consonant or agreeing to all or anie of
these, to commit any outrage, and that such an outrage, as to any other
were not so proper, as to a villaine, a wretch, a rascall, such a one
as neither by nature, education, or custome, knoweth to do otherwise?
What would you exercise I pray you on her, if you had her? Once you
confesse she doth not loue you, then no question, would she ten times
more hate you: Your answere I knowe would bee, either by entreatie to
perswade her, or by force to subdue her.

[Sidenote: _Dialysis._]

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

[Sidenote: _Confutatiō._]

The conclusion is friuolous, if being now her supposed wel-willer, you
can by no meanes allure her, imagine you then by prayers to conuince
her, after you haue once shewed your selfe so extreame vnto her? And
if force be it you pretend, it is repugnant to gentlenes, yet (be
it you neglect what therein to be considered) assure your selfe her
malice neuerthelesse towards you will neuer be quenched. For that of
our selues we cannot freelie accept of, we neuer by compulsion can be
procured to like of. With you now, the case is quite contrarie, for so
imminent euerie way are the perils thereof vnto you, as if her friendes
should abstaine it, yet the lawes will punish it, and if no lawes were
at all, yet God would reuenge it.

If then you will hearken or vnderstand what is right, you must bee
disswaded from these intendments, wherin if my selfe should haue become
so graceles, as to haue set in foote with you, iustly we might haue
both confessed to haue beene drowned in all vnhappines togithers.

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

And nowe good brother, vse I pray you that meanes herein, that with
greatest commendation maie beseeme you, weigh with your selfe,
that such distemperate motions are not to bee followed, conceyue
that _Vertue_, whose seruaunt you were in your first education,
forbiddeth you to bee ledde by such sensuall appetites, thinke that
honour of Armes which you haue professed, extendeth not it selfe to
the frayle and weake subduing of a Womans condition, who by reason
of her sexe rather chalengeth at your handes a defence, then anie
man-like enforcement: besides, much vnwoorthie should it bee vnto your
reputation by violence to dishonour her, whose estimate and account
by reason of your liking, you oughte to preferre with all honour.
In fine, frame your selfe to doe that vncompelled, which by force
you shall bee constrained to wish once to haue perfourmed, so shall
you euer doe that beeseemeth you, and giue me cause, as my deare and
louing brother euermore to accompte of you. Our former loue and liking
willeth mee euermore to greete you, your sister and mine commendeth her
heartilie vnto you. Fare yee well, B. this thirteenth of Nouember, &c.




                      _Of Epistles Conciliatorie.
                               Chap. 13_


=After these Epistles |dehorting| and |disswading|, followeth nowe the
nexte title |Conciliatorie|, whose vse being preferred in acquiring
vnto our selues the acquaintance, friendship or familiaritie of men
worthie, haue often their directions as well from those of honourable
or worshipfull name or calling, to such as are their inferiours, as
otherwise betweene equals, or those that bee accompted familiars: but
seldome or neuer is frequented to such as are our betters, for then
it looseth the name of |Conciliatorie|, and because of the humilitie
thereof séemeth to be |Petitorie|. Touching the first degree of these
Epistles, it is likelie, that hee who is much our better, will either
of his honour, woorshippe, or gentlenesse, in plainest tearmes alwaies
offer himselfe to his inferiours, whome in such sorte hee desireth
to bee knowne vnto, or otherwise willinglie woulde repute of. For
the others, touching equals or familiars, order therein requireth,
that pithily and plainly wee set downe the cause moouing vs to
take knoweledge of him wee write vnto, and thereupon to mooue his
acquaintance.=

=This, albeit without some assentation, it hardlie falleth with some
in their writing to bee caried, yet shall our learner by all possible
means indeuour to keepe such |Decorum| herein, that hee gloze not too
palpably, least by such means he do incurre a notable suspition of
flatterie.=

=If in our selues we do conceiue or find some one or mo things, that
are vnto such a one pleasing, or whereof wee may coniecture the regarde
to returne vnto him, commodious, or to confirme towards vs a more
speciall liking, that shall we modestlie tender, and deuise without
arrogancy in some conuenient sorte to be signified. These are the
onely precepts in this kind of writing, to be considered, the effectes
whereof are in this sort following by their examples deliuered.=


                   An Epistle Conciliatorie, written
                   _from one of good accompt to his
                              inferiour_.

After my verie heartie commendations vnto you. This bearer and my
seruaunt whome I greatlie credite, hath signified vnto mee manie
matters tending to your great commendation, the reporte whereof, I
haue often sithence hearde confirmed by others. And for asmuch as
touching mine owne condition, I haue alwaies beene a fauourer of artes,
and entirelie accounted of the singularitie of anie one according
to his worthinesse, I haue so much the more greatlie desired your
acquaintance, as one whome willinglie I would doe good vnto. Assuring
you, that if at some conuenient time you will take paines to see mee,
I will not onelie (as occasion serueth) bee well content to imploy
you my selfe, but also in place of further accompt doe the best I
may to recommende you. Meane while I woulde gladlie bee infourmed by
the returne of this Messenger, at what time I may expect to see you,
according to which I will appoint horses, and send some to accompanie
you. And so for this present doe bid you hartilie farewell. From my
house of N. this twentieth of April, &c.


                _An example Conciliatorie, from one e-
                          quall to another._

The vniuersall reporte of your excellencie, each where declared, hath
mooued mee good M. N. not onelie to admire you for the same, but among
a greate manie others, that regarde and especiallie doe accompte
of you, hath induced mee also hereby to praie your acquaintance. I
confesse sir, sithence I first heard of you, I grewe euen then verie
desirous to see and to know you, but being this other daie in companie
with sir T. P. I vnderstood howe much for your singular vertue both of
the good Knight and Ladie, you were hartilie commended and entirelie
fauoured.

This considerate opinion of theirs, hath in my speedie determination
egged mee forwarde, and caused me to salute you by these letters, the
rather for that I haue sundry times bene enformed with what ioifull
and friendlie conceite, you doe entertaine the familiaritie of euerie
Gentleman. Little (God knoweth) resteth in mee to pleasure you, the
worthines whereof I coulde wish, were as well answerable to your vertue
as effectuallie you might haue power in mee to commaunde it. This one
thing can I deliuer of my selfe, that since I had first capacitie to
discerne of mens conditions, I haue alwaies studied to honour the
vertuous, and euermore with reuerence to entertaine their actions. A
fauourer I haue still beene of the learned, and a diligent regarder
of their excellencies, such as in minde more then wealth wuld wish
to be reputed happy, & to my vttermost power gladlie accomplish what
might bee deemed most worthie. Such a one if you vouchsafe to like
of, I wholie yeelde my selfe vnto you, expecting nothing more then at
your conueniente leisure I might finde occasion to see you. Whereunto
referring the residue of all my desires, It doe for the present cease
to detaine you. London this fourth of Iune, &c.

=To these Epistles might be added two seuerall answers: in both of
which there is required a special and wel demeaned modesty, in the one
of humility to bee according to his better, in the other of curtesie
to gratifie his equall, each of them containing, a submissiue executio
of that, in either of their faculties and professions simply to be
attributed, the diuersities of both of them not impertinent to these
our instructions, I haue in sort following put downe to be considered.=


   _An Epistle responsorie answering to the first of these Letters._

It may please your Worshippe, I haue receiued your curteous Letters,
and by the same, as also by your messenger haue fullie conceiued of
your fauour and louing intendment towardes mee, for all which I can
but render vnto you my most humble and duetiful thankes. Touching
my selfe, I verie gladlie wish that there were anie thing in mee,
whereof you might take pleasure, or wherewith I might anie waies bee
enabled to doe you seruice: Such as it is I humblie render vnto your
commaunde, and doe pray that in as good sorte as I tender it, you will
bee pleased to accepte of it. Your man can witnesse, that as yet I
haue some earnest occasions for a while to detaine mee, who otherwise
woulde bee well contented foorthwith to waite vpon you. And were I not
thereunto especiallie enioined by your good fauour, the importunitie of
your seruaunt might happily in such case haue preuailed with mee. It
may therefore stand with your good pleasure to pardon mee, one moneth,
which tearme beeing expired, I thence forwarde will remaine at the
commaunde of none so much as your Worshippe, to whose good acceptaunce
I eftsoones doe recommende my selfe in all reuerente duetie. London
this of, &c.


        _A letter responsorie answering to the latter Epistle._

Sir, I haue vnderstoode by your gentle and friendlie letters, not
onelie howe much I rest beholding to your good opinion, but also to the
curteous Knight, and my especiall good Ladie you write of, to each of
whome I haue founde my selfe indebted exceedinglie. Manie waies might
I aduertise you howe much I haue to thanke both them and you, which
that my desires may appeare answerable to your wishes I doe leaue, till
personallie in as present hast as conuenientlie may bee, I see you. I
am not altogether ignoraunt of the good partes which by some (vnto your
selfe well knowne) hath beene aduertised heretofore vnto me of you,
and for which I do most willinglie embrace you. Assuring you yᵗ you
haue but preuēted me in this one curtesie, which before my going out of
town, I was vehementlie perswaded to haue tendred vnto you, wherein
neuerthelesse I rest satisfied, in that by one so well accomplished as
your selfe, I haue heerein been so farre foorth conuinced. My busines
with his L. resteth I hope vpon a present dispatch, and therefore doe
I reckon (by Gods grace) within these verie few dayes to visite you.
Meane while, confessing howe much I stande charged vnto your selfe for
this sole courtesie, I doe pray that vnto the good Knight, and his La.
you will report my right humble dutie: And euen so doe commit you to
the Almightie. This of, &c.




                     _Of Epistles Reconciliatorie.
                              Chap. 14._


=Nowe after these |Responsorie| Letters, each answering vnto the
others tendered courtesies, I thinke it meet to come to the next
title, being in order |Reconciliatorie|. The matter whereof importeth
a reconciliation to those from whom wee acknowledge in some sort or
other to haue beene disseuered, contrarie to the bonde of friendshippe
or dutie that therein might bee required, whether by our owne default,
or by whose or what defect, as by the circumstance of the action shall
bee tendered. In the framing of these Epistles wee shall recorde with
our selues, in what league, amitie or dutie, wee haue before time
stoode charged or bounde to him to whome wee studie to bee reconciled,
thereupon shall wee according to the district obseruation at that
instant helde of the same, studie eyther to qualifie, adnihilate, or
vtterlie to extinguish the cause of falling of the disseuerance, or
breach. Then shall we desire for the considerations thereunto inducing
vs, to be retained againe in his wonted fauour or friendlie acceptance.
And these as in the examples following may accordingly be suted.=


       _An example reconciliatorie, from one friend to another._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Parenthesis._]

[Sidenote: _Epitheton._]

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

The regarde of our auncient amitie and long continued acquaintaunce,
wherein so firmelie and manie yeares wee haue beene knit togithers,
will not permit (my good D.) that wee for one slender grudge, (rather
by the malice and despite of others enuying our olde friendship, then
by anie occasion of our selues, in ill time suggested betweene vs)
shoulde in this sort bee disseuered. True it is, that before this time
the like breach, or anie thing neare vnto the same was neuer seene
betweene vs, but what (mischiefe) shall I nowe tearme it, or imagine
to bee the occasion, that in so vnlooked time, and vpon so vnexpected
occasion, hath in this vilde sort, giuen meane to vntie vs, betweene
whome so great a league of loue, so long confirmed and approoued
liking, so manie protestations and vowes haue ere this passed, as that
by the force thereof it might well haue seemed wee should neuer haue
fallen to this variance. But what cannot enuie doe? What is it that
cruell, detestable and inueterate malice cannot performe? Credite
mee, my D. for my part I am sorie that euer follie so much maistred
vs, as to hearken in any sort to the stirrers vp of such bitternesse.
And as my selfe was the first that by admittaunce and allowaunce of
those rumours gaue the formost onset, by meanes whereof grewe this
discontenting and vnkinde department betweene vs: so will I bee the
first that shall endeuour to renue againe our friendshippe by a more
iust reconcilement, to the intent the fruites of our vnfained liking
becomming by such meanes the more forcible, may render vnto all the
worlde a sufficient testimonie, how hard and difficult a thing it is
to part those whome (but onelie death itselfe) hath power to disseuer.
Bee onelie contented my D. once againe, to restablish that which being
a little vntwisted, could neuer wholie be broken. Thy knowne good will,
and heartie zeale vnto mee; assureth mee not to distrust the same at
thy handes, which thou shalt euer finde to be graffed within me. This
euening by Gods grace I meane at our lodging to see thee, whither, and
to thy selfe I doe most heartilie commend me.

=This Reconciliatorie being different from that other |Conciliatorie|
Epistle, by reason of the argument thereof tending to renue that,
which formerlie might by the other before bee intreated for, carrieth
the effects thereof as well as it dooth betwéene equals: so from an
inferiour person to one who in reputation is somewhat more then his
better. Upon presumption of whose fauor, or by negligence of his own
dealing, hauing thrown himselfe into some disgrace with such a partie,
he may by meanes herein offred, reconcile himselfe in any sort he list
of humility. To the furtherance whereof, this example following may bee
considered.=


        _An Epistle Reconciliatorie, from an inferiour person,
                      to one that is his better._

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Propositiō._]

[Sidenote: _Dichologia._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

Pleaseth my honourable good L. It was giuen me to vnderstand about two
daies passed by M. R. that your L. should very hardly conceiue of me,
in that vpon some vrgent occasion, I delaied to yeeld that testimonie
vnto his cause, which in equitie and reason I ought to doe: and the
rather, for that by your earnest entreatie and request, I was eftsoones
thereunto required. The griefe was not small I sustained thereby, in
that hauing receiued many and sundrie benefits by your honourable
fauour, whereby diuers waies I remaine in dutie and honestie charged
during my life vnto your L. I should stand on so great a hazard, as the
aduenture or losse of your good opinion, onely for a matter sinisterly
suggested vnto you against mee, without anie maintainable reason. Your
L. dooth I hope remember, in my last speeches had with you about the
very same matter (albeit before that time, I stoode on some tearmes,
doubting the malicious dealinges of the aduerse parties agaynst mee, in
reuengment of my plaine and honest testimonie to bee there giuen) yet
at the last I concluded, to gather together all the Notes ministring
furtheraunce to the cause, and thereuppon to deliuer my true and
certaine knowledge according as had beene required. Nowe, what care
I haue sithence vsed in the matter, and vppon intelligence had with
M. R. howe vehementlie in satisfaction of what might anie wayes content
your L. and bee furthering to his right, I haue proceeded therein, I
had rather himselfe shoulde deliuer, then I to become a reporter vnto
you. Insomuch as I well knowe (howeuer any others haue misinformed your
L.) himselfe as a Gentleman, will vppon his woorde assure the truth
and certaintie. I did I must confesse at the first vse some delayes
in immediate dispatch of the thing, but how and in what manner,
and to what end and purpose, let him also relate. Your L. I hope,
will therefore bee pleased to do mee that right, as not to be euill
perswaded towardes mee, in a case wherein I haue vpon your honourable
assuraunce and commaund, entred so farre foorth, as thereby I stande
assured to haue purchased vnto my selfe matter ynough of hatred, and
by those whome (hauing refused to entertaine as my friendes) I haue
inabled sufficiently thereby to become my heauie and bitter enemies.
The hatred of whome cannot vnto mee anie wayes become so iniurious as
the ill conceyte of your L. should redound to bee of all others most
grieuous. For mine owne parte (so much doe I stande on the reuerent
regarde and account I beare vnto your L.) as were it not I rest
perswaded that vpon the equall deliueraunce conceiued of my willing
minde vnto your seruice, you would againe bee reconciled in fauourable
and good opinion towards me, I should so farre foorth bee discontented
in my selfe, as neuer could I bee at attonement with mine actions,
wherein by the least sparke of negligence whatsoeuer, I might thinke
to haue ouerslipped anie thing that shoulde become displeasing, or
otherwise offensiue vnto your honourable liking. Your L. woonted fauour
and bountie giueth mee great expectation of the contrarie, and mine
innocencie and true report of maister R. doth also in some sort assure
me. Whereupon remaining as he that alwaies thinketh his life no better
spent, then for and in your L. vtmost seruice, I humblie surcease, this
day of, &c.




                 _Of Epistles Petitorie.    Chap. 15._


=The manner of these Epistles might in another purpose then herein
expressed, bee also applyed, as being |Reconciliatorie|, in the
behalfe of some other to bee written, as occasion may bee offered, but
forasmuch as they in that sort beeing handled, doe for the most part,
fall into the |Swasorie|, |Disswasorie|, |Defensorie|, or |Excusatorie|
kinde, I deeme it besides necessitie, to write anie further examples
thereof, for that when anie such shall bee brought in question,
the substaunce and conueyance of the state and cause, may readily
thereunto be drawne out of the places before sorted vnto each of those
kindes, as in the discourse formerly set forth are at large remembred.
In manifestation whereof, let it be considered, that if by an epistle
of this title I shoulde endeuour to reconcile a man to his wife, or
a woman to her husband, a seruaunt to his maister, or a maister to
his seruant: the father to the Childe, the friende to a friende, the
neighbour to neighbour, or kinsman to kindred. Needes must I for the
compassing thereof shewe some reasons howe and which way to induce
these, and therefor must I of necessitie run into diuers perswasions,
defences or excuses, in the qualities whereof (by whatsoeuer action
I goe about to transpose them) the effectes yet must néedes be
concluded. Sufficeth therefore that for these Epistles I haue deliuered
sufficiently, and herewith will wee wade vnto the nexte, which in
order hereunto are |Petitorie|. And in asmuch as these Epistles are
so named, for the earnest |petition| or requests in euerie of them
contained, and that the variety of thinges are such to be demanded,
and mens conditions so diuers, at whose handes or from whom the same
are to be receiued: It therefore falleth out by consequence that
according thereunto the maner of the Epistle must needs also be diuers
and variable. For some things ther are which fauorably and with great
indifferencie, are oftentimes to be graunted, required or obtained, as
counsell, aid, patronage, good speeches, natural care and regard, &
such other like. Some also and such semblable persons, as for which,
or to whom, to aske or sue a certain kind of shame, is in a māer tied,
|viz.| in crauing, borrowing, importuning, charging, or to vehement
troubling. The stile, order, and deliuery therefore appertaining to
either of these must needly be different. Touching then the generality
of both, to either of them it is requisite that in the |Exordium|, an
indeuour bee vsed whereby to adhibit vnto vs the good will, fauour, or
good liking of him to whome wee write. Nexte that therein wee procéede
according to our acquaintance with the partie, his estate, credite,
or supporte whereby to pleasure vs. Thirdlie, that the cause we take
vpon vs to preferre, bee iust, lawfull, and honest. Fourthly, that it
be in his ability, or power, counsel, aid, or protection, to prefer
or relieue vs. Fiftly, the order or meanes whereby the same may be
wrought and accomplished. Sixtly, our gratitude and |remuneration|,
worthily tied to the thankefull acknowledgement or requitall of the
same. In the first sorte of these, the cause standing fauourable or
indifferent, we may the more bolder indeuour to produce or lay forth
the aptnes or beseeming therof. In the second, greater modestie, and a
more shamefast deliuerance is to be retained, the preferring whereof
woulde be best by |insinuation|, the better by couert meanes to wade
into the depth of our |petitiō|. In this place a more then ordinarie
bashfulnes would bee admitted, which giueth no small furtherance to
euerie demaund, as audacious and wainscot impudencie on the other side
returneth the greatest impediment in anie thing to be obtained. For
no man willingly would do benefit to such a one who in maner goeth
about as of duety and not of curtesie to exact the same, and rather
as a commaunder then crauer, woulde impudently thrust himselfe to
the obtaining thereof. And because the whole course hereof obserued
by way of euerie |Petition|, is by inference of many circumstances
to be altogither determined, the order as I haue related vnto you
before, must be conueyed by places |Swasorie|, resting very often in
confirmation of the honestie, goodnes, lawfulnes, and needfulnes of
our petition. And if the |Exordium| be happily framed of his person to
whom we direct our letters, it shall not be amisse that therein briefly
wee capitulate some parte of his vertues, curtesies, humanity, bounty,
readines to comfort, pleasure, or doe reliefe vnto any, whereby we
may priuately draw his fauour and good acceptance vnto vs: besides,
if he haue made vs before time beholding vnto him, we shall gladly
acknowledge the same, and declare that being already indebted, we study
more thereby to yoke our selues vnto him. If of our owne persons, then
shall we lay open, with what great expectation and regard we do in
our conceits entertaine the desertes and worthinesse of such a one,
modestly preferring what in fauor of him, and common and equall loue or
regard hath passed between vs. If of the interchangeable loue, liking
and curtesie, whilome resting between our predecessors or auncistors,
then the weight and force thereof we shall put forwards accordingly. If
of the person of our aduersarie against whom we demaund any assistance,
fauor, protection, or remedy, we may infer (if any such be) the common
mislike of both of vs towardes him, and how ill he hath deserued at
eithers handes and thereupon require aid against him. If of the thing
or matter it selfe, the same be to be caried, we shall shew the value,
godlines, goodnes, or common benefit of the same, that the matter is
vnto him easie, to vs of great importance, and if without arrogancie
it may be done, we may inforce some occasions of benefit or other
contentment thenceforth to happen vnto him. And if any discommoditie do
happily séem to appeare in laying open the same (the liklihood whereof
may either alienate his minde, or withdraw his assistance or other
liking from vs) that shall we either study to extinguish or otherwise,
as much as we may, to qualifie or auoide; By such kind of meanes,
behooueth we prepare our selues to the deliuery of our petition, which
being in as apt and plaine tearms as may be laid open, we shal by
such inforcements (as in moouing affections hereunto, may be deemed
pertinent) with greater facilitie procure the same to be effected.=


          _An example of an epistle Petitorie written on the
                         behalfe of another._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

The studie and great desire wherewith (sir) I see you bent continually
to the vniuersall aid and benefit of al men, and for which to your
great praise you haue generally well deserued, and deseruedly are
euerie where reputed, hath mooued me in the behalfe of this poore man
to become a petitioner vnto you. About two moneths since, hee had
dealings with a neighbour of yours, touching a farme which he was for
tearme of yeares to take at his hands, and notwithstanding a promise
and graunt thereof to this bearer made (in consideration whereof
he paide him then in hand a good parte of his money) the iniurious
cormorant glutting him selfe with extorting from the pouertie of this
and manie others, hath sithence that, not onelie passed a demise
thereof in writing to another, but goeth about to defraud the poore
man of his money, the sum whereof is the whole patrimonie, riches, and
stocke of himselfe, his poore wife and familie. And for so much as
without the countenance of some one fauouring the poore mans right,
hee is like to bee ouerborne with the weight of the other, and so
consequently to bee vndone: I haue thought good to make thus bolde to
pray your lawful fauour in his furtherance, that by your authoritie and
meanes, some honest satisfaction or ende may be therein to his behoofe
had. You shall doe an act verie charitable, in dealing for such a one,
for the procuring of whose right, his heartie praiers for your safety
shall witnes wel the comfort you shall do him therein. I am perswaded
your speach and aid may herein preuaile verie much, as a thing which
with great facilitie you may cause to bee dispatched. And for my self,
as I shal at no time rest vnmindful of my request tendred vnto you
herein, so shall I not faile in what I may to the vttermost of my power
to satisfie you, by whatsoeuer possible requitall. And euen so with my
heartie commendations, I doe bid you farewel. R. this twelfth of Aprill.


                  _An example petitorie in the nature
                   of Reconciliatorie, from a sonne
                           to his displeased
                               father._

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Epitheton._]

[Sidenote: _Ecphonesis._]

[Sidenote: _Periphrasis._]

[Sidenote: _Metanoia._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

If floods of teares sealed with harde and bitter sighes, if continuall
sorrow and neuer ceasing care, if consuming griefes not of a diseased
bodie, but of a pestred mind, might haue rendred sufficient and
assured testimonie, whereby to perswade your laden eares surcharged by
this time with the weight of my incessaunt and continuall cries: the
intollerable woes wherein I liued, secluded from the right and name
of a sonne, and barred quite from the sweete and gentle tearme of a
louing and kinde father, hadde ere this time giuen meane of recouerie,
to my daunted and dismayed spirites, and kindled in mee some wan hope,
one day to haue founde an houre so happie, wherein by a right conceite
conceiued of my vnkindlie pleasures, or conuinced by the importunity
of those who haue pittied my euils, your naturall care might in some
sorte or other haue bin renued, to the redresse of all my fore wearied
and heauie groning mischiefs. But infortunate as I am, that for all the
humble suit so manie times presented in these and such like blubbered
lines, so hardened is the mind of him I write vnto, that whilome hauing
bin a deare and louing parent, I may not heerein dare to tender, or so
much as once put forwarde vnto him, the appellation of a gratious and
pittifull father. If it haue so pleased vnto your grauitie, in such
seuere manner still to deale with me, and that the hatefull shewe of my
ill desertes, is yet become of so loathed and detestable recordation,
in this verie season vnto you: then as (before time) eftsoones doe
confesse my letters vntimelie to haue approched vnto you: but if the
long detained grace, by whose heauie want (your sonne might I say?)
nay, the forlorne and despised issue of your aged yeares (for so I am
now forced to say) is perforce driuen almost into a desperate conceite
and mislike of his liuing, may by the least sparke of expectation,
be annexed to the most vehement effects of his prostrate and meekest
submission, then groueling vppon the lowest ground, and humbling my
highest imaginations to the deepest bottome, wherein your implacable
displeasures haue hitherto beene coueted, as meekely and with as
penitent speeches, as anie grieued and passionate minde can vtter: I
do beseech you sir, that at the last you will receyue (not into your
accustomed fauour) but to your common and ordinarie lyking, the most
disgraced of all your children, and pardoning the disobedience wherein
hee dared once so far foorth to prouoke agaynst him, the weight of your
knowne anger, vouchsafe hee may nowe againe bee of your familie, though
not partaking with your children.

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

This sole benefite and last request if my burthened soule may obtaine
at your handes, happilie I may then liue as comforted by the hope of
that whereunto a buzie and carefull endeuour may once peraduenture
enable me, otherwise dying in the ouerflowing of my desperate and
continued griefes, I pray at Gods handes I may obtaine that by mercie,
which cruell destinie in my life time could neuer win vnto me, by all
possible intreatie. My submissiue dutie answerable to the regarded
place of your fatherlie authoritie compelleth mee to attend with all
humblenesse the resolution of your clemencie. In the hope whereof,
resting my decayed and ouerwearied imagination, I liue till the receyt
of your knowne lyking do ascertaine, in what sort may please you to
repute me.

=The stile of this Epistle is vehement, because the passions of him
from whence it came were vehement, and is deduced as you see from the
nature of |Reconciliatorie|, which aswell for the submissiue & lowest
tearmes it beareth, as also for the vrgent petition therin contained, I
haue rather chosen to place among yᵉ |Petitorie|. The part of |honest|
herein deliuered, is passed in wordes méekest & of great obedience,
wherein he studieth by all possibilitie to mittigate towards himselfe,
the too much seueritie of his father. The |Exordium| is carried by
|Insinuation|, expressing the vehement affects and surcharged conceits
of a mind more then ordinarilie grieued. The |Possibilitie| resteth
in the father, which commonlie by nature is with some more facilitie
then estranged diffcultie, entreated towards his sonne. The meane to
compasse it, is the mitigation or satisfaction of the iust mislike
of a father, whose charged authoritie affecteth nothing so much as
obedience in children. Thus are the places required herein, in sort as
you see performed. And for because within any one title, there is no
one thing affoording matter more plentifull, or with vse more commonlie
frequented, then is this |petitorie| kinde, (insomuch as whatsoeuer
containeth any speciall request, is hereunder included) I will sort
you downe so many examples of all sorts, as that there shall not faile
herein wherewith sufficientlie to instruct whatsoeuer in the like
occasion is or ought to be required.=


     _An Epistle Petitorie, wherein is craued trauell and counsell
                to be assistant vpon vrgent occasion._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Petitiō._]

[Sidenote: Possibilitie.]

As one greatlie emboldned by the forwardnesse of your woonted courtesie
and liking euer bent towards me, I haue dared (Sir) once again vpon
presumption of the like, hereby to intreate you, wherein you may see in
what degree of affection I do intertaine you, in that not contented,
I haue alreadie so manie and so often times vsed you, I doe by such
meanes endeuour solie to make my selfe wholy and to none other so
much as beholding vnto you. My man hath returned me from London, how
by more then common celeritie I haue in my suite beene preuented by
my aduersarie, whereby it is like, my cause standing vpon so great a
hazard, it will goe verie hard with mee. Nowe if your woonted counsell,
and friendly assistance bee not speedilie ayding, both the hope of
benefit, charge and expense thereof will be lost vtterly? In regard
whereof, these may bee in as earnest maner as is possible to intreate
you, that vpon the attendance of my man, I may (as woontedlie) vse you.
Your counsell ioyned with a little trauell may greatlie profite me, and
now more then at any time else, exceedinglie pleasure mee. Wherein if
it may please you to yoke mee further vnto you by the waight of your
courtesie: I shall not onelie endeuour by all possibilitie to requite
it, but also your selfe shall not faile at anie time to finde such a
one of mee, as of whose trauaile, industrie, or what other abilitie to
pleasure you, you may account of assuredlie. I haue by certaine other
Letters mooued my L. to haue fauourable consideration touching mee,
which as I am informed, his L. hath receyued. What els to bee performed
heerein, my man shall make knowne vnto you. And thus doubting as little
of your friendship herein, as of mine owne thankfull disposition,
prest alwayes to the vttermost to requite you, I doe heartilie bid you
farewell, D. of this, &c.


                        _An other of the same._

Sir, I am so bolde in my great necessitie, vnder assurance of your
forwardnes to do me good, to entreate your especiall ayde and
furtherance in two things, the one whereof this bearer shall instruct
you in, the other your selfe can best tell, for that I made you at my
last speech acquainted with the same. Both of which consisting in your
labour and deuice, I am of opinion that none then your selfe can fitte
the occasion better. And trulie such is the force of imprisonment, as
contrarie to that you haue woontedly knowne in me, mine vnderstanding
is quite decaied, and forworne with my libertie, and where the spirits
are so distuned, it must needes follow, the memorie can sounde nothing
but discord.

In fine, sir it is in you to doe me good, and to make me by this onlie
action for euer beholding vnto you, wherein if I may so farre foorth
presume of your fidelitie, assure your selfe, that if euer God giue mee
libertie, A. C. to none so much as to you shall be yoked in courtesie.
Good M. D. the matter hereof requireth some haste, wherunto I most
heartilie entreate you. Fare ye well, this of, &c.


                  _A Letter responsorie to the same._

Good M. C. needelesse were it you should entreate mee in that, wherein
you haue founde mee alwayes most willing, and such whome with small
perswasions you may induce to a farre greater purpose then what in
your last letter is required. The Messenger I haue appointed to morrow
morning to returne againe to my lodging, at which time I will not
faile to finish, what in the best sort I can conceiue to bee vnto your
occasions furthering. Hard will it bee for mee to accomplish that,
wherein your selfe seeme so vnperfect, for that the dullest conceyte
forged from the most distempered of your imaginations, cannot but
sounde farre better tunes then the ripest of my inuention is anie
wayes able to deliuer. Neuerthelesse, such as it is, or so much as (by
dislike of your owne) you haue will to account of, that will I prepare
to your view, and put forward to your good speed, thinking it better by
deliuerie of a grosse deuise to satisfie the demaunde of a friend, then
by concealing the simplicitie therof to bee censured as vncourteous. In
conclusion, it is (sir) lawfull for you to vse mee to the vttermost,
and fittest to our confirmed league of amitie, that (in whatsoeuer) you
should imploy mee, wherein I desire you conceiue no more, then such as
I intend to become, and you shall assuredly find me, viz. yours, &c.

=Here must I note vnto you the last of these Epistles |Petitorie|, in
which is neither |Exordium| nor |Narration|, but formost of all the
petition, and afterwards the parts folowing, the like whereof you may
perchance finde hereafter. For that where practise and skill hath
enabled a man to doe well, there is no necessitie that such should bee
tied to rule, who being of sufficient knowledge and capacitie are able
to discerne what is méetest, and accordinglie to direct the square of
their owne doings, sometimes one way, sometimes another, as in the
intendment thereof, may to the present occasion séeme most conuenient
and readie. And as in this one Letter, so may the learner light vpon
many others being different also from the obseruation herein deliuered,
& somtimes abruptly entring into the matter without any limitation at
all, one other example whereof shall bee next hereunto deliuered, the
first beginning of which, declareth the meane of accomplishment of
the request, before the petition declared, whereunto by imitation the
vnskilfull may not rashlie enter, without good aduisement of what in
the performance is meete to be considered; The method of which is in
this sort pursued.=


    _An example Petitorie, concluding a briefe request and curteous
             remembrance of a thing before time promised._

Nowe is the time (wherein if your pleasure bee) you may perfourme what
erst you haue promised. I therefore desire you as heartilie as I may,
that your intent, being to doe me good, you will nowe execute the same.
And albeit I doubte not of your willingnesse herein, whose curtesie
hath not beene straunge towardes mee: yet rather enforced by mine owne
necessitie and continuall remembraunce of my vnprouided estate then
by anie other misgeuing, I prepare these lines, sollicitours of your
expected promise, which bearing in their fronte a token of oportunitie,
woulde praie you not to let slippe occasion, but with as much speede
as willingnesse to accomplish the same. Remembring howe manie waies I
am beholding vnto you, I remaine in accompt of your curtesies, rather
studious to thinke on them, then anie waies able to requite them, &c.


                 _Another example of the like effect._

[Sidenote: _Exordium_, by comparison.]

[Sidenote: _Insinuatiō._]

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

Even as a bold begger, the more he is relieued, the more he still
presseth forward vpon the bounty of those, whom he supposeth to fauor
him: so fareth it with mee, who hauing eftsoons enioied your trauel to
my no small benefit, am neuertheles so shameles as stil to importune
you in the same. I haue, sir, I cōfesse, by your good means recieued
sundrie fauors at the hands of my Lord, which I cannot, nor euer shall
be able to requite vnto you, the matter of my suite notwithstanding
hetherto depending before his honour, I neither can nor may so farre
foorth withdrawe my selfe, but I must needes nowe and then solicite
you, as the Gentleman by whose onelie curtesie and perseuerance in
woonted care and good affection towardes mee I do liue, and so liuing,
continue my daies and yeares with such assured respecte, as hee that
hath sworne and vowed in himselfe neuer to forget you. It doeth sir,
so much stande mee vpon the procuring of his L. letter in my behalfe,
for the indifferente triall and hearing of my cause, as without (in
speciall and earnest speeches the same be directed for mee to the
Iustices and Commissioners) I am in greate despaire howe the case will
goe with mee. It is you therefore that must helpe mee herein, and by
your onelie meanes I must bee warranted in this action, the intendment
whereof furthering so much vnto right and cause of equitie as it doeth,
I hope his L. vpon your motion will the easilier condiscende vnto. This
is that I require at your handes, and to the speedie dispatch whereof I
may not cease to importune you. Whereon concluding for the present, I
doe heartilie bid you farewel, &c.




                      _Of Epistles Commendatorie.
                              Chap. 16._

=Much more might bee handled in this kinde, the method whereof is
one of the most ordinarie of any sortes of Letters that are indited,
for that the greatest number of directions are commonlie concluded
in this matter, the requests wherof doe either especially concerne
the writer, or are otherwise to be respected in the behalfe of some
other. The occasion of which hath caried herein the plentie of so
many examples, that by manifesting the diuersities of their orders
and vses, the learner might not wante wherein to bee directed, and
choice of varietie wherewith to be delighted. Now, besides these hereby
alreadie deliuered, there are letters also yᵗ might be suted vnder
this forme, which from Noble men or others, are many times written in
fauor of sundrie persons, containing requests in their behalfs to be
performed, which not withstanding the difference of estates in that the
same doe for the most part passe vnto their inferiours, yet séemeth
the nature thereof to be |petitorie|, but in a different order of
these to be altogether pursued. Insomuch as neither agree-eth it, to
vse like circumstances of humilitie and entreatie, nor of pleasures
or curtesie, as in the other are required: but rather a necessarie
supposall and assurance of their demandes to be hearkened vnto, in
respect that of their honours, reputations, or credites, it is intended
they will require nothing, but that with reasonable toleration may be
liked of. But the vse of such kinde of directions in choise of both, I
rather hold pertinent to the title |Cōmendatorie|, for that whatsoeuer
is therein written, in fauour eyther of the person or of the cause,
may in respect of the honour or reputation of those from whome they
come, bee better déemed in sorte of a curteous recommendation, then
otherwise by or vnder anie title of humilitie or submission: for these
causes I haue thought meete to adioine immediatelie hereunto, the same
Epistles |Commendatorie|, beeing so nearelie combined with those of
|Petitorie| as they are. The vse whereof are not neuerthelesse so farre
forth caried, but that from an inferiour to his superiour, in some
causes and vpon sundrie accidentes, the same are deriued. The places
appertaining vnto these kindes of Epistles be as in the |Petitorie|
are alreadie declared, chiefely when the same, intendeth to a cause
or person preferred to be fauoured. In which, when it concerneth the
person, we must beware that in the credible deliuerie of whatsoeuer
tending to his praise or preferment, we doe it either by warrant of our
owne knowledge, or by such certaine report of others, whose opinion
we deeme will not bee misled. And if neither of these doe fall out to
be knowne or beleeued, then shal we shew what information wee haue
besides our owne opinion, or peraduenture no other assurance at all
but our owne simple liking. Petitions also are frequented in requiring
fauour to these causes, wherein standeth in highest regarde the state,
countenance or authoritie of him, from whome the letter is framed,
who accordingly thereunto may desire that the rather at his request,
or vpon his sute, or for his sake, or in regarde of his liking, the
person may bee accompted of, or the action furthered. Besides, it may
bee added to the increase of a more speedie performance, the loue,
(if anie be, or the occasion thereunto sorting) we owe to him we
commende, or in whose fauour we write, either solie for himselfe, or
conueyed from his friendes, his parentes, the consideration of his
charge of wife, children or seruantes, the wrong offered, benefite to
be attained, or whatsoeuer other matter to bee deemed requisite or
conuenient. Nowe from whence or out of what instigations, the matter of
such commendation is to bee drawne, you haue in the generall chapters
of this booke alreadie at large. The circumstances of which, and
whatsoeuer else hereby forewarned, shall in the ensuing examples bee
more at large deliuered.=


                   An example commendatorie, wherein
              _is recommended to a noble man from his in-
                feriour, the conditions and behauiours
                             of a person_.

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: Cōmendation of the party.]

[Sidenote: _Petition._]

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

It may please your Lordship, This Gentleman the bearer hereof, with
whome a long time I haue beene acquainted, and of his qualities and
good behauiour haue had sounde and large experiment, hauing beene a
good time a sutor vnto mee, to mooue his preferment vnto your Lordships
seruice: I haue nowe at the last condiscended vnto, aswell for that I
know your Lordship to be now presentlie disfurnished of such a one, as
also that there shall hardlie be preferred vpon a sudden any one so
meete as himselfe to supplie that place. And thus much by your pardō
and allowance dare I assure vnto you, yᵗ if it may please you in credit
of my simple knowledge and opiniō to imploy him, you shal find that
besides he is by parētage discended from such, as of whome I knowe your
Lordship will verie well accompt of, hee is also learned, discreete,
sober, wise, and moderate in all his actions, of great secrecie and
most assured trust, gouerned in all companies accordinglie: finallie,
a man so meete, and to this present turne so apt and necessarie, as I
cannot easilie imagine howe you may be serued better. Pleaseth your L.
the rather for the great good will I beare him, and humble duetie I owe
vnto you, to accept, imploie, and accompt of him. I nothing doubt but
your L. hauing by such means giuen credit to my choice, shall finde him
such, as for whose good seruice, you shall haue further occasion to
thinke well of mee for him. Whereof nothing doubting, I doe refer both
him and my selfe in all humblenesse to your best and most fauorable
opinion, from my house in B. this of, &c.


                  _A Letter responsorie to the same._

After my verie heartie commendations vnto you. Sithence the receipt
of your last letters and recommendations of P. B. into my seruice,
I haue had small occasion either to write or send vnto you till this
present. And for so much as vpon your certaine notice deliuered vnto
mee in fauour of his preferment, I helde my selfe so well assured in
all thinges of his behauiour, as I doubted not thereupon to receiue
him in place of greatest fidelitie, I haue thought good heereby to
let you vnderstand, what great pleasure I haue taken in his diligent
attendance, assuring you that for manie vnexpected qualities, which I
haue prooued to be in him, I doe woonderfullie well like of him, and
that with so good affection, as I intend not to omit anie thing that
may tend to his aduauncement. In beholding him oftentimes mee thinkes
hee manie wayes dooth resemble his father, who in sounde troth, I
doe suppose, might haue beene intertained with the best for his well
deseruing. This bearer shall enforme you of some especiall causes,
concerning my affayres in the Countrey, whom I doe pray you to conferre
with, and to affoord your trauell for his present dispatch, which I
will not faile heartily to requite vnto you. For your care had of my
wants, and diligent supply of such a one I do many times thanke you,
and haue promised in my selfe for the same to become a debter vnto you.
And euen so I do bid you hartilie fare wel. From the Court this of, &c.


              _An other Epistle Commendatorie of the sort
                          before deliuered._

My verie good L. I am enformed by this Gentl. the bearer hereof,
that by meanes of one of your Chapleins, a motion hath beene made
of his preferment vnto your L. seruice: and forsomuch as those his
good friendes are not nowe in towne, who in respect of their account
with your L. might stande him in verie good steade: vnderstanding his
well-willing minde, and greate desire thereunto (for that I wish verie
well vnto his aduauncement) I haue taken vpon me heereby to entreate
(albeit I may not presume so farre, as to preferre a man vnto your L.)
that it may yet please you vpon my speeches to haue the better liking
of him. Assuring you that both by the credite of my La. F. who vppon
verye good conceyte towardes him, wished his preferment, with her late
deceased brother and last L. C. and also by the knowledge my selfe
haue had of him, and others besides, whome your L. hath in speciall
and chose regarde, he is one so sufficient, and euerie way so well
furnished to doe seruice to anie honourable personage, as by tryall and
proofe made of whose good parts and behauiour, your L. shall not reape
occasion of ill conceit, to whome soeuer haue vndertaken to preferre
him vnto you. And if it shall notwithstanding seeme farther conuenient
vnto your L. to make stay of his acceptaunce, for some priuate causes
hitherto vnsatisfied, I shall yet in his behalfe neuerthelesse become
thus farre a suter vnto you, that this my recommendation may with
your L. good fauour become a speedier meane the better (when it shall
happen) to mooue your L. good lyking towardes him. For which I shall
thinke my selfe, as in manie other occasions besides, vnto your
honourable opinion most deepely beholden. In acknowledgement of which,
and respect of my humble and dutifull regarde to the same, I doe nowe
and euermore remaine your L. &c.

=These two examples |Commendatorie|, are concluded to one effect, the
formost whereof with little alteration, may become a president for
anie recommendation, whether it bee to fauour, friendship, choyce, or
account, and not vnto seruice at all, for that herein is shewed, in
what sort men for their vertues may be recommended. Now if there be
anie other particular occasion in the person, besides these, inducing
matter of good liking the same in place and stead of other, or togither
with the other may be then alledged, and the course herein deliuered
at all times indifferently to be obserued. And as these are from
inferiour persons directed vnto their superiours: so will we sort out
some others, that from Noblemen in like sort haue béene passed to their
inferiours, examples whereof are in like maner hereunto annexed.=


     _An Example Commendatorie, from a Noble man to his inferiour,
               wherein one is recommended to an office._

After my verie heartie Commendations vnto you, where I am giuen to
vnderstande, that you are in election, and it is also verie likelie
you shall bee pricked by her Maiestie, high Sheriffe for this yeare,
of the Countyes of Sussex and Surrey. This Gent. the bearer hereof,
beeing one whom for manie respectes, I doe greatly fauour, and for his
learning, skill, and honest vsage, haue long time vsed and reputed of,
I haue thought good by these (if it so happen you shall this yeare bee
named thereunto) to recommend to your good allowance to bee receyued
as your vnder-sheriffe for that time, putting vnto you such good and
reasonable securitie as appertaineth, for discharge of the sayde
office. And hereby also to pray you, that the rather for my sake, and
for the especiall choice and reckoning I haue made of him, you will
nowe before hand make certaine acceptance of his skill, by refusall of
whatsoeuer other that may bee recommended vnto you for the exercise of
the same office, assuring you, for that I haue well knowne and prooued
to be in him, you shall be so well furnished, as you would wish. And
besides, in that you shall gratifie me herein, I will not faile in anie
sort I may to requite you. And euen so I bid you heartily farewell.

=Heerein is the honour and nobilitie of the personage greatlie to
bee respected who by so much the more his estate, countenance, or
authoritie requireth it, by so much the lesse may it be considered,
that in the inditing of these letters hee should with ouer large
entreatie bee charged, but rather with fewer spéeches, and lesse
circumstances to demaunde what hee purposeth. The conformitie whereof
may bee gathered out of the examples ensuing, according whereunto, hee
in whose fauour such kinde of Letters are to bee directed, (especiallie
if the inuention beeing of his owne procurement bee brought to bee
signed) ought to take heede that the regard of his honour and calling,
in whose name the Letter passeth bee not by too great humilitie of
tearmes in any sort misprised.=


        _An Epistle commendatorie, from a noble man, in prefer-
                         ment of his seruant._

After my verie heartie commendations vnto you. This bearer hauing
of long time serued mee faithfullie, and beeing nowe desirous to
trauaile. I haue thought good heartilie to recommend vnto you. And
forasmuch as by reason of your office of Lord Gouernour of V. it is
likelie there are manie places of good preferment remayning in your
gift, vppon your followers to bee bestowed, I doe most heartilie pray
you, that you will not onelie for my sake bee contented to receyue him
into your seruice, but that also in fauour thereof, you will in anie
place of preferment about you, doe him that benefite and furtherance,
as to one whom you wish throughlie well vnto, you woulde performe.
Herein if my request may preuaile with you, I shall not onelie bee
readie to thanke you, but in whatsoeuer cause you haue to vse mee, bee
as willing to requite you. And so I doe bid you right heartily fare
well. At the Court this day, &c.


                  An other example, wherein is recom-
                     _mended the cause and speedie
                       furtherance of Iustice._

After my heartie Commendations vnto your Lordship: where I haue beene
informed by this bearer, beeing a poore Tenaunt of mine, of a certaine
cause of his depending before you in her Maiesties Bench, and that
after manie thwartings and euill practises of his aduersarie, the
matter is nowe driuen to an issue, and tryall, from the benefite
whereof by corruption of some kinde of persons, hee hath these three
tearmes passed beene alreadie detayned, to his great hinderance, and
almost vtter vndooing. I haue thought good vppon his humble suite to
mooue your L. in his behalfe, and to pray you that at my instaunce you
will at some conuenient leysure examine the state of his matter, and
being informed thereof at large, doe him that speedie fauour in iustice
and right, as hee may not anie longer time therein bee deferred, but
that notwithstanding anie cauill or obiection thereunto hindering,
hee may before this tearme passed in anie wise haue a tryall. In
accomplishment whereof, besides that you shall greatlie satisfie mee in
respect of the poore mans right, whereunto I wish great regard to be
giuen, you shal also performe a deed so charitable, as whereby you shal
perpetually bind him, his poore wife, and children continually to pray
for you. And albeit I nothing doubt herein your great willingnes and
voluntarie disposition to Iustice, yet that by reason of my request,
the matter wich more diligence may be harkened vnto, I eftsoones pray,
and therwithall hartilie doe bid your L. farewel, this of, &c.

=To all these examples |Commendatorie|, belongeth thrée especiall
sortes of Letters |Responsorie|, in which is either flatly denied,
absolutely allowed, or doubtfully accepted of, what by force of those
|Epistles| are seuerally commended. Of either of these sutes I haue
thought good to set downe some directions, the diuersitie whereof, at
the choice of him that searcheth the same, may according to his present
humor be either reiected or followed.=


              _An example responsorie, wherein is denied
                  what in the foremost directions may
                           be recommended._

Pleaseth your good L. I receiued your fauorable Letters, and
cōmendation giuen in the behalfe of M. L. with whom hauing had
conference at large, I doe finde nothing lesse, then what by your L.
was of him deliuered, and in truth it doth not a little discontent
me, that as well in regard of your honourable and earnest demand made
in his fauor, as also that many great and vrgent respects, I stand
deeplie charged vnto you Lord. I cannot neuerthelesse herein perfourme
what I woulde: For that (besides it is yet doubtfull whether I shall
bee to the same place appointed by her Maiestie or no) if I bee chosen
Sheriffe, I haue two yeares since giuen my worde and assured promise to
my Lord of L. that I shall then accept of such a one to the exercise of
the vnder Sherifwick as shall by him to mee bee preferred. According
vnto which, standing nowe in election for this yeare as I doe, I am and
euer sithence haue beene yearelie sollicited to the selfe same purpose.
Whereof I thought it my duetie to aduertise your L. by these, most
humblie crauing pardon of the same, in that I may not as I woulde,
herein satisfie your vrgente and vehemente request. And so with my
right humble duetie vnto your Lordshippe doe take leaue. This x. of
Nouember.


                  Another Letter responsorie, where-
                     _in consent and allowance is
                        giuen to the matter re-
                               quired_.

My humble duetie remembred vnto your good Lord shippe. The Letters
directed vnto mee from the same, together with the Gentleman in whose
fauor they were assigned, I haue entertained. And so much the more
welcome were they vnto mee, by howe much the more I repute my selfe
honoured, in that it hath pleased your Lordshippe anie waies to require
mee. Touching the partie recommended, your Lordshippe doubteth not I
hope, but that of the least of yours, I woulde make especiall accounte,
the effectes whereof you shall in this perceiue, in that for the
regarde I beare vnto your Lordshippe I will both repute of, and fauour
him. Besides what other aduauncement or prefermente his owne desertes,
or my aide may anie waies bring vnto him, hee shall bee sure at all
times to enioy it. Praying your Lordship in all other thinges as farre
foorth to stande my gratious and fauourable good L. as herein I shall
not faile to accomplish what to the vttermost may bee helde meete and
conueniente. And thus beseeching the Almightie to haue your Lordshippe
in his eternall protection, I doe in all humblenesse take my leaue,
from R. this seuenth of August, &c.


                 The third Epistle responsorie, where-
                 _in is doubtfullie allowed or accep-
                     ted of, what to the same was
                             recommended_.

My singular and especiall good L. I haue vnderstoode by your last
Letters, of a certaine fained and vntrue suggestion, deliuered by one
of your L. tenantes, against the proceedinges to him supposed to bee
tendred out of this Courte, according whereunto (albeit I was before
time, not altogether vnacquainted with the clamourous condition of the
partie) yet did I neuerthelesse, as by your Lordship was enioined,
examine at large the circumstances of the cause, and for the better
satisfaction of your Lordship, haue determined to set down vnto you
the trueth of the same. This R. L. whom your Lordship tearmeth to bee
a verie poore man, is not (as in simple shewe hee maketh himselfe
apparantlie to bee) but is rather such a one as from whome (beeing
narrowlie sifted) your Lordship might sooner drawe a hundred poundes
of his money, then halfe an inch breadth of his honestie. The argument
whereof in nothing so much appeareth as in this one action, wherin
against a poore man indeede, hee hath verie iniuriously behaued him
selfe, and hauing extorted from him this bonde nowe in suite (vppon
some conclusion, though no good consideration at all) of the summe of
one hundred pounde, goeth about vpon a nice quillet in the condition
to prosecute the forfeiture of the same, which indeed by the direct
wordes of the writing, is in lawe forfeited. For reliefe whereof his
aduersarie complained in the Chauncerie, by reason of the prosecution
of which bill, and notice particularlie thereof giuen to my Lorde
Chancellor, the saide R. L. hauing diuers time agreede to comprimit
the matter, and yet greedie as it seemeth to obtaine the forfeiture,
stil crieth on for triall, whilest the matter is still in debating,
for which cause the same hitherto hath onelie, and not otherwise been
delaied. And for as much assithence your Lordshippes letters receiued,
my selfe verie earnestlie haue trauelled to make some conscionable and
quiet ende betweene them, yet wil the same in no wise on his parte bee
assented vnto, by occasion whereof the extremitie of the lawe beeing
verie like to proceed, hee is the nexte tearme without further delaie
to obtaine a iudgemente, and so the poore man on the other side, to bee
vtterlie vndone: I thought it not amisse in aduertising the substance
hereof vnto your good Lordshippe to praie that in credite of what here
deliuered, your Lordship woulde bee pleased to procure the saide R. L.
to assent to some reasonable order. So doing, what in conscience the
poore man is then able to pay, in respect of the other charges, and
purchase of his owne negligences: I holde not too extreame to be out
of the saide bond deducted, because in lawe hee was something charged,
though in equitie otherwise hee ought to haue been clearelie acquited.
Thus in discharge of my conscience herein, hauing so much deliuered
vnto your good Lordship, I doe recommend you to the protection of the
Almightie. London this thirteenth of Maie.

=Nowe after these Epistles, let vs enter into one strange
|commendatorie| kinde, somewhat different from the order of the rest,
béeing such as wherein the partie directing the same, beeing somewhat
scant in deliuerie of ouer large & too credible spéeches, thought good
to mittigate the force of the same by the verie partes of extremitie
it self, wherein of a merry conceit, or some other pleasant humor, he
appeareth verie vnwilling to flatter, in reciting the example whereof,
because with many tedious precepts I haue now a good while wearied the
reader, I may peraduenture occasion some matter of recreation, which by
the single shewe therein gathered, appeareth in sort following to haue
bene performed.=


                _A Letter commendatorie pleasantly con-
                   ceited in preferring an vnprofi-
                            table seruant._

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Hirmos._]

[Sidenote: _Ironia._]

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

Sir, I do send vnto your view the bearer hereof (a man shaped as you
see, & as bold in condition as he appeareth in shew) whome by all the
superfluities of summer ale, that hath wrought in his giddie brain, I
haue bin requested to cōmend vnto you. And in as much as in putting
so vnworthie a worthie in substance of so incredible allowance, it
somthing behooueth I hide not the giftes which by great search in
many a good hosterie, tauern, & alehouse, he hath by long trauell and
drowsie experiēce ere this time gained, to his insupportable credēce.
I shall not spare in some sort to signifie vnto you, what in regard
of al these I am led to coniecture. Trueth is Sir, that hee is verie
well studied in the mysterie of Malt-wormes, and for his peculiar skill
in decerning the nappie taste by the nut-browne colour of Seller-ale
in a frostie morning, hee is become a sworne brother of the rag-mans
number, and thereby standeth enioyned neuer to weare furres or other
lyning in the coldest winter, but onely the warmth of the good Ale,
which inwardlie must hearten him: Besides Sir, if you haue occasion to
credite him with a small parcell of money in dispatch of a iourney,
do but say the worde that it shall once lie in his charge, and you
may stand assured, that it shall be laide vp so safe, as any liquour
in the worlde can safe conduct it from his bellie. Take no care for
your kitchin, butterie or larder, for once a day hee loues to see all
cleane before him. Little apparell wil serue him, for his leueries
ensue weekly, out of the Bruers mesh-fat. His lodging hee reckes not,
the Chimney floore, and Billets endes serue for a Featherbed and
Coueringes. When you haue most neede of him, you shall alwayes bee sure
to go without him: if you delight in a Pigs-nie, you maie by receyuing
of him, be sure of a Hogshead. Great store of small lyking you happily
may haue to him, wee knowe not what woonders the worlde may rende out,
for nothing is impossible where all thinges may bee compassed. It may
please you for recreations sake to looke vppon him, so you be not in
case to surfeit, looke what ill lyking you conceiue, report backe
againe I pray you in the inner facing of his chimney Casket, _Omnia
sua secum portat_, hee is somewhat a foolosopher, for hee carries all
his possessions about him, for _terram dedit filiis hominum_ he must
needes then haue a large dwelling, I pray sir, giue him good wordes
how ill-fauouredlie soeuer you fauour his acquaintance, for my part I
request no remuneration for the preferment I haue tendred towards him.

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

[Sidenote: _Metanoia._]

Thus much, would I haue done, and more, long since to bee rid of him.
His old maister beeing dead, it is necessarie some place to be pestred
with him, hee makes great choyse of your housekeeping, if you can like
to frame with him. Much more might bee deliuered in the condemnation
of his woorthinesse, but that I leaue to rehearse it, and nowe sir for
your owne appetite, I leaue to your contentment: Blame not me, but him
that lead mee, and so foorth to an ende. Commend me, but not condemne
me, for I shall once doe you a better turne, this is but the first, the
next may be woorse (better) I woulde say. And so fare ye well, &c.




               _Of Epistles Consolatorie.    Chap. 17._


=Time is it now, I should leaue this last title of epistles, as
hauing thereof spoken alreadie sufficiently, & giue my selfe to the
deliuery of the next, which are |Consolatorie|, the effects whereof
are to bee bestowed on such as are grieued, according to the weight
or qualitie of the matter wherewith they are perplexed. And for that
the life of man is circumuented with so manie, and so vnlooked causes
of sorrowe and griefe, as it many waies néedeth to haue the remedy of
comforts to be applied vnto it, yet the equality of al sorts of minds
not such, as in one and the selfe same degree can accept and beare
it: It shall therfore be meete and conuenient, that in deuising to
yéelde this swéet and gentle remedie to anie troubled conceit, we doe
so moderate the matter, as that in the Discouerie therof, we rather
strike not to a far greater impatience or extremitie of vnmeasurable
sorrow then before, vpon vntimely thrusting forward, or ignorant
pursuit of the same, seeing that the mindes of some, are of so high
& incomprehensible stoutnes, as they shun in themselues and account
it a slauerie to be ouerwhelmed with woes. Others againe so rife and
so abundant in teares, as the least shewe of repetition in them,
induceth matter inough of continual mourning for which cause, we will
sort these matters of comfort, into three seuerall orders. The first
whereof shall be at choice, plainelie and simply as occasion serueth
to comfort or perswade, measuring our common calamities by yᵉ rule
of Iudges, séeing vnto a wise man, no one thing can returne cause of
disquiet so much as the shrowd of filthinesse and ignominious shame,
neither can hee be hurt of anie one without himselfe. These (the more
sensible they are with whome we deale, and of greater capacitie) the
more vehemently may we enforce by all sorts of forcible argumentes or
examples. The second of these must by insinuation be entred into, as
supposing a person of a high & statelie mind, and in a cause not common
to be censured, the weightinesse of whose griefe suppressed by a kinde
of vnconquered fortitude, we would goe about to comfort. We may not
with these deale, as in a case of ordinarie griefe with the others, but
rather by a more valuable meane, as who would say, it appearing to vs
the inuincible valour wee see or holde to be resiant in their mindes,
shunning to bee tainted with the least touch of sweltring griefe, wee
doe offer our speeches or Letters to entertaine time with them, whose
hearts wee knowe cannot yeelde to anie forcible sting thereof. And nowe
considering the great validitie of their wisedome, and a minde in them
so vnconquered by anie stormes of Fortune, as is apparant, wee can but
encourage them stoutlie to beare, what others as weaklings doe lie
groueling vnder. In which wee shall finde greater cause to reioyce by
the woorthinesse of so goodlie a minde, then otherwise bee occasioned
to grieue for their sorrowes. The thirde and last likewise must in
another sort bee conueyed, as finding the passionate and perplexed
conceytes of some, yet fresh bleeding vppon the heauie wounde of
their sorrowes, wee maie not abruptlie enter with them, into the iust
occasion they haue so to be distempered, but rather for the lenefying
of their griefes (for in sorrowe also to bee accompanied breedeth
often some comfort) séeme to take vppon vs one part of their euils, by
declaration how grieuous for some especiall causes the same becommeth
vnto vs, either for vertue or some other praiseable condition in the
partie, by occasion whereof, wee doe euen participate, as it were,
with the griefes of them wee goe about to succour. For commonlie it is
giuen to vs to mislike such as dissent from our affections, and loue
them againe, who make themselues partakers of our euilles. It auaileth
also verie greatlie sometimes to extenuate or lessen the cause of the
griefe, either by the incertaintie of thinges casuall, being in some
respects subiect to frailtie, or by the hope of short continuaunce, or
by the necessitie of the action which may not bee withstoode, or by
some comfort or expectation left to mitigate the same. The reputation
also of wisedome, grauitie, the opposition of permutation of times
and seasons, the diminution of the occasion being nothing so great
or vrgent as we deeme it, the indurance of the thing to be a meane
vnto Vertue, and finallie, the common lot and condition of all men,
subiected vniuersallie to mishappe, to sorrowe, griefe, sicknesse,
disquiet, iniuries, wrongs, oppressions, and all kinde of euils, the
generall recordation whereof, aboue manie things that may be opposed,
swaieth commonly ouer the passions of the minde, by a déepe regarde of
the vniuersalitie of the same, as that it soonest of all beateth downe,
the weight of all kind of il sorrowes and conceiuings whatsoeuer.
Herein the quick sentences and pithie sayings of philosophers, may
also be a great spurring, and finallie, all possible arguments that
maie be, wherby men are anie waies perswaded or led to forget their
euils. In this place it is principallie to be obserued, that in
ministring comfortable spéeches to the redresse of anie mishaps, wee
doe not by preferring of toies and sporting deuises, séek to relieue
them, for that albeit in times of pleasure, the humour of the partie
might in some sort, be therewith greatlie delighted, yet in causes
of such extremitie, all persons for the most part, verie hatefullie
doe endure the putting forwardes thereof, as too much impertinent to
the heauinesse wherewith by sorrowfull remembrances, their mindes are
commonlie amated. But if the cause be light, then may it not be much
amisse to vse some pleasaunt deliueraunce to such a one, especiallie
whose appetite standeth anie thing towards the same, but this also in
such louing, sweete, and gentle sort to bee done, as that true comforts
may seeme to be mingled with those conceited pleasures. Neither may we
in anie case seeke in vaunting sort, to thrust into their priuate view,
the present tranquilitie and happinesse wherein our selues repose, the
obiection whereof were too rusticall. For that as societie in miserie
it selfe, lenedeth the force of the greatest griefes, so the opposition
of anothers pleasure and freedome, is a corosiue or sting to the want
of anie one that is sequestred from the same. All these obseruations in
causes |Consolatorie| are greatlie to be regarded, whose vses being to
be imploied according to their seuerall suppositions. I leaue to the
discretion of the writer in what sort hee thinketh méete to haue their
efficacies performed.=


   _An example consolatorie of the first sort, wherein a Gentlewoman
               is comforted of the death of her sonne._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Insinuatiō._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Antipophora._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Paradigma._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

Good Mistresse P. I am sorie that my selfe must become the vnluckie
Messenger of mine owne infortunitie vnto you, and that in the fore
fronte of my letter is planted such extreame griefe as I cannot but
extreamelie bewaile, so often as I thinke of it. Neuerthelesse, knowing
vnder what motions wee liue, and that aboue our reach ruleth one,
vnder whose becke the mightiest doe stoope, and the greatest are made
subiecte, I must as my selfe, so likewise perswade you, to tolerate
all such chaunces whatsoeuer, as falling from such absolute direction,
to alter anie one iote thereof is impossible, and to resist the same,
fruitelesse and vtterlie vnauaileable. The care of my selfe (albeit
manie doe knowe howe much I tendred that I sigh for) is not so much,
seeing by reason I am led to be assured of yᵉ necessitie of our decaie,
as the motherlie pitie I haue alwaies perswaded my selfe to bee in
you, and that I nowe alreadie doe feare least forgetting the directe
square of our certaine liuing, you will runne into such vntimelie
sorrowes, as with manifolde teares will hardlie bee washed, and with
innumberable sighes, will scarcelie bee wiped awaie. But what shall I
rehearse vnto you a thinge so sudden and vnlooked for, as I protest by
the heauenlie maker and ruler of all thinges, at the receipte of your
last letters I neuer mistrusted or once looked for to haue happened?
Your teares I see, euen nowe awaite what I will saie, and loe, your
imaginations doe alreadie deeme the matter I must vtter. At least wise
if I shoulde seeme further to dissemble the occasion of my griefe,
(and by hiding the summe of all that may breede discontentmente) to
conceale what nowe I am inforced to vnfolde vnto you, the discharged
messenger returned vncompleate, woulde bewraie the effectes thereof
before you. It is then your son, good M._P._ whose want I am inforced
to tolerate, and whose presence you must now henceforth determin
vtterlie to forbeare. Your last presage in commanding him to be seene
liuing or dead, hath now returned his liuing to be discharged, & his
earthlie coarse vnlooked for, to be couered with cinders. Had I thought
it theē (as by the Almighty I least mistrusted it) & had you prepared
to haue receiued him, as then before was required, you could not more
sooner haue assured mee his returning, then I am able now to performe
him, at your present sending. He is commaunded to another, that before
did expecte him, hee is swallowed in the gulfe, that from the foremost
howre of his birth did hetherto awaite him. Nowe if you will say hee
was young and might haue liued, examples doe shewe that younger then
hee haue died. If you will say, you loued him greatlie. God by your
patience shall accepte him the more woorthilie. If you will say, you
are sorie for it in that hee was vertuous: consider the worlde wherein
hee liued, that might haue made him more vicious. Finallie, to answere
euerie obiection that by you may bee affirmed, nothing herein can more
fitlie bee auerred, then that in our life time wee see daylie before
our eies to happen. Knowe yee not, that all thinges doe by little
and a little growe into ripenesse, and foorthwith by degrees fall
into rottennesse? Hath not God vnto euerie thing after their greatest
perfection, included such certaine limites, that by and by they seeme
to bee appropriate to their latest confusion? Is there anie thinge on
earth so assured, that by vnstaied incertaintie is not continuallie
guided? Among all fruites and blossomes on the ground, are there not
some that are sooner then others, euen on their tenderest braunches,
as it were alreadie ripened, and others againe that by long lying are
made rotten and mellowed? Al flowers spring not at one instant, nor all
blossoms with one sole blast are scattered. To man is appointed his
certaine boundes, vnto which to bee attained, and beyonde the which not
to passe, is alreadie limited. Your sonne as timelie fruite, so timelie
ripened, and as fitte for his season was as timelie gathered. It was
necessarie by nature hee shoulde bee perfected, and the perfection
attained, by nature also he was consequentlie to bee depriued. Onelie
that his sickenesse was naturall, and that in the continuance thereof
hee wanted no attendaunce, the credite of others as well as my selfe
can testifie. If _P_hysicke coulde haue saued him, if Syrrops, hot
potions, or other necessaries woulde haue cured him, if teares and
praiers might haue kepte him, you had yet in safetie receiued him. Hee
is deade, hee is gone, wee must after him. Of his first sicknesse hee
was whole, and perfectlie recouered, afterwardes from the Iaundise,
though somewhat weakned, yet lastlie deliuered. But the inwarde moath
that consumed him, would not suffer him to liue, which with extreame
gripes assailed him, that beeing not able anie longer to continue, at
the pleasure of God hee died. It is your parte therefore to bee nowe
recomforted, and therein in with patience to referre your selfe to Gods
determinate pleasure and iudgement, to which intent I haue taken in
hand this mid nights labour, after the receipte of your letters, which
were to bee returned the nexte morning earlie, by reason whereof I can
no waie satisfie what you write for, neuerthelesse resting hereafter
to my vttermost power to pleasure you, and recommending my selfe also
to your woonted curtesie, I ende this fourteenth of Ianuarie, your
carefull friend, &c.


           _An Epistle consolatorie of the same, wherein one
                     is comforted in case of harde
                             extremitie._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Epitheton._]

[Sidenote: _Metanoia._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Concessiō._]

[Sidenote: _Meiosis._]

[Sidenote: _Etiologia._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Epitheton._]

Seeing the instabilitie of worldely chaunces is such, as permitteth no
one thinge liuing to remaine stedfast, or in assured staie or certaine
condition at all times to endure and continue: no maruaile then (good
Sir) if your selfe beeing a mortall man, framed of the same earthlie
substance and qualitie, incident to terrene frailtie, and natures
imbecilitie, doe as other creatures alike participate the suddaine
euils, and daielie alterations thereunto annexed: a proofe whereof
resteth chiefelie in your present state and beeing, then which no one
thing may induce a more serious aduertisemente, of the vile accompte
and wretched contempte appropriat vnto your liuing. And albeit diuers
are the calamities wherwith not onelie your selfe, but sundrie others
your louing friendes carefull of your presente mishape, and grieued
to see the vncouth and bitter chaunge whereinto you are hapned, are
continuallie afflicted, in so much as there is not the stoniest and
flintiest minde of all that euer haue knowne you (your desperate vowed
enemies onelie excepted) but doe in some sorte or other, bewaile, and
as it were grieue to see the vnacquainted yoke thereof, with such
extremitie to be cast vpon you: I cannot yet but greatlie commende
the inuincible _fortitude_ of your high and noble minde, who by howe
much the more, the vehemencie of these sorrowes are to you vnknowne,
and therefore the more vnused, doe not withstanding by so much the
lesse permitte, the mightie power of them to rule or beare swaie ouer
you, neglecting or (which is greater) despising the sharp pricking
sting thereof, who by the deepe pearcing force of the same, is
woonted to gall the remembraunce of manie others, and (as it were by
a forcelesse contempte of such validities) not onelie not giue anie
token or signe at all in their vttermost practises, but seeme rather
to triumphe ouer the strength that thereby they had wrought, and by
an aduised, sage and woonderfull modestie and discretion, plainelie
to extinguish and put from you the furie of the same. Manifoldlie I
must confesse, haue you hereby deserued and much more euill, by the
wise and moderate entertainmente of these troubles, hath to your
aduersaries beene tendred, who in nothing so much do rest vnsatisfied,
as that in subduing your bodie, they cannot also yoke and bring vnder
by whatsoeuer extremitie the courage, and statelie progression of
your high and vnconquered minde. Wherein there is lefte in my opinion
great cause of comforte euen in the verie greatest of your miserie
vnto you, that in constant indurance thereof, you haue power to punish
them, that woulde disturbe you, and that in the perplexed imaginations
of their owne wicked and malicious enuie. Neither maie this that you
sustaine bee rightlie tearmed miserie, or such a one as your selfe
seeme to bee accompted miserable, whose minde in the verie captiuitie
inflicted vppon this your bodie is thus freede, and accompanied with
so ample and sweetened libertie: For these kinde of troubles as they
are worldlie, so haue they power also vpon the worldlie partes of
a man, and therein are cohibitions of such earthlie delighte, as
fauouring more vnto the satisfaction of a sensuall appetite, then
conducing to the excellencie of the inwarde minde, doe breede that
ordinarie restrainte wherewith men mortallie conceited, are for the
most parte troubled. But to the sweete imaginations of a pure and
innocent minde, what is left wherewith to bee discontented, but onelie
to haue committed anie thing vile, wretched, or otherwise ill beseeming
the vertue and excellencie wherewith the inwarde partes thereof are
throughlie indued. How manie waies then are lefte vnto you to reioyce,
vnto whose eies the continuall thirst of _vertue_ it selfe hath long
since laide open the momentarie pleasures of this worlde, the libertie
whereof is vnto a woorthie conceite a meere seruage, in whose fickle
and transitorie affections reposeth so slender assurance, and whose
effecacies contemplate no other then vaine and foolish obiectes: seeing
that you haue thereby so well perceiued howe much the instinct of a
braue and delicate minde climbeth far aboue the reach of the body,
with a pleasant and vncontroulled libertie. These things impugning I
must needes say a corporall appetite) permit you not, for such losse
of riches, possessions, children or friendes to become passionate, or
ouercome with extreame greefe, albeit participating as we doe with such
naturall causes, I doubt not but therewith you are sometimes touched,
though at no time conuinced. For which cause as often as you happen to
fall into the remembraunce of the same, suppose with your selfe that in
time, the bitter sting may yet bee repulsed, and that the lotte that is
fallen vnto you heerein, is no other but the common reward and hatefull
disquiet of the worlde, wherein the most noble and worthie minds are
commonlie the most vehementlie assaulted, and with deepest extremitie
by such kinde of meanes pursued.

The recordation whereof, may returne vnto you one principall and great
occasion of comfort, in that by distinction of your woorthinesse,
though you bee partaker of common trouble, yet are you sequestred
from the entertainment of a common opinion. It dooth not a little
reioyce mee to see that with such impregnable stoutnesse you doe so
farre foorth endeuour to resist your appetites, wherein (besides the
expectation of that which is incident also to these alterations, a
chaunge, I meane, and reuocation of woonted pleasures) you shall in the
meane time giue greater glorie to your actions, in not appearing for
anie worldlie estate, riches, or contentment to bee surprized in your
imaginations. Praying the comfort of all comfortes to bestowe vppon you
the deawe of his heauenlie grace in assistaunce of your extremities, I
take my leaue, this of, &c.


   _A consolatorie Epistle of the third sort, wherein a Gentlewoman
            is comforted of the death of her husband slaine
                            in the warres._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Paramologia._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

[Sidenote: _Etiologia._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Climax._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote:_Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Dialisis._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Antipophora._]

[Sidenote: _Etiologia._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

Albeit my selfe (hauing receyued the sorrowfull newes of the vntimelie
death of my dearest kinsman, and your deceased louing husband) was in
the first hearing thereof so greatlie troubled, as by reason of the
griefe then presentlie conceyued for the same, my selfe happilie might
seeme to neede that comfort, which nowe I goe about to bestowe vpon
others: Yet weighing in my minde the state wherein you stande, and
beeing also informed with what great extremitie you haue entertayned
the newes of his losse, I cannot but in respect of the great loue
I ought to him, and remembraunce of the like care, wherewith hee
principallie entertayned you, enforce my penne hereby to yeelde vnto
you those comfortable speeches, by the veritie whereof my selfe in so
great a storme of griefe, coulde hitherto as yet bee verie hardlie
satisfied. It was deliuered vnto me by my brother F. B. that beeing
nowe a Moneth or somewhat more passed, since by Letters out of H. the
maner of your husbandes death was vnto you reported, you immediatelie
vppon the reading of the Letters grewe into so great aboundance of
teares, and to so woonderfull impatience, as hauing euer sithence
continued the same, you will in no sort thereof bee recomforted.
Assuredlie my good Coosen, I must needes conclude with your owne
speeches, and the waight of your interchaungeable likinges, that there
is great cause left vnto you to become sorrowfull, as hauing lost the
chiefe and principall iewell of all your worldlie loue and liking,
the fauoured Companion of all your pleasant and youthfull yeares, the
entire comfort and solace of your present happinesse, and such a one,
who aboue all worldes, or anie earthlie estimation at all, accounted,
honoured, and entyrelie receyued and loued you: but that you haue
so great and vrgent cause of extremitie to continue with so hard
impacience as you doe, it befitteth not, it is vnnecessarie, yea it is
in my iudgement of all others the most insufferable. For when it is not
denied vnto you, that you haue cause to mourne, that it is fittest vnto
the matter of your loue, to weepe ouer him, and bewaile him, it is then
thereby intended that there must be a meane therein, that the force
thereof must be limited, that the appearance beare shew of discretion.
Doe we not all know I pray you, and are witnesses that he was a mortall
man, that as our selues he was borne, vnder the selfe same condition,
that hee must once die, that hee had his time set, beyond which hee
might not passe, and that God who gaue him life thus long to liue
with you, hath nowe called him againe from this earth to leaue you?
Are we ignorant that Nature compelleth the wife for her husbande,
the husbande for his wife, parents for their children, and kindred
for their kinsfolke, to weepe and lament? But followeth it not also
therewith that the losse and want of them beeing layde downe by an
immooueable necessitie: wee can by no meanes afterwardes bee in hope to
reclaime them? What great follie doe wee then commit in thus searching
after the ghostes of our deceased friendes? Or what other thing doe wee
therein performe, but yeeld a plaine demonstration, that our teares are
to none other ende, but to bewaile them, because they were mortall?
whome death could neuer haue shunned without they had beene immortall.
Are wee not eftsoones put in minde by the common casualtie of all
thinges, that there is nothing stable, that continuallie Kingdomes
decay, Prouinces are shaken, Countryes destroyed, Cityes burned, townes
wasted, people consumed, and that it remayneth a thing ordinarie with
vs, daylie to bee conuersant in these euilles, the losse of all, or
eyther of which, (if they may bee accounted euilles) why then doe we
giue our selues by vnmeasurable griefe, to a perpetuall continuance
and renouation of those euils. But you will heereunto alledge, that
it is loue that enforceth you vnto the same, and that such is the
continuall remembraunce you haue, as you cannot forget him. Alas, howe
fruitlesse is this loue, and zealous remembrance in the deliuerance
thereof? Howe farre sequestred is the vehemencie of the same, from
the searched recompence? Why learne wee not rather of the wisest and
woorthiest, how to mitigate the impacience of our owne imperfections?
In whose precepts, examples, and counsels, if the immoderate vse or
entertainment of anything bee forbidden, shall wee not then in this,
aboue all others be chieflie reprehended, when wee enforce our selues
by continuall Meditation of our losses to shedde so manie teares to no
purpose? What if your Husbande had not nowe dyed at this instant, hee
must, you know, haue dyed; hee could not alwayes haue liued. Yea, but
hee died you say, vntimelie, what call you vntimelie I pray you? If
in respect of the force preuayling vppon him, whereby he was slaine,
you name it vntimelie: then doe I graunt vnto it: But if in regarde of
the time of his life you affirme it, I denie that the same may then
bee sayd vntimelie. _F_or why? hath not the eternall Creatour of all
thinges ordered by his diuine wisedome each matter to passe his course
in sort to himselfe best beseeming and most pleasing? howe can you then
say that to bee vntimelie, which by his heauenlie moderation was so
appoynted? Assure your selfe if hee had then beene at home with you,
hee had also died, you could not haue preuented it, his houre was come,
so was it determined, which way could he shun it.

[Sidenote: _Antipophora._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Antipophora._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote:_Brachiologia._]

[Sidenote: _Asindeton._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

[Sidenote: _Paradigma._]

What then grieueth you in this action? Is it that hee was slaine?
Consider with your selfe it was in his princes seruice, his death was
thereby the more honourable, for in so doing, he died as a man, as a
souldiour, as a Gentleman. Yea, but you shall neuer, you say, see him
more? True in deed, but what of that? Is this death now greater then
his absence before? Yes forsooth it is indeede, and whie? because you
had hope then to see him againe, which by this means is taken away?
verie well. You did then while he was liuing recomfort your selfe with
hope, content your selfe nowe with necessitie, because it must needes
be so, and you can no wayes amend it. Is not this an ende sufficient
to determine all sorrowes? If you weepe, lament, crie out, and become
grieued, requisite were it the same should returne to some ende, that
all your care, sorrow, griefe, lamentation, or what els should not
appeare fruitles, that the intendment and determination thereof shoulde
be to some speciall purpose. See you then, herein is no supply, the
effects are bereft, the end taken away. Be not then so fond, as to
bedew that with your teares, wherunto belongeth neither redresse, nor
mean of recouerie. Who is he that would be so mad, as to crie out vnto
him of whom he might be assured neuer to obtaine remedie? by cunning
art beasts we see, though they be most fierce, are tamed, a meane is
found wherewith to breake the Marble, the Adamant howe hard soeuer it
be, may by deuises be mollified: Onely death is of such force as no
wayes can be conuinced.

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Procatalepsis._]

At the least wise, if neither of these argumentes might mooue you to
suppresse your exceeding sorrowes, you must finally consider that wee
are Christians, and by the benefite of this corporall death, doe make
exchaunge for an vncorrupted life, that the withdrawing vs from this
vile earthly bodie of Clay and filth, is a commutation to a sacred and
heauenlie progression, and that wee haue nothing left vnto vs, in all
the trauelles, cares, disquiets, and heauie turmoyles of this wearisome
liuing whereof to reioyce vs, but the expectation wee haue of happines
and euer flourishing gladnesse. Suppose the Ghost of your husbande were
heere present to see you in all this extremitie, what thinke you woulde
hee say? Howe much disordered imagine you woulde hee thinke you to bee
in your affections?

[Sidenote: _Prosopopœia._]

[Sidenote: _Metanoia._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Paradigma._]

[Sidenote: _Parenthesis._]

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

And were it not that so manie coastes had seuered him both by lande and
seas peraduenture wearied with your bitter out cries in the conceited
image and shape of death, you might in apparance heare him, in these
like speaches accusing and rebuking such your distemperate actions.
And with breathing spirit to crie out vnto you saying, What is it
you goe about? what meane you by teares to search out for a thing
so irrecuperable. Whie torment you your youthful yeares, with such
vnprofitable, or rather as I may call it, desperate kinde of mournings?
whie with such vniust complaints accuse you Fortune, & so often doe
appeale death, and destinie of so hainous trespasse? Is it for that
you enuie my happie state, so soone transported from this vntowarde
soile, to a more prosperous felicitie? thus credit mee, and in this
sorte (were it possible he coulde speake to you) woulde hee accuse
you, in which consideration, were there not iust cause thinke you (of
such intemperance) whie you shoulde be greatlie ashamed? Beleeue mee
good Cosin, there is neither profite or liking at all, of this bitter
continuance reaped, you haue alreadie waded sufficientlie in your
teares, you haue mourned for him in earnest loue as beseemed a wife,
it is nowe high time you bee after all this comforted. Thinke that
the greatest storme is by time at length ouerblowne, superfluitie of
coales encreaseth rather heate then flame, the ardencie of affection,
with vehemencie sufficient may be expressed, though not by extremitie
enforced. What shuld I say vnto you? You may not as other foolish
creatures, that are neither gouerned by wit, nor ordered by discretion,
make your selfe a spectacle to the world, but rather with such
temperance (for euen in this extremitie of sorrow, is also planted
a rare patern of modestie) seek in such maner to demean your selfe,
as the lookers on may rather pittie you, by insight of your greate
discretion, then in this sorte to tormente your selfe by a needlesse
supposition. Much more haue I considered with my self, whereby to
satisfie my greeued imaginations, in which beeing recomforted, and
reposed in my secrete thoughtes, I haue deemed it necessarie hereby to
imparte the same vnto you, beseeching that as well in regarde of your
selfe, as the little pleasure your friendes haue to behoulde you in
this straunge kinde of perplexitie, you will enioy the fruites thereof
with such sufficient contentment and satisfaction as verie heartilie I
doe wish vnto you. And euen so tendring my selfe in all thinges to your
curteous and gentle vsage, I doe heartily bid you farewell, S. this of
&c.

=Touching these |Consolatorie Epistles|. It is to bee intended that
ouer and besides the examples formerly deliuered, their vse is also
in causes of banishment, losse of parentes, goods, or friends, in
times of imprisonment, slander, persecution, sicknesse, in miserable
olde age, or plagued by disobedience, in ill successe of mariages,
in pouertie, and finally in whatsoeuer griefe of minde, trouble, or
aduersitie. In each of all which is as I said before, vsed a great
efficacie of perswasion for the mittigation of the same, by laying
the troubles and vncertain state of the world, with innumerable euils
annexed to the turning whéele thereof, the communitie of the mischiefe
to all, who though not with the selfe same, yet in some sorte or other
are alike disquieted, that the best way to expell the griefe thereof,
is by meditation of our estates, the condition wherein we liue, the
ineuitable force of that which is befallen vs, which because wee are
worldlinges must néedes in like sorte betide vs, howe neare thereby
wee may bee drawne in contempte of earthlie vanities, the inticing
baites, whereof are enuenomed with so manie and sharpe poysons, that
troubles are sent vnto vs from God, to call vs thereby home vnto him,
that they are the scourges of our disobedience, that by such meanes
wee are discerned to bee his children, that by pacient sufferance,
and entertainment of our harmes, we do nearest approch vnto him, who
beeing in humane shape on earth, conuersing with men, was persecuted,
slaundered, tooke vpon him the most despised estate of pouertie, and
by cruell death was constrained, that they who are cloyed with most
aboundance, haue therefore the greater charge laide vppon their neckes,
and that no one then they are nearest to destruction, the height of
whose estate, oftentimes occasioneth their vntimely deaths: finally,
that it were bootlesse to striue against their forces, in that we
thereby seem ignorant of Gods pleasure and ordinance, who working all
things vnto the best, knoweth perchaunce the punishment to be most
fittest for vs, wherewith if we were not entangled, we might happilie
forgette him, and become carelesse regarders of his high and mightie
excellency. So and in such maner may we wade in these actions, whereof
hauing now deliuered sufficient, wee will adde hereunto one example
more, and therewith of this title conclude.=


                 _An Example consolatorie, pleasantly
                    written to one, who had buried
                            his olde wife._

The posting newes hitherwarde of the late decease of my good old
mistris your wife, hath made me in the verie going away of mine ague
fit, to strain my selfe to greet you by these letters. In the inditing
wherof, I manie time praied in my thoughts, that I were as readilie
deliuered of this my tertian feuer, as your selfe are in mine opinion
deliuered by such meanes of a hateful and verie foule encombrance.
I doubt not sir, but you doe nowe take the matter heauilie, being
thereby dispossessed as you are of such an intollerable delight, as
wherewith you were continually cloied by the nightlie embracements of
so vnweldie a carcase. I haue, I must confesse, verie seldome known
you for anie thing to mourne, neuerthelesse, if by such meanes you be
happily constrained to change countenance, I haue prepared a golden
boxe wherein I meane to consecrate all the teares you shed for that
accident, to _Berecynthia_ the beldame of the Gods, as a relique of
your great kindship and curtesie.

Beleeue mee T. I am sorie that mine ague had not lefte mee, and that
I were not nowe in L. with thee, were it but to viewe thy lookes and
manlike behauiour, after so harde a bickering and incounter wherein
thou was berefte a hearte of golde so daintie, as I promise thee to
some graue sober fellowe, might haue become pretie conceited, and a
verie sweete pigges nie. Well T. thou must needes loose her, _ferendum
est quod mutari non possit_, bee not sadde I pray thee, wee will finde
out a better match wherewith to delghite thee. Thou must consider that
it is requisite that all thinges shoulde bee done with indifferencie,
shee hath lefte a thousande pounde in goodes, and a C. markes by yeare
vnto thee, let that content thee: what though she was not maried a
moneth to thee, thou must be a pacient man, her long continuance with
so much wealth might peraduenture haue glutted thee. The gods haue
become more fauourable to thy young yeares, then thy selfe doest
consider of. Shee might I knowe haue liued longer time for age, (for
foure skore yeares olde I graunt is nothing) the woman also in verie
good plight too, by Saint Margerie: but what of that, wee must, as
I saide before, beare with necessitie. I praie God thou beest not
ouercome with sorrowe, but thou maist take it quietlie. There bee men
in the worlde that are so carelesse of their fortune, and so verie
fooles in their wishing, as they coulde content themselues greatlie to
bee in the like predicamente with thee: but thou I assure my selfe art
of a cleane contrarie opinion, sweare no more good T. I am perswaded
alone that it vtterly discontenteth thee. But hearest thou, plaie not
the madde man for all that, I will rather comfort thee my self, then
that thou shouldest die for sorrow.

One thing greatlie misliketh mee, I heard saie thou tookest an othe
vpon her death bed neuer to marie againe? See howe loue may leade mē?
Good God it is strange? I promise thee I could hardly be perswaded thou
didst so, without I shuld hear thee swear it. Be not so sottish good
boy, remēber thy self, and think on the _P_hilosophers words: _non
nobis solum nati sumus_. Thou maist haue a wife man, and become the
father of ninetie nine children perchaunce ere thou die. Forsweare thou
nothing good T. but building of monasteries and entring into religion,
for these my selfe dare vndertake thou neuer wilt nor meantest to doe,
I woulde faine talke longer with thee, but I am wearie, and therefore
intende to leaue the expectation of the rest, till I fortune to see
thee. Fare (as otherwise thou canst not chuse) well, hauing neither
olde wife nor feuer, wherewith to encomber thee. At S. this of &c.

=What answere may be returned to all or any of these Letters, is to be
expected according to the griefe or presente condition of the partie.
The efficacie of the one whereof may bee such, as endureth small
arguing, and the inclination of the other so plausible, as beareth
with whatsoeuer may sounde vnto them comforting. But for because the
labour were endlesse to measure by writing, the affections of each
one in particular, I will onely set downe for this one fourme, the
generalitie wherof may be inferred to the circumstances of any other.
A Letter |Responsorie| therefore vnto anie of these Epistles, should in
the generall parts thereof containe (as séemeth me) a |Remuneration| or
friendlie acceptance of their good wils, that so haue béene imploied
in comforting, and (if the partie so thinke meete, or the occasion so
standeth) to commend the wisedome, learning, fauour, care or liking of
him that so writeth, and therein also the good effects, the same haue
wrought, if some things (that may bee alledged) did not impugn it,
shewing his counsel is far lesse vehement then our euill, and therfore
swayeth not in respect therof, in our minds, so much as might haue done
with many others. In conclusion, that we acknowledge neuerthelesse
his great discretion therin, & that deserued account of his trauell.
Each of which places, howe they are to be distributed appeareth in the
example following.=


              _A Letter Responsorie to be conferred to an
                        Epistle Consolatorie._

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

Good brother, I haue receyued your kinde Letters, wherein carefullie,
discreetlie, and effectuallie, you haue endeuoured to minister sundrie
comforts to my diseased minde, in all which I confesse you haue dealt
with mee as appertayneth vnto a faithfull, courteous, and louing
brother, whereunto as much as possiblie may be expected, I yeelde my
selfe vnto you for the same most bounden and assured. Neither will I
wrong you so much as to denie that in perusing the contents thereof, I
was not sometimes by the force of your arguments a little withdrawne
from the deepe consideration and hard suppose of my present euils, but
entring againe into mine owne estate, and finding howe mightily the
shewe of my forward mishaps swayeth ouer my maistred spirites, I doe
imagine the greatnesse of my losse to bee so much, as in comparison
whereof, whatsoeuer you haue deliuered eyther in the mitigation, or
qualifying of my harmes, seemeth farre lesse in quantitie, then the
smallest that may be conceyued of all mine euils. Follie were it for
mee to thinke, or you to beleeue, that the pensiue imagination of a
thing so neere, as wherupon concerned erst, the sum of all my ioyes,
pleasures and happinesse, could with the vehemencie of a fewe speeches
(more of zeale then equitie deliuered) bee suddenlie remooued. But (as
hath the adage) _Omnes quum valemus recta consilia agrotis damus_.
For coūsell is plentifull in euery one whose conceits by freedom are
exempted from any passion at all. Take it not so good brother, that
I thinke you not for mee, as well as my selfe, to bee a partaker of
my griefe, for I knowe it well you are, but yet the one proceedeth of
charinesse, the other of extremitie, you in pitie of my sorrowes, and
I in the very touch of mine euils. What time may doe I cannot tell, to
weare away what presently I feele to be forcible vpon me, yet feare I
the woorst, but will giue my selfe notwithstanding as much as in me
lyeth, to the practise of your counsels. How euer the case standeth, I
must acknowledge, that very waightily you haue dealt concerning me, and
for the same will neuer cease to thanke you. Fare ye well, this of, &c.




               _Of Epistles Monitorie and Reprehensorie.
                              Chap. 18._


=In this place wee will conclude our Epistles |Consolatorie|, and passe
out of the same title to the next therof, which are |Monitorie|, and
|Reprehensorie|. The one part thereof beeing |Monitorie|, consisteth in
forwarning to the vnexperienced such matters as hee knoweth not, in
sort as if therewith hee should be throughly acquainted: the other,
in skilful explaining the offence of a thing faulty, which standeth
vpon to be reformed. And insomuch as there be few men that gladlie
like to be supposed ouer much faultie, or loue much to be rebuked for
the greatnes of their errors, the order therfore of these |monitory|,
in setting forth what may be counted offensiue, shall not accuse
but admonish from the greatnes or smalnesse of the same, qualifying
the bitternesse of reprehension with a certaine maner of praise, how
euer desert doe affoord to the furtherance thereof. For in a gentle
condition or minde, not altogether bent vnto euill, to suppose that the
greatest part is the better inclined, and it also in some good measure
to commende, breedeth no small incouragment to do well, hee to whom
the admonition passeth, hauing mean therby to think that his behauiour
is not so far ouergrowne, but that presumption of his |Vertues| do
yet sway in mens opinions, or at the leastwise imagining that men are
ignorant altogither of that, whereof they seeme to take no notice at
all, he will study the rather to hearken to such wholesome directions,
and accordingly to reforme his maners thereunto betimes. And verilie
(as you haue before in the examples |Dissuasorie|) so in this also
it would not be amisse where we see an offence but new beginning, to
induce many good conditions of the partie to be opposed against the
same, and to lay before him, how ill sounding it would be to the due
commendation of the other, to bee touched therewith. Or otherwise
where wee see an inclination (though no matter in acion) to euill,
to say, that not for that we see him spotted with such offences, we
do warne him from their forces, but to the intent he may thereby the
better be instructed, in the vilenesse and discommended partes of the
same, or that because wee are for the most part led away and easily
sliding into euill, wee set before his eies therein, the hazard and
inconuenience of such euill. Now if the matter be so far forward, as
we find it a plain and open imperfection in him to whom we write, let
vs then consider yᵉ weight or inualiditie of the action, which beeing
too monstrous or notorious, it then needeth not admonition, but sharpe
reprehension, and is thereby secluded from the partes hereof, but not
being intolerable in his age or estate, in whom the same is found,
then shall we not aggrauate, but extenuate the apparance therof,
shewing that it is a thing common for men to fall, chieflie young men,
who by the furious sting of their youth, and want they haue of aged
experience, are hastilie led thereunto: but yet therewithall how manie
wayes necessarie it is, that he be withdrawne from the same, least
happily the long intertainment giuen to a fault, make it seeme a great
offence, and consequentlie hee be thereby led into far more dangerous
euils. Hereupon may we manifest vnto him our loue and tender care wee
haue ouer him, compelling vs for such cause to forwarne him, declaring
that our selues falling into the like errours, would be glad at his
hand to find the like, if the skill and experience of the partie might
so much performe. Another kinde of admonishment or reprehension there
is also, when men deale with those who are highlie before them in
account, vnto whome either imminent daunger or occasion of great hate
or mislike pursuing the same, forbiddeth in expresse manner to vse
anie tearmes, insomuch as their estate (beeing peraduenture loftie,
and of power to commaund or sway ouer vs) will not admit by writing to
intermeddle with their actions, and yet happilie by reason of some
hard dealings offered vnto vs, or our friendes, might séeme much to
preuaile in one sort or other to giue them notice of it, whereby to
auoide (if it be possible) the expected vehemencie and intolerable
support of the same. With such men to deale, behooueth, if at least
wise we be compelled therunto, to make a recitall of many vertues,
such as might be commendable & beautifying vnto so great estate and
authoritie, and therwithall set forth the worthines to the vttermost of
that we wish to be in him planted: and fainedly also wee may suppose
those |Vertues| to be insinuate in his person, and howe much they are
furthering to his name and reputation, by occasion of which, we may in
the contrary haue meane to lay open all those vices, the insupportable
burthen, vileness, & execrable hatefulnes, or what bad purpose soeuer
is in them concluded, and shew how much they impugne the state, rule,
or authoritie of any one, what blemish they cast vpon him in whom
they are frequented, howe they destroie the good partes for which men
mightie and gracious haue desired to be commended, the conceit whereof,
may be with such facilitie and excellencie caried, as that he to whom
we write, shall with some insight thereinto, receiue a speciall view
of his owne faultinesse, yea and by the couertnes of the same, maie
also participate within his owne imaginations, the particular loue &
hate generallie attributed to either of both, wherein what other thing
shall we goe about, but in silence to admonish or reprehend what in
each of those ought to be bee refused or followed, which manner of
writing performed to suche ende and example, without shame and blushing
at all, each one may lawfullie vse, otherwise palpably to affirme,
those vertues and praises to be in a man in whose actions (becomming
most notorious in al kind of apparance) no one thing is to be found
so plentiful as very wickednes it selfe, this were a flatterie most
detestable, and of all others most filthie, to be in anie writer
receiued: yet such kinde of admonishment or reprehension as is before
recited, is pretily alledged to haue bene vsed by a certaine poore
man, who neghbouring néere vnto one worshipfull & of great account in
calling, but therewith more practising with vehemencie, then honestlie
vsing his knowledge of the lawes, had sustained a mishap by an Oxe of
the Gentlemans, who being a fierce beast, had goared a Cowe of the
poore mans. The poore man hauing receiued wrong, and doubting howe to
haue recompence, by reason that the Gentleman was of as noted authority
as knowne hardnes, and to whome expresly he durst not complain of
the iniurie, deuised yet this subtiltie wherewith to entrap him. Hee
commeth to this great mans house, and being brought to his presence:
Sir (said he) I am come to deliuer vnto your Wor. who are a Iusticer
in place, for righting of wrongs done and committed, a matter very
conscionable to be respected, & for which in my opinion there ought to
be made a recompence. An Oxe of mine being a naughtie beast, through
the default of mine own fence hath goared a Cow of your Worships, which
is nowe lost and dead by the mishape thereof. Saist thou so, saide this
greate man, by my faith thou must then pay for her. And good reason
too, said the poore neighbour, for it was a wilfull offence, but and
if it please your Worsh. I mistook mine arrande, for in trueth, it is
your Oxe that by defaulte of your owne fence hath entred my ground,
& goared my Cow. Oh then (quoth the other) the case is altered, wee
will talke thereof at some more leisure hereafter. Nowe howbe it the
poore man happely departed without recompence, yet at the least by
this prety deuise he made the Gentleman to vnderstand his fault, & so
far as hee best might, did both admonish and reprehende his owne harde
and iniurious dealing by so witty a conclusion: for had hee not thus
gone about the bush, it is like he had not onely bene frustrate of
recompence, but also voide of any sentence at all of wrong, which by
this handling the matter, was by the Gentlemans selfe clearely on his
part adiudged. Infinite sortes of these, as well in the wise sayings
of Philosophers, as in other written histories are extant, which for
breuitie I omit and leaue to the desirous thereof, for their better
satisfaction, and hence will proceede to the examples of these two
seuerall sorts of Epistles.=


                   _An example Monitorie concerning
                       a stayed and well gouer-
                              ned life._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

The execrable force of mischieuous euill, is such, and the maleuolente
disposition of the heauens to some people so greate, as that hauing
once throughlie planted the fatall sting thereof in the mindes of
manie, it seemeth they bee created to none other ende, but onelie
by daring to perpetrate whatsoeuer matter of villainie cometh in
their mindes, to purchase to themselues with the determination of a
shamelesse life, the limited rewarde of a shamelesse and ignominious
death: This inchaunted course, perceiuing in these dangerous times howe
much it hath bewitched the estate of the whole worlde, and considering
with my selfe, that by reason of your fathers late decease, you beeing
a greene youth, voide of experience, bente to the triall of all
companies, richlie possessed, and wealthilie endued, are nowe lefte
into your owne handes, and thereby deliuered from the plausible and
quiet moderation of a faithfull and louing guide, vnto the endlesse
reach of a youthfull, carelesse and vncontrouled libertie, hath mooued
mee in respecte of the care that euer I erst had of you, beeing yet but
a childe, and in assured testimonie of the memorie I haue otherwise
protested to the ghost of your deceased louing parentes, to admonish
you of some few thinges, for the order and conuersation of your liuing,
beeing a course so important, as that in the admittance and exercise
thereof, cannot but consist the scope and after fruition of all your
happinesse, and benefit whatsoeuer.

[Sidenote: _Paradigma._]

And first of all, will I call vnto your remembraunce, that beeing the
sonne of so vertuous a father as you are, howe greatlie it importeth
vnto your estate to bee well gouerned, that as well the precedent
vertues, as auncient possessions of your antecessour, may in your
person bee resiant, that of your deceased parent (as well as in
corporall shape and fauour) you beare (in minde) the verie true image
and portraiture, that you stand not more in your actions vppon the
glorious name or title of a Gentleman, then of the verie true and
woorthie conditions and behauiours, that rightlie doe produce and
make a Gentleman. And albeit I finde no greate apparante cause (your
youthfull heade and vnstayed state of headestrong libertie onelie
excepted) that may induce anie argument or supposall to the contrarie,
but that you are of such and so worthie regarde, as that in your life
and conuersation, you deeplie ynough do conceiue of all or anie part of
these instructions or admonishmentes, which I nowe goe about to offer
and preferre vnto you; yet knowing howe manie, and howe sundrie are
the euils wherewith our mortall state is endangered, howe diuers are
the motions to wickednes, and how manie waies we are readie to fall
into the crooked paths of the same. I coulde not but warne you that
comming euen nowe into the middest of the worlde as you do you shall
finde sundrie baites and allurementes drawing you into the worst and
most vilest parts thereof, that vnles you were directlie gouerned with
the righte rule and square of an honest and sober life, twentie to
one you would not onelie fall verie deeplie into the inconueniences
thereof, but (without great and vnexpected matter leading you to the
contrarie) be drowned and ouerwhelmed in the gulf therof for euer.

[Sidenote: _Monitiō._]

You must call to minde that liuing in a place so ordinarilie frequented
as is the Citie, wherein you are, and being in fellowship with so
manie and diuers sorts of men as you now be, conuersing also with the
innumerable multitudes of persons, of all estates, conditions and
faculties, as you there doe, it is no difficult thing for a young
youth of your birth and qualitie to be led into lewdnes, of a wanton
to become dissolute, of a spender to bee made a consumer, or of a
towardlie gentleman to be framed to an vntowardlie companion. Much may
the euill example of some lewdlie giuen, conduce hereunto, making you
to beleeue, that to become a roister, is credit: to become a swearer,
valiant: to shewe your selfe a waster, liberall: to be a drunkard, is
fellowship: to maintaine rakehels, is bountie: to become fantastical,
is youthful: and to bee an vnthrift, is to be counted gentle: But
better entring into these things then by common aduisement men in your
case ordinarilie doe, it shall appeare contrariwise, that in gaining
of credite you are to become modest and discreetlie behaued: in being
noted to bee valiant, you ought to bee a supporter of honour: shewing
your selfe liberall, it shall bee in rewarding the good: in maintaining
of fellowshippe, you shall vse sobrietie: in beeing bountifull, you
shall remunerate seruices: in manifestation of your youth, you shall
entertaine honest pleasures: and in beeing gentle, shewe your selfe
therewithall frugall.

[Sidenote: _Parimia._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Antipophora._]

[Sidenote: _Parimia._]

[Sidenote: _Perorasiō._]

The asse goeth out in the morning to carie burthens, and in the
euening receiueth his prouender for aduantage. The Oxe grazeth all day
in the pasture, and at night is caried to the butchers stal: their
rewarde is their feeding, and the contentment they require is onelie
to fill their bellies: behooueth that men also who from beastes are
sequestred by manie degrees of reason, should of their continuance and
finall determination liue a like carelesse? No verilie, it is too much
vnseemely. Such illusions as these are not fitte for a man, who by
the nobilitie of his creation was ordained to swaie ouer, and not to
become subiect to such vilities. You nowe beeing at your owne choice
and libertie, must beware and giue great and diligent aduertisement
to all your waies, you must eschewe and auoide not onelie the verie
euils thēselues, but also all occasions inducing or partaking with
those euils, you must imagine, that to bee in all thinges temperate
and discreete, doeth solie argue a reputation to bee within you, shun
vice as you would doe a serpent, flie wicked companie as a pestilent
infection, doe alwaies thinges woorthie your selfe, affecte not so much
the vaineglorious title of praise, as desire how and in what sort to
deserue and win praise. Esteeme nothing so precious as time, abandon
sloth, and in all your societie (as neere as may bee) accompanie with
the best. Consider that such as is the tree, such is the fruite. Who
toucheth pitch must needes bee defiled. With the good thou shalt bee
made good, and with the euill thou shalt bee peruerted. Thinke none so
greate an enemie as he that misleadeth you. Misdeeme no man willinglie,
and giue occasion to all men to iudge of you indifferentlie. These
counsels (forewarninges of your ruine or happines) if aduisedlie you
will hearken vnto, and faithfully lay vp among your chiefest secrets,
it shall no waies repent you to haue beene admonished, nor discontent
me in this sort so much to haue counselled you, in that pursuing the
effectes hereof, you shall become such as I with you, and your carefull
father if he had liued wold haue bene glad to haue seene you. The
Almightie giuer and moderator of al our actions, blesse and keep you.
Farewel from my house at _D._ this of, &c.


         _An other Epistle Monitorie, touching the reformation
                         of a Couetous life._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Metonomia._]

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Ecphonesis._]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

[Sidenote: _Brachiologa._]

[Sidenote: Metonomia.]

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

Albeit good brother, I knowe the matter of my writing will become
offensiue vnto you, and that I am not ignorant what heauie aduersaries
you haue, that daylie doe goe about to suppresse the soūd & faithful
aduise of those, who without flattery doe wish heartilie wel vnto you,
and studiouslie are busied at al times for and towardes your good.
Such neuerthelesse is the loue and dutie that I owe you, as seeing you
in so great an errour as you are ouerwhelmed in, I cannot in respect of
our brotherlie affection, but I must needes warne you of it, whereof if
you become not repentant, and a renouncer betimes, I doubt, not onelie
the worlde will crie out agaynst you, but God also in high displeasure
will bee angrie with you. Trulie for mine owne part I am ashamed, and
also it greatlie grieueth me euerie where to heare of this extreame
couetousnesse and harde dealings, by you vsed towardes your poore
tenants, and other the inhabitants about you, who notwithstanding that
God hath aboundantlie blessed you with ryches more then sufficient,
you bee yet so miserablie bent vpon the worlde, as you care not by
what district and seuere handling you doe attaine vnto your wealth,
onelie so you haue it, or can come by it, you holde no conscience or
question at all of the winning it. Alas what cries doe you procure
agaynst you of the poore and wretched people, who beeing plagued with
the harde yoke you laie vppon them, are not able of themselues to
redresse, but onelie doe pray to God that hee will for them reuenge
it. The matter is too hatefull, and so great is the oppression and
wrong thereby offered, as it cannot continue. Might my woordes become
of weight vnto you, I woulde wish you to leaue it, and if not for my
sake, or in regard of your owne credite thereby so greatlie blemished
and impayred, and your good name and fame vtterlie by such meanes
obscured and defaced, yet for Gods sake, who commaundeth charitie and
right to all men, who willeth that wee doe to euerie one as wee would
bee done vnto, who forbiddeth by such execrable lucre to heape to our
selues so vniust and filthie gaine, you will refraine it, reforme it,
amende it. In trueth you doe not knowe, howe much euill thereby you
procure vnto your selfe, the blind desire you haue to heape vp riches
will not permit you to see, what rancour, mischiefe, impietie, terrour
and dread, you crowde so neare togither, the little care you haue of
the world to come, so quencheth your affections, as you haue not power
to beholde the enormitie wherein you are so vehementlie transported.
For shame abstaine and become not the common obloquie of all men, bee
not you the man alone whome so manie shall curse, and all men for the
most part crie vengeance vpon. Otherwise if by no admonition you will
relent, assure your selfe, God who is the righter of all wronges, will
in most seuere manner compell you vnto it, and in the ende by great
rigour punish you for it. It little liketh mee that herein, so iust
cause remaineth, as whereby I am forced in this sort to argue with you,
in which action the nature of a brother may giue you to vnderstande in
what sort I admonish you, and with what louing care I retaine you: the
consideratien of which hath mooued mee (as my selfe woulde wish in the
like of whatsoeuer I shoulde haue erred, to bee dealt withall by you)
to account the sweete rebukes of a friend to bee farre more profitable
then the dissembling glozes of a cruell and bitter enemie; to which
end whatsoeuer I haue sayde, may in like maner be conceyued by you.
Farewell. L. this of, &c.


         _An Epistle Monitorie to a father, touching the lewd
                   and ill demeanour of his sonne._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Aporia._]

[Sidenote: _Prolepsis._]

[Sidenote: _Orismus._]

[Sidenote: _Parimia._]

[Sidenote: _Metanoia._]

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Metonomia._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

Though it seeme an approoued follie to cast pearles before swine, or
to offer a golden saddle to an Asses backe: yet (not that I thinke
either the Sowe worthie of the pearles, or the Asse fit for the saddle)
I haue written vnto you, the one cause to manifest vnto you the vile
and bad parts of your sonne whereof you will take no notice, and of
which this Letter herein closed shall beare sufficient testimonie: the
other for charities sake, to admonish you which are his father, that
by your timelie looking to those matters, you may winde him from that,
which by small sufferance will breed your woes, and his irrecuperable
destruction, I haue vnderstood that hauing beene found heretofore in
the like pilfering with two Masters that he serued, and the secrete
information thereof beeing brought to your eares, you misliked his
courtesie that tolde you, iustified the matter to bee false that was
deliuered you, and not so much as examining the action, (which a good
father would haue done by all manner of industrie) you allowed your
sonne for honest, and affirmed that it was vnpossible hee should
enter into anie such theeuerie. If I see the childe of such a father
come to an euill ende, I will not maruell at all, seeing that besides
the ordinarie inclinations alreadie graffed in his young yeares, his
parentes are content by winking at it, to giue him furtheraunce, and
in a manner to affirme it shall so bee, in so much as thereby seemeth,
the sonne hath sworne hee will neuer liue honestlie, and the father
hath promised that hee will set him forwarde to _Tiburne_, for his
villainie. Is it reason that men (of zeale and conscience) should
goe about to pittie their misfortunes, who haue protested neuer by
compassion to preuent in themselues, the iust and appropriate rewarde
of their owne euilles? What shall I say to the vnhappie father of such
a sonne, or rather vnhappie childe of such a father, whether shall I
forewarne him or you, the one purposing, the other animating, to what
vnto each of you in the ende muste become a particular desolation?
Trulie these thinges will not continue, they can not long holde. Well
(not in respect that eyther of you haue deserued so much at my handes)
but for pities sake, I am content to beare with your infirmities, and
(so you will not vrge mee to your owne harmes, by your courteous,
though not so much as honest vsage, for honestie willeth I shoulde haue
mine owne againe, or recompence) will part with my losses: but yet
therewithall warne you (to which ende I haue written this Letter) that
you preuent your mischiefes betimes, you doe consider the successe of
your owne harmes. So long the potte goeth to the Riuer, that at last
it commeth broken home, euerie man will not deale with you as I doe.
It can not bee, but you must needes knowe, nay rather bee a partaker
of your sonnes euilles, howe euer you dissemble with the worlde, and
face out the matter before people. Take heede I say, God when hee
striketh, smiteth home, you will else repent it, for it will none
otherwise bee. Because I haue yet some hope, that by driuing into your
conceyte the enormitie hereof, and discouering the packe, which you
saide was lockt vp from your seeing, that at the least wise for the
feare of God, and to saue him from the gallowes, you will endeuour to
chastise him. I haue sent this bearer, who can infourme you of the
truth, time and place, of that which you goe about to shrowde vp so
couertlie, and if afterwardes you will not bridle him, I protest his
shamelesse foreheade must bee corrected by iustice, and the lawes must
further passe vppon. Surelie not for enuie of the person, but for the
shamelesse browe hee beareth, as one that had done none offence, to
prouoke mee by euill vsage to blaze his faultes, that otherwise by good
counsell, woulde haue couered them: I thinke it a deede meritorious
to haue him punished, if you haue a desire as a father to cherish him,
haue a regarde as a friend betimes to correct him, otherwise you shall
sooner see him come to shame, then anie waies climbe vnto credite. But
for ought I can heare, both father & mother are so addicted to the
bolstring of his doings, as that it seemeth they haue alreadie vowed
their infamie to the world, and his life to the gallowes: good counsell
may do much, and though in taste I seeme a bitter enemie, the proofe in
triall shall be better then of a fawning friend.


    _An example reprehensorie wherein a man of wealth sufficient is
        reprehended for mariage of his daughter, to the riches
                      of an olde wealthie Miser._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Metonomia._]

[Sidenote: _Propositiō._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

Sir, I am not a little grieued for the loue I owe you, to see that
in these ripe yeares of yours, wherein men commonly are freight with
discretion, you neuertheles do verie indiscreetlie goe about to
compasse a matter so repugnant to reason, or any maner of considerate
and sage aduisement, as whereat the worlde can but woonder, and whereof
all that know you, or by any meanes may vnderstand of the match, will
no question greatly accuse & for euer condemne you. It is deliuered
with vs here for certain, that you are intended (vpon the doting
affection of a miserable old man, your neighbor, whose yeares are as
well fraught with diseases, and his manacled and benummed old ioynts
with imperfections, as his barred coffers with coine) to marry vnto
him my neece your yoongest daughter vpon a suddaine, and that to the
furtherance thereof, you offered to contribute of your owne store a
reasonable and sufficient portion.

[Sidenote: _Antiphrasis_]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

Trust mee when I heard it at first, I deemed it as a counterfeit ieast,
thinking that the man whom I so wel knew before time, could not on
a sudden become such a paragon, as whereon a maiden of her feature,
youth, accomplishment, and fauor, could so quickly become enamored,
neither thought I that howsoeuer the dotage of the olde man stood as a
conceit to smile at, that you for your part would so much as vouchsafe
to hearken to it, especially at any time so seriously to speake of
it, much lesse to open your purse to become a purchaser of it, or by
constraint at all to enforce her fauors, to giue signe or token anie
waies vnto it.

[Sidenote: _Ecphonesis._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Emphasis._]

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Metonoia_]

[Sidenote: _Hyperbole._]

Alas sir, was there no one thing more wherein besides you coulde
ouershoote your selfe, but onelie in so bad a purpose, an action so
vnhonest, an intendment so vile, a matter so much impugning nature, as
that the verie earth, or hell it selfe, coulde not belch out againste
the fayre Virgine, so huge and so intolerable a mischiefe, to match
I say, the matchlesse fauour of so young and dayntie a peece to the
filthie, tawnie, deformed and vnseemelie hue of so wretched and ill
fauoured a creature? What nature is this, to worke vnto her, whome of
your owne flesh you haue ingendered, whome so long you haue nourished,
whome to such and so manie perfections you haue trained, vppon a
suddaine, naie euen in one moment, so manifest an occasion to cast
her awaie, not yeelding vnto her heauy censure, so great a benefit as
death, but ten thousand griefes, the least of all which is worse then
any death that may bee, wherein comfortlesse she may complaine, grieue,
and bemoane her selfe without any reliefe at all, but by the precious
price and hazard of her own soule.

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Hypotyposis._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Antiphrasis._]

[Sidenote: _Antiphrasis._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

Howe vnequally doe you deale herein, to render vnto her being scarce
sixteene yeares of age, a husbande enfeebled by fourescore yeares and
vpwards, whose toes are swolne with the gowt, and legs consumed with
the dropsie, whose leane carcase beareth no apparance but of old scars,
and stifned limmes become vnweldie supporters of his pined corps,
whome furs must fence from the least blast of cold, & dew of nappy Ale
cherish with warme fires, whose nightcap carrieth more store of heat,
then al his body doth of agility or strēgth, and nose far more fruitful
then sauory, with distilling drops down trilling from thence in
freshest spring of the ioliest seasons, maketh ill fauored refections.
What wrong do you tender the poore maiden therin? How vnworthy and
far ill beseeming is the same to her, who hath such a father, and
apparantly shal be known to be such a mans daughter? shall you not
therein bee noted of great folly, will not all men laugh at it, pitie
it, crie shame of it, and her selfe poore soule praie to God to reuenge
it.

[Sidenote: _Commoratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Anthypophora._]

It is too much intollerable beleeue mee, that you should endeuour in
this sorte by colour of your Fatherlie authoritie to constraine her,
whome (albeit shee is your owne childe) yet maie you not thus forciblie
compell vnto so vnnaturall an extremitie: Consider with your selfe
howe grieuous the thing you goe about to compasse, may returne vnto
her, and whereas liking and choise is of all other things in case of
marriage to bee accounted most dearest, you not onelie agaynst her
will, do endeuour to induce a breach thereof, but also do giue her
ouer into the handes of such a one, whose inequalitie so far forth
disseuereth frō her appetite as that it cannot otherwise be, but (as
vnto all others, so vnto her chiefly) it must become vnsufferable. Haue
you no more care of her that is your daughter, but when nowe you haue
brought her to the passe, wherein shee should participate the vertuous
and modest vse of that, whereunto her yeares haue adapted her, and for
which ende and purpose, marriage was by Gods sacred ordinance at the
first ordayned, in steede of a louing and contented husbande, to giue
her a withered olde Truncke, in lue of sweete and mutuall societie, to
wedde her to sorrowe and euerloathed griefe, to endow her with larger
profite then with honest contentment, thinke you that shee is a stone,
that her senses from others are different in their right operation
and qualities, that shee more or lesse, or in stranger sort then anie
others, can become therein more forcible, or lesse iniuried? No sir,
assure your selfe, you must needes heape vp no other but extremities
vppon her, it cannot bee but if you proceed herein, you must of force
vndoo her, the ende and conclusion is so vtterlie bad, as it cannot be
remooued.

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

Returne then vnto your selfe, and thinke herein what best beseemeth
your daughter, remember that what you take in hande in that action
is vngodlie, iniust, seuere, and vnnaturall, that in giuing such a
husband, you shall giue her (without the greater grace of God) and
him both to the diuell. Consider, that you are with pietie, and to
a Christian purpose and ende, to moderate your authoritie, weigh
with your selfe that the couetousnes wherwith you are ouercome is no
purchase to her of safety. And ballancing all these in the waight and
cords of equalitie, withdraw your selfe, and by such meanes become
disswaded from so great an absurditie. So may you the more easilie
performe that vnto her belongeth, as a kinde and louing father, and for
the profite by this trauell reaped at your hands, bind her and all vs
with greater feruencie, to loue you. Whereon concluding the scope of
all my former desires, I end, &c.


                 _An Epistle reprehensorie to a young
                              Gentleman._

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

About seuen dayes passed, I receyued Letters from my Brother N. the
long expectation whereof, and desire I had to bee infourmed of your
well dooing, made mee inwardly reioyce at the first viewe of them,
supposing that as I deliuered you out of my handes, I should still haue
found you in the same predicament, without alteration, or so much as
anie surmize of that wherof I haue beene thereby aduertised.

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

It is long since indeede that you were with mee, at which time you were
in manner a childe, neuertheles in those tender yeares so towardlie
giuen, and of so milde and gentle disposition, as there was great
cause whie then I should esteeme of you, and much matter offered to
all others that knewe yee, whereupon to commend you: But nowe if it
bee true as I am informed, your actions are turned quite contrarie,
you are become a chaungeling, you are no more the same, but another
in qualitie, minde and operation. If this bee so, you haue surelie
taken a wrong course, in exchaunge of vertue, to make choise of vice:
in steede of laudable exercises, to admit a number of lewd qualities:
in place of good and honest vsage, to enter into a life vnciuill,
lewde and sauage: your companie keeping is (as is reported) without
anie order, your studies are carelesse, your pastime recklesse, your
tabling drunkennesse, your liuing vnthriftinesse: finallie, blushing
before time at all thinges, for their noueltie, you dare boldlie nowe
to aduenture anie thing bee it with neuer so great infamie. These
things, my good Coosen, I must tell you are vnfit for a Gentleman,
and much ill beseeming that education of yours, whereunto they were
neuer accustomed. From these, if you will doe aright, you are nowe
to weld your speedie course, and quicklie to depart, calling to your
remembrance, that what approcheth the condition of euerie ordinarie
person is not meete for your credite, and what in men of common account
appeareth to bee no blemish is in your reputation helde to be a great
and notable faultinesse.

[Sidenote: _Hirmos._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

When men desire to bee well famed, and by true renowne to rise
vnto worthinesse, they flie sloath, and giue themselues to auoyde
all occasions of Idlenesse, they endeuour to become painefull and
industrious to couet thinges of highest accompt, and to bee in companie
with the most vertuous. Their credite hath no supporte by vanities,
they seeke not their reputation among raunnagates, they conuerse
not with Tauerne-haunters, and bibbers, they liue not with men of
vilde accompt, dissolute and vngratious, such kinde of meanes (as
insufficient to glorie) they deeme wretched and opprobrious.

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

You nowe if you would bee such as you ought to bee, must also pursue
the tracte of these, the sweetenesse and delicacie whereof (if but a
little you will pierce into the sowre and harsh taste of the other)
you shall quicklie conceiue, marke but the praise, benefites, estimate
and good reporte, entertained with the one; and on the other side, the
discredite, shame, discommoditie, and vile reckoning alwaies made of
the other, and then iudge by your owne decernement, howe much and howe
greatlie you are ledde awrie, in thus careleslie roaming vppon others
vilities, and concluding with your selfe vppon the ill conceipt that
all good men haue of such hatefull and disorderlie kinde of liuing,
returne betimes, ere too late, for want of good aduisement, you
foolishlie begin to crie out of your winning.

          _Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur,_
          _Cum mala per longas conualuere moras._
    First stop the cause, too late doth phisicke come,
    When euils smal, to great (by sufferance) run.

Credite me (whome euer you haue knowne to fauour you) the disgrace that
quickly you shall sustaine, if betimes you relent not these euils, wil
to a good mind become so vile and so odious as not without great sorow
and griefe, may bee wiped away. I disguise not with you in that I saie,
for you shall finde it and proue it to be true. It is a shame for any
man in those yeares, wherin of al others his towardnes should chiefly
be effected, to be accompted then bad, vilde, lewd, and ill demeaned,
much more for a Gentleman, whose education was so good, whose infancy
so well trained, whose adolescency so formerly with al kind of vertues
indued, to become, now when most discretion should swaie in him, worse
then before, more disordered then when hee was to be corrected, lesse
commended in his owne gouernment then when he was vnder anothers
intertainment.

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

The loue that I beare vnto you, maketh mee the more largelye heereof
to enfourme you, which for that I deeme not of anie ill seede sprong
out of your owne nature, to bee growne vppe into such kernels, I doe
thereby adiudge, that with more facilitie they maie be disseuered, the
braunches I knowe are of others wearing, which I neuer wish to bee
so farre foorth lyked, as to become of your owne gathering. From the
inconuenience whereof, I hitherto haue studyed thus much to withdrawe
you, as hee that most of all desireth aboue anie other to enioie you.
The haste of the messenger, and wearinesse of writing enforce mee
to leaue. God, who is the conductor of all happie endeuours, blesse
you, and till I heare from you againe, my selfe will exspect the best
reformation that any good opinion may induce in mee, as yet to conceyue
of you. Fare you well, this of. &c.




                 _Of Epistles Amatorie.    Chap. 19._


=Diuers other patternes of sundrie occasions concluded vnder this
Tytle, might besydes these heere bee put downe, whereof because I haue
so largelie spoken in the discourse before these Epistles, I thinke
the examples alreadie proponed to bee sufficient. And nowe the last of
all these diuisions yet vnspoken of is |Amatorie|, whereof because the
humours of all sortes with loue possessed, are so infinite and so great
an vncertaintie in them remaineth, as that perchance euen in yᵉ verie
writing of his letter, the louer himself is somtimes scarce certain
of his own intended purpose therein, the lesse must of necessitie
be the precepts of the same, for that in some of them wee require
and entreate in others expostulate the matters and occasions falling
in the necke therof, other times complaine, another while fawne and
speake faire, then purge or cleare an accusation supposed agaynst vs.
Finallie, innumerable are the deuises wherewith the reynes of loue are
conducted. But in as much as I haue heretofore giuen vnto all other
titles their seuerall preceptes, I will somwhat also in this place
speake to the purpose thereof: In which I must first referre the writer
vnto the consideration of the honestie of the action by him pretended
to be written of, and then for the places of request, complaint,
expostulation, or auoydance of anie thing therein happening to the
waight of his owne affection, which how vehemently, or slenderly it
weigheth, himselfe can best testifie, and lastly, for the well ordering
of either of these, to the examples |Petitorie, Expostulatorie,
Defensorie|, and |Excusatorie| in this booke plentifullie deliuered,
wherein howbeit the matter of loue is no wayes expressed, yet to anie
capable or wel disposed conceit, the conueyance thereof cannot in the
selfe exchange of the subiect be without some import vnto them.=

=In this place there might also bee made a distinction of loue where
in a |Sympathie| of minds from man to man aswell vniteth togither by
an indissoluble league of amitie their hearts in one, as betwéene man
and woman, and that for the most part by a far more waightie league,
and more inuiolable discretion. But sith the alteration thereof, as it
much differeth in qualitie from the other, is also alike exchaunged by
title, that one tearmed by the name of |Friendship|, and this other
chalenging onelie to be deciphered by |Loue|, these amours in this
definition shall onely be intended such, as are modestly tendered from
men vnto women, and so accordingly herein to be exampled and written
vpon.=

=And howbeit the little experience I haue had of some conuersing in
this kinde of studie, hath sufficientlie taught mee to knowe, that the
verie instinct or setled impression of this kinde of fantasie is such
a Schoolemaister to inuention, and so cunning a refiner of any well
disposed conceit, as that with very small help, it thereby commonlie
performeth much more then well could bee otherwise intended. To the
helping and putting forwardes whereof, a number of excellent penned
discourses onelie pertinent and seruing to the efficacie of those
amours, are with the greatest singularitie that may bee deliuered, yet
in so much as this booke taking vpon it to set foorth of euerye the
tytles therein distinguished, some one or other particular example,
may not by the defect of these, seeme to haue anie want of that,
which by it hath bin formerlie promised. I haue thought good for order
sake, to pursue also in this place, the effect of this Methode. The
circumstances whereof by the examples following shall bee tendered.=


          _An example of an Epistle, for the first entreatie
                            of good will_.

The long and considerate regarde, by which in deepe contemplation I
haue eyed your most rare and singular vertues, ioyned with so admirable
beautie, and much pleasing condition graffed in your person, hath
mooued me good Mistresse E. among a number whome entirely I knowe to
fauour you, earnestlie to loue you, and therewith to offer my selfe
vnto you. Nowe howbeit I may happilie seeme in some eyes, the least in
woorthines of a number that daylie frequent you, yet may you vouchsafe
in your owne priuate to reckon mee with the greatest in willingnesse,
wherein, if a seded and immooueable affection towardes you, if feruent
and assured loue grounded vpon the vndecaiable stay and proppe of
your vertues, if continuall, nay rather inexterminable vowes, in
all perpetuitie addicted vnto your seruices, if neuer ceasing and
tormenting griefe vncertainlie carried, by a hazardous expectation,
closed in the circle of your gracious conceyte, whether to bring vnto
the eares of my soule a sweet murmure of life, or seuere sentence of
a present death, may ought at all preuaile either to mooue, entreate,
sue, solicite, or perswade you, I then am the man, who shrining in my
inwarde thoughts, the dignitie of so woorthie a creature, and prising
in deepest weight (though not to the vttermost value) the estimate of
so incomparable a beatie, haue resolued liuing to honor you, and dying
neuer to serue other but you, from whose delicate looks, expecting
no worse acceptance, then may seeme answerable to so diuine an
excellencie, I remaine.

                   _Your most passionate, loyall and
                       perpetually deuoted, &c._

=This example seeming to be in the superlatiue degree, it is intended
that the direction thereof or the like, shoulde passe vnto such a
one, whose birth, education, or other complements, maie sufficientlie
answere the greatnesse and efficacie thereof, otherwise to one meanlie
demeaned, or farre lesse enabled, to indite or offer the like, it might
seeme vnto the writer, a great indignitie, as well in iudgement, as by
an apparant want of some other sufficiencie. For which I thought good
to admonish thus farre in this place, howbeit in the seconde Chapter
of this booke, I haue touching a respect in all writing to bee had
vnto the partie, his partes, place and qualitie, plentifullie alreadie
discoursed.=


                  _Another example to that purpose._

Good Mistresse E. I am bolde though a straunger, to make these Letters,
messengers at this present of my good meaning towards you, wherein you
may please to thinke that I goe not about by pretence of a most entire
and heartie good will which I professe to beare you, to make present
surmise thereupon, that on so bare an assertion you should immediately
credite me, I prise your worthinesse at farre greater value, and weigh
your good allowance so much, as I onelie desire, that by your fauorable
liking I may intreate to haue accesse vnto you, not doubting but by my
being in your presence, I shall so sufficientlie by apparant proofe
maintaine the efficacie of that I now protest, and giue you so good
occasion to deeme well of mee, as you shall haue no reason to repent
you, that vpon so honest and louing request you haue condiscended to
my entreatie. Whose health and prosperitie tendering in all things as
mine owne, I sende you with my Letter a token of that great affection I
beare you, which I most heartilie praie you to accept of, and weare for
mee. And euen so doe continue.

                         Yours, if so you please to accept of me, &c.


             _An answere to the first of these Epistles._

That men haue skill, and are by sundrie commendable partes enabled
to set foorth their meaning, there needeth, as I thinke no other
testimonie then your presente writing, your eloquence is farre beyonde
the reach of my poore witte, and the multiplicitie of your praises
fitter for a Poeticall Goddesse, then to the erection of anie such
earthlie Deesse. For my parte, I houlde them as the fancies and toies
of men, issuing from the weakest of their humours, and howe farre my
selfe can deserue, none then my selfe can better conceiue. Beeing one
of good sorte, as you are, I coulde doe no lesse then write againe vnto
you, the rather to satisfie the importunitie of your messenger, wishing
such a one to your lot as wel might paragonize those excellencies your
write of, and answere euerie waie vnto the substaunce of all those
inestimable prayses. So hauing, your loue and your writing, might (as I
take it) bee best suted togethers.

                               Yours, as far as modesty will, to aun-
                                       swere your curtesies, &c


                    _A replie to the same answere._

Gracious obiect of my pleasing thoughtes, and mistresse of all my
inwarde happines, sweete were the lines you wrote, God wot vnto mee
your seruant howe comfortable, and how precious, knowing that their
premeditation had issue from those your peerlesse excellencies, & the
touch of those letters passed the guidance of your delicat hands, how
sharp or powerful soeuer be the weight of the same, the lesse shall be
the griefe, in that she whom I honour and estimate aboue all others,
hath vouchsafed to wish vnto my lot, y accōplishmēt of all those
excellencies, which none but her self can paragonize, and wherein she
onelie goeth beyond all others. Vouchsafe (sweete Mistris) that what
vnto you is intended to bee pleasing, may not seeme disgraced, by the
ornamente of _Eloquence_, the Soueraigne and praise-woorthie _Glorie_
whereof, beautifieth both speeches and reasons. Too dulle are my
senses (I confesse) to blaze foorth the weight of your merites, your
accomplishmentes beeing so manifold, as whereout (if euer anie earthlie
Deesse by anie excellencie were deriued) the same might bee thought
to haue alonlie proceeded. You may please of my loue to deeme as of
your owne deseuinges the foundation whereof cannot bee so slender, as
whereon so weake a thinge as fancie shoulde bee grounded. But as your
_vertues_ are permanent, so may you iudge of my loue to be perpetuall.
Let it once more accord with your curteous consent, that these letters
with the first may haue the like fauourable acceptaunce, whereby you
shall kindle in mee no other or greater presumption, then what best
fitteth vnto the woorthinesse both of your _vertue_ and calling. With
heartes longing and sighes sending, my Letters, and well wishinges
speede them togethers, crauing that you will euer holde and deeme of
me, as of him that in all protested faith, loue and loyaltie, is and
will bee alwaies.

                                                           Yours, &c.


                 _An answere vnto the second Letter._

Sir, your message is vnto mee as strange as your selfe, who are vnto
me a stranger, & what your good meaning vnto me is, I knowe not,
for giuing of hastie credite to your assertions, as you seem not
to chalenge it, so was I neuer hetherto of my self so hastie to do
it, hauing eftsoones bene taught, that of fairest speaches ensueth
often the fowlest actions: I cannot condemne your purpose, because I
entende the best of your dealings, and howbeit I am in no point so
restrained, but that in all reasonable sort that may be, anie accesse
may be granted: so when you shall by further notice sufficientlie make
apparant that with modestie I may doe it, I shall bee willing so farre
foorth as my yeares and present beeing, may minister occasion, in anie
thankfull requitall that may bee to yeelde my selfe vnto you. Till
which time I returne your token againe and my hartie thankes vnto you
by this bearer.

                                      Your friend as one vnacquainted
                                           hetherto may be, &c.




                          THE SECOND PART OF
                        the English Secretorie.




                  _Of Epistles Iudiciall.    Chap 1._


=As I haue already exampled vnto you all sortes of |Epistles|,
contained vnder the two titles of |Demonstratiue|, and |Deliberatiue|:
So by the order and disposition formerlie vsed, it behooueth (as nexte
in course) I doe nowe come vnto the title |Iudiciall|. Why this title
is so called, I haue in that other booke alreadie deliuered. So that
nowe it may séeme fit, that herein as in the other twaine before going,
we deliberate what order and places for the well handling and proper
conueyance of |Epistles|, are principallie to be obserued.=

=You shall then vnderstand, that for so much as the efficacie of
this title is wholie caried in cause of |Accusation|, |Inuectiue|,
|Charge|, or |defence|, the matters whereof are wholie censured by
lawe, by common reputation, by custome, by authoritie or by iudgement,
the |Rhetoricians|, for the more excellent setting foorth of the
|Oratoriec| partes hereof, haue vnto the generalitie of the same,
allotted thrée states or principall heades, whereout by imitation, all
our |Epistles| vnder this title are wholie to be caried. The first is
called |Coniecturall|, that is, where a matter by coniecture onlie of
time, place, estate, or condition of the person, or other likelihoodes
to the same agréeing, may be supposed or enforced.=

=The second is |Iuridicial|, wherein not by coniecture, but by matter
in action, sentence, lawe, or iudgemente, wee aggrauate the cause in
question, in which remaineth the qualitie, circumstance, or greatnes
to be decided, and howe vehementlie or slenderlie it hurteth or
importeth.=

=The third is tearmed _Legitima_, which by |Lawes|, customes, common
vsage, or |allowance|, defineth a thing to bee good or bad, tolerable
or not to be suffered. Out of these heades ariseth the plentie of all
our following diuisions, which also hereafter are in their places to
be collected, the first whereof, containing matter of |Accusation|
or |Charge|, may be saide to be |Accusatorie|, |Expostulatorie|,
|Exprobratorie|, |Comminatorie| and |Inuectiue|. The Second, beeing
|Responsorie| to either of these, may be saide to be |Excusatorie|,
|Purgatorie|, |Defensorie| or |Deprecatorie|. The compasse aswell of
the one as the other, either for matters |accused, obiected, purged,
excused, entreated for|, or |Defended|, are simply or wholie included
vnder all or one of these heads before remembred.=

=The efficacie of either of these, aswell for inforcementes, as for
clearing or auoydance of anie matter do séeme to be drawne, _per
locos absolutes_, places absolute, and _locos assumptiuos_, places
assumptiue.=

=_Loci absoluti_ are such, as containe in them enforcementes not to be
auoided, whether it be in charge, matter |inuectiue|, or |defence|, for
that they are collected of vnauoidable groundes, that is to say, of
|Nature|, |Lawe|, |Custome|, |Contract|, |common allowance|, |Righte|,
|Lawfull| and |Good Sentence| and |Iudgement|. These aswell to the
state |Iuridiciall|, as to the other of _legitima_, are alike ordinarie
and common, this onely difference, that in that of |Iuridicial|, they
are all enforced to condemnation: in that of _legitima_, censured by
their qualitie, vse or toleration.=

=_Loci assumptiui_, are only collections by coniecture, and not matter
in certainty, but such as may be vrged by likelihoods yet greatly
enforce to accusation, and serue alike to mitigate by defence or
excusing, this to the state |Coniecturall|, and this of Juridiciall doe
remaine alike common.=

=The parts and places |Cōiectural|, for the heaping of likelihoods,
either to accuse, excuse, purge or defend, haue respect vnto the
|Wil, dispositiō|, or |ability| of any one. The |Wil| is searched by
the outward quality or condition of a man, by his readines, hate,
affection, or mislike to a thing, |Dispositiō|, by the country or soil
wherein one is borne, as if wee shoulde say at this presente of a
forraine aduersarie, |Hee is a Spaniard, how can hee beare good will
to England?| By his ofspring, as if we should saie, |Being born, and
bred of lewde parents, how can the issue be good.| By his education, as
thus, |He was so looselie trained vp, and so vilelie inured, that there
is no hope at all to be in him expected.| By his studies, as to saie,
|Consider but the application of his whole manner of liuing, weigh
his continuall practises, see but into his particular and ordinarie
studies, and then tell mee what you may iustlie suppose of the
residue of his beeing|. And likewise by sundrie other circumstances.
|Abilitie| is vrged by |Oportunitie|, by |Time| and |Place|, |Aydes| or
|Supportes|, and the means of either of these, measured by the credite,
affection, want, companie, conceit, or instabilitie of the person we
goe about to accuse, excuse, purge or defend.=

=Thus haue I largelie deliuered vnto you, the sum and scope of
what in speciall to be intended vnder this title, the vse and more
particular shew whereof shall bee by their seuerall Epistles more
amplie explaned vnto you. And howbeit I could here a little dwel by
some continued discourse, in the commendable aduancement vnto you of
the woorthinesse of this present part we haue now in hand of well
writing, wherein not onelie these places alreadie remembred, but in a
manner all other partes of the |Deliberatiue| and |Demonstratiue| kinde
are most plentifullie accited: Yet will I but remember vnto you howe
effectuallie by the well handling of anie the particulars therunto
belonging, and howe farre more singularlie then in anie others, the
excellencie of a good witte and a quicke, and fine inuention is most
fullie deciphered, feeling that in the occurrents heereof, the writer
is neuer tyed to anie one course in particular, but hath scope to wade
into all things in generall.=

=For that by the verie order of these Epistles, hee shall sundrie
times haue occasion to vse the partes |Descriptorie, Laudatorie,
Vituperatorie, Hortatorie, Swasorie, Disswasorie, Petitorie, Monitorie,
Conciliatorie, Reprehensorie|, and at many times diuers or the most
part of them altogithers. Wherefore leauing any further respect hereof,
vnto the ready conceite of such as thereunto may bee enabled, we will
proceed vnto the rest.=

=The partes for |Disposition| required in these Epistles, are as in
the others before going, that is to saie: |Exordium, Narratio|, or
_Propositio_, _Confirmatio_, _Confutatio_, and _Peroratio_.=

=The first of the distinctions vnder this part Iudiciall to be
prosecuted, appeareth to be |Accusatorie|, which either simplie by
coniectures, or by matter of knowne or verily supposed troth, as you
haue before remembred, or both wayes at once, may bee conueyed. Whereof
the first in sequence which I will deliuer vnto you for example, shall
be in the state coniecturall, which being framed to be questionable
betwéene a Merchant and his seruant, falleth out in sort following to
be performed.=


 _An example of an Epistle Accusatorie in the state Coniecturall, from
               a merchant to the father of his seruant._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

Sir, you will perchaunce maruell to see the sudden accesse of these my
letters vnto you, togither with the hastie repaire of my man, (such as
heretofore hath not beene accustomed betweene you and me, sithence our
formost acquaintance) but to stay that doubt, and to enforme you at
large, what vrgent occasion I haue so to doe, it may please you with
as little discontentment as may bee, to giue your selfe to the view of
these Letters, and thereupon to censure on my behalfe the matter of the
same accordinglie.

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

Your sonne sir, who nowe these three yeares passed to your good lyking
hath continued in my seruice, and whome your selfe doe verie well
knowe, that for the reputation of his parentes and friendes, I alwayes
for the most part haue entertayned with especiall trust and regarde,
beeing this last Summer returned out of Barbarie, with an aduenture
in a shippe of mine owne, I did vpon great choyce, immediatelie after
his account deliuered, place in the ouersight, disposition and rule
of all my whole goodes, stocke, and Merchandise. And in expectation
and assurance of his especiall and more then ordinarie care and good
behauiour therein, did about September last (vppon a iourney which I
had to the North partes with diuerse of my nearest friendes, whereby I
was compelled to bee foorth by the space of two Monethes) commit vnto
his like credites, the custodie of diuers summes of money alreadie
receyued, as also the collection and further receyte of sundrie other
paymentes of great waight, at the dayes and times wherein they were
payable, by him to my vse to bee reserued and layde vp, sithence
which, by what sinister humour I knowe not, nor by what vntoward
conceit can I yet imagine, in the time of my absence, and a little
before my returne homewards, hee is gone away, no man knoweth whither.
Vpon the newes whereof being greatly aflighted, I haste to his counting
house, search his bookes of receits and paiments, and there withall
breake open his deske and coffers, in which after all reckoninges
fullie perused and considered of, I find my selfe to bee backewards of
diuers allowances, the certainty whereof I cannot yet determine, but
the greatnesse by the likelihoode, is verie vehemently to be suspected,
by reason that in this sort, without anie other occasion he is fled,
and from so great a charge without knowledge of anie one about me, so
suddenly departed.

What presumptions I haue, and those verie large, by such kinde of
dealing, whereby I may iustly burthen him, you may heereby coniecture,
as first his disposition, giuen (as sithence hath verie crediblie bin
reported vnto me) to be verie prodigall, & of most excessiue expence,
then the occasion offered by such immoderate confidence in him reposed:
next, the vncontrolled rule hee bare throughout all my dealings:
lastlie the time and secrecie of his departure, beeing thus hasted in
mine absence, and here withall some such things which are missing, as
whereof none were priuie but himselfe, and whereunto no accesse could
bee without himselfe. Insomuch as the losse which I reckon of, and
wherefro I can yet finde no release, by reason of this his vnknowne
departure, cannot (for ought I hitherto perceiue) amount to so little
as CC.li.

By some fewe that since his going away haue encountred with him,
it appeareth, that not onelie he is well monied, but also of his
iourneying Westward, whereby I am led to thinke his resort to be no
way so likelie, as to you which are his father, or to some other his
friends there about you. For which cause I haue directed these togither
with my man, as well to referre vnto your consideration what hath
passed, as also to pray that by your due search and examination of the
action, both his person may be answered, and my suspition of him the
better and more manifestly be cleared: and euen so recommending my
selfe and cause to the furtherance of your good direction, I take my
leaue. This of, &c.

=This letter hauing direction from the maister to the father, in
seeming a Gentleman of some good account, we will according thereunto
frame you an answer, which in this place according to the nature
thereof may be tearmed |Excusatorie|. The conueiance of which, either
lesseneth by vehement likelihoods the qualitie of the offence, or
otherwise (though not clearlie auoydeth) yet by the naked truth
or simplicitie of the action it selfe, maketh it seeme of farre
more slender moment or importance, then before it might haue béene
coniectured. And forasmuch as the father was a by partie to the wrong
suggested, and onely in that it was his son, and the reformation of the
thing opposed, might by him in some sort bee redressed or recompenced,
wee will suppose herein the Letter in forme following by him to be
answered, and the residue vnspoken of to be left to the purgation or
defence of the other on whome the fault is charged, and to whome in
particular, it belongeth to sée the same answered.=


  _An example excusatorie returned to the effects of this coniectural
       epistle, from the father to whome the same was written._

Maister R. I haue receyued your Letter, to no small griefe (at the
first) of my priuate conceyts, but sithence hauing examined the matter
am somewhat deliuered of doubt, by the satisfaction that in search of
the cause I haue alreadie receyued. My sonne (as you write) was here in
the Countrey, at my brothers house, not farre from mine owne dwelling,
and yet so newlie come thither, as he had reposed himselfe but one
night ere the sight of your present Letters and messenger were arriued.

To the action wherewith you do charge him, I can say nothing more then
that himselfe hath written, which agreeing with the formost speech, and
first examination had by his Vncle, I must hold as yet vndetermined
till I heare your further answer. For the coniectures you haue
deliuered, whereby to induce that you are a greater looser by him then
without further grounde I can hitherto imagine. I aunswere thus much,
that the alteration were verie strange, and humour too sudden, to finde
him now so lauish, whom before time your selfe haue commended to bee so
frugall, and especiallie in whatsoeuer to his charge and gouernment
hath by you beene committed.

To the residue I will be silent, because himselfe that first bredde the
occasion appeareth meetest to answere it.

If I heare not from you before the middle of this tearme, my intent
is by Gods grace to bee at London, where your apprentice and my sonne
shall be in person forth comming vnto you. At which time if I find
farther defects, or more equitie to charge him, contrarying to that
which alreadie haue bin answered by him, he shal not be mine by anie
his ill dealings to be vpholden, but yours as belongeth in any sort you
like to chastise him. And euen so recommending my selfe heartilie vnto
you, I do bid you farewell. This of, &c.


   _An example Purgatorie from the partie chalenged in answer of the
                Epistle accusatorie before remembred._

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

It may please you sir, on Munday last, beeing the next day after
my comming to my Vncles, he sending to T. to my fathers house to
vnderstand his pleasure, worde was returned immediatelie, of a
messenger and letters receyued from you, whereby it was my fathers
pleasure to commaund me to his presence, and to require mine vncle to
be there present also in companie.

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

At my comming thither, many things were laid forth as wel by your
writing, as by the mouth of your man, how grieuouslie you were damaged
both by diuers summes wherein you were short in reckoning, and other
thinges by you missing, vppon my running away (as you tearme it) the
muchnesse whereof was not so much enlarged by your letter, as the
ouerlauish deliuerie of your man had to the great encrease of ill
opinion in my father, with diuers vnbeseeming tearmes, augmented the
same.

And nowithstanding I had in mine own conscience sufficientlie, and with
sound appearing trueth to the viewe of others answered the occasion,
yet forasmuch as neither seemed the same a full satisfaction to my
father, nor a matter clearlye auoided towardes you, till in your plaine
and certain notice, I had also confirmed the same, I was commaunded
by him to write what I there affirmed, and accordinglie to aduertize
you of the state of your busines, and inualidity of your coniectures,
that by the verity thereof I might with more liking be reputed of, and
himselfe haue lesse cause then he supposed whereat to be grieued.

To the matter of your letter, whereby I am accused, and in which you
saie you are backward I knowe not in what, it appeareth that for the
finding out of the certaintie or likelihoode thereof you entred vpon my
desk and coffers, and searched my books of account and payments, which
beeing so, if you were as circumspect in my behalfe, as you were in a
rash surmize of your own harmes, you might haue assured yourselfe, for
to haue found no one penie of any summe wanting at all, or where any
was missing, either by exchange at your own appointment, or vpon other
good occasions to haue also seene howe the same was bestowed, or where,
or vpon what it was els where imploied.

[Sidenote: _Metonimia._]

For your better assurance wherein (if hitherto you vnderstande not so
much) my boxe marked with this letter A. lying in the neather parte
of my deske, will confirme the same. And least I might be deceiued in
ought, before your comming, by the sinister practise of some such as
had more enuie at my honest credite with you, than care of your good
(whereof I mistake not at all, if I iudge this _viper_ to be one) I
not onelie reserued notes of euerie thing, caused one whome you will
beleeue (though to what purpose I protest hee then knewe not) not
onelie to tell euerie summe of money remaining in euerie bagge, and
to see the same sealed vp, but also to set his hand to my notes, as
witnesse to the same, so much I knowe I lefte, and of the residue the
declaration of a trueth shall bee witnesse sufficient of mine owne
fidelitie.

Finallie, touching the likelihood of my going awaie without knowledge,
and that also in your absence, to bee a token of some waste or wrōg
to you offered, which you value not to be so litle as CC. poūds, I
trust sir (albeit the sum be great where little remaineth, and if
also it were lesse, it were yet too much to bee lost) your selfe
notwithstanding can tell verie well, that more then once I haue bin
credited with ten times the value of that at your handes, when by great
similitude, I could with more facilitie haue benefited my selfe to a
farre greater value, if I had bin so disposed, then what herein to be
accompted of, and (if so I had beene then also minded) coulde haue been
therewith farther out of your reach then euer I yet entended. And where
you suggest that it is sithence told you of my lauish expence, I can
thereunto say nothing more then euerie one knoweth, that trulie will
speake of me, and so you find not the hindrance in your owne accompte.
I trust you will beare equallie what in others opinions maie bee
construed of reasonablie.

My going away is apparant, I cannot denie it, wherein if happelie
I haue done more then beseemeth, yet none so much as my selfe hath
thereby beene wronged, for that such occasion hath by meanes thereof
ensued, whereby my credite by sinister reports hath so greatly been
hazarded, yet was not yᵉ same altogether done without cause, nor voide
of honest excuse, for if either I had beene certaine of your so speedie
returne, or had not had so presumptuous an intruder vppon the trust
to mee committed (as at my comming to London I shall make more plaine
vnto you) I had not done as I did. And this assure your selfe sir, that
howe farre soeuer you imagine or are informed, that mine vncontrouled
rule in your house stretched, if I might with performaunce of as honest
trust haue discharged the same vnto you, as I alwaies had endeuoured, I
neither had lefte your house or stocke, to haue depended vpon so harde
supposed reckoning, nor lost you one houres commoditie of my seruices,
as you nowe challenge me to haue done.

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

My endeuour towardes my self, my fathers care, and your woonted good
opinion, hath mooued mee in sort as you see, to giue items of those
whome iustlie I am to complaine of, and to praie you that surceasing
all other surmizes vppon our hastie comming to London you will more
circumspectly in the meane time consider both of your dealings and my
writing, which in as dutifull manner as beseemeth, eftsoons crauing at
your handes, I doe (as euer I haue been) remaine, and take my leaue, &c.

                               Your seruant confirmed in all fidelity
                                             towards you, &c.


    _An example of an Epistle Accusatorie in the state Iuridiciall
                          and Coniecturall._

[Sidenote: _Exordium, Anadiplosis._]

Iniurious R. iniurious I maie iustlie tearme thee, whose long
acquaintance with mee, and interchangeable good liking passing
betweene vs, bredde yet so little respect in the waight of the same,
as could not forwarne me of an euill so imminent, by meanes whereof
I doubt and cannot forbeare to thinke, but that I am vtterly induced
to the shipwracke of mine owne estate, and burthened with such
infortunitie, as I shall neuer cease to remember.

[Sidenote: _Emphasis._]

[Sidenote: _Metanoia._]

But why (sencelesse as I am) make I doubt vnto thee of that, whereof
both the condition, abilitie, disposition, and euerie accident and
circumstance of the partie, whom I am forced to accuse, beareth so
sound witnesse, as if men and Angels should goe about to countermaunde
the same, not beeing able by a more certaine veritie in open shewe to
impugne it, there is none I am sure would beleeue no anie one that in
respect of the manifolde likelihoodes thereof, would almost so much as
vouchsafe to hearken vnto it.

[Sidenote: _Epizeuxis._]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Irmus._]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Parison._]

[Sidenote: _Ecphonesis._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

But if in the foremost deliuerie of these thou alreadie musest, and art
desirous to be resolued what it is, wherein so questionles I deeme my
selfe thus deepelie to be wronged: knowe then, that finding here at L.
thy kinsman, thy vnhappie kinsman, wandering as a straunger, conuersant
with badde fellowes, threedbare in apparell, forsaken of his neerest
kindred and friendes, readie to perish almost for want of foode, and
so pennilesse, and therewithall estraunged from all good account, as
beeing amongest other lewde persons, brought before a Iustice vppon
suspition of his wretched liuing, my selfe beeing in presence, and
taking vppon mee in hearing of his name, to bee knowing both of his
parentes and Countrey, had such credite with the Iustice, as hee
foorthwith discharged him, wherewith not contented I did for thy sake,
and in regarde of thee alone, take him home to my lodging, apparelled
him, saued his life, recouered againe his lost credite, and restored
him: Were not these benefites, thinkest thou sufficient to binde an
honest nature, to thinke himselfe beholding to such a one? Happie had
I then beene, if neuer more had I intermedled with him, neuer better
regarded him, or at no time after giuen farther credite and liking vnto
him. Alas, was it alone my chance among so manie that had cast him off,
euen then to entertaine him, to relieue him, to reckon of him, nay
rather beyond all reason (as thy selfe by the sequell wilt confesse) so
farre foorth to dote of him, as nourishing my secrete mischiefe, as it
were in mine owne lodging, vnder the shadowe of mine owne couert, yea
in my verie bosome, I must lead him yet farther along, in the end to
spoile me, and to meditate nothing so much, as my intended destruction?

[Sidenote: _Paradoxon._]

[Sidenote: _Periphrasis._]

[Sidenote: _Parenthesis._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Hypotyposis._]

[Sidenote: _Meiosis._]

[Sidenote: _Aporia._]

Thou maruellest I know to heare this (and strange & most strange it is
I must confesse) but yet true, and if not in him true, then in no other
true, by all likehoodes. But ere I farther report vnto thee, howe and
by what accident encreased my griefe, let mee yet shew thee more what
I did vnto him. So ordered the vnluckie starres my cruel Fate, and in
such (more then disordered maner) wrought the heauens against mee, as
albeit here at L. (for I must needes deliuer a truth vnto thee) he
was greatly desirous and became an earnest suter, I shoulde euen at
that time leaue him: yet pressed by mine one misfortune, and more then
tolerable liking, nothing regarding, or so much as once remembring in
what worse estate I might haue conceiued him, I bethought my selfe he
was a Gentleman, bredde of good and vertuous parents worshipfullie
allied. In their Countrey whilome well reputed, and if anie defect had
before befallen him, I knewe hee was a yonger brother, and want of
liuing and maintenance might impaire him, I had no sonne of mine owne,
his learning and other qualities (not to bee despised) drewe more and
more fancie vnto him: what should I say? I rendred vnto him all account
and preferment that lay in my possibilitie to procure him: and shortlie
to conclude, into the Countrey (furnished in the best part according to
his calling) I took him with me.

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

[Sidenote: _Liptote._]

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Anthypophora._]

[Sidenote: _Polyptoton._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

If I should say to thee, that his demeanour, his attendaunce, his
forwardnesse in all thinges to my noted liking, his outwarde shew in
whatsoeuer action vnto mee seeming to bee pleasing, did not of it
selfe appeare to chalenge so much, I shoulde lie vnto thee. But what
of that, howe is falshoode couered, but by the daintiest glosse, where
lurketh craft, if not in the shade of most simplicitie? Coulde the
Syren deceyue, if shee had no song? Which way should men bee bewitched,
if there were no meane of inchauntment? But did hee in the ende prooue
such in deede, as he seemed, or hereunto appertained? No, no. God
knowes he failed much therein, yea, hee was too farre from it. See then
how much beyond my selfe I was, that beeing thus intreated to discharge
my selfe of mine owne bane, would yet allure both Gods and men, to
bring into my bosome the purport of mine owne secrete and vnknowne
mischiefe.

[Sidenote: _Metalepsis._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Emphasis._]

[Sidenote: _Hypotyposis._]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

Christmasse nowe drewe on, after that a good time we had remained in
the Countrey, alas that times ordained and sacred to holie purposes,
should become ayders and furtherers to mens vile imaginations. In this
time, whilest all mens mindes were busied and occupied in dauncing,
banquetting and feasting, as vse and custome, and season of the yeare
had of auncient times induced, whilest the Hall was full of all sortes
of people, reuelling, playing, and occupyed in pastime, my daughter (O
griefe to thinke on, and heauiest sound to remember) my onelie daughter
was at bed-time missing: Search was made heere and there, inquisition
of this partie and that, this way ranne one, that waie another, the
house was troubled and filled with all hurlie burlie, onelie wading
further into the matter, and her Chamber throughlie perused, her
apparell was missing, Chests broken vp, iewels bereaued, mine owne
lodging spoyled, and in the ende, I sawe and found my selfe in what
cruell sort that might be robbed.

[Sidenote: _Climax._]

[Sidenote: _Polyptoton._]

[Sidenote: _Periphrasis._]

[Sidenote: _Auxesis._]

[Sidenote: _Emphasis._]

[Sidenote: _Prosopopœia._]

[Sidenote: _Epizeuxis._]

[Sidenote: _Parenthesis:._]

[Sidenote: _Irmus._]

Hereupon grew suspition, and of suspition arised matter of likelihood,
and of likelihood at last, assured and most probable coniectures.
One while this man was brought in suspect, another while that partie
chalenged, then he was misdeemed, and another againe culpable adiudged,
but all in vaine. For hardly could my mind suppose, that hee to whom
my thoughts were so sincerely tied in all more then common affection,
would so farre forth haue beene estraunged, as at any time to become
weeting of my intended harmes, neuer a conspiratour, much lesse
an executour. But wicked and vile conceited _fraud_, what cannot
dissimulation, in cloake of sugred guile vnder thy title put forward.
And yet might my ignoraunce herein verie well haue become excusable,
for a seuen night before that time, that luckles time in which this
action was concluded (for long before was it purposed) your kinsman by
my allowance and good will had taken leaue, and seemed to be departed,
to goe into N. to visite his friends, whose absence besides the little
matter that euer in him I supposed to be hereunto sounding, and euerie
other circumstance conducing in all his common behauiours, not so much
as in shewe to giue a shadowe of this or any such like pretence, could
neuer haue induced mee to the least imagination at all, that hee of all
others, would haue offered to be seene in anie such thing.

[Sidenote: _Anthypophora._]

[Sidenote: _Expeditiō._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

But if you will nowe aske mee what presumption I haue then to charge
him more then another, in whome so little matter of suspition coulde
before time bee conceyued, I will aunswere yee. The presumptions are,
their conuersing together in one place, besides that, shee is by his
directions at L. and placed at his finding, that his pretence of going
away, was to depart into N. the deuise whereof appeareth nowe but a
plaine colour, to haue procured this vnhappinesse. Of all which I am so
surelie assertayned by the credible report of a Gentleman, so honest,
and of reputation so sufficient, as whereof I need to make no question.
For once they being togither, and in such sort as is deliuered, argueth
the circumstaunce of his going to N. to bee but a meere disguising, his
intent eyther onelie to bee a meane with lesse suspition to compasse
her, and so consequentlie to betraie her, the stocke whereupon they
liue, to bee my wealth, and what from mee is robbed and vnkindlie
bereaued, howe can it otherwise choose? is not the matter plaine and
euident? how else should he see her, compasse her, receyue her, and in
such sort entertaine her?

[Sidenote: _Epitropis._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

If these bee supposes, then what may bee serious, if such assured notes
as these seeme trifles, what then can bee sayde to bee certaine? and
yet long was it I must needes bewraie, ere my selfe could conceyue
the similitude it bare of trueth, so harde a matter it is where good
opinion is once rooted, by the veritie it selfe, almost to driue out
the same. But nowe sounding deeper into the action, I finde both will
and abilitie in each poynt so furthering, as without I determined to
winke still in mine owne blindnesse, I must renounce all fauourable
conceyte, and vtterlie confesse the same to bee but an errour.

[Sidenote: _Epanodis._]

[Sidenote: _Parison._]

[Sidenote: _Anthypophora._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

[Sidenote: _Meiosis._]

[Sidenote: _Conoratiō._]

For hauing waded into euerie deepe conceite, and imagination of the
accident, well weighing with my selfe also what maner a one the
partie hath beene, how euill vnto mee sithence he hath likewise beene
reported of, how vilelie before my receit of him hee was generally
demeaned, with what base people and men of basest reckoning I found him
accompanied: I do immediatelie condemne my selfe that was so sottish
as to expect any other euent at his handes, then what hath alreadie
succeeded, seeing where so manie euil dispositions haue bene before
time abounding, it is not easily noted that from such a one any good
at all coulde bee at anie season proceeding. But too late nowe to my
no small griefe, doe I fall into this reckoning, which wisedome would
before haue preuented, and more circumspectlie haue intended to. For
whence (if I trulie shoulde speake of the action) ensued this abilitie?
Was it not the fauour and especiall liking wherewith I receyued him?
Howe could hee else haue presumed on it? Howe could he haue sought it?
Howe could he haue done it? But not for this doe I accuse thee my R.
as either accessarie, or fauourer of so badde and vnkinde a purpose,
but for thou knowing his course of life, weeting of my well deeming,
assured of his beeing with me, hauing reported vnto thee in what degree
I did credite him, woulde notwithstanding not so much as tell mee of
him, nor suffer mee by thy gentle admonition so much as to surmize how
I might bee deceiued by him.

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

Let I pray thee the sorrowfull demonstration of these my Letters bee
a meane vnto thee, as thou louest mee, tenderest mee, and carest for
me, to search out the truth, the state and circumstance of the thing,
and yet (forlorne as I am) seeke I therein but mine owne sorrow, for
neuer shall I like of him, care for her, or hardlie after this in any
sort abide her. Yet for my minde desireth to be resolued (though euen
in these verie wordes deliuering I doe not seeme to doubt) let me
receyue the plentie thereof at large, bee it that the resolution be a
confirmation of mine owne vnhappinesse, the force whereof beeing past
remedie I must support as I can, and seeke as I may to endure the rest
with patience.


   _A Letter defensorie answering by confutation all the obiections
                   in this former Epistle surmized._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Insinuatiō._]

It is sir, accustomed that men in griefe of minde doe often speake
diuers things, for which in respect of their sorow they seeme to
deserue many wayes to be pardoned, according to which, your selfe
hauing of late sustained some aduerse hap, do what by surmises, & what
by misreports, seeme to be at oddes with your owne liking, and vpon
a sodein to become enraged with your owne fancie. In the course of
your whole letter viewing the wrong you haue sustained, & the extreame
disquiet wherewith you are perplexed, I pittie your misfortune, and
as a friende doe inwardlie grieue at that wherewith you are troubled,
wishing that either I had abilitie to redresse the matter to your
liking, or otherwise that my wordes were of weight to perswade you,
that with the extremity thereof you would not so greatly be moued.

[Sidenote: _Polyptoton._]

Touching my kinsman, whome for my sake in such sort as you write you
receiued, and to whome vpon the outward deserte of his behauiour you
vouchsafed such entertainement, and vppon whose absence and departure
(albeit with your good liking) you seeke to intrude the summe of all
your vnhappinesse and misfortune. Hee is not indeede at this instant
here in the countrey, but as I deeme and you haue informed, about
London. Neuerthelesse for so much as it seemeth by your writing,
and also by his thankful acknowledgement and deliuery, both vnto me
and others, how much he hath stoode beholding vnto you, and that it
standeth to bee parcel of a gentle mind, as wel to recognise a good
turne, as to remoue by a louing censure an ill opinion, where the same
rather of griefe then of malice is vniustlie conceiued (notwithstanding
I may not so effectually speake to the purpose, as if himselfe were
personally present) I will endeuour vpon mine owne knowledge as farre
as I may, and so much as in truth I canne lawfully iustifie, hereby
to satisfie you, and if it bee possible to expell those causelesse
coniectures of him, that in such sort doe annoie you.

[Sidenote: _Apostrophe._]

To the matter therefore wherewith you are grieued, I thus much dare
affirme vnto you in his behalfe, that in all your imaginations you haue
greatly misconceiued, and the reasons leading me thereunto are these.

[Sidenote: Answere to the cause of coniecture.]

[Sidenote: _Procatalepsis._]

First, where your selfe doe confesse that the onely matter you haue
in apparance inducing you to accuse him, is the credible report of a
friende of yours, that sawe him and your daughter at London, and a
suppose thereby, that shee is at his disposition, and the theft of
your goodes to them both an indifferent finding. I saie the validitie
of all this is nothing, for omitting that by diuers casualties men and
women at aduenture doe daily meete, experience whereof is in common vse
amongst our selues, and euen then when we least do thinke of it, and
most woulde woonder at it, the reason whereof I ouerpasse, because to
the accident I am but a straunger, what reason haue you so resolutelie
to thinke that the expenses whereon they remaine (so bee it they doe
as you alleadge continue togethers) must onelie bee drawne out from
that part of your lost substaunce, and so by consequence aggrauate a
likelihoode of his stealing your daughter? I neede not I trust perswade
you of his kindred, nor abilitie of his friendes, it resteth not in
doubt, you knowe it: then vnderstande you sir, it may also bee as
possible, that some one or other of them might at the length by some
more gentle motion then before time tender his good. Whereof I need
make no question, my selfe can assure you, for that an Aunt of his
dying of late, left him possessions to three hundred poundes value,
which beeing at his choise either to accept a diuision or money, it
is like he hath the coine and let the lande goe, and therupon is
the better enabled to do what is reported vnto you both for her and
himselfe.

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Dichologia._]

[Sidenote: _Anthipophora._]

[Sidenote: _Pleonasmus._]

Hereupon you begin to call in reckoning his life, and I knowe not
what late reportes and informations of his liuing, to coniecture
thereupon his common disposition and ill vsage, with abilitie to doe
you a displeasure, performed by your owne countenance. Alas sir, why
shuld you be so far led awry by these vncertainties? Know ye not that
reportes are manie times slaunders? and that men for the most parte
speake generallie when they find a man in any sort to be iniured
particularlie? Hee is my kinsman I confesse, but not for that would I
yet defende him in his treacheries, but for mine owne knowledge of him
from the beginning, canne I witnesse the contrarie, I must tell you to
conclude thereupon, you do him small equitie. What if hee fell into
your notice by a little penurie? Manie an innocent and good man by want
hath beene driuen to ill companie, yet themselues vnknowing, and not
weeting at all of their facultie, and so truelie may I herein deeme of
him, gladlie in the meane time thanking you, and himselfe eftsoones
confessing the weight hee then receiued of your curtesie.

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Metonoia._]

And if we shall aunswere likelihoodes againe by coniectures, why may
not (I pray ye) the carefull endeuor and diligent aduerting, your
selfe doe confesse in all his continuance to haue remained in him
towards your liking, be as well a testimony of his honest affection,
and glad indeuor to recompence by any seruice your kindnes, as vpon
his naked sole information, you would goe about to wrest it as a token
of dissembled iniurie? Nay rather why may not the suppose thereof bee
forcible to quench any other conceipt to the contrarie, seeing in the
reuolution of the same, you also doe graunt, that in all his behauiour
you neuer sawe so much as one suspect, whereby so farre as you are
gone, in such sort to induce you? For my part if we shal studie to
measure the conditions of men aright, I am of opinion that wee ought
rather to credit the vse and practise daily seene before our eies, then
by any misreport or vnseemely coniecture to giue scope vnto our owne
imagination or a selfe willed fantasie.

[Sidenote: _Anthithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Dialysis._]

[Sidenote: _Confutatiō._]

Honest gratuity and dissembled trechery, seldom in my conceipt, do
drawe in one line togethers, thankefull I doe know him vnto you for any
benefite, for I haue seene him more then once, and that most feruentlie
to professe it, how he should halt with you by nature I finde not, as
whereunto I neuer saw him addicted: besides, thus much can I yet say
more to ascertaine you, that about the time mentioned in your Letter,
hee came hither to visite vs, sithence which till within this fortnight
he remained with vs. After about the receipt of his money, and for the
conclusion of that agreement, hee was disposed to London. There what
hath betided him I cannot rightlie enforme you, yet may the apparance
hereof bee sufficient, by good reason to assure you, that beeing thus
continued, as I haue declared, hee coulde verie hardly and almost
without possibilitie, haue beene so forwardes in the matter as hath
beene suggested by you.

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

In respect of your ancient amity and acquaintance, I doe yet pray
you, that you wil be recomforted of your griefes, opposing vnto your
selfe this one assurance, that by some strange euent your daughter is
happened to his knowledge, and this fixed hope that by beeing with him,
she is retained to her best safegard, who as well in respect of the
accompt he beareth vnto you, as of the curteous regard it is most like
he carieth vnto her, hath vpon some vrgent businesse beene compelled to
stay her, determining in some conueniuent time, I warrant you to your
comforte and his credite and good opinion to be encreased, to returne
her vnto you. Not being vnmindfull howe much I haue heretofore beene
staied, both to thinke woorthilie of you, and to thanke you, I doe for
the present bid you most hartile farewell. T. this of, &c.




               Of Epistles Expostulatorie.    _Chap. 2._


=With these expressed examples, I thinke good to conclude this passed
title, and thenceforth to goe to the next, which is |Expostulatory|.
This worde seemeth to haue his definition of reasoning, debating or
arguing a cause, thereby to find the depth, weight, certaintie or
qualitie of the same, and according thereunto to lessen, qualifie, or
enforce the substance of griefe or mislike by such meanes conceiued.
And albeit iniuries, mislikes and discontentments are ordinary to all
men, yet do they for the most part, fall principallie to be receiued
among friendes, among kindred, great acquaintance and familiars, by
occasion whereof, this title in writing is but (as it were) the first
matter of challenge, before anie vile reproch bee performed. And this
also not where there is a resolute malice alreadie conceiued, but
where men aduisedlie and consideratlie do deliberate of their and
other mens actions according to reason to bee considered. By which
aduisement being led, without anie hairebraine or brainsicke deuise
or humor at all, they sometimes mildlie, and in curteous and louing
tearmes according to the state of the writer, and the condition of
those to whome he writeth, expostulate the iniurie, desirous rather
that the trueth by circumstances might be knowne, then anie quarrelsome
matter to bee obtruded. Otherwhiles more roughly and peremptorily they
deale, and yet not vnfittinglie nor badlie. But if the effect of your
writing be not determined in anie of these two sortes, but falleth
otherwise to a manner of reproching of benefittes, or to an exclamation
or bitter enforcement of euils, then may not the same bee said to be
|Expostulatory|, but rather to bee |exprobratorie|, or |inuectiue|, of
which both twaine hereafter shall be further declared. And as this kind
of expostulating falleth most with persons of equalitie, for that it is
scarse thought good maners, and sometimes helde perillous to dispute of
offences with one far aboue vs in authoritie, and with our inferiour so
to doe, it turneth more often to bee |Reprehensorie| then otherwise:
yet is the force thereof manie times caried from an inferiour to his
better, neuerthelesse with a kinde of aunswerable submission alwayes
respectiue to the others reputation or greatnes. And so may a man
with his inferiour also in good sort sometime expostulate an iniurie,
wherin if he shall vouchsafe so to doe, the partie lesse in abilitie
hath the more reason to recognize his courtesie: for a man of good sort
and greatlie reputed of, to offer as it were an imparlance vnto his
inferiour, whereby to argue with him a matter in suspence to bee noted
an iniury, cannot be but much to be praised, and so adiudged in that
betternesse, as to procéede of a most singular bountie. So be it he do
it not by insultation, nor anie pricke of vainglorie, for so doing it
looseth a great part of the vertue therein praysed, vnlesse the desert
of the partie be such, as may well merite that or a greater euill to be
tendered. By all these means as aforesaid may iniuries be expostulated,
the vsage whereof as well in matter of accusation as defence, is
indifferently to be carried, considering that onely by varietie of
allegations and not otherwise those questionable causes are to be
sifted. And so here out will we wade into their seuerall examples.=


  _An example of an Epistle expostulatorie touching certaine iniuries
                        betweene two friends._

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

Maister L. there passed if you doe call to minde, twixt you and mee
certaine speeches of great secrecie, vehementlie concerning the state
and good support of my brother. And for as much as I had then great
suppose, both of your honest courtesie and great fidelitie (as I
thought) sufficient to the matter then spoken of, I did (the extremitie
of the cruell creditours requiring it) not sticke to reueale vnto you
the conceiued maner and means how the same might be redressed. I do
verie perfectly remember, that but to one other besides your selfe, I
did communicate the cause, of whose rare and singular honestie I doe
so much assure my selfe, that if hee should reueale the same, I could
despaire for euer to find any man secret, or that with whatsoeuer
matter of friendship might hereafter be credited. But to be briefe with
you, the secret is discried, and therewithall so fully laide open,
as the whole maner of the same in sort as it was determined by one
of the parties whom it specially concerned, hath been to my brothers
owne eares deliuered. The other partie to whome I reuealed it hath
chaunged his lodging, and hitherto I haue not sent vnto him: whose
approoued fidelitie for that it remaineth of no small record to my
certaine knowledge, I will presume to verifie. It resteth then that
I must needes expostulate with you touching the iniurie, of whome I
haue more cause to doubt, being thereunto led not without manie and
those verie absolute coniectures. For first it is generallie knowne,
that you are verie needie, and to be plaine with you, there be those
that will iustifie that by such meanes you do shift now and then verie
cunninglie. It is master L. a verie base kinde of shift for a Gentleman
in anie treacherous manner to deale with his friend so vnkindlie. And
I can prooue besides, that sithence my trust reposed, you haue entred
speciall conference with the partie. The time likewise dooth somewhat
assure me, in which no one but your selfe coulde so suddenlie preuent
mee. There want not to giue scope hereunto, the speeches also which
the next day you deliuered mee after I had spoken with you, which
was, you feared least my man ouerheard, and might possiblie descrie
mee, whom your selfe knewe an houre before our conference, to haue
beene discharged our companie. Againe, the person and place where he
remaineth, enforce something, whereunto vnaccustomed you haue accesse,
and therefore for some speciall policie. And notwithstanding all these
vehement likelihoodes, yet will I not condemne you, till I see how
you will confute mee. Albeit my censure hitherto passeth that verie
hardlie you may answere it, without especiall note of infamie; which
being so, the displeasure may returne such as I can tell you, will not
be maistered verie easilie. The haste of the messenger forbiddeth me
longer delay, by reason whereof, I am compelled to leaue you. B. this
of. &c.


              _An answere defensorie vnto the effects of
                          the same Epistle._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Liptote._]

[Sidenote: _Excusatiō._]

[Sidenote: _Paræmia._]

[Sidenote: _Anthypophora._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Procatalepsis._]

[Sidenote: _Paramologia._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Charientismus._]

Maister H. The manner of your writing seemeth vnto mee verye straunge,
and the circumstaunce such, as I promise you, wherewith I was neuer
acquainted. I am not a little greeued to thinke that you shoulde
in that peremptorie sort you doe, attribute vnto mee the name of
so base and vnfitte a dealing. I would well you and your informer
vnderstoode: that it is not my practise to vse that cunning, which
you like to tearme by the name of shifting, neither (by whatsoeuer
necessitie constrained) doe I inure my selfe vnto the same. It is an
olde Prouerbe, _Where the hedge is lowest, there euerie man is readie
to goe ouer_. The verifying whereof appeareth in you, who hauing no
more certaintie then your meere imaginations to suspende mee, doe
iniuriouslie obiect my necessitie, as beeing the onelie meane wherewith
to disgrace me. Whie, maister H. dooth it therefore followe because I
want, that my minde must of force become maimed with such treacherie?
You are deceyued, and they guesse much awrie, that in such hatefull
manner doe go about to abuse mee. What argument call you that, that
for because you reuealed your counsell to vs two, and it liketh you
to preferre by certaine allowaunce the others reputation and abilitie
before mee, that therefore I haue deceyued you? Whie if you list to
suppose a trueth on my side (as lawfullie you might doe) were there
not as much reason that I for mine honestie, as hee for his brauerie
shoulde as indifferentlie bee censured? But your probable coniectures
you will saie doe entice you, the one whereof is the time wherein none
coulde preuent you. Was not I pray you that other in Towne as well
as I, though hee altered his lodging? And suppose that euerie daie
wee were both heere since, may it bee vnpossible that another might
endammage the matter as well as we? But I had speciall conference with
the partie, and the place and person without that occasion, of no
likelihoode by mee to bee frequented. Had I conference? Is that a thing
so maruellous? Am I so farre estraunged from honestie, that I may not
haue speech with a man, but to worke my friend villanie? Alacke man,
whie, I was neuer so fearefull of mine one keeping secretes, that I
woulde haue denied it if you had asked mee, neither doe I much force
if your owne eyes doe witnesse the cause when I next speake with you.
In saying the place and person was before time by mee vnused, you
speake iniuriouslie, for your owne selfe doe knowe, that both he and
the rest, were to mee knowne before time, and that verie familiarlie.
To conclude, I wish you to bee perswaded, that in rewarding mee with
such conceytes as these, you shall doe mee but small courtesie, and ill
requite my faythfulnesse by vpbrayding mee with my necessitie, that
woulde haue endeuoured all meanes possible to pleasure you. And as
touching anie infamie to me redounding herein, I woulde I could as well
cleare all my offences to God-warde, as I can free my selfe of this
suspition, and that with as great honestie, as others most maliciouslie
haue sought to defame mee, and then no doubt my account should be a
great deale lesse then it is, when euer the Almightie by his eternall
summons should call me. In resolution whereof, I ende this answere. The
of. &c.


  _A reply to the said answere Defensorie, wherein the matter of the
                 Epistle is more firmlie maintained._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

Of ancient time it hath often beene sayde, _that it is euill halting
before a Cripple_, faithfull dealing and flourishing glosing are two
contraries. Among true friends indeede, and such as doe make more
account of their credite and honestie, then of the base acquiring of
a sleight commoditie, I doe confesse it is not of small moment to
builde vpon the rock of their assurance, and to make reckoning of
their word, to the vttermost, but where Gentilitie is not alonelie
spotted, but in a manner couered and debased alreadie with vnhonestie,
and men hold it for a _Maxime_ to shrowd their lauish and euer emptied
expence, by whatsoeuer kinde of lucre, bee it neuer so filthie, it is
not necessarie that repose bee in such place stablished, least the
vntimelie rooting thereof, doe make men banne their winnings, and
lament the bitternesse of their losse, when too late they are out of
hope, for euer to haue the same recouered.

[Sidenote: _Hypotyposis._]

It seemeth Maister L. by the continuance of your Letter, that the
censure of my former direction, you haue passed ouer very sleightlie,
conceiuing that by a number of od speeches (which in maner of a racket
you haue vsed, to tosse my coniectures as tennis balles, being at your
deeming not much materiall, whether by order of the game you returne
them into the court, or banding them in the aire, suffer them to flie
at all aduentures) you do yet suppose to haue wrought a masterie, and
of whatsoeuer to bee saide agaynst you, to haue discharged your selfe
verie soundlie. You must thinke M. L. I am no babie, neither do you
deale with such a one, that notwithstanding in a plaine and honest
vsage hee accordeth to all simplicitie, is yet of so meane conceyte
but hee is able to vent your vttermost actions, deale you in the
handling of the same neuer so cunningly.

[Sidenote: _Commoratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Confutatiō._]

The maner of your vsage, being peraduēture deliuered in some place
where you were lesse knowne, might make a flourish for your credit,
and for the present, in one sort or other auaile you, but vnto me it
is but matter to smile at, and occasion (to deale plainlie with you)
the more to mislike you, who not contenting your selfe to haue dealte
more vnfriendlie then befitteth, haue determined belike in your reasons
to make me beleeue, that I haue offered you the iniurie, and when you
haue stung mee to the quicke, perswade me that the violence of the
mischiefe lighted vpon your owne body. But the course herein you take,
is too far wide from the censure of any honest opinion. What tell you
me you were acquainted before time with the partie, and of I know not
what businesse you had to do, which at the next sight you care not to
shew mee? and then forsooth that the others ability and my suppose must
bee preferred before you, in respecte of your necessitie? with such
other friuolous repetitions without substance or honestie? and after
that some _Robin_ the deuil, or I wot not what spirit of the aire must
besides impossibility be supposed to reueale the accident. What vanity
is this? what matter of reason therein, that as before I might not
assure my selfe of your infidelity? to what end proceedeth al the other
circumstances, vpon what conceipt doe they cleare you? Tush, tush,
deceiue not your selfe, nor thinke you go so couertly but that men of
discretion can and do daily see you.

Somwhat more thē you think I haue sithence heard how the world
goeth with you, you thought it very much at the beginning I shoulde
expostulate with you, but if I should stir you with this _item_ that I
can tell you where, when, and vpon what expectation you descried mee,
you might thinke I did not then disguize with you.

I study not to capitulate your iniuries, as confessing my selfe also
not to bee vnburdened with offences: But good I deeme it were M. L.
that by some meanes you tooke notice of your owne infirmities. To
aggrauate the wrong that you haue done me, I list not, and more then
I intended haue I spoken vpon that you haue answered. Being vnwilling
to toile my selfe, or trouble your conceiptes any further, I herewith
conclude,

_More sorie of your ill condition, then of the abuse you haue done me._


               _A second answere by the like reasons of
                   the replie, in further defence of
                             the partie._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Paræmia._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

As auncientlie it hath beene accustomed (as in the prouerbe by you
alleadged) _Better it were for some to steale a horse, then for others
to looke on_. It is an easie matter to find a staffe to beate a dog,
and to him that list to haue a bad conceipt, what honest excuse may be
alleadged that can drawe him from it. Men that are opinionatiue, doe
not for the most part measure thinges as they are, but commonlie as
their mind leadeth them, and generally to speake of many thinges that
in particular are vnnumbred, what the cōceipt giueth in certainty to
be adiudged, there is with diuers persons no question of good and bad
afterwardes to be opposed. Among friends sundry occasions do happen
that meerely for themselues are to bee supported, the least of which
happening among strangers, would not without great discontentment be
carried.

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

It is giuen to some to beare much, because they seeme to bee borne to
it, and to laie their shoulders vnder euerie loade, because they are
inured vnto it: yet all that carie loades are not Asses, not euerie
one that supporteth a burden is forthwith a pack-horse. I knowe wel
M. A. you are no babie, nor I thinke you do suppose me so sencelesse
as to be a foole. I vse no rackets to your reasons, as vniustlie you
conceiue of me, nor would I haue you imagine that bicause you think ill
of me I must needs be guilty. I tell you againe as I told you before,
you highly doe wrong me. And in this one more then any other, you most
vnfriendly do abuse me. Why do you so oftē inculcate vnto me, what
other haue reported, and some say they haue seene in me? It is the
truth I stand vpon, & not the malice of any one whatsoeuer, that so
vilely misdeemeth me.

It is not my custome to winke at all thinges as I doe vnto you, so
indifferently, but yet would I haue you conceiue howe much the iniury
toucheth me. You argue against mee that it is not inough that I say it
is not so, so say I vnto you, that you ought not to charge mee without
you can proue it so. Because there resteth some matter wherby I am in
good condition tyed vnto you, it is not seemely for your credit, nor
fit for the honesty wherof you make profession, to lade me any whit the
more with iniury. Make what large collection you list of my present
state and necessity, I tell you, I deeme my selfe the same man that I
was in greater prosperity.

My request is for the surcease of all this iarre, your opinion maie
stande as you list, but giue mee conuenient time and accesse to cleare
mee. To vrge me as you doe, maie but breede that which to neither of
vs may returne pleasing, and which in the end I knowe will be to you
most discontenting. It were good that with lesse resolution you did
sway your opinions, so might you with smaller difficulty decerne, what
with facility in fine you will of your selfe condiscend vnto. My selfe
being as loth to disturbe you, as your self seeme wearied with the
former toile doe herewith set my limits, who worse conceipted of your
light beliefe then of the wrong you haue done me, do not withstanding
continue,

                         _Desirous of your reformed imagination_, &c.

=Now after these double thwartinges on either part receiued in
expostulating this iniury, (the like whereof by writing is sundrie
times occasioned, and remaineth in this place onlie for varietie, to
make shew how by well handeling, matters may on both sides be equally
enforced or weakned) I will sort you forth two or three seuerall
examples more, because of the necessary and often occurrence of this
title, daily being accustomed in our writing. The first whereof shall
be for matter of vnkindnesse: The second for breach of promise: The
thirde from a meane Gentleman to a personage of great honour, wherby in
cause of betternesse shall be exampled how iniuries may be expostulated
or complained of, and these in sequence shall followe by their
examples.=


           _An example of an Epistle Expostulatory touching
                        vnkindnesse receiued._

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

Maister G. I haue great maruell that remaining hitherto in town as
you do, we can by no possibility heare of your being, but by such
iangling messengers as you make currors for spite, whereby to abuse
your friendes. In which the discurtesie is far more by the vnbeseeming
courses & dealings therein vsed, then fitteth either your honestie or
our friendship to be tolerated. I doubted not ere this time how apt
you were to conceiue (euen for a verie toie) in the worst degree that
might bee, of any one that behaueth himselfe neuer so well vnto you,
so ticklish are your humours, and so vnsteady your censures. And which
is worst, it cannot with you rest in imagination alone, but in such
odde kinde of reportes, and to such base persons you deliuer it, as
it verelie seemeth, you little recke what discredit you offer a man
in the same, the least whereof would make you storme to the gall, if
a man should but ouerslip himselfe in giuing any manner of sound of
you, tending to such effect as you proffer. Good God sir, are you and
I of late become such straungers together, as that neither writing
nor request may serue to haue accesse to your presence. Trust mee I
am vnused to these deuises, nor fit they at all vnto my appetite.
Either something or no body to me, but vnto such as more recke of your
coynesse then I doe, you may be as you will, or as their fortunes
may beare with you. For my part I am too vnapt to weld any such
insupportable amity. If you can vse me as your vpright, honest, and
well meaning friend, I am vnto you as firme as you woulde wish me,
otherwise to encounter so many diuersities, of vnfrequented fancies,
toyes, or mislikes, it aunswereth in no point vnto my propertie, which
hauing thought good of meere well wishing to signifie vnto you by
present writing, I leaue you to your best opinion, this of &c.

                      _Yours in all good sort to be entertained, &c._


              _An example of an Epistle expostulatory for
                          breach of promise._

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

Master K. I haue abstayned hitherto to come or sende vnto you, partly
weried with importunity, for that I thought two moneths being now
passed, I might in this space haue found a season conuenient, wherein
to haue ended with you. Hauing taken this cause in hand, I woulde (as
in good reason it seemeth fit) you should determine with me vpon some
conclusion, wheron resting assured, I might thenceforth know wherunto
to trust, & neither waste labour in comming to so small purpose, nor
hinder my certaine busines by the vnsteadie stay of your affaires,
as alreadie I haue done. We haue talked manie times, and set downe
certaine limits, marie to so slender effect, as I neither know when to
demaund, nor you howe to satisfie. So that depending vpon shadowes, I
haue passed my time with small benefite, and you haue gone forward to
little purpose. I doe pray you therefore that hence-foorth such honest
meaning maie assure vs, as alreadie betweene vs hath on either part
beene performed, To delaie me thus with nifles, as I thinke it farre
from a Gentleman, so do I suppose you not intend it, considering how
many wayes thereby, I am and shall be hindred. This therfore may be the
certaine meane to satisfie vs both, that you will (as on Friday last
you promised) come and see the agreement betweene vs performed, whereof
I pray you aduertise your full resolution by this bearer. And so I bid
you heartily fare well, &c.


 _An example of an Epistle Expostulatorie from an inferiour Gentleman
        to his farre better in degree, authoritie and calling._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

Right Honourable, though by the custome and common policie of this
vnhappie worlde, I am better warranted with a personage of your
greatnesse, to dissemble, then to deale plainlie, yet because I
finde as well by Gods owne worde, as by the euent of mens practises,
that such customes are neither pleasing to his Maiestie, nor alwayes
profitable to such as vse them, I haue aduentured to manifest that by
paper, which by words (albeit many times desirous) I neur had heart to
vtter.

[Sidenote: _Propositiō._]

My purpose is to be plaine, and in honest and dutifull sort to
expostulate with your L. wherein I finde my selfe greeued, and
vpon what ground this my complaint is framed. I therfore most
humblie beseech your L. for Gods sake and your owne, to pardon this
presumption, and to admit me fauourable and indifferent construction,
of what I shall here vnfolde vnto you by writing.

I exclaime of wrong passed, I vrge my miserie present, and I complaine
of you to your selfe, and so doe make you iudge of all that shall be
hereafter enformed.

Your L. did once knowe, and hath still some cause to remember, that of
all such lande and liuings as my father at his death was possessed,
one onelie poore farme fall to my share.

I my selfe doe knowe, and shall neuer easilie forget, that after
the same was thrust into my handes, I neuer inioyed it without much
vnquietnesse, quarrell and vexation, nor without the continuall malice
and molestation of my vnnaturall Vncle, and such his associates, as by
setting him on, vnderhande, did afterwardes finde meanes to fasten in
the same.

This poore liuing (once in maner lost, afterwards recouered, and yet
still fearefullie kept, the rather by meane of a newe trouble, moued
vnto me by maister B.) I was in fine driuen to offer for a little, but
to sell for lesse. Now here begins my iust cause of complaint. For vpon
firme hope of your L. fauour towards me, and that you would according
to your honourable promises haue done me an expected good: I was
content to yeeld my interest for eleuen hundred and three score pounds,
where sixteene hundred pounds had beene before offered by my kinsman,
and so I then told you.

This offer of mine, your L. for the time accepted, yeelding with some
difficultie to paie the odde eight score poundes, where I ought it.
Howe be it afterwardes, hauing gotten the Lease into your hands, and
beeing possessed of the bargaine, and none nowe daring to take the same
from you, you quarrelled with the Lease as before you had done with the
title, and made mee a fresh abatement of the odde eight score poundes,
affirming it to bee no part of your charge to paie my debts.

To salue this mischiefe, and to saue my eight score poundes (your
Lordship hauing reported the former bargaine to your most aduauntage)
I laboured without auaile, to helpe your memorie therein. Protesting
(and that most trulie) that vpon mine earnest and humble petition vnto
your L. to leaue mee woorth a thousand pounds, and to paie my debts,
and in regarde also of the great abatement of what I might haue had
else where, your Lordshippe had condiscended in the former conference
to discharge the same. And thereupon willed me, at my next returne to
bring a note of my debts, with the names of my creditors.

This tale I well remember with more trueth then good successe vttred
(speciallie the often touch of what my kinsman had offered me) did
greatlie mislike you. Whereupon growing in heate (yet with some regard
of honour) you swore that if anie other bought the same at my handes
then your selfe, you would haue it for lesse then fiue hundred pounds,
yea, for nothing, or else it should go hard. Marie keeping it my selfe,
you said you would stand my friend: which hote or colde conclusion, I
protest did so appale, as with feare of further losse, with griefe and
discontentment I grewe sicke, and thereupon resolued to take what you
would giue me.

Your Lordship hauing thus, what with countenaunce and choler dismayed
mee, and finding by such peremptorinesse my sense to bee ouercome,
you ranne on still with this wresting course, and vpon authoritie
without cause or colour, cut me yet thirtie pound shorter. So as in
place of one thousand sixe hundred pound offered mee by my kinsman in
the Countrey, your Lordship gaue mee nine hundred and seuentie pound,
leauing me out of this to pay a hundred and sixtie pound debt.

By these meanes (right Honourable) was I then halfe impouerished, and
am now altogither vndone, hauing neither skill to vse that little
you gaue, nor will to raise my selfe after my fall, which I thought
impossible.

It was a wholsome caueat giuen mee by your Lordship, and a full
resolution put downe by my selfe, rather to stoope and to liue somwhat
sparing, then by anie prodigalitie to impaire my stock: but being
neither Marchant, Artizan, Broker, nor Vsurer, nor hauing among manie
debtors, scarce one good payer, I coulde hardly frame to doe what
was aduised me, or be so much mine owne friend, as at first I had
determined.

My state then brought thus lowe, my friends decayed and dead, my liuing
sold for little, and the money spent, I resolued and stil doe with the
rest to leaue my Countrey, as well to couer my want from mine enemies,
as to seuer my selfe from so vnfortunate acquaintance.

Find time therefore I beseech your honour, before my going to examine
these particulars, they containe I protest nothing but matter of truth.
It is a high vertue and most commendable in a man of your state, to
right your inferiour against your selfe, by this shall you winne him
vnfainedlie to loue you, who now vpon iust cause can do no lesse, then
thinke himselfe wronged by you.

And so my good L. this bill exibited into your chamber, not into any
court, deliuered to your owne handes, and to no man els, I leaue to
your honourable and best consideration, humblie once againe beseeching
your L. to suspend your hardest conceit against mee, for expostulating
my griefs, in repect my plainnes herein, passeth not without truth, nor
any wrong enforced, but vpon iust occasion.




               _Of Epistles Exprobratorie.    Chap. 4._


=From matter |Expostulatorie|, wee will nowe turne our selues to the
next title beeing |Exprobratorie|, vnder which is contained cause
indeede of vehement and grieuous disdaine: chieflie touching offences
that impugne a contrarie and laudable merite and desert. For which,
howbeit in all ciuill vsages it be accounted vndecent, vncourteous,
and vnbeséeming anie gentle condition, to reproch a man in time of
mislike, with good offices or turnes, that before he hath receiued. So
when contrarie to the honest affection vnto him bountifully tendred,
a man shall either vngratefully refuse to recognize the same goodnes,
or impudentlie, vnciuilly, or inhumainly go about to reward euil for
good, and to enforce a most vniust vexation, where himselfe hath
receyued most comfort. In such cases to vse this _Exprobratory_ maner
of writing, to signifie vnto yᵉ party so forgetfull of gentlenes, both
what he hath receiued, and howe much he was charged by all waies,
limits and means that may be enforced, of humanitie, pietie, or
gentlenes, it shall not be amisse, and to such ende & no other is this
|Exprobratorie| kind of Epistles to be vsed: Of which, some certaine
examples are in this place to be deliuered.=


        _An example of an epistle Exprobratorie touching ingra-
                           titude receiued._

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Synathrismus._]

[Sidenote: _Commoratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Liptote._]

[Sidenote: _Metonoia._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

I doe not maruell at your woonted and sundrie delayes in aunswering my
requestes, nor that you breake so manie promises with your friendes
for the gratifying of their courtesies: In that beeing thinges by
nature annexed as they are to so seruile a condition, they seeme (as
remedilesse) in all discreet iudgementes to bee borne withall. But that
I wonder at, is, howe my selfe (knowing as I doe, and hauing so often
tasted of that contemptible and harde disposition of yours towardes
mee) should yet be so assotted, as to straine my friendes, to spende my
money, exercise my wits, yeelde my trauell, bende my care, and passe
my credite, to relieue, vpholde, nourish and maintaine such a one, in
bringing him from nought to ought, from the dunghill to the court, from
woe to wealth, as hath neither honestie to regarde me, wit to vse me,
will to requite me, ciuilitie to respect mee, good nature to thanke
me, nor any one sparke of endeuour whereby so much in good seeming to
behaue himselfe towards me. Many occasions haue beene giuen mee before
time by some other misprizers of my curtesie, but you of all others
haue exceeded and do passe them all in vnhonestie. That I shoulde bee
occasioned thus to reproch you as I doe, is iwis vnto me no great
contentment, but that at my handes who alwaies haue so manifoldlie
deserued of you, you should so far forth challenge to be reproched,
that certainly is it whereof you ought most to bee ashamed. Howe many
wayes you haue wronged me, and howe little cause hereafter I haue to
entermedle or haue to doe with you, hauing so ingratefully, nay rather
inhumanelie dealt with me, let the world iudge betweene you and me. Had
I tried you in much, or in one halfe of that whereby in very dutie you
are charged vnto me, it had beene somewhat to haue denied me: But in a
matter so slender, so small valued, and but a trifle, to delay me, to
stande with mee, to breake promise with mee, and which is worst of all,
most vnciuillie therewith to bearde me, that of all others is the most
detested that may bee. Sorie I am, not that I haue knowne you, for the
knowledge shall keepe mee from you, but that in nourishing of you, I
forgot my selfe so much, as I coulde neuer till this present perceiue
nor looke after you. Fare as you will for me, who euer hereafter desire
neither to know nor see you. From B. this of, &c.


           _An Epistle exprobatory, more largely exampled._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Hyperbole._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

Albeit vnto a gentle minde there is nothing lesse proper, then a
reproching of benefittes: nor any thing more contrarying, then to bee
touched with discurtesies: yet respecting the weight of the manifold
wrongs done vnto me, & most iniurious deuises, wherein thou hast
contrary to all lawes of nature, vertue, or honestie, gone about to
abuse mee, rewarding not euill, but worse then mischiefe it selfe,
for good, and doing that which all men hate, and the most discreet
doe abhorre in requitall of that which I chieflie deserued of thee, I
hold my selfe neither to be touched in gentlenes, nor deemed at all
in discurtesie, if to such a Camelion I giue his due colours, of so
vile a viper doe bewray the feature, to so ingratefull a wretch doe
blaze forth his picture, and of so vglie a beast do yeeld his due
portraiture, to the ende that at least it may appeare vnto thy selfe,
howe vnlike to that thou hast euer seemed vnto me, I haue nowe found
thee, and how contrarying to that my selfe haue manifoldly bounde thee,
thou hast now shewed thy selfe vnto me.

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Brachiologa._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

[Sidenote: _Anthipophora._]

To the opening whereof let mee call to remembraunce that beeing here
a great while sithence a straunger, spoiled of that thou haddest,
laden with sicknesse, pursued of thy foes, burdensome to thy friends,
subiect to a number of casualties, of death, pouertie, hatred, penurie,
griefe, trouble, and want, I tooke thee, I kept thee, I relieued thee,
I prouided for thee, and that at such time as when forsaken of all
others, thou wast onely compassed with extremitie, had not this one
curtesie, nay rather vnaccustomed kindnes, beene sufficient alone,
wherewith to haue bound thee? Questionlesse it had, rested there at al
any sparke of good condition within thee, yet had this been all that I
had done for thee, happilie could I then haue contented my selfe, and
haue thought that thou haddest therein alone dealt but ingratefullie.

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Commoratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Aporia._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Paradoxon._]

[Sidenote: _Hyperbole._]

Abhorrest thou not in the perusing hereof to thinke howe thou hast
vsed mee? Well knowest thou that on this hie point of curtesie, I
stucke not alone with thee, for after a recouery by my meanes had, and
restitutions of thine estate, vnto thy wonted possessions, health,
freedome and libertie, I not only so setled thee, but beeing haled thy
selfe (as it were) out of the Lions iawes, I made thine aduersaries a
praie vnto thee, I fauored thee, I loued thee, I esteemed thee when
none would regard thee, when all men despised thee. Were not these
benefits sufficient, to haue yoked any good or honest disposition vnto
me? What Viper may I then terme thee? what monster or hellish imp
that not onely hast not vouchsafed so much as to requite, but scornest
in apparance so much as to beare a good opinion towardes me? Is it
possible that man than a Serpent, or than the very Crocodile it selfe
should become more malicious, yet hast thou in far greater quantitie
then these contained thy venome, the Hydra was not answerable vnto thy
propertie, the very Sauages themselues could not equall thee, thou art
infine beyond all, and there are none beyond thee, for both men and
beasts do abhor thy treachery.

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

[Sidenote: _Pleonasmus._]

[Sidenote: _Polyptoton._]

What then auaileth that of such a one I haue merited so highlie?
Whereto serueth it to haue extended on him so greate and vnused bounty?
The dog fawneth by kinde where he is loued, the Tyger by gentlenes
is from his cruelty disturned, the Lion wil not suffer a kindnes
vnregarded. But thou (hatefull of all others) degenerating from all
nature both of men and beasts weighest not of friendship, reiectest
fauors, hatest all gentlenes, regardest no kindnes, contemnest merits,
and kindlesse of all kinds, or rather sequestred from any kinde, giuest
thy selfe to rewarde the best deseruinges, with vnauoidable and most
destestable villanies.

[Sidenote: _Epizeuxis._]

[Sidenote: _Anaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

Had I not too much deserued as I haue done at thy handes, it might in
some sort haue sufficed me. Had I by any known or pretended euill,
euer pursued thee, had I meant at any time badly vnto thee, it might
yet haue cōtented me, that forgetfull of al that before passed, thou
shouldest in this hatefull manner haue dealt with mee. But hauing onely
heaped on thy head a multitude of fauors, receiued thee as I haue
done with so sundrie curtesies, imbraced thee as thou knowest with
infinite contentmentes, deliuered thee from death, and verie hellish
tormentors, what kindnesse could be more, or what merite so ample?
And contrariwise, what requitall so slender, what acknowledgement so
bad, or what recompence so euill, then wherewith besides all course of
iustice and equitie thou hast most vnnaturally acquited me? One only
comfort resteth, that of all honest minds thou art hated deseruedly,
and out of all gentle company art excluded perpetually, wherin hauing
the only solace vnto my grieued conceits, that for the present may be
acquired, I liue in hope to see thee once againe to haue neede of mee,
when according to thy demerits I shall thinke of thee, and in the meane
while esteeme of thy fashions, as thou hast giuen me cause to accompt
of them.




                         Of Letters inuectiue.
                              _Chap. 5._


=To these |Exprobratorie| epistles, doth next follow the title
|inuectiue|. A sharpe and bitter inueighing against the person, déedes,
or behauiours of men, occupied altogether in condemning, disabling, and
wresting, whatsoeuer maie bee collected to the reproofe, diminution,
or impugning of anie one, and that by all maner of quips, tauntes,
reproches, blames, imputations, or designmentes that maie bee of
euils. And yet this not by a disordered, malicious or railing humour,
vniustlie and without great and forcible cause to be pursued, but by a
learned, discreete, lawfull, or reasonable toleration to be followed,
which in all maner of directions is principallie to be required. The
conueiance is as full of Art as anie others, that heretofore haue
beene exampled vnto you, and as well for rife and quicke inuention,
as orderlie disposition, enforcementes, and neate deliuerie, hath his
speciall commendation.=


            _An example of an Epistle Inuectiue of a father
                          against his sonne._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Metonoia._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

[Sidenote: _Liptote._]

[Sidenote: _Periphrasis._]

The sight of your letters, and message receiued by your seruant haue
(good Coosen) bred to mee in perusing and harkening vnto the same,
no small matter of disquiet, not that your letters or messages for
themselues are, or haue beene at anie time ill welcome to my hands,
but in respect of him for whom they come, whom in truth I neuer recke
if I heare of, so filled haue I beene long since with the euils by him
committed. I am nothing ignorant that of loue and meere good will you
beare to mee and mine, you framed your speeches vnto me, which with how
much tediousnes I haue considered of, and with what willingnes I could
haue omitted to answere them, no one can so wel giue testimony, as the
burthen of mine owne sorrow beareth witnes vnto me.

[Sidenote: _Apostrophe._]

[Sidenote: _Noema._]

[Sidenote: _Liptote._]

But for that I see you are ill conceyted at my heauinesse, and of your
owne good nature woulde gladlye finde meane to recouer that vnto mee,
which my selfe am out of hope for euer to compasse, I am content,
though ill pleasing to my remembraunce, and the rather also that by the
extremitie of the euilles your owne minde maie bee disswaded from anie
further dealing in the cause, to shewe vnto you the good conditions of
him you sue for, what manner a sonne hee hath alwayes beene vnto mee,
what reason thereby I haue to commaunde him from mee, and howe farre
wide you are, that in such sort as you declare, doe conceiue both of
him, and of mee.

[Sidenote: _Paralepsis_]

I neede not repeate heere vnto you, with what fatherlie care I haue
brought him vppe to mannes estate, by what prouident foresight, I
sought both with maintenaunce and conuenient place of credite, to
continue him as a Gentleman, howe vnwilling I was to enter into the
search of euerie small offence, but attributing the force thereof
to his tyme of youth, was content to winke at that manie times,
the sufferaunce whereof I doubted would turne to the ruine that it
presentlie carrieth. I will but giue you an instaunce of the same, to
the intent that as you shall knowe thereof, so may you in reuoluing the
rest, consider the better howe vnkindlie, yea, more then vnnaturallye I
maie saie, hee hath rewarded me, and therewith will come to the present
estate wherein he now remaineth.

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Commoratio_.]

It is I iudge about three yeares sithence, to the intent to retaine
him in some good order of life, I placed him with a right godlie and
worshipfull Knight, Sir H. D. who for my sake both loued him, and I
knowe tooke paines to the vttermost to reforme him, before that time
I had placed him in an Inne of Courte, where with expences sufficient
I kept him. In both of these places hee brought mee more then I will
rehearse indebted, ranne himselfe on the rockes, durst not besides
(for that priuilie hee had taken vp) to shewe his head. Complaints
were infinite against him, this man could not bee in quiet for him,
that mans seruant hee misused, this partie hee deceyued, that other
hee highlie wronged: what coulde I doe vnto these thinges, but as one
desirous to reclaime him whom he knewe to be his owne (though with a
resolute vow neuer to deale with him,) I then had cast him off, yet
by intreatie of his friends, and his earnest submission I receiued him
againe. Sithence which too much it is to be reuealed, how stubbornlie
euen in mine owne house, how iniuriously among mine owne people, he
hath behaued himselfe, by reason whereof as compelled for the quiet
of mine owne familie, I appoynted him to goe from hence into S. there
to remaine with his Vncle. And because it was against a Christmasse,
and that I woulde not dismisse him vnfurnished of that belonged vnto
a Gentleman, (besides that, with a couple of good Geldings I horsed
him and his man, and suted him of apparell, and what other needfull
necessaries) I deliuered him twentie pounds in his purse. Hee was no
sooner gone to D. beeing not past twentie myles from my house, but the
verie same night hee loste all his money at dice, pawned his horses for
twentie Nobles, and was faine of an honest friend of mine to borrow
tenne poundes for his expences, and to redeeme his Geldings, one of my
poore Tenants there refusing to supplie his wantes, hee fowlie beate,
and if companie had not come in to the rescue, had like to haue slaine
him.

Nay, what hath hee done more, but knowing that these his ill demeanours
comming once to mine eares, I woulde neuer after repute of him, hee
hath confederated with a wicked rascall that once was his man, who
beeing the verye same night in his companie, the next day after came to
my house and robbed me.

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Prolepsis._]

[Sidenote: _Prosopopœia._]

Are not these impieties (thinke you) verie straunge? What Nature is
in such a sonne, nay, where in him are those district lawes of Nature
become, that commonlie enforceth in all other children, an awfull
loue and reuerent regarde vnto their parents? Where is the feare of
diuine and humane lawes, the one threatning a sharpe scourge for such
vndutifulnesse, and the other punishing by penall forfeytures and
imprisonments, the manner of such detestable and disordered loosenesse.
To what issue is the auncient right and laudable custome of our
forefathers alreadie runne, that whilome by seuere directions compelled
the runnagate vsage of their children to a more district imposition and
farre estranged exaction then nowe vsed, of a most rare and singular
obedience? Why is the common intendment earst in our predecessours
tymes, of lawfull and good so accustomablie vsed, thus quite forworne,
and in these our seasons (filled with all kind of carelesnes) so far
forth disgraced? who is he that now recketh farther then his owne
fantasie, or what sonne wil for any zeale or dutie once seeke to repell
his owne appetite? Whither are ye gone yee iust and seuere iudges, by
whose sentence and opinion definitiue sharpe and bitter tortures were
laid downe vnto them, that durst presume by any outward shewe in the
world, but once so much as to countermaund the authoritie of their
fathers?

[Sidenote: _Emphasis._]

[Sidenote: _Aporia._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Orismus._]

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

O times more iniurious then euill it selfe, by whose onely sufferance,
mischiefe spreadeth her selfe so highly as it doth, into such manifold
branches. What would you haue me to say in these things? thinke you
not that I haue alreadie receiued discontentment inough at such
a ones hande? or would you wish me againe by returning him home
weetinglie, to sucke vp mine owne misfortune, and by nourishing an
expugnable wickednesse, to see a demonstration of mine owne sorrowe and
destruction daylie before mine eyes? No, no, coosin, I haue (I hope)
taken order sufficient for these thinges, his presence I am resolued
shal no more disquiet mee, by hearing or remembrance of him, if no
friend of mine doe otherwise vexe mee, for needes a vexation must it
bee, be it but the least suppose, to conceiue that I haue yet remayning
vnto mee such a sonne. Take heede (good Coosen) that as hee hath
deceyued a great manie others, but mee of all others most especiallie,
he also doe not deceyue you. Driue him quicklie from your presence, and
thinke that a greater plague can you not receyue into your familie,
then a person so vile, and of all others demeaned so wickedlie. This
is all that I can delyuer you of my present opinion, but not the least
of a thousande other accidents occasioning the same. Whereon I am
determined fullie to repose my selfe. Sending in the meane time my
heartiest commendations and earnest thankes for the indifferent care
had of my being both to you and your bedfellow, this of, &c.


    _An answere purgatorie of the sonne touching matters Inuectiue
                        of the former Epistle._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

Were it not sir that my presence might more offend you then I wish,
or by anie action of mine owne, woulde willinglie deserue, I had
(emboldened by the equitie and right of my cause) in all humble
reuerence and dutie, tendered my self vnto you, but vnderstanding howe
greatly the malice of mine auncient enemies haue preuailed towards mee,
and that without the verie pietie of your selfe, and equall regarde
had to the due information of my cause, there is no place of fauour
left vnto me, I choose as the meetest to abandon for a while the
yeelding vnto you (by my accesse) of anie such annoyance, and in the
meane time, to frame these humble lines, pacifiers of your more then
ordinarie discontentments, that as true aduertisers of the course of
that wherwith I am charged, they may plead pardon of your protested
mislike, and winne vnto me (as I hope) that intertainment againe, from
which hitherto by the vndeserued proceedings of mine aduersaries, I
haue iniuriouslie beene detained.

[Sidenote: _Insinuatiō._]

[Sidenote: _Paresia._]

And albeit there is no reason whie, in the measure of all your actions,
I shoulde or ought to deeme, that you doe, or enterprise anie thing
vnaduisedlie: yet for so much as the secret sting of malice is such,
as is able to penetrate the wisest, and that where much is feared, the
least matter inducing thereunto is made occasion to question of, I doe
in as lowlie manner as I maie, beseech that but with indifferencie you
will see howe and in what sort I am wronged, and giuing credite to what
hereby in mine owne defence alledged, you will censure the rest, as to
the respect of your fatherlie pietie appertaineth.

[Sidenote: _Propositiō._]

[Sidenote: _Anaphora._]

The weight of that, for which as I vnderstande you are agreeued agaynst
mee, is that heretofore you haue had suggested vnto you that I am
verie vnthriftie, that I keepe lewde companie, that I consume all at
dice, that I am a quarreller, and lastlie, that you surmize you were
robbed by meane of mee, or by my assent, all which to confirme, mine
aduersaries seeme to haue gathered vppon me great aduantage, in that
notwithstanding, beeing often forewarned the contrarie, I sithence fell
into companie, played at dice, brake a mans head, and that my man that
robbed you, was the night before in my companie.

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

[Sidenote: _Paramologia._]

Much more euill commonlie carrieth the reporter, in deliuering an ill
suppose of a reasonable conceyted matter, then oftentimes dooth the
action it selfe, in the most woorst degree of truth that can bee,
beeing equallie considered of, for example, was it euer helde a thing
insufferable for a Gentleman to frequent companie or to plaie at dice?
May it not sometimes be iustifiable to breake a mans heade? is it a
matter of preiudice that hee who once did mee seruice was seene in my
company? Your selfe, sir, I knowe wil aunswere for me to all these, No.
Then will not I, not only not deny but I did all these, but by your
fauour, iustifie to their faces, that honestlie, lawfullie, without
offence against you, or reasonable mislike of anie other, I haue and
might againe at any time enter into the like vsage of all or any of
these, as at that time I did, when they so complained of me.

[Sidenote: _Commoratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Hypotyposis._]

[Sidenote: _Metonomia._]

[Sidenote: _Epiphonema._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

The company whereof I am accused were such onely and none other as
I found in mine Inne, gentlemen ech to you wel known and of all men
generallie well reputed, the plaie that I vsed was with them, the
set by agreement not great, concluded vpon more to passe time, then
whereof to make gaine. Hereunto commeth a bad fellowe out of the town
accompanied with one of your tenaunts, who looking on a good while,
craued at last hee might set, which being granted, a cast fell between
him and me of a nūber to be decided, for his opinion he dared me a
good time with twenty Nobles to my geldings, I accepted the wager, the
boorde went with mee, your tenant excepted, who against all others
stood against me, and hauing this wager in his custody would not
deliuer it me. Words by such meanes multiplied, and they both arose
against mee, whereupon forced to some impatience, my hand made way to
my right, wherewith I quailed their resistance. Lo now sir, the matter
thus highly framed against me, lo here the losse, the pawning, the
borrowing of money, and what killing and slaying against mee reported.
See here I beseech you the vnthriftines, the misrule, the il company,
and what else that malice could any waies deuise to ouerthrow me.

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

And yet if but truely in their verie supposes they shoulde haue dealte
with me, what conceipt could they then haue found in all this to obiect
against me? Is it not a thing ordinary among Gentlemen when they
meete together to solace themselues with some one or other reasonable
pastime, in allowance whereof, no one is ordered by himselfe, but by
common liking of the rest? Is it not a thing naturall to man, after
wearisome trauels to vse vnto his minde some honest recreation? Is
it not accordant to ciuilitie to entertaine times and occasions?
Affoorded you not therefore the money you gaue mee, in companie well
reputed, and in their honest exercises, moderatelie to maintaine
mee? Agreeth not hereunto your onelie dailie conuersation, your
entertainments, your continuall vse of companie applied in your owne
behauiors, and in others commended before me?

[Sidenote: _Anthypophora._]

[Sidenote: _Paramologia._]

[Sidenote: _Epanodis._]

What then may bee saide to condemne me? the common name (perchaunce)
of the plaie, carying with it a continuall surmize of inconuenience?
I need not here lay vnto your wisdome for my defence, that as well
therein, as in all other demeanors, there is _vse_ which is allowed,
and _abuse_, that in it selfe is insufferable. To commende the moderate
vse hereof, I can induce nothing more then _custome_, and for the
choise of the best obseruation, the company must cleare mee. Nowe in
auoiding the enormities, the charge (if I misconceiue not) you gaue
me, extended to the fellowship of the worst, in whose societie nothing
is so common as ill vsage, and in whose pleasures, no one thing so
ordinarie as vnthriftinesse, each of which occasioning that euill which
I seeke to shunne, hath beene herein so far exempted, as I protest
there resteth in veritie, no suspicion at all wherewith I may be
charged.

[Sidenote: _Apostrophe._]

[Sidenote: _Paradigma._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Polyptoton._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

But if nowe sir, you will reason of your tenauntes hurte, what therein
may bee obiected that shall not euery waie further mee: who is hee
that by nature could bee so restrained, but by the verie instinct
thereof, hee will rather kill if neede bee, then stande to be killed?
Hath not the Soueraigne mother of all our earthlie beeing, armed euen
the verie Beastes themselues to their owne defence? hath not the Lyon
his clawes, the Bull his hornes, the Dogge his teeth, and the Boare
his tuskes? Doe not the worthiest sort of mankinde also contemne to be
misprized, and naturallie couet where they bee enforced, immediatlie
to be reuenged? Allotteth not the lawe vnto euerie man his right? Was
it not by Conuention agreed, that the winner shoulde haue the wager?
And did not the vniuersall sentence of the whole boord, adiudge it
to me? What resteth any waies then to bee alleadged whereby in this
action to accuse mee? Nay rather what is vnleft herein to condemne him,
that being your tenaunt, hauing his liuing of you and yours, beholding
as hee is to all yours, woulde yet be so vile conceipted against any
of yours, as not with ordinary speeches alone, but with vnfitting
tearmes, with violent force woulde goe about to withstande me, to hurt
mee, yea desperatelie to confederate with another of my life and money
to bereaue me.

[Sidenote: _Dialysis._]

[Sidenote: _Ecphonesis._]

[Sidenote: _Expeditiō._]

[Sidenote: _Dichologia._]

But nowe to drawe vnto the last parte that toucheth my man, standing
as a coniecture for that hee was in my companie the night before, I
must conspire with him to rob you. Do but cōsider sir I pray you,
what likelihood of truth this beareth: would any one be so mad as
once to harme, or go about to hurt the possessions that in right is
to no one so much as himselfe? Woulde I euer appeare so vngracious
as to confederate with a stranger, to no benefit but of himselfe,
to rob and spoile my father? Alas, what coulde there be so aduerse
vnto Nature, as should enforce in me so vnkinde a condition? You must
needes Sir (by your fauour) something consider, what one thing or
more might bee in mee occasioning vnto the same, it must either bee
some vehement necessitie (which neuer hapened) constraining mee, some
great extremity (which you know to bee contrary) wherewith by keeping
mee too short of expence or maintenance you might enforce me, a kinde
of wanton prodigality, whereof no worlde can accuse me, ill counsell
whereunto so far forth I neuer could yeelde me, or a most detestable
and vile disposition graffed in my selfe, which no man euer found in
me. These causes as I thinke are the most likest of all others inducing
to those opinions, which howe farre they or any of them haue estranged
my condition, let but the verie consciences of my vtmost aduersaries
indifferently trie: me what if hee were in my company, is not that a
thing that without any suspition at all, might easliest of al others
happen vnto me? I am not weeting of mens thoughts, neither can I
coniecture of any other but their outward demeanors: if he were il,
weigh I pray you, the fault proceedeth not from me. Sory I am that any
such conceipt by any one of mine should so much offend you.

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

[Sidenote: _Dichologia._]

These things then falling out in such sort as they be, it may please
you sir, henceforth to allowe of this my iust Apology, and by the
selfe same _nature_, _piety_, and _louing condition_, wherewith in all
duty and obedience I seeme firmely charged vnto you, in like sort to
recognize and receiue mee, who notwithstanding I confesse many waies
heretofore, to haue erred, yet heerein in no one point indifferent rest
I rightlie to be challenged. The expectation whereof hath made mee
presume to the recommendation of these letters, attending therwithal
the newes of your good conceipt, and happy returne of this bearer.
From, &c. this, &c.

=To this defence, we will for the more variety suppose a reply to
be made by the Father, the reasons whereof shall yet also consist
in the selfe same state |absolute|, yeelding thereby a more ample
demonstration of the diuersitie of constructions incident to those
places, and how by the forcible applications of their special
intendmentes, they are, or may be caried to diuers seuerall purposes.
Inasmuch, as like to their present vse in this defence they haue beene
suggested for confirmation and to the clearing of the sonnes faultines,
herein also by the same conueiance they shal be maintained by the
confutation of al his former allegations, the matter whereof, in sort
following may be considered.=


    _A replie of the father confuting the allegations of the sonne,
               and maintaining the causes of the former
                         inuectiue alleadged._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora_]

Your wiles (Sirra) and sophisticall expositions of your owne
misdemeanours, with sundrie confirmations therein vsed, whereby to
driue me from the verie suppose of that whereunto no one thing hath
giuen more euident testimony, then the course and progression of your
whole life, are either too newlie forged, to reape at my hands any
sound credite, or the metall so light, as carieth in the weight thereof
verie small substance. in my conceipt to be beleeued.

[Sidenote: _Insultatiō._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

Well haue you applied your wits (no doubt) and to especiall good
purpose haue your studies bin framed, that can so cunninglie cōment as
you haue done vpon so bad a text, but withdraw your measure betimes,
and cease this ouerweening, least by continuing your selfe in a fools
paradice, and where al things are naught, supposing nothing to be
amisse, you do (as by your deserts you haue sundry times endeuored
to lose a father) so in the end frame a desperate meane to lose your
selfe, when you may neuer be recouered.

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Parison._]

[Sidenote: _Synathrismus._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Orismus._]

[Sidenote: _Metonoia._]

The shame you haue of your mischiefe done, and guiltinesse of your
owne conscience to come in my sight, togither with a knowne mislike
that you haue receiued from mee, either to see or heare from you: you
vse as a cloake, to couer the long pretext you haue made in defence
of your euils, you haue well shewed that paper beareth no other
hue but his owne, and the letters you imprint therupon, carrie but
their proper colour. Though they falsifie a thousande actions, and
bolster vp inumerable lies, it is not seene in their chaunge, but in
a shamefast browe of him that were not past shame, the least of all
these would quickelie bee deciphered. Is it not inough you haue done
badlie touching your selfe, vnkindlie demeaned your selfe towardes your
fathers friendes, vnthriftily consumed your time in some one or other
badde companie, run at randon euerie way to your parents and your owne
infamie, but that also in your behauiours, you will not onelie dare
to denie it, but which is woorse, in your writing seeke to defende
it. It fitteth not that I shoulde vse reasoning, neither meane I to
contend with your cautels, but for fashions sake, or (if so you list)
to beate that to your remembrance, whereof hitherto you abandon the
notice, let me aske you this one question. In all your smooth passage
and flourish made of your companie, their reputation, your ciuilitie,
small play, my allowance, and your construction vpon the same, dooth
it not drawe to this ende, that it was in an Inne, in a place filled
with all vnthriftinesse, in a dicing Chamber, in a spectacle for all
companies? Doth not the verie deliuerance of your owne fact condemne
you, dooth not the verie sequell of his entrance, looking on, and
plaie (whome you tearme to bee a base fellowe) impugne you? Dooth not
your after quarrell and mischiefe done oppose it selfe agaynst you?
What if all the information deliuered vnto mee in particular were not
true? Is not the substaunce true? _Nature_ coueting recreation, is in
him that will bee modestlie gouerned, to be measured as well by time
and place, as by entertainment of companies, _Custome_ carrying with
it selfe anie secrete insimulation of euill, is not to bee followed;
_ciuilitie_ is not _ciuilitie_, when it shall bee repugnant to a right
gouerned modestie: can that be agreeing to _Law_, which in effect is
discordant from anie good order of law? Induce you my allowance, as a
confirmed _sentence_ to your vaine opinions? Why, sirra, frequented I
euer anie such play in Innes? Nay rather did I not euer mislike it,
alwaies spake against it, and in euerie action condemne it? Stood not
my conceit that being in the best part it might be, though young men
stoode neuer so much on their light gaming, and little hinderance, it
was rather an allurements and inurement to vnthriftines then a pastime
of any gentlenes, when it was vsed in a Gentlemans house, which is by
sundrie defences more tollerable, and not in an Inne, the verie publike
intertainer of all kinds of societies.

[Sidenote: _Synathrismus._]

At your departing from mee, your iourney laie to S. you were to
trauaile to my friendes house. In respect of the time, my reputation,
your beeing, the place, and the companie, I furnished you with money,
knowing that there, and with such persons, and in their seuerall
pleasures you were to bee conformed to companies: Hereof gaue I euer
allowance, the like whereof haue I deemed meetest for the expence and
societie of anie Gentleman, thither shoulde you haue trauelled, so in
the honest distribution of that allowed for your maintenaunce, you had
both auoyded the present mischiefe, alreadie incurred, and preuented
occasions, wherby manie times they are aduentured.

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

[Sidenote: _Antithesis._]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

It is not inough, not to doe euill, but we ought also to resist the
occasions of euill, what recreation I pray you, after trauell is more
natural then rest? Who more subiect to casualties, then they that
hazarde themselues to most companies? What _custome_ better, then
to vse our Inne for repose, the onelie and sole intent whereunto it
was prepared? Wherein is _ciuilitie_ more commended then in honest
gouernment? What more lawfull for any man then laudablie to beare
himselfe? Your demeanour is tyed to your own behauiour, and not to
anothers inclinations, your actions well disposed, are not offensiue to
what by others pleasures to bee continued: had you vsed the place as it
serued for, who would haue beene discontented? Once it appeareth that
euill is come of it, brawlings arise, men are hurt, slanders ensue, and
infamy doth guerdon it.

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

Touching the latter part of your Letter I say little, till I haue
more deliberatelie of the circumstaunce considered. Some, hoping
more of that you will bee, then I dare intende what you maie bee,
haue manie wayes in this action perswaded mee. Where much hath beene
ouerpassed, it is reason that something at length do beare shew to
haue well deserued. Simplicitie in well doing, is farre more pleasing
then a curious definition of well dooing. When I finde proofe of your
amendement, I shall then wish to see you. Meane while, it shall behooue
you to enter into your selfe, and more circumspectly to consider what
most fittest beseemeth you, wherewith at this present my directions
shall conclude. R. this, &c.


 _An example of another Epistle Inuectiue, pleasantly written against
        the humours and conditions of a vaineglorious person._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Epanodis._]

[Sidenote: _Liptote._]

Were the peeuishnes of my conceits correspondent to those vaineglorious
humours of yours, I could before and sithence your exemplified
discourse committed to my view, haue vpon occasion sufficient, deuised
how and wherewith to haue preuented or answered your accustomed cauils.
The first whereof not hauing performed, so could I willinglie also haue
left the latter vndone by determined speech to haue beene accomplished,
were it not that hauing prooued the arrogancie to bee in you, wherewith
vniustly you charge me, I might by my ouerlong silence giue head to
your follies, and whilest by an outragious well liking of your selfe
you become ignorant of your owne mischiefs, you might vse a scope not
necessarie therby more farther to abuse my sufferance, as heretofore
you haue done a great many others by their common negligence.

[Sidenote: _Ironia._]

For auoyding whereof, I haue (as my leisure would induce mee) thought
good to giue place to mine owne determination, & to serue your humour
so farre forth as to answere your letter, not being stung, as you
fondlie and vainlie imagine, with the venome thereof, nor galled with
the opposed surmises of your munificence, wealth, credite, reputation,
and I know not what besides, all which I do suppose either to be so
skant, as no man can substantiallie discerne them, or otherwise that
you would neuer so often as you do, without a surfeiting follie enduour
to obtrude them.

[Sidenote: _Omiosis._]

[Sidenote: _Sarcasmus._]

The policies you vse with mee are nothing straunge, which because
they are nowe growne so stale, bee euerie waie therefore the lesse
currant. Howe like vnto a shamelesse woman, or some other base
conceyted creature, you appeare in your wryting, let but the matter
of your Letter testifie, if because you haue both manlie shape and
countenaunce, you will admitte neither of these similitudes, you must
bee either a childe, or a foole, and so weare a bable, or take a horne
booke at your girdle, and get you to schoole againe.

[Sidenote: _Anthypophora._]

[Sidenote: _Schesis onomatō._]

[Sidenote: _Ironia._]

[Sidenote: _Insultatio._]

[Sidenote: _Meiosis._]

[Sidenote: _Merismus._]

[Sidenote: _Antiphrasis._]

[Sidenote: _Prosonomasia._]

[Sidenote: _Meiosis._]

[Sidenote: _Charientismus._]

[Sidenote: _Epitropis._]

[Sidenote: _Asteismus._]

You complaine that I haue done you iniurie, if I haue, why then doe you
not content your selfe to pursue the reuengement thereof, either with
manlike or lawfull extremitie? Whie take you for a refuge these cankred
foolish vpbraidings, womanish encountrings, vnseemlie lyings, and
childish threatnings. If we folow the rule you begin, we must straight
waies bee children, and then I must wrangle why you stole away _Toms_
bread and butter, and you must threaten if I tell of that, you will
then complaine of mee for eating vp the firmentie that was kept for the
childs breakefast, or how I drunke vp my grandams ale and toste, or
lick bread in the dripping panne, or some such like weightie causes. A
soueraigne capacitie no doubt. Is this manner of dealing deriued I pray
you from your Gentilitie, or had you it by education, or haue you won
it with your wealth, or is it incident to your reputation? Bee these
your incounters? A braue canuisado, indeede, when to deface an honest
minde, you haue shot out all the venome of twentie yeares acquaintance
that you haue stuffed togethers, and all not woorth a butterflie, then
to tell to those that accompanie you, howe brauelie you haue touched
mee, howe with your learned enditing to so manie read and shewed, you
haue quencht mee, howe manie wayes behinde my backe, if you were so ill
disposed you could kill mee, and for default of other matter forsooth,
howe they laughed at mee to whome I haue spoke somewhat against you,
and howe master B. found _Socrates_ in my Letter, and sent to seeke out
your well reputed sconce to expound it, not without the credit of your
owne worshipfoltie to be admitted to the sight hereof: If I should for
carrying this insight, not say you were a great Clearke, your grauitie
I knowe would condemne mee, and it would bee thought in your deeper
studies, that my senses did faile me. But alas sir, what is it that I
woulde denie you? It is not I, well I wot that haue abilitie, or if I
had, woulde presume so far as to impugne you, what wold you more sir?
I am come to your bow, and acknowledge your credit, your worshipful
acquaintance, and all else you haue brought me to. But yet sir, after
all these sporting deuises, hee is but a Nidcote, and that wise man can
tell you, that will glory so much in such fruitles follies.

[Sidenote: _Metonoia._]

[Sidenote: _Anthypophora._]

[Sidenote: _Sarcasmus._]

But say I tis your vaine glory? No, not so, it is but a Thrasonicall
exercise. There bee that affirme Gentilitie hath no deriuation, where
is neither good nature, honesty, nor friendly condition. But what is
that to you? A man may sit vnder a stall with credit, but to be laid on
a stal, smelleth somwhat of beggership. Go to, I warrant him he is a
proud fellow, and little of good maner knoweth, that so rudely wil dare
to speake of your maistership.

[Sidenote: _Apostrophe._]

[Sidenote: _Charientismus._]

Yet nowe we be in, let vs goe to it by the weeke. In odde sooth I must
tel you plainly, your occupations haue beene too manifolde to thriue by
your honesty. But perchance the terme is quaint, and you will saie this
matter of honesty is besides your profession? Alacke sir, though it be,
you must pardon the writer, it was but a mistake in his penning, by ill
noting your pedegree.

[Sidenote: _Irmus._]

[Sidenote: _Asteismus._]

Tush pedegree, pedegree, here is nothing with you in hande but twitting
with pedegree. Cockes fish, these proude fellowes that haue nothing
to liue vpō to see how malapert they be, if they had ability to take
to as you haue, & wherwithal to beare vp their heads in yᵉ world as
you do, such credit with honorable & worshipfull, who haue multiplied
your praises for noted good parts, apparantly seen to be in you, what
would then become of their doings? Very true sir, but will not this be
sufficient to giue scope to the name of a gentleman? Faith sir, to be
plaine with you, tis but as the wiser sort do hold opinion.

[Sidenote: _Orismus._]

[Sidenote: _Omoiteleton._]

[Sidenote: _Brachiologa._]

For in our beliefe it is saide, that a great deale better shewe doth
it make to giue but one certaine & true demonstration of a gentleman,
then to yeeld twenty brauados, and neuer come neare the true meaning
of them, railing, lying, backbiting, slaundering, facing, vaunting,
contemning, cogging, menacing, vpbraiding, taunting, and proudlie
defacing other mens actions, desertes, qualities, behauiours, and
vertues, are in right reckoning, in verie trueth but slender partes of
a Gentleman.

[Sidenote: _Paramologia._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

[Sidenote: _Meiosis._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

[Sidenote: _Omiosis._]

[Sidenote: _Apostrophe._]

[Sidenote: _Synonymia._]

[Sidenote: _Epitheton._]

[Sidenote: _Epizeuxis._]

You wil say, I am too far bewitched to tell you of these things, you
will raile at me, you will storme at me, you will not beleeue me: you
will alleadge I am too different herein from all other opinions, your
acquaintance doe like of you, praise you, and magnifie you, very true
indeede, but they are but a fewe, and such also as doe it, haue intent
but to laugh at you, you are but the anuile whereout they hammer their
pastimes, they vse you but as an instrument to bee pliable to their
turnes. In this as to _Will Sommers_, they yeelde to your rages, they
sooth vp your passions, and cokes vp your humors. But vnto me, to whom
such fashions are loathsome, and in whose cares those base purposes and
surfetting demeanors of yours are most ridiculous and hateful, they are
too intolerable.

[Sidenote: _Paradigma._]

[Sidenote: _Periphrasis._]

The Peacoke when hee spreadeth his tayle, is glorious of his beautie,
but stooping downe to his feete, his feathers fall with the selfe sight
immediately. Woulde you but abase your eyes vnto the lower part of your
rising, you might then recognize your original, and seeing the simple
obiect whereout your prosperity hath beene deriued, confesse that tenne
such glorious plumes as you studie to haue aduanced, without they were
better qualified coulde scarse make a shewe beseeming the lowest part
of all that belongeth to a Gentleman.

[Sidenote: _Epanodis._]

[Sidenote: _Hysterō proteron._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

For my part it is not the shew you beare, but the pride wherewith you
are caried that despiteth me, the qualities you haue, and not the
malice you vtter, that discontenteth me: whether your opinion stand
good or bad to me, it is not that I accompt of, as beeing such a one
whose censure to my knowledge, neuer stoode in that degree to bee
reckoned of. Onely doubting least ouerswolne with your humours, you
should consume in your follies I haue written that I haue done, leauing
the rest to your own correction, if at least you haue any wit at al
whereby to amend them.


         _An example of an other Epistle inuectiue, written in
                   cause of great desert against two
                           seueral parties._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

I am sorie it falleth vnto my lot among matters more serious, that I
must at this present incomber my pen, and enforce my labours, about so
needlesse a purpose, as to decipher a knaue whome the worlde knoweth
alreadie by his colours, and a companion of his that will shortly
giue proofe of his facultie by his far spreading titles. And yet the
time hath bin when by their shadowes I could set them both to viewe,
and hauing cunningly deciphered them, could laugh at the portraiture,
imagining that there were more heades to carpe at their villanies then
honest meaning to excuse their treacheries.

[Sidenote: _Sententia._]

It was not amisse said amongst the wise, that there cā be no friendship
but amongst the good, and yet is society so common amongst men, that
there is not the arrantest varlet in the world but he will find a
companion, & why? because therein is a likelihood, which although it
cannot turne to friendship, yet growing _ex similitudine morum_, I
find no reason but that a coniunction may be of knaues as well as a
separation of honest men sometimes.

[Sidenote: _Paralepsis._]

Leauing your yokefellowe M. whome I esteeme so base a fellow as
comming out of the very Cell it selfe of all villanies, smelleth so
strongly of the stench thereof, that he is not worthy to come within
a mile of my paper, nor neare by a thousande Yeardes vnto the worst
parte of my studie, I will speake two or three words vnto you maister
F. which are his aduocate, and as it seemeth his second selfe, nay
rather incorporated in his bowels, and become maklenezed, yea rather
M. himselfe, for he hath taught you to handle his cause so cunninglie,
that he neede not ioine with you to lie for himselfe, for you will lie
for both, and surelie (not thinking you haue it by nature, _absit_)
I iudge it rather yᵉ infection of him who hath so transmuted your
disposition, that to boast, face, scold, and lie, and that without
shame, credite, or honesty, you surpasse as I heare, why M. himself (of
whom you are thought but the shadowe) cannot go beyond you. You haue
deliuered forth in publique speaches, that I and my companions abused
your Client with a false Lease, that we led him by degrees into a
deceiptful marriage, that I wil come with my hat in mine hand to craue
your Clients fauor, that you know me well, and thereupon demaunded
whether I was not once master L. his man, and being answered yea, you
paused, and then said, belike you knew me then.

[Sidenote: _Sarcasmus._]

Remembring that you are become a M. (whom alwaies I note for a shameles
liyng knaue) I wonder the lesse at your impudencie, marie if you were
an honest Gentleman, that did rather stande vppon your credit, thē vpon
such base respects to get money, by bolstering whatsoeuer villanies you
care not, I would then saie, _tota erras via_. But not shewing you such
fauour, I must needes tell you in shorte conclusion (You lie.) And so
much the rather because in the deliuerie thereof you make not a matter
of information of it, but rather as it seemeth a thing of your owne
knowledge.

[Sidenote: _Charientismus._]

[Sidenote: _Allegoria._]

And because the lie seemeth rather a word of course, then commonly of
substance, without proofe added to manifest the certaintie, I further
affirme that I will bring halfe a score, honester knowne then either
you or your Client, to whome he hath confessed the contrarie himselfe,
and made knowne the same most amplie vnto their owne vnderstanding,
who by the iustifying thereof, will proue him a shamelesse lying knaue
in his slaunders, and you a prating foolish dolt in the rash deliuery
of the same vpon so sleight a grounde, to defame an honest man of
more accompt then your selfe, and that without occasion. And because
you take vpon you to know me so well, and are yet of opinion that I
wil stoop to your Client, I must tel you therein your wisdom greatly
mistaketh both my nature and condition, for that I can neuer bee so
disparaged in conceipt, but that I coulde alwaies find an Asse by his
braying, and scorne a rascall though he were neuer so full of vaunting.

My dwelling with Mayster L. continued euermore with reputation and
credite sufficient euen to this present daie, I desire to be informed
without pausing, what you canne say to impugne the same, and albeit I
knowe a slaunderous mouth neuer wanteth whereof to gather, yet taking
mee at that present state, you shall finde mee such in trueth as all
your malice shall neuer bee able to disgrace me.

[Sidenote: _Asteismus._]

[Sidenote: _Emphasis._]

[Sidenote: _Epitheton._]

You saie I dare not walke abroade, that I cannot bee seene at
Westminster as your Clyent is. It is indeede spoken like a Tinker, and
sauouring somewhat of a Coblers stall, what betwixt choler and lying,
your Client and you haue taken order, to speake nothing honestlie.
And I woonder not of it, for you haue not so much as a sauour of
honesty about you. Vile malicious deuourers of men, do you thinke it
an easie thing, or matter of sleight purpose, so villainouslie to
derogate a mans good name (then which to a generous minde nothing is
more precious) or do you deeme all men of so base contempt as your
selues, that they can willingly suffer all things to bee benefited by
any thing? And when you haue shamefully vttered your lies in place of
audience, dare not for your breeches stand to the lest word of smallest
moment, that you let fall out of your ouerflowing venemous mouthes.

[Sidenote: _Aposiopesis._]

[Sidenote: _Synathrismus._]

But _de his taceo_, the best is, you are both well knowne, for the one
of you, seeke all London for a cogging, brabling, boasting, rayling
shamelesse and lying knaue, M. is the man, and hee shall doe it. He
seeking all the towne ouer for a facing Aduocate, one that coulde
handle the matter like himselfe, F. was the man: Yee are both well met
together, continue your purpose, and see the ende, for you meane so,
nay you will do it.

I vse not F as he vsed me, to brabble, and to lie of him to strangers.

But hauing drawne his portraiture, I send the first counterfeite to
himselfe, that seeing it hee may shunne his lewdnesse, which yet lieth
in secret, and if hee continue shall quickelie bee published, and that
to his shame openlie.

I leaue you both as I found you, my paper and present matter for this
time taking end. In apparant hast, hauing otherwise more weightilie to
imploy my selfe, this last of Februarie, &c.




                _Of Epistles Comminatorie.    Cap. 6._


=This |Inuectiue| seemeth to haue béene ouer sharp in the matter,
but not in the maner, for the occasions thereunto inducing might
peraduenture merite that and greater. And howbeit both the termes
and conueyance are somewhat hard, yet is it in such cases verie
tolerable, when either the vilenesse of the action, or base demeanour
of the partie doth require it. And in this point there is a great
|Decorum| principallie to be obserued, to vse a bad person with
termes correspondent to his behauior & qualitie, as in any other
laudable purpose to entertaine another party according to his
calling or dignitie. And as this title of |Inuectiue|, and that of
|Exprobratorie| before going, are néerely affianced togither: so also
is the next heereunto, which is called |Comminatorie|. The |Etimologie|
or signification whereof, is by menaces to threaten. Insomuch as
participating with a kinde of |Accusation| for iniuries committed,
it expostulateth not, nor reasoneth of anie circumstance, obiection
or qualitie, but protesting a due desert in the partie challenged,
menaceth thereupon a speedie and answerable reuengement. This, of this
title is the substance and propertie. And so will we procéed to the
examples.=


               _An example of an Epistle Comminatorie._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Prolepsis._]

[Sidenote: _Antanaclasis._]

[Sidenote: _Peroratiō._]

Master D. I see well by some experience had of your dealings, that
you haue small regarde of your honestie, or welfare, two things in
mine opinion, whereof each one should bee charie. Your honestie, in
respect that you keepe no promise: Your welfare, in that you neglect
the oportunitie, for releasment of that, which in the ende must lie
vpon your owne shoulders. But seeing your inconsideration is so great,
and the like respect you carrie of your owne good growne to be slender,
blame not other men that breake with you vpon desert, nor mislike at
all their want of pittie, that haue no meane to pittie your selfe.
For my part looke for it, and you shall surelie finde it, that I will
prosecute all meanes possible to arrest you, and beeing so arrested,
I will not bee moued with intreatie, prayer, or other submission to
release you, till you haue payed the whole debt, charges and penaltie.
And whereas you sent mee worde by my man, that you could not accustome
your selfe, with one that trusted you to deale treacherouslie, I
answere againe, that if you make it so nice to bring him foorth to bee
arested for whome you are suretie: paie then the debt your selfe, and
satisfie me, and that speedilie: for if you doe not I vow I will meet
with you and that verie shortlie, when to your little content you shall
perceyue that in so vsing mee, you haue dealt most vnaduisedlie. Thinke
of it as you list, and deale with me accordinglie: and so to your best
consideration of your owne safetie, I leaue you. This ninth of Iune, &c.


          _An other example Comminatorie containing a greater
                     vehemencie in the deliuerie._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Periphrasis._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

[Sidenote: _Aporia._]

[Sidenote: _Emphasis._]

[Sidenote: _Metonoia._]

[Sidenote: _Erotema._]

[Sidenote: _Ecphonesis._]

[Sidenote: _Aphorismus._]

[Sidenote: _Anthypophora._]

[Sidenote: _Epizeuxis._]

[Sidenote: _Asyndeton._]

[Sidenote: _Epitheton._]

[Sidenote: _Periphrasis._]

[Sidenote: _Synecdoche._]

[Sidenote: _Pleonasmus._]

[Sidenote: _Polyptoton._]

[Sidenote: _Insultatio._]

[Sidenote: _Aposiopesis._]

[Sidenote: _Metaphora._]

Vngracious ofspring of hellish brood, whome heauens permit for a
plague, and the earth nourisheth as a peculiar mischiefe, monster of
mankinde, and deuourer of men, what maie I tearme thee? With what ill
sounding titles maie I rayse my selfe vpon thee? Thou scorne of the
worlde, and not scorne, but worldes foule disdaine, and enemie of
all humaine condition, shall thy villanies scape foreuer vnpunished?
Will the earth yet support thee, the cloudes shadow thee, or the
aire breath on thee? What lawes be these, if at least wise such may
be tearmed lawes, whereout so vile a wretch hath so manie euasions?
But shalt thou longer liue to become the vexation and griefe of men?
No, for I protest, though the Lawes doe faile thee, my selfe will
not ouerslip thee, I, I am hee that will plague thee, thou shalt not
scape me, I will be reuenged of thee. Thinke not thy iniuryes are so
easie, that they are of all to be supported, for no sooner shall that
partched withered carkasse of thine, sende foorth thy hatefull and
abhorred lookes into anie publike shew, but mine eyes shall watch thee,
and I will not leaue thee, till I haue prosequuted that which I haue
intended towardes thee, most vnwoorthie as thou art to breath amongst
men, which art hated and become lothsome euen in the verie bowels and
thoughtes of men. Triumph then in thy mischiefes, and boast that thou
hast vndone mee, and a number of others, whom with farre lesse despight
thou hast forced to bende vnto thee. And when by due desert I shall
haue payed what I haue promised thee, vaunt then (on Gods name) of thy
winnings. For my part: but I will saie no more, let the ende trie all,
liue wretchedlie, and die villainouslie, as thou hast deserued, whome
heauens hencefoorth doe shunne, and the world denieth longer to looke
vpon.




                _Of Epistles deprecatorie.    Cap. 7._


=The menaces of this last Epistle you may well déeme to haue issued
from a hot enraged Spirit: of which though the stile bee vehement, yet
vnto men alike humorous, the same may stand for a president. Such kinde
of inuentions and men so affected with such estranged passions, are
as we sée diuerslie found, wherof I thought good to giue foorth this
example to bee considered, the waight neuerthelesse to bee measured as
in the others before to the person and matter occurrent. And nowe will
we to the last of all this state |Iudiciall|, which are the Epistles
|Deprecatorie|. The title of these Epistles carrieth a name, accordant
to the submissiue matter in them contayned, for their efficacies are
onlie carried by entreatie, request of fauour, good opinion, allowance
or pardon of anie iniurie or offence conceyued or committed. In good
natures, it is a thing proper to weigh with themselues, howe much
anie waies they stand charged, whether by respect of person, dutie,
friendship or soueraigntie, accordinglie thereupon to frame their
speeches or writings. Yet is not the matter hereof Supplicatorie, as
growing by waie of petition. But rather an honest and gentle submission
to the good liking, estimate or friendlie respect of such, vnto whome,
or by whome we are either accused, tied, charged, or constrained,
clearing, if it may be, or honestly otherwise mitigating or auoyding
what sinisterly, or vpon some intended conceit, may be drawne to
be against vs, and of the vse hereof to be spoken let this now be
sufficient.=


      _An example of an Epistle Deprecatorie, where the partie is
                       charged in good opinion._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Hypotyposis._]

When a Phisiognomer by chaunce (hauing beene famous in other places)
came into the _forum_ of _Athens_, hee declared by the view of diuers
mens faces the diuersitie of their conditions, whereupon (for better
triall of his Arte) hee was demaunded what (_Prima facie_) he thought
of _Socrates_, he answered, by his countenance, to be a man of verie
euill condition. The people which knew the contrarie, growing thereby
into great rage, were readie to driue him out of the _forum_. But
_Socrates_ comming forth. Be not angrie (quoth he) for such a one might
I haue beene, if by Philosophie I had not corrected my maners.

By this might bee inferred (right Woorshipfull) that at the first
shewe, it is not good to giue rash iudgement of anie man, for the
Phisiognomer beeing able to iudge what men might bee, was not able to
say iustlie such they are: In like manner, your Worship hauing beene
led by misreports, are able to say, thus it is spoken, but not so it is.

[Sidenote: _Narratiō._]

To my great griefe it is informed vnto mee, that by the sinister report
of mine aduersaries, you thinke hardly of me. And so much the rather
haue I cause to bee grieued, for that in the mouth of an ignorant
person, I am not therby iudged of, but by the sentence and opinion of
the wise, held a man badly demeaned, careles, and such a one as beareth
small reputation.

[Sidenote: _Epanodis._]

Beleeue mee sir, and if it please you to take further notice of me, you
shal find it true, that it is more euill vnto me to be adiudged loose
of a wise man, then of a thousand base persons to be vtterly condemned,
for that the one speaketh of skill, and the other of a bad conceipt,
the first wishing all men to bee good, the other confessing no man to
be sufficient, that is not possessed with euil.

My aduersaries haue brought many heauy informations vnto you tending
in outward shew to my great disgrace, naming me as it pleaseth them, a
man (as they thinke of themselues) indifferent for all purposes. But
because I know you to bee wise, and thinke it a matter of no small
accompt to be well thought of at your hands: I am therfore the more
carefull to cleare my selfe, and do beseech you, that you will hold for
firme what I do here set down: assuring your selfe, that whatsoeuer my
aduersaries report of me, I doe make accompt what speeches passe from
me: and those that I deliuer vpon credite, I will performe with trust.

This then I say for aunswere generall, to whatsoeuer they canne obiect,
that if any parte of that in substaunce they haue deliuered vnto you
for certaine bee true, I will loose the credite of a Gentleman, and bee
regarded as I repute them: and besides, will repay whatsoeuer is to me
paide, and release what nowe I haue in sute against them.

Besides, pleaseth it your Worship for my credit sake to haue the
hearing of the cause, I will come face to face, and (though I knowe
the one of them to haue a shamelesse countenance) of himselfe, yet
let bring what counsell he will with himselfe, if I ouerthrowe not
euery matter obiected, and proue my selfe an honest man, I will loose
the debte and my credit too, which I accompt aboue all debts. Haue
not I then had great cause (hauing beene as vnto you, so in diuers
other places besides verie vniustlie railed at and defamed) to write
vnto these persons, and inueigh against them for it? Behold my letter
throughout, being well considered of, it shall bee euident that I had
great cause, and that very manifold to do it: for my part I knowe not
what others deeme, but touching my selfe, I had rather lose my life
then my good name, then which vnto me nothing is of more regard, and I
tell you sir, if F. or a better man then he maketh no more reckoning,
but to defame me without a cause, he shal know and vnderstand that my
credit is deare vnto me, and that to maintaine the contrarie he shall
find a hard reckoning.

I spende not my time in making of Lybels, but to write in reproofe of
him that abuseth mee, which I take so highlie in griefe, as namelie,
they shoulde be so shamelesse to report that vnto your Worship which
they cannot stande to, that I holde it a wretchednes therein to be
silent, and a mischiefe for credit sake not to discouer a trueth.

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

Beseeching your worship of fauour and credite, to me and my rude lines,
I humblie take my leaue, beeing alwaies ready to auouch what here I
haue set down, wherof not failing I remaine

                                          Your worships whensoeuer to
                                                be commanded.


            _An example of an Epistle Deprecatory, in cause
                       of wrong supposed to bee
                              committed._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

[Sidenote: _Dicæologia._]

[Sidenote: _Silepsis._]

Sir, your Letters more troublesome to my conceipts, then sauoring (as I
am credibly led to thinke) of that your woonted most noble disposition
vnto mee, I haue receiued. With what supportation and vnaccustomed
griefe I haue retained them, I refer to anie one (guiltlesse accused
and suspended from so high fauours as formerly by your bountie hath
been to me performed) simplie to be coniectured. Long was it ere I
could satisfie my selfe by any accesse that might bee to proffer my
selfe or these humble Letters vnto you: Yet neuerthelesse weighing howe
farre different these newe occurrentes were from those your auncient
fauours, I surmised with my selfe that the instigation proceeded soly
from others, hardlie perchaunce bearing those graces wherein I stoode
with you, and becomming thereupon my bitter enemies, the sinister
deuise whereof, stood vpon me wholy to ouerthrow or impugne. For
which hauing no other or better meane at this instant, then these my
submissiue lines, I propose them vnto you, as solicitors of your
former liking, confessing that if any waies I haue erred vnto you, as
I will not vtterlie seclude my selfe from any errour, it was but as
a young man, and rather by ignoraunce, then of malice anie waies to
bee intended. And as touching any other obiection, let mee but craue
pardon to haue accesse vnto your presence, and then iudge as you finde
mee. Two waies are onelie left, my accusers to my face, or mine owne
simplicitie to cleare me. This is all I require, and so much I hope you
will not denie me. Wherewith resting in the due acknowledgement of that
your former bounty, I humbly surcease. This fifteenth of Nouember.


           _An example of an Epistle Deprecatory, pleasantly
                      written to answere a former
                               Letter._

[Sidenote: _Exordium._]

The long sweating paines wherein your good selfe (my verie good friend
A) haue lately trauelled with your weatherbeaten barke, to aunswere
my Letters, moueth mee (howe simply so euer) to reply a little to the
same. Wherein, pardon first craued for so meane a wit, at a suddaine,
to take vppon it, to encounter so selected a stile, wherewith your
youthfull yeares are so replenished, I go to the matter.

Touching the iar you make of my formost writing, and late inciting you
to the tediousnesse of your studying, which for the causes alleadged,
your curtesie yet vouchsafeth to allow of, I, with so friendlie a
prospect as may be to so respectiue a iudgement, do right curiously
thanke you.

The compasse of your writing, according to the measure it beareth,
being so much mystical, as that the grossenesse of my wit cannot
well conceiue of, hauing drawne thereinto as it seemeth, the very
quintessence of those well performed partes, that in your person
are resiant, maketh me post off the answere, till by a more deepe
consideration I may better conforme me vnto it. Wherein I must confesse
in very deed, that all that may be within or without, ouer or vnder, or
besides master B. you haue to the vttermost strained.

For the paines you haue taken, I must pray you pardon though I render
you no profit. My forgetfulnesse also in prising the simple value I
beare, with your worthines, & many other beautified parts of your
gentlenes, you must also let slip, otherwise I am vndone with the
griefe, and so I would sir, your worship did take it.

Nowe as touching the forgoing complaint you thrust in of your wants, I
could hardly beleeue that in the action you beare you could so greatly
be distressed. Neuerthelesse, for the little time I haue beene of your
masterships acquaintance, I haue vnderstoode of some that weare a
veluet suite with as small inheritance as your selfe, who haue vsed the
matter as slenderlie as may be, by any great credit to bee accompted of.

[Sidenote: _Epilogus._]

Yet must you needes giue me leaue to be gone, for the tide tarieth no
man, but if you find your selfe in the lurch before I returne againe,
the best is, at my home comming you know where to find me. _Et sic
valeas_, gentle friend _Topas_.




                   Of Epistles familiar.    Chap. 8.


=With this pleasant direction I thinke meete at this present to
conclude these last Letters Iudiciall, and therewith also the verie
ende of all our Letters speciall, so tearmed by me as aforesaide, for
the speciall matters and conueyance to them seuerallie appropriate.
And nowe the next and last in turne, are those letters familiar,
for the ordinarie causes and matters of handling in them likewise
contained, so formerly named. Little informations néede here, more
then the directions alreadie in the Chapters of the first Booke that
haue beene deliuered, for their stile and methode. Seeing the common
matter in them vsuallie frequented, challengeth no such districtnesse
in propertie or conueiance, as was required in the others, only they
for orders sake as the rest, are herein to be distinguished (the better
to be found out & known by their partes) vnder their seuerall titles.
The first whereof appeareth to bee |Narratory| and |Nunciatorie|, both
alike in their vsage, consisting onelie in aduertisementes of affaires,
from friende to friende, seruant to maister, or generallie to speake,
from one person to an other, the examples whereof according to the
seuerall properties do plentifullie ensue.=


     _A Letter Nunciatorie from a sonne to his father or friends,
                    touching his being in seruice._

My humble dutie remembred, good father, vnto you and my mother: These
are to aduertise you, that I am, I thanke God, in good health. As
touching my placing heere with my maister, I doe like verie well of the
trade, but I doe not thinke the seruice fit for me, as well for that it
seemeth, that more for the money that shall bee giuen with mee, then
for any desire to my good, hee is willing to haue mee. Besides, for
ought that I can learne, my maister is verie backeward in the worlde,
so that what minde soeuer you carrie to my placing here, I doubt it
will turne to verie small purpose. Neuerthelesse, as my dutie is, I doe
gladly submit my selfe to your pleasure, and am willing as becommeth
me, to do in all things according to your will. And euen so with my
heartie commendations to my Vnkle and Aunt, with my brothers and
sisters, I leaue further to trouble you: desirous, if it may seeme good
vnto you, that I may verie shortlie see you. From L. this thirteenth of
Februarie, &c.


          _A Letter Nunciatorie in another sort of the selfe
                             same matter._

Good father, hauing the oportunitie of this bearer, I thought good to
certifie you of my present beeing, giuing you to vnderstande that I
am, I thanke God and you, in good health, and verie well placed heere
in London, where I am in hope to continue my heere beeing to some
profitable purpose. My maister vseth mee in verie good sort, and I
lacke nothing that appertaineth vnto such a one as my selfe. I trust
you shall haue ioy of mee, and ere a fewe yeares passed, I doubt not
but so to behaue my selfe, that I shall well deserue this good lyking
that alreadie I haue of my Maister, and further credite also at his
handes, and imployment about his businesse. I hope that you and my
mother, and all our friendes in the Countrey are in good health. I
pray you that you will write vnto my Maister as occasion serueth, and
thanke him for his good vsage: and if you can to remember him with
some conuenient token from the Countrey. Thus desiring your daylie
blessings, and remembring my humble dutie to you and my mother, I take
leaue, From L. this of, &c.

                   *       *       *       *       *

=These presidents as they are here vsed, may be applied to any the like
purpose, of what qualitie soeuer the seruant be, or the seruice, whence
the same is deliuered, there néedes but change of names, and contrarie
applications, according to the being of the parties to be vsed, and
this onelie forme to be obserued and continued. And so will we now to
the other examples.=


       _An Epistle Narratorie containing aduertisements from one
                          friend to another._

My good N. you shall vnderstande by this bearer what speeches I haue
had in your behalfe, with Maister R. F. whome to tell you trueth, I
found at the first time verie strange, but after wee had a while
debated of the cause, and that I had enformed vnto him all those
reasons, which stoode both for your benefite and his owne satisfaction,
he was verie well contented. You haue much to thanke this Gentleman,
who omitted no part of a friend to deliuer in your absence what he
saw meetest to the purpose, and that in sooth with so deliberate and
sound resolution, as my selfe for your sake must needes also thinke the
better of him. I do refer the circumstance to both your leysures to be
debated on. And as touching that you willed me to deale for, with your
Vncle, it is, I see, to verie little profite, for that his suspicious
humours are such, as will not with anie reason whatsoeuer be diuerted.
I coulde tell you a Hystorie of that matter, but I leaue all to our
next meeting. My brother S. desired mee heartilie to commend him vnto
you, and so did your olde seruant D. You shall by the next Carrier
either heare further of me, or else verie shortlie thereupon you may
expect to see mee. And euen so with my heartiest commendations till
then I bid you fare well, S. this fifteenth of August, &c.


        _A Letter of aduertisement from a sonne to his father._

My humble duty remembred good father vnto you, and my mother. It maie
please you to vnderstande, that vpon the receyte of your Letters
sent mee by P. your man, I haue done your commaundement. And whereas
you expected an aunswere by the carrier, for that P. went forwarde
Westwardes in his iourney, I could not till this present write vnto you
to anie effect. I haue receiued of Maister N. the twentie poundes which
shoulde haue beene paied at Easter last, and for the continuation of
my here beeing, I thinke it would turne you to some profite, so be it
I may be furnished accordinglie. Wools are as yet at high rate, but I
thinke shortlie they will fall, wherefore I haue not yet thought meete
to laie out anie monie about them. The next weeke you shall receiue by
C. the Carrier fortie poundes. And if it please you then to returne by
him those parcels of wares that I last wrote vnto you of, they will
now come in verie good time, respecting that the Faire at F. is nigh,
and for ought I yet perceyue, they are like to bee well solde there.
This is all I haue to write vnto you at this present, sauing my heartie
desire of your health, and likewise of my mother, with all my brothers
and sisters. It is here sayde, G. hath verie lewdlie demeaned himselfe
in his maisters businesse, whereby maister L. is like to bee much
indangered. Praying your daylie blessings vnto me, I humblie recommend
you to the Almightie. From B. this thirtie of May.

=Accordant vnto this last Letter maie any seruant frame himselfe
to aduertise his master of his affaires, altering onelie the names
of directions, and the matter as occasion serueth. Neuerthelesse
forsomuch as in causes of other accidents beyond the seas, both
masters haue occasion to write vnto their seruants or factors, and
likewise the seruant or factor to answer them againe, whereof perchance
some examples in this methode might also be sought for. As néere as
my little guesse in those causes will serue me, I wil set you down
some directions. Noting by the way, that the infinit number of all
occurrents are not herein to be satisfied, though to as many as bee
néedfull examples are intended to bee giuen. Onely the learner must
consider, that the true and proper intendment hereof, is but for an
orderly conueiance of euery action to be prescribed, wherout one
direction picked, must and may well serue for a number in that or the
like degrée, vpon other occasions to be suted. Neuerthelesse, that
as well in this, as the former booke, we haue omitted no trauell for
the ease and better instruction of the studious to giue vnto them, of
euery common or néedfull matter, as manie seuerall directions, as that
the leading along of the same herein, may be wel iudged to be most
plentifull. According whereunto, of these two last recited partes, wee
will now sort you out some particular examples, of the first whereof
from the maister to the seruant, you shall expect hereafter vnder
the title Mandatorie, & of the second this example ensuing may be a
president.=


          _A Letter from a seruant or factor to his maister._

Sir, my humble dutie remembred vnto you, and my good Mistresse, you may
please to vnderstand that I haue laden for your account in the good
ship called the R of B. according to your remembrance sent vnto me for
the same, by maister S. T. seuen Buts of Secke, which cost the first
pennie seuenteene Duckats the Butte: marked with your accustomed marke
in the margent. Moreouer, fiue Roues of Cochinelie, verie excellent
good, and of fine colour: which cost after Duckats the Kintall. All
which I hope by Gods grace shall safelie come vnto your hands, I send
you also herein inclosed your bill of lading: I wrote formerlie vnto
you for certaine commodities out of England by maister D. L. who came
alongst in the Fleete of L. and is as I vnderstand, safely arriued
from _Lyons_ againe. Here is at this present small newes worth the
writing vnto you, wherefore, praying Almightie God for the health and
prosperitie of you and all yours, I humbly take my leaue. From L. this
of, &c.

                      _Your faithfull and readie seruant at command._




               _Of Epistles Remuneratorie.    Chap. 9._


=In the writing of this last Letter, there was shewed mee by the
Printer, a booke called the |Marchants Auiso|, helping, and in mine
opinion most fully & amplie suffizing to this instruction. And for as
much as the conuieance of these letters, bee rather matters priuate to
Merchantes aduenturers, then resting in publique for anie other vsers,
I haue determined herein for that sorte, vnder this |Narratorie| or
|Nunciatorie| title to laie downe my limits, referring the desirous of
further direction, vnto the writer of that Booke, whose labour for
that purpose, not without his speciall desert, cannot be by me or anie
other to such end better furnished or deliuered, his tearmes being most
currant to those kind of dealinges, and his methode also best answering
vnto the true passages thereof. For which in supplement of the residue
of the required examples yet vnfitted to this my |Secretorie|, I will
proceed vnto the next title of these familiar letters, which appeare
to be |Remuneratorie|. This title serueth to a |Remuneration| or
thankfull acknowledgement of benefits receiued, and to such end is by
the examples thereof to be imploied. And in so much as vnto euerie one
well conditioned, or of good and liberall education, it is a thing
pertinent, not to omit the respect of euerie benefit without some
thankefull consideration, it shall behooue that according to the estate
or qualitie of the partie, from whome we receiue the same, we do frame
our letters of thankes, which to our betters, equalles and inferiours
are in sundrie sortes to be deliuered, and according to the dignitie
and worthinesse of euerie one, excelling or going before vs, are euer
to be measured, and with the more or lesse submissiue and humble
acknowledgment is alike to be caried. Neuerthelesse, that according
to the efficacie of speech in each of them deliuered, the greatnesse
and weightie respect of euerie good turne, is by the considerate and
respectiue regarde thereof, the more amplie to be perceiued.=


                _An example of an Epistle Remuneratorie
              from an inferiour, to one far his better in
                       reputation and calling._

To recognize (Sir) in multitude of wordes, howe much charged I stande
vnto your bounteous and euer curteous regard towards mee, were vnto
your wisdome I knowe but friuolous, who better respecteth the inwarde
seruice intended of anie one, (whereof I humblie beseech you on my
parte to stande assured) then an outwarde behauiour, the validitie
whereof maie manie waies bee doubted.

Yet neuerthelesse, in that the thoughts of men are only in word or
action to bee deciphered, let it I beseech you stande with your good
fauor that I may by these few lines confesse my selfe bound vnto you.
And for the residue, when it shall seeme good vnto your Worship to
command me, I will not haue life or abilitie that shall not be yours,
in al that it may please you to vse me.


                _A Letter remuneratory from a Gentlewo-
                  man of good sort to a noble man her
                               kinsman._

My good L. howe much I am bounde vnto your L. for multitude of fauours,
and especially that it pleased you to thinke so well of me, as to
write your fauourable letters in my behalfe: I can by no other waies
expresse, then to continue your L. most humbly affectionate poore
kinswoman, & wil for euer acknowledge it as of your great goodnes,
beyond any merit of mine owne. And as my bounden duty is, no day
shal passe me that I will not pray to God for your L. health and
prosperitie, and the redoubling of your daies. Beseeching your L. to
excuse this my boldnes, and to pardon me that in person I cannot do my
humble duty, but by writing, my Lady making such haste away, as so much
time wil not be permitted me. I most humbly therefore take my leaue of
your L. From S. this eleuenth of Nouember.


                    _A Letter remuneratory from one
                          friend to another._

Good M. D. my breach of promise in not hauing visited you with
deserued requitall, sithence my departure, maie breede suspicion and
doubt of ingratefulnesse, but I hope, and by hope presume, that of
your owne good disposition towards all your acquaintance, you will
yeelde vnto an approoued trial before you condemn. For my part, if
I should not owe vnto you all honest minde and fidelitie, I shoulde
much contrary your great curtesie, and deseruedlie incur the shame of
ingratitude. You knowe that hauing swaied, as I haue done, out of the
limits of a comptrolled rule, and displeased so much thereby as my
case hath bewraied vnto you, those whome by nature and duty I ought
to be awed vnto, it is reason that by a more district obseruance I
make amendes for the residue. My father it seemeth though not yet by
me, hath otherwise vnderstoode how much I stand yoked vnto you, and
thinketh himselfe for all his sons vnthriftines somwhat therein to
be tied vnto you. His meaning is one of these daies to intreat your
paines hitherwards. But how euer deserts be noted, or care by nature
doth binde, assure your selfe whilest life leadeth along this earthly
coarse, I am and will bee alwaies most vnfainedlie yours. To whom, and
your good bedfellowe, I most hartily and often commend me. From B. this
of, &c.


                    _A Letter remuneratorie from a
                       Better to his inferiour._

T. F. I haue vnderstoode by my seruaunt P. howe much I am beholding
vnto you for your paines taken in my behalfe, about such busines as I
sent him, for which I not onlie thanke you for the present, but will
remaine your willing friende to requite you in anie thing that I maie.
It was tolde mee you had occasion to trauell this way verie shortly, I
pray you if you doe, let mee see you. And looke you faile not to vse
me as your good friende, if at anie time you fortune to haue neede of
me. Wherein doubt you not but you shall finde my readinesse as great as
your forwardnesse hath beene already in my businesse. And so doe bid
you hartily farewell. From T. this of, &c.

                                              Your louing friend, &c.




                   Of Epistles Iocatorie. Chap. 10:


=Thus haue wee deliuered vnto you of euerie of these sutes their
seuerall examples, wherein you must note, that if you write to your
better a letter |Remuneratorie|, you maie not promise vnto him your
gratefulnes with the verie word of requitall, but rather by the proffer
of seruice or other affectionate meaning in you, to the answering
of such curtesies as haue beene receiued. And next hereunto will we
passe vnto the title |Iocatorie|. The letters of this sute are such
as of some pleasant conceipted vain, do procéed from one familiar
friend or acquaintance to another, rather of some sporting deuise then
of anie important matter. The vse is common among pleasant heades,
and rather suted forth according to their present vaines, then vpon
anie prescribed order. Such whereof is at the end of our Epistles
|Commendatorie|, & one other vnder the title |Consolatorie| mentioned
in the former of these bookes, and likewise a third vnder the title
|Deprecatorie|, written in this last part of letters, & a like whereunto
was once written by my selfe, and three or foure other of a merie
acquaintance, to a parson beeing our familiar, and one of good nature
and disposition in the country, wherein each one wrote a line of a
seueral hand, and as occasion fel out, inserted his sporting deuises,
with many odde quips & meriments, wherwith the good Parson thought
himselfe greatlie wronged, till he knew from whence it came. But in so
much as to an inuention onlie naturallie to be expected, no method can
be well prescribed, I leaue the Epistles of this sort to the discretion
of the writer, as his fantasie serueth to be pursued. And goe to the
next, which are called |Gratulatorie|. For as the one is a pleasant,
merie and sporting vaine, so is this a kind of reioicing, but in a more
modest and curteous maner, ouer the good healths, fortune, or other
good partes or preferments, of our friendes, kindred, or acquaintance,
whose examples to their proper purposes are nowe next to be deliuered.=


         _An Epistle Gratulatorie from one friend to another._

Sir, I was verie sorie to vnderstand by the common report of our
neighbours of your great sicknes, as of such a one whom our countrie
should misse, and I promise you as much as anie poore welwiller of
yours, I grieued thereat, but being certainlie againe assured of your
good recouerie, I praise God in my thought for the same, and do reioice
it hath pleased his goodnes to bring you to your former strength.
Whereof hauing no better nor more apparant token at this present, then
my heartie well wishing, I thought it parcell of an honest purpose to
signifie the same vnto you by writing, especiallie hauing therunto so
good and fitte oportunitie, as this bearer, whome entirelie I knowe to
loue and regard you. And euen so with my heartie commendations to your
selfe, and my good Coosen your wife, I heartilie bid you farwell, From
B. this of, &c.


          _A Letter Gratulatorie from a wife to her husband._

Good husbande, I am glad that you haue at the last remembred your
selfe by this bearer, to write vnto me, who haue thought it verie long
to heare from you. I doe greatlie reioice of the good and prosperous
successe of your iourney, and chieflie that you haue endured your
trauel so well, being in so good plight and strength of bodie, as I
vnderstand you are by your Letter. We are much beholding vnto our
good friends in the Countrie, that haue giuen you so great and good
entertainment. And I heartilie pray you to commend mee vnto them. Your
businesse heere at London goeth well, thankes bee to God, and wee haue
no want of any thing but your presence, which if you would once hasten
hitherward, it were a comfort vnto vs all to see you, hauing beene as
me seemeth verie long absent. But maister C. and his friendes where
you are, vseth you so kindlie, that I thinke you cannot well tell howe
to winde your selfe out from your good companie. Yet good husbande
remember that at the last you must come home, and the sooner the
better. I referre all to your good discretion, and so commend mee most
heartilie vnto you. From L. this of, &c.


  _A Letter Gratulatorie from one to his kinsman seruing in London._

Good Coosen, I am glad to heare of your good preferment in London,
and that, as I heare by your father and mother, you are so wel placed
there, and with so good a Maister. It is no little comfort vnto mee
to vnderstande, that you doe so resolutelie, and with so good a minde
dispose your selfe to your businesse, which I gladlie wish you would
continue. You must nowe remember that your friends with great charge,
care and industrie haue brought you vp, and that their intent and
meaning therein was, that in expectation thereof, they should haue
ioy and comfort of you in your elder yeares. For which, as you haue
now bequeathed your selfe to this place of seruice, so must you for
any feare of hard vsage, bitternesse of speech, or other mislike of
tauntes or rebukes, make account to endure and continue. It may be,
being yet vnacquainted with the customs and vsages of London, you doe
now at the beginning thinke well of that, which hereafter maie turne to
a discontentment: but good Coosen, so be it you haue no want of things
needfull and necessarie, frame your selfe to forbeare all other crosse
matters whatsoeuer, and giue you wholie on Gods name, to the benefite
of your seruice. You shall want therein no helpe, furtherance, or
incouragement on mine and your friends behalfe, who reioycing in that
alreadie to see you so well behaued, doe daylie praie to God to prosper
and blesse you. And thus with my heartie commendations I bid you fare
well. B. this of, &c.

                                         _Your Vnkle carefull of your
                                              well doing, T. B._




               _Of Epistles Obiurgatorie.    Chap. 11._


=These three examples may bee sufficient to serue to anie matter of
this title: seeing in eyther of them is required but an alteration of
the cause whereupon wee frame our Letter to reioyce vpon: the forme of
conueyance is all one. For which we will hence procéed to the next in
course being |Obiurgatorie|, or a rebuking of the ill vsages, demeanors
or parts of any one. It sauoreth somewhat of the |Monitorie| and
|Reprehensorie| kindes before going, but in a different maner: for that
the efficacy of those Epistles do beare force in matters publike or
notorious, and these in vsages priuate and of lesse importance. The
order whereof by the examples following maie be the better perceiued.=


        _A Letter Obiurgatorie from a maister to his seruant._

Among some other causes that latelie haue beene aduertized vnto me
from my good and louing friends, it is made knowne vnto me, that you
in my absence, as well towards your Mistresse, whom in my place I haue
appointed ouer you, as among others your fellowe seruants, doe take
much vpon you. You runne and goe at your pleasure, wade into vnseemelie
courses, and giue your selfe vnto some other matters, neither fitting
the trust on you reposed, nor answering vnto my seruice. The newes
hereof, you must thinke pleaseth me not verie well, neither can I
with patience digest, that a companion of your being, to whom by my
sole fauour I haue giuen place of direction in my house, should be
so imperious ouer my wife and her due command in mine absence. Your
wide wandring & common haunts at your liking, cannot by all coniecture
be vnto mine estate profitable. Wherefore in signification that I am
nothing well pleased with these so lauish demeanors, if by the next
report I hear not that they are better amended, you are shortlie
thereupon likelie inough to find how ill contenting they be vnto
my humours: with which priuate rebuke, if priuatelie so it may bee
considered, being at this present resolued to conclude, I attend the
redresse of these euils: and so giue my selfe to my further trauels.
From B. this of, &c.

                  _Your maister to requite you as you shall deserue._




                _Of Epistles Mandatorie.    Chap. 12._


=The force of these Epistles, mingled, as I said before, with the other
Titles in the last Chapter declared, may for further matter or other
occasions therin required, draw yᵉ plenty of their examples from those
|reprehensorie| and |Comminatorie|, kindes alreadie specified, this,
for any other like direction being thereunto for this place sufficient.
And now the last of these familiar titles ensueth, which is called
|Mandatorie|. These Letters haue their titles of such directions,
matters in charge, or other instructions, as by writing from one person
to another are deliuered, and are the most ordinarie in vsage of all
other letters that are amongste vs frequented. The conueyance whereof
in these following Examples shall be tendered.=


     _A Letter mandatorie from a maister to his seruant or factor,
                        being beyond the seas._

My heartie desire of your good sucesse and wel-fare intended, which
I hope God will blesse, I maruell that I haue receyued no Letters
from you since the fourth of March last, I hope you doe neuerthelesse
continue your good care and trust in mine affaires, whereof I nothing
doubt. I wrote by maister N. in the good ship called the P. of London
vnto you, which will shortly by Gods grace arriue at B. and is bound
for L. vnto my coosen T. R. for all your necessities to giue you ayd
as well in counsell as money: howbeit I hope you haue no great want of
either, considering those trusty friends I haue remaining where you
are, and your owne allowed diligence which formerlie I haue proued.
I do now send you by a bill of lading in the good ship called the S.
of D. those commodities you last wrote vnto mee of, viz. one packe of
verie fine broad cloathes, & twentie Tuns of Lead: the broad cloathes
stand me with all charges in sixteene pounde a cloath. I hope you will
haue regarde to the selling of these commodities to my best aduauntage,
wherein I pray you do your best endeuour as the market serueth. And
for the money arising thereof, I would haue you to employ on these
commodities there, which are here most vendible, wherof I principally
wrote vnto you in my last letters, which I doubt not by this time you
haue receiued. Otherwise I would haue you to confer with my coosen T.
R. there abouts. And thus desiring Almighty God to blesse and prosper
you, whom I desire you in all your actions and dealings to remember, I
bid you heartily farewell. L. this last of Maie.

                       _Your maister willing in all things to requite
                                      your seruices, &c._


               _Another Letter mandatory from a maister
                           to his seruaunt._

Albeit I haue manie occasions to write vnto you by this bearer, which
time will not suffer me to doe: Neuerthelesse such as are most needfull
I will hereby remember you of. At my departure from N. I gaue order for
certaine wares to bee sent vnto you from thence by the carier of C. and
thereof did then write vnto you at large in a Letter, and sent inclosed
in that letter a bill of the parcels. Now hauing sithence considered
with my selfe of the matter, my desire is that you do not transporte
them as I was determined, but let them rest vntill my home comming,
for that there is a shippe shortly going for B. of M. Alderman H. with
whome I am determined to ioine in the whole freight, and meane by Gods
grace therein to passe both those and some other commodities. About
thursday next, there is one T. B. appointed by my coosen L. P. to come
vnto you for fiftie pound, if he do come let him haue the money, and
take his note for the receipt, and this shall be your warrant. I would
haue you to looke to the waters side if the wind continue Southward,
for it is now serueth wel, and I doubt not but to heare from Lisbon,
for gladly would I vnderstand of our shipping, and of such letters as
shall be sent I wish you to take notice, and if I returne not before,
vse circumspection I pray you to prouide for their returne accordingly.
The haste of this bearer wil not suffer me to write more, only looke to
my businesse, haue care of the trust in you reposed, and commend me to
your mistrisse, tel her I will hasten homewards, as fast as I can. And
so to God I commit you. R. this of, &c.

                                             Your louing maister, &c.


             _A Letter mandatory from a man to his wife._

Good wife, considering my hasty departure from you and my children,
my hope is that you wil haue that louing and respectiue care towards
them and your familie, that appertaineth. I haue left many things raw
by reason of the suddennes of my iourney, which standeth vpon your
good regard to be ordered, as namely the charge of my seruantes, and
disposition of some other affaires and businesse. You shall nowe shewe
your selfe a carefull and discreete wife, if in mine absence, you will
a little take vpon you to be in my place. Regard and consider with your
selfe, that seruants are negligent and carelesse, and if the maister
forget his owne profit, they are as readie as others to share with
his gaines. Your painfull attendance to ouerlooke them, shal straine
their labours to my vsing, your desire to see into them, shall worke
their vsage to my well seruing. You must now a little while forget
neighbourhood, and walking for company, considering the old prouerbe:
That when the Cat is away the mouse wil go play: If master and dame
haue both continued absence, seruants fall a wasting, and do what they
list. You know good wife, I haue now taken a great charge of late vpon
me, which with some carefull looking to, may turne to good, let it not
be grieuous vnto you, nor thinke it hard, that I thus make you partaker
of my charge, as I do of my profit. For we are yoke fellowes you know,
and the charge is equall betwixt vs to be borne and supported. If as
louing mates and companions wee drawe forth togethers, we doubtlesse
shall by Gods blessed goodnes see the fruits of our labours. Our
children shall participate with vs of our trauels, and God shal prosper
our endeuours. And howbeit good wife, I haue alwaies found you such,
as of whose care to my well doing I neede haue no doubt, yet if by
the importance of my charge I bee driuen thus much to write vnto you,
thinke that in great trust of your modesty, respect of your loue, &
zeale to both our goods I haue done the same. And though no mistrust
remaine of any one about me: yet doe I put you in minde what youth
by too much sufferance and neglegct of libertie may be inclined to.
This is al I would, and so much I hope as you gladly will yeelde vnto.
Commend mee manie times to your selfe and likewise to all our friendes.
From R. this third of Maie, &c.

                                     Your assured louing husband, &c.


                  _A Letter Mandatory from one friend
                             to another._

My harty commendations remembred vnto you, good maister R. These are
to certifie you that I haue presumed so much on your friendship, as
to put ouer certaine causes of mine in your name, for so much as for
many respects I find my selfe too far insufficient to deale with the
parties, I must therefore desire you to receiue some instructions
which I haue herwith sent you by this bearer, and therein to vse such
needfull furtherance as in like cases of friendship you may commaund
at my handes. I pray you also that you will take so much more further
paines for me, as at conuenient leisure to walke towards S. and there
to confer with my brother P. and vpon sight and hearing of such
matter as by him shall bee shewed and set forth vnto you, to deale
accordingly. Thus with my earnest desire to see you here at L. where
you shall most hartily finde your selfe welcome, I take leaue this of,
&c.

                                         Your very louing friend, &c.

=Thus haue I led along, as you sée, this promised Methode by varietie
of directions and examples, fitting to euery purpose I hope to the
pleasing and content of all the indifferent readers: and here as a
limit sufficient to that determined labour, doe I laie downe my rest.
If anie faultes happen, as no doubt there will (for what from fault
maie bee frée) let the learned I beseech them winke at it, the curteous
ouerpasse it, and the considerate and well practised in such like
trauels fauour me in it, seeing my endeuour therein was done for the
best. And so doe I conclude my Methode.=

                                FINIS.




                                   A
                              DECLARATION
                of al such Tropes, Figures or Schemes,
               _as for excellencie and ornament in wri-_
                   ting, are speciallie vsed in this
                               Methode.

                   Collected and explaned togithers,
                   according to their applications,
                        vsages, and properties.

                           _By Angell Day:_

                            [Illustration]

                    Imprinted at London by P. S. for
                        Cuthbert Burbie. 1599.




                      _To the courteous Reader._


As in the two bookes before going (gentle Reader) my mind and purpose
was to set foorth vnto the learner, how much the phrase of our daylie
speech by well ordering and deliuerie is graced with Figures and
other ornaments of Art, and to such end and purpose, haue I in the
margent of euerie Epistle, directlie against the places where they are
vsed, quoted them to be seen. I haue now for better supplement of the
learners knowledge, determined in this place to make a collection of
them all, remembring with my selfe, that vnto such as are vnexperienced
in their particular applications, they shall be but of verie slender
moment in their quotations, without also they may be instructed by
example, how, where, and in what tearmes, wordes or cariage, they
are vsed, and wherein, and by what conueyance their efficacies are
explaned. For which cause, these briefe instructions following,
conteining, as in the title before going, a demonstration of their
true & seueral qualities, properties and natures, are to such ende
deliuered: wherein my purpose is to omit nothing, which in my poore
opinion may seeme vnto this deuised Methode anie wayes furthering.
And howbeit my selfe in the writing of these collections, doe well
consider the want I haue of other perfections, whereby to ornifie the
matter hereof, with examples correspondent, yet shall it by such meanes
appeare vnto all fauourers of science, what will and desire I haue to
deserue with the best, confessing (as by due proofe I haue found) no
speech to be accounted valuable or of weight, that is not graced with
these parts. Thus hauing at large expostulated my true meaning herein,
I commit the rest to your curteous censures, and my selfe to your good
opinions.

                                                       _Yours, A. D._




                   OF FIGVRES, TROPES, and Schemes.


=A |Figure| is a certaine meane whereby from a simple and ordinarie
kinde of speaking, we growe into a more cunning and excellent
deliuerie.=


            A Figure is diuided into _Trope_ and _Scheme_.

=A |trope| is as much to say, as a variation of a worde or sentence
from the proper & apt signification, vnto another neere vnto the same,
sometimes for pleasure, and otherwhile for ornament sake, and there are
|tropes| of words, and |tropes| of sentences.=

=A |Scheme| is a certaine new kinde of forme of writing & speaking, and
for the excellencie thereof is called the ornament, light and colours
of Rhetoricall spéech.=

=Betweene a |Trope| and a |Scheme| the difference is, that the
|Trope| changeth the signification, as in these wordes |Generation|
of |Vipers|, meaning thereby |homicides| of their owne issue or
antecessors, as the |Viper| deuoureth her owne broode. The |Scheme|
hath no change of signification, but retaineth the expresse meaning,
as, |Can so great anger be in heauenlie mindes?| written of _Iuno_ in
the |Aeneidos| of _Virgill_, whereas anger is indéede onelie a humaine
passion, yet without alteration is there allotted vnto the heauenlie
Gods. And of some there is helde in them small difference, in so much
as often times they runne into one anothers meaning.=


                      The _Tropes_ of wordes, are

=_Metaphora_, which is, when a worde from the proper or right
signification is tanasferred to another neere vnto the meaning, as to
saie: |We see well|, when wee meane |wee vnderstande well|, or to call
them |eaters or deuourers of men and houses|, who vndo the poore,
or extort from them their goods or liuings: or to saie, a homelie or
rude speaker doth |braie|, which to do belongeth to an Asse, or to
attribute vnto thinges the properties they haue not, as if we should
say, the ground wanting wet, |doth thirst for raine|, or |fruits|
in their growth do |labour|, or |corne| by the statelie length and
weightie eare it carrieth, to bee |proude|, or by |Emphasis|, that
|by desire, men are enflamed, by anger kindled, fallen by errour:| And
lastlie, in prayse of mans ofspring, as to saie, |the beautie of his
stocke|, or to call the place of renowne, |the well or seate of glorie|,
also to say, |the showers of speech, flouds of eloquence|, onelie for
ornament in writing, without anie other proper affinitie, attribution
or likelihoode.=

=_Synecdoche_, when by one particular we vnderstand a number, as to
saie, the |braue English was conquerour|, as much to saie, |Englishmen
were victours|, or when by a part wee vnderstande the whole, as to say,
a |blade| for a |sworde|, a |Hall| for a |house|, or when by one thing
we vnderstand another, as to say, |the highest fall| for |the deepest
fall|, the |toppe| for |the bottome, Neptunes reigne| for the |Sea|: or
when we put the matter whereof a thing is made, for the thing it selfe:
as to saie, |the loftie Pine did scowre the Seas|, for the ship made
of the Pine trée, or thus: |With slashing Iron furious on his foes,
hee rusht amaine, &c.| for |with slashing sworde:| Likewise hee put
|spurres to his horse|, for |hee ranne his horse|. |They haue liued|,
that is, |they are dead, they flourish|, for they are rich, braue or
happie.=

=_Metonymia_, or _transnominatio_, the putting of one name for an
other, as the |inuenter|, for the thing inuented, so do we call
corne by the name of |Ceres|, we put |Bacchus| for wine, |Venus| for
lust, |Vulcane| for fire, |Neptune| for the sea, |Mars| for warre:
likewise the continent for that which is contained, as if we should
say, |acceptable to the heauens|, meaning to him that dwelleth in
the heauens, a |happie soyle|, meaning happie people in the soile,
|hee drunke vp the whole cup before him|, for the wine in the cup
before him. In like maner when the cause efficient is vnderstood by
the effect, as when we say, |Pale death, sorrowfull dread, headlong
rage, carelesse wine, vnshamefast night|: wherein is shewed, that
dread causeth sorowe, |death| palenes, |wine| carelesnes, and so of
the rest. Further, when by her that holdes the |Scepter|, wee signifie
the |Queenes Maiestie|, and likewise by mentioning the |Sword|,
|Magistracy|.=

=_Antonomasia_, where to the person of anie one, wee giue an other
name, then his owne proper, as in stead of |Christ|, to saie the |Holie
one of God|, or |The worlds Sauiour|. Or of the Queenes Maiestie,
to saie |The Virgin Queene, The Royall Maide|, with other like
appropriations fitting so great an excellencie.=

=_Onomatopœia_, where to a thing not hauing a proper terme, wee faine
or deuise a name, as to saie, |the murmure of the waters, the roring of
the cannon, clashing of armour|, & such like: where neither |murmur|,
|roring| nor |clashing| is by nature to these belonging.=

=_Catachresis_, where wee accommodate a name to a thing that is not
proper, as to saie, |lend me your hand, or your aid|, which tearme of
lending is more proper to money, or things that are borrowed, and to
say, |mens powers are short|, or |their counsels long|, when in neither
of both there is anie such measure.=

=_Metalepsis_, or |Transumptio|, when by a certaine number of degrees
we go beyond that wee intend in troth, and haue meaning to speake of,
as to saie: |Accursed soile that bred my cause of woe|, when we might
as well crie out on the parties selfe that hath don the wo, & not to
go so far off as to the soile that bred him, or as |Penelope| bewaling
her husbandes ouerlong absence from her, exclaimed in her Epistle to
|Vlysses|, on |Paris| that had raped |Helena|, wishing that he and all
his fleet had perished, ere the rape had bin committed, intending that
by that rape, the |Grecians| were drawn to the warres, and so the
siege for tenne yeares space continued, and ten yeeres after that,
her husband forced by many landes and seas to haue wandered. Of the
originall cause whereof her iust complaint was deriued.=


                      Tropes of sentences, _are_

=_Allegoria_, a kinde of inuerting or change of sence, as when we shew
one thing in wordes & signifie another in meaning, a |Trope| most
vsuall amongst vs euen in our common speaking, as when we saie, |Bow
the With while it is greene|, meaning to correct children whilest they
bee yong: or, |There is no fire without smoake:| meaning that there is
no ill conceipt without occasion: or, |I smell a Rat|, that is, I know
your meaning, for other applications you haue the same diuerslie quoted
in our Epistles to bee seene in their margents.=

=_Ænigma_, a darke sentence, or as we ordinarilie say, a riddle, rather
vsed in high and déepe mysteries, otherwise conueied sometime in
pleasant fancies, then accustomed in other writings.=

=_Parœmia_, called amongst vs an _Adage_ or common saying, as thus:
|Who so toucheth pitch shall bee defiled therewith: It earlie pricketh
that wil be a thorn: many hands make light worke, &c.|

=_Ironia_, a scoffe or flout, as when wee saie, |Alas good man|, or to
one that hath set debate or contention, |you haue spun a faire thred|:
or to him that hath made a long speach to no purpose, |you haue brought
forth a mighty mole-hil|, or to a lewd person, |you are an honest man|.

=_Sarcasmus_, a bitter bob as wee saie, or enuious derision, as of one
arraigned for fellonie, to twit him, |that hee had like to haue knockt
his head against the gallowes|, or of one suffering for treason to
saie, |that it made him hop headlesse.

=_Asteismus_, a smooth, as we call it, as when one tels a thing
repugnant to the present matter or companie, to saie, |I had as lieue
he told me it snew|, when neither the time of the yeare, or present
weather admitteth it snowe. Or when one misseth of a number, to bid him
|take a sticke and tell it|, or telling a lie, to bid him |take the
haire from his lips|.

=_Antiphrasis_, when a word scornefullie deliuered, is vnderstoode by
his contrarie, as of a dwarfe, to saie in iest, |what a gyant haue we
here|, or of him that telleth a matter ordinarie for strange, to saie,
|what a wonder telleth he|, or to say, |the man hath a sharpe wit|,
when we intend he hath a verie blunt capacitie, or of a blacke Moore
woman, to saie, |Will ye see a faire pigion.|=

=_Charientismus_, as when we scoffe a man in his threatning mood to
say, |O good words, I pray you|, or |kill vs not at the first dash|,
or, |Bite not my nose off I pray you|, and such like.=

=_Hyperbole_, when for the manifestation of a thing vehement or
exceeding, the wordes of our speach doe goe beyonde credite, as to
saie, |It woulde haue made a stonie hearte to weepe: hee wearied the
heauens with his clamour: Shee was fairer then beautie herselfe, more
cruell then Nero or Phaleris: Worse then the Deuill: Whiter then snowe:
sighing without ceasing|, and infinite such like.=

    Of Schemes there are two sorts,
                    _that is,_
          Grammaticall, and Rhetoricall.
    Grammaticall are also deuided into two parts.
                    _that is,_
    Orthographicall, pertaining chieflie to Poesie:
                      _and_
    Syntaxicall, which are to be applied to our vses.


                      Schemes Syntaxicall, _are_,

=_Eclipsis_, that is a defect of sence in a word or necessarie
reason, aunswerable to the due construction, as when hauing spoken
sufficientlie of a matter, we close vp the sentence with these wordes,
|But this for that let be, and now to the rest|, where after |let be|,
this worde (|sufficient|) seemeth to be wanting. Likewise, |what might
be more in the matter?| for |what might be more don or spoken in the
matter|. Also to saie, |you are not to aunswere or compare with him|,
for |you are not meete, sufficient, or able to answere or compare with
him|. Or otherwise to say, |A man of so rare vertue, so deeplie to be
ouerseene|, for, |is it true that a man of so rare vertue shoulde so
deeply be ouerseene.|=

=_Aposiopesis_, when by passing to another matter, we stop our spéech
on a sudden, as it were in an interrupted or discontented mood, as to
say, |Are these the practises you take in hand? be these your deuises?
hath your worthy courage endeuored so mighty effectes? But I will first
tame your courses, and for the residue, I wil hold you in so bridled
a meane, that my selfe will warrant you henceforth from any such like
further proceedings|. Or thus, |Vngratefull creature, hast thou dealt
wel with me in thus conspiring my ill that haue euer sought thy good?
Wel, I wil saie no more, but for thee & thy complices I wil take order
well inough to stay you|. Or otherwise by way of a fearful rehearsall
thus: |What euill was there whereunto we were not subiect? But whie
dwell I in circumstances? wee were the men allotted to that purpose.|=

=_Zeugma_, when one or more clauses are concluded vnder one verbe, as
to saie, |His loosenesse ouercame all shame: his boldnesse, feare: his
madnesse, reason:| where all these clauses are concluded vnder this one
verbe, |Ouercame|. Or thus: |What auaileth it to shrine so much this
vaine beauty, which either by long sicknesse, extremity of old age,
infinite sorrowes and cares, or a thousand mishaps besides, is euery
day in daunger or subiect to bee vtterlie crased:| In which all the
clauses before going are concluded in this one verbe |is in danger,
&c.|=

=_Syllepsis_, when one verbe supplieth two clauses, one person two
roomes, or one word serueth to manie sences, as thus: |He runs for
pleasure, I for feare|: where this verbe |run|, serueth to both
purposes: also thus: |But scorning so to be reproued, and with a manly
resolution by one stroke giuen, he acquited his shame, his credit, and
his person|, where this one worde |acquite| serueth to all clauses
aforegoing and following.=

=_Prolepsis_, where some thing generallie first spoken, is afterwards
drawne into partes, as thus: |Let vs take vpon vs one selfe charge, I
to direct abroad, you to order at home|. Or otherwise: |Men diuerslie
do erre, some by an ignoraunt simplicitie, others by a most peruerse
follie.|=

=_Pleonasmus_, where with words seeming superfluous, we do increase our
reasons, as thus: |With these eares I heard him speake it: Or with mine
eies I behelde him sorrowing|, where we well knowe that without eares
or eies, we cannot wel heare or see, yet carieth this kind of spéech,
|a vehemency in enforcing| the matter so plainelie, or throughlie to be
hard or séene.=

=_Macrologia_, where a clause is finallie added to the matter going
before, in seeming more then néeded, as, |Men of so high and excelling
vertue, let them euer liue, and neuer die|, here |neuer die|, seemeth
superfluous, and yet notable wel adorneth the sentence.=

=_Anastrophe_, a preposterous inuersion of wordes, besides their common
course, as when we say: for |faults, no man liueth without|, when order
requireth we should saie: |No man liueth without faults: Long when he
had confusedly thus liued|, for when he had long time thus confusedlie
liued.=

=_Hysteron proteron_, where that which ought to be in the first place,
is put in the second, as thus: |After hee had giuen saile to the
winde, and taken the Seas|, for after he had taken the seas, and giuen
saile to the wind. Also, |That which of all others is most sacred and
permanent, honoured, and euer shining vertue, chuse vnto your selues:|
for chuse vnto your selues honored and euer shining vertue, which of
all others is most sacred and permanent: or, as commonly we say in our
English spéech, |Pull off my bootes and spurs.|=

=_Tmesis_ of _Diacope_, a diuision of a word compound into two parts,
as, |What might be soeuer vnto a man pleasing, that had he|, for
whatsoeuer might be, &c. |Hither should he haue come to, when he
finished his argument|: for hitherto should he haue come, &c.=

=_Parenthesis_, an intercluding of a sentence in any reason commonlie
set betweene two halfe circles, as thus: |I am content (not in respect
you deserue so much at my hands) onelie for pitie sake to hearken ynto
you|, the knowledge hereof is ordinarie, and therefore I néede speake
the lesse of it.=

=_Hypallage_, when by change of propertie in application a thing is
deliuered, as to saie, |Darkesome wandring by the solitary night|,
for wandring solitarilie by the darkesome night, or the |wicked wound
thus giuen|, for hauing thus wickedlie wounded him. The vse hereof in
|Poesie| is most rife.=

=_Hendiadis_, when one thing of it selfe intire, is diuersly layde
open, as to saie, |On iron and bit he champt|, for on the iron bitte
hee champt: And |part and pray we got|, for part of the pray: Also
by |surge and sea we past|, for by surging sea we past. This also is
rather Poeticall then other wise in vse.=

=_Asyndeton_, when two or thrée clauses or more disioyned do follow
one another, as to saie |his house, his land, his purse, himselfe, his
life, were all at his commaund|. Or thus, |he scapte, he ran, he rusht,
and fled away|. Or otherwise, |thy fame, thy wealth, thy friends, thy
kin, and all hast thou lost togithers.|=

=_Polysyndeton_, when in like sort by many coniunctions sundrie words
one following the other are vnited together, as thus, |Both sworde
and fire and dearth, three dreadfull scourges of the war were alwayes
attendant vpon him.| Or thus, |with faith and troth and plighted heart,
and loue he made him hers, &c.|=

=_Hirmos_, where a continuance of speech is vsed, vntill the ende
of the clause, as |God in the beginning made heauen, earth, sea,
firmament, sunne, moone, starres, and all things in them contained|:
where you see all these words, |heauen, earth, &c|. haue all one
continuance vntill the last end of the sentence.=

=_Epitheton_, when for ornament sake we adde vnto a worde, or for
mislike do attribute somewhat vnto the same, as when for ornament we
say, |Sweet beautie, precious loue, friendlie fortune:| Or contrariwise
in mislike, |vnbrideled lust, filthie gaine, wicked guile, deceitfull
fauour, fond fancie, &c.|=

=_Periphrasis_, when by circumlocution anie thing is expressed, as
when we say, |The Prince of Peripateticks|, for |Aristotle|, the
|subuerter of Carthage and Numantia|, for |Scipio. A man studious of
wisedome|, for a Philosopher: |A man diuerslie enriched|, for one that
is wealthie, &c.=

=_Liptote_, when by the lesse that is spoken, the more maie bee
vnderstood, as thus: What auaileth it that thou dost not despise me,
which is by the contrarie, |that thou louest mee|, the deliuerie
thereof is singular by the negatiue, for that giueth grace to the
|Figure|, as |it discontenteth me not to heare of you, but it griueth
me to heare ill of you. We are not so ignorant of things, but we can
perceiue somewhat|. That is in the one, |it pleaseth mee well to heare
of you|, and in the other, |we haue skill to discerne of things, and
thereby can perceiue somewhat|.=

=_Paradiastole_, when with a milde interpretation or spéech we colour
others or our owne faults, as when we call a subtill person, |wise|: a
bold fellow, |couragious|: a prodigall man |liberall|: a man furious
or rash, |valiant|: a parasite, |a companion|: him that is proud,
|magnanimous|, and such like.=

=_Meosis_, a maner of disabling, as when we saie, |Alas sir, it is not
in my power to doe it|: or otherwise, |little God wot could man doe in
such a case|.=


                       Schemes Rhetoricall, are

=_Anaphora_, or |Repetitio|, where by rehearsall of one worde wee
make sundrie beginnings, as to saie, |Learning bringeth to knowledge,
learning maketh wise, learning enableth to vertue, learning is the
ornament of the minde, finallie, learning is the onelie substantiall
proppe and guide of mans life, without which nothing in a manner
can bee pleasant, nothing sauourie, nothing of value, &c.| Or thus,
|hauing committed so great euils, couldest thou yet dare to come in
open shewe of the worlde, couldest thou dare to shewe thy selfe in the
face of men, couldest thou dare to bee seene of anie one, that hast
thus generallie deserued to bee hated of all:| Or otherwise thus, |When
death commeth to chalenge his due, what then shall auaile beautie, what
youth, what riches, what strength? where then shall become thy landes,
where thy reuenue, where thy possessions? who shall argue thy cause,
who stande for thee, who plead for thee?|=

=_Epanalepsis_, when with one selfe word, we doe both begin and finish
a sentence, the vse hereof is méerelie appropriate to |Poesie, Much
asked he of Priams state, of Hector verie much|.=

=_Epizeuxis_, or a redoubling of a word, by vehemencie to expresse a
thing, as thus: |Thou thou art he on whom I liue to be reuenged. He, he
it was that wrought all my care. Thus, thus behooueth men of vertue and
courage to doe.|=

=_Anadiplosis_, when the last word of a comma or member of a sentence,
is the beginner of another that followeth, as |heauens witnes my fall,
my fall more grieuous then may be well supported by common sorrow:| or
thus, |Fie, too much vngratefull, vngratefull to mee of all others,
that so much at thy hands haue deserued.|=

=_Antistrophe_, where manie members are drawne to ende with one and
the same worde, as, |we haue our felicitie of vertue, our renowne of
vertue, our hope and expectation of vertue|. Or thus: |men from their
errours are reclaimed by loue, reclaimed by hope, reclaimed by feare|.=

=_Symploche_, where sundrie members haue one selfe beginning and
ending, as thus, |If we shall debate of the times present, what is
I pray you the cause of all these euils? money: what hath beene the
decay of our estimate? money: what the ruine of our soules? money: what
the torment of our conscience? money: what the meane of all ambitious
aspirings, treacheries, and villanies? money: In fine, this cursed and
wretched title of gaine is it that bewitcheth all ages and seasons,
and that onelie by a seruile regarde and account giuen vnto money:| Or
otherwise thus in contempt. |What sillie soule wast thou when I beganne
first to like thee? nothing. What when I tooke thee? nothing. What
before I cherished and regarded thee? nothing. And now that by me thou
hast beene made somthing, thou esteemest me as nothing.|=

=_Ploche_, when by an Emphasin, a worde is either in praise or
disgrace, reiterated or repeated, as thus: |Though Scipio were neuer so
much terrified with the Carthaginians in Spaine, with the Numidians in
Affricke, with aduersaries abroade, and with priuie enemies at home,
yet ceased he not to be Scipio still|, that is, _sui similis_, like
vnto himselfe still.|=

=_Polyptoton_ or |Traductio|, when one worde is often repeated by
varietie of cases, as thus: |Who hath in his life nothing so much
pleasing as the verie life it selfe which he enioyth, it is impossible
that his life with vertue should anie wayes be adorned:| or by
translating of one worde into diuers formes, as thus: |What manhoode
call you this, so vnmanlie to deale in those actions, that speciallie
appertaineth to a man?| Here is this word |manhood| translated into
|vnmanlie| and to |man|.=

=_Membrum_, or |Parison|, when one or moe members doe followe in equall
sentences, as thus: |See now by one fault how manie mischiefs thou
hast heaped to thy selfe, thou hast consumed thy patrimonie, grieued
thy parents, estranged thy friends, defamed thy stocke, vndone thy
kindred, and heaped mischiefe a thousand folde to thy selfe more then
can be auoided:| or thus with copulation: |neither hast thou herein
dealt discreetlie for thy selfe, nor respected thy frends, nor regarded
thy being, nor studied of the euill, nor cared for the good that might
happen, but leauing al at randon, thou hast done what in thee lieth to
worke all our vndoing.|=

=_Omoioteliton_, or _similiter cadens_, when words and sentences in
one sort do finish togithers, as thus: |Weeping, wailing, and her
handes, wringing, she moued all men to pitie her|. Or thus: |Thou
liuest maliciouslie, speakest hatefully, and vsest thy selfe cruelly.|
Or thus: |Wee find it much better of wise men to be rebuked, then by
filthie flatterie to be fondly deceyued.|=

=_Prosonomasia_, a pleasant kind of collusion in words, in
significations diuers, only by changing, detracting, or adding a letter
or sillable in a word, as to say, |No doubt he is a foole wise man|,
for a full wise man, |for a Doctor|, a Doter, or otherwise, |thou art
no bewraier, but a betraier of mens counsels. Of one religious thou art
become prodigious.|=

=_Antanaclasis_, when we produce a word in a contrary signification to
that it commonlie portendeth: as to saie, |For my kindnesse you haue
vsed me kindly, meaning indeede you haue vsed mee verie badly. And I
can bee contented to pray with you though you pray not vppon me|. Where
this worde |kindly| is applied to the worser part, which of it selfe
carieth as wee see a far other meaning: and likewise |pray| in one
sence being to entreate, is in another sense intended here to spoile.
And as another said to a rude fellow, |you are too course to keepe
course in our companie|, here is |course| for rudenes, and |course| in
another sense for |good order|.=

=_Erotema_ or _Interrogatio_, when by interrogation we sift out anie
thing somtimes by demand, as to saie, |But you sir, now frō whence
I pray you, deriue you your fancie?| by asseueration, as to saie:
|Haue you not in this action behaued your selfe excellent well?| By
commiseration, as to saie: |Alas what grounde may holde mee, what lande
or shore may possesse mee, circumuented as I am with so many euils?| By
vrging, as thus, |What hadst thou to intermeddle in so bad a company?
How long shall wee bee thus abused with so fained treachery? Art thou
not ashamed seeing thy purposes thus reuealed? Perceiuest thou not thy
driftes to bee all discouered?| By indignation, as to saie, |Shall I
yet couer thy villanies being at thy handes thus hatefully misused?|
or thus, |Wicked and peruerse kinde of people, howe long will you
thus hatefully deale with your fauorers?| By admiration, as to saie,
|Good Lord, who woulde haue thought so much loosenesse in so chaste a
countenance! But what is it that this blind and sottish loue draweth
not a man headlong into?| And lastly, by doubting, as thus: |What shall
I say, or what further speeches may I vse to withdraw you from these
euils?| Or otherwise: |Whither shall I turne me to speake vnto you, or
what wordes may I vse whereby to withdraw you from these vanities?|=

=_Anthypophora_ or _Subiectio_, when to a question asked by vs, we
answere of our selues in our own reasonings, the maner whereof is
accomplished three kinde of waies, as first when wee obiect vnto our
selues that which to others might be obiected, and answere it againe.
Secondlie, when we do (as it were) vrge those we speake vnto to answere
vs, and so answering, do confute their sayinges. Thirdlie, when in a
deliberatiue sort we propound diuers things, and refute them all one
after another. Example of the first maie bee this. |Is this a maner of
discipline? Doe men in such sort deliuer their instructions? Had they
for this cause the authoritie of tutors to them giuen, that in vanities
and misliked pleasures, they who are committed vnto their charge,
shoulde consume their youth vnder them? Beleeue me I am of a farre
other opinion, neither do I thinke, that the reasonable time of young
men, being now fittest of all others for anie vertuous impression,
shoulde thus cautelouslie be deluded of that, whereunto both their
parents and birth do commend them|. Of the second, this: |Nowe after
al these proofes of the happie comming and acknowledgement of our
true and onelie Messias: Let me speake vnto you againe, yee Iewes,
enemies, and maligners of our sole and onelie God and Sauiour Christ
Iesus, with what reasons strengthned doe you persist in your madnes?
Stande ye vpon the Oracles of Prophets? Wee haue made plaine vnto you
that they are wholie for vs. Looke ye after Moyses? It was only of our
Christ, and none other that he that written. Waite ye on Types and
Figures? They all in one do agree to bee in him fulfilled. Preferre
you vnto vs miracles? Who could desire more then by him was shewed.
Bring you against vs a number of consents? Alas you onely bring the
smallest number, and lurking as it were in a corner, are the gainsayers
of trueth itselfe, sith the whole world round about you doth witnes
for vs. Doth the hope of any euent yet a little detaine you? Beholde
your temple long since subuerted: your sacrifices quenched, your Citie
rased, your people runnagate and dispersed, nor anie hope at all left
vnto you to be relieued but by the clemencie of the Christians|. Of
the thirde, this. |Tell mee I praie, what or wherein is it, that a
worldlie man hath such meane to glorie in? wherein shoulde hee bee
proude, or for what cause should he thus puffe vp himselfe in vanitie?
Is it for his riches? they neuer make a man either happy or blessed,
so farre off are they many times from anie such euent, as often wee
do see that they are the verie cause of their owners destructions,
they sundrie waies are meanes to inconueniences, and in our owne sight
forsake their maisters in their life times, but seldome followe them
for ought wee see to their graues. Is it for children? The keeping of
them is then of riches far more vncertaine. Is it in respect of a wife,
familie and other such like commodities? they are vexations, cares and
griefes, nothing in them stable, nor such as may induce a man to any
hoped tranquility, &c.| There is also of this sort another example, by
an immediate answere to euerie question, as thus: |Wherfore then is
the law? for transgressors, wherefore reward? for wel-doers|. Or thus:
|Where is now their pride? vanished. Where are their boasts? deluded.
Came they to aide vs? no, rather to suppresse vs. Came they to comfort
vs? no, but to kill vs|.=

=_Antenagoge_, when hauing spoken as it were in the dispraise or
mislike of a thing, we goe about to helpe the same againe with a new
colour to the matter: As to saie, |It is a thing difficult to attain
learning, but yet verie commodious. It is tedious to trauell for sundry
knowledges, but vnto our liues it is a thing most necessary.|=

=_Ecphonesis_ or _Exclamatio_, which hath signification of griefe or
indignation of a thing, as of griefe thus, |O cruell and lamentable
times wherein wee liue, subiect as wee are to so manifolde miseries!|
Of indignation thus. |O incredible boldnesse, or rather impudencie of a
shamelesse creature: not fit to bee suffered|. Neither is this manner
speaking, alwaies framed by the Interiection O, but rather otherwise,
as thus: |Vnhappie man, made vnhappie by so great a misfortune, what
vnkinde destiny droue him to so imminent a perill? Howe miserable and
vncertaine is the state and condition of man, subiect to so many and so
huge calamities?| Or otherwise, |What kind of people are you to rage in
so vile a madnesse? Was euer seene a multitude so fierce, a company so
carelesse, an assemblie so desperate? What inconsiderate dealing do you
vse? I shame to see you, & grieue to behold you, &c.|=

=_Insultatio_, when iniuriously, or by a contumelious reproch we insult
vpon a mans doings, as thus: |Trudge on with thy mischiefs, proceed in
these thy insatiable cruelties, and he that hath power ouer al, wil
one day I hope correct thee|. Or otherwise, |Pursue I pray you your
glorious enterprise, you haue, no doubt, very waightily begun, & we
cannot but expect thereof a notable issue.|=

=_Aporia_ or |Dubitatio|, when wee make staie or doubt howe to tearme a
thing, or which waie to wade in a matter, as thus: |What shoulde I say,
was it anger or an inueterate malice that led him to this mischiefe?
Shall I cal him cunning as cautelous, that procured it, and so well
could shift himselfe of it?| Or otherwise thus: |May hee bee said to be
beloued, or rather fortunate or blessed, to haue escaped such daungers?
is it to bee tearmed clemencie or rather piety to vse one so miserable
with great curtesie|. Or thus: |I am not well perswaded what course to
take in these causes, shall I begin where others haue left? or of my
selfe shall I renewe againe vnto you what you haue so often heard? &c.|=

=_Paradoxon_, affined vnto that before, but with a kinde of maruelling
or woondering thereunto added, as thus: |Could it possibly bee thought
that learning and place of good education might euer haue produced such
monstrous effectes?| Or otherwise: |I haue great maruell that men so
generous, should so quickly be diuerted from their honest purposes|. Or
thus. |I woulde neuer haue beleeued that such graue and considerate
counsels shoulde so easily haue beene subuerted.|=

=_Epitropis_, when by proposing a cause, wee reason what should
bee done therein, as thus: |In times so troublesome and seasons so
tempestious, giue now your aduise what is fit to bee done. If the
case were your owne, what would you doe, what would you say therein,
tell me I pray you, you that conuerse in these and such like actions,
I herein appeale vnto your wisdomes, your owne consciences, shewe me
but your mindes herein|. And this figure is vsed in reasoning, when as
to conclude a matter, and seeming loath to trouble the auditorie anie
further in the same, we pretend to reserue a great part thereof, which
we would refer to their iudgements.=

=_Parresia_, or libertie to speake, when by winning of curtesie to our
spéech we séek to auoid any offence thereof, as thus. |Pardon if I be
tedious, the circumstance of the cause requireth it. If my speech seeme
vehement, the matter occasioning the same is vrgent. If what I write
seeme offensiue vnto you, you haue to mislike the ill disposition of
such as inforce it, and not with me to be agreeued.|=

=_Apostrophe_, or _Auersio_, when wee turne our speeches from one
person or thing to another, as if one hauing spoken much of the vanitie
of the worlde shoulde thereupon turne and saie vnto the worlde, |O
world, how sweete and pleasant are the shewes of those things which
thou producest: but in taste, how full of too much bitternes?| Or in
speaking of the certaintie of death, and the little respect thereof
had, to turne a mans speach to death it selfe and saie, |O death, how
bitter is thy remembrance to a man hauing peace and plenty in his
riches, &c.|=

=_Prosopopœia_ when to things without life wee frame an action, spéech
or person, fitting a man, as if we should saie of |vertue|, as of a
liuing person, that |her wayes were sweet, and replenished with all
maner of delight, that she putteth her selfe foorth to the woorthiest
to be receyued, and to the most honoured to be embraced|. Or faine
the |ghosts| from out their graues to prescribe good examples, or
to rebuke the vices of men. Or our |countrey| to accuse vs of our
negligent regard vnto it in these or suchlike speeches: |Vnkind people
and Citizens whom I haue ingendred in my bowels, nourished with my
paps, fostered with my delights, why doe you thus vngratefullie not
onelie abstaine to tender mee, but giue mee an open proy to my foes
to suppresse mee: yea, which is most loathsome of all others, become
proper murtherers and paracides of your owne parentage and familie,
cruell destroyers of your owne patrimonie, and wretched renders and
tearers of your mothers bowels, without all regard or pitie.|=

=_Synonymia_, when we bring foorth many wordes together of one
signification, or sounding all to one purpose, as to say, |thou hast
spoiled thy Countrey, destroied thy Citie, and turned the Commonweale
topsie-turuie:| all which do sort but to one purpose, for the
expressing the hatefulnesse of the iniurie: or otherwise to say,
|What head hadst thou to deuise such a thing, where was thy wit when
thou wentst about it, what became of thy minde in purposing the same,
whither was thy discretion caried in the prosequution?| Here is |head,
wit, minde and discretion|, all sorting to one thing. Also, |what
desirest thou, what soughtest thou, what couldest thou wish or expect
in the action|. Here is |desired, sought, wish and expect|, being all
to one meaning.=

=_Auxesis_ or _Incrementum_, where by degrees we not onlie rise to the
summe of euerie thing, but also sometimes go beyond, as to say, |Hee
first set vpon him with reproachfull wordes, after assayled him with
his weapons, then wounded him, and lastlie did moste miserablie murther
him|. Here by degrees is passed to the last exigent. Now to the second.
|It is euill to reproch, wicked to slaunder, villanous vnwarilie to
strike, detestable to murther. What shall I say to betray a man to
all these|. Here is now _vltra summum_, beyond all that was spoken to
the vttermost. The excellencie of this Figure is so much the more, by
howe much euerie degrée is still inforced one aboue another, and goeth
beyonde in comparison, as to say: |golde, riches, honour, estate,
treasure, kingdomes, life, and all he helde of no moment|. Another
kinde of recitall pertaineth also to this figure short in repetition,
but for vehemencie wonderfull, as to say: |Thou hast conspired the
death of thy Prince, and in her the subuersion of a whole kingdome,
what should I say thou hast conspired the death of thy Prince|. As who
would enforce that no one thing then that could be greater: Finallie,
for inforcement of a thing, to say in reprehension of follies. |If thou
hadst done or spoken this in a priuate audience, among men of the ruder
and meaner sort, among such as are lesse capable of skill then a great
many others, thy fault could not haue beene hid: but to doe it before
thy betters, in the presence of such as are adiudged both honorable and
wise, in the hearing of those of great account of such as haue power to
checke, and authoritie to compell thee, it was too peeuish.|=

=_Sinathrismus_, a heaping of words diuersly signifying togithers, as
to say, |Hee was a man wholie malicious, exceedinglie proude, vtterlie
arrogant, altogither subtill, by nature cruell, and in speeches
contentious|. Or otherwise thus: |What should I tell thee further of
his partes, how wise, how sober, how honest, howe courteous, howe
friendly, how choicelie he liued.|=

=_Brachiologa_, when in single wordes without anie coupling togethers,
we procéed in a broken kind of deliuerie, and yet hasten forward as in
the other: As to saie, |loue, hate, Ielousie, frensie, furie|, drew him
from |pitty|.=

=_Antithesis_, or |Contentio|, when we amplifie by contraries, as to
say, |Being in my power to vse as I listed, I cared for thee, and did
not destroy thee. Thou wast charie vnto me whē no man regarded thee,
and when my selfe also might haue despised thee|. Or otherwise: |If
you doe that is good, you haue the rewarde of praise, if you prosecute
badnesse, your merite is euill|. Or thus: |To thy enimyes and those
that maligne thee, thou art placable: to thy friendes, inexorable. In
coole matters thou art hotte: in the hottest causes, colde: Art thou
called? Thou art gone. Thy absence required? we cannot be rid of thee.|=

=_Epanodis_, carrieng a reference to the matter preceding, much like to
the figure _Prolepsis_, but that yᵉ figure _Prolepsis_, hath relation
onelie to the matter, this to the matter and tearmes therein vsed, the
difference whereof you maie see in some of mine epistles as the same is
quoted in the margent where the figure is vsed.=

=_Comparatio_, which taketh his increase of smaller matters, which
if they may séeme great in all opinions, then that which we séeke to
amplifie must of necessitie séeme greater, sometimes also by diminution
of things great, to make the residue the greater, example of the first
may bee that saying of |Cicero| of |Catiline|, in these wordes, |Did
the famous Scipio for a little ill gouernment of the common weale,
cause Tiberius Gracchus priuatelie to bee made awaie: and shall wee
preferre Catiline that goeth about to fill the whole worlde with his
slaughters?| Here is |Catiline| compared to |Gracchus|, the state of a
common wealth to the whole worlde, a small sliding to an insufferable
wasting, and a priuate man to the whole Senate. Or otherwise thus:
|Tell mee I praie thee, if one had giuen thee but a small summe of
money to comfort thy neede withall, were it not humanitie to thanke
him: If hee had giuen thee possessions to liue vppon, were it not
honestie to requite him: If of a slaue hee made thee rich, shouldest
thou not bee bounden vnto him? Howe much more then to him that hath
not alonelie done all these, but farre more then these vnto thee,
oughtest thou in the verie bondes of nature and courtesie to bee both
thankefull and louing?| Example of the seconde sort for diminution
might bee this: |What is it that you propose vnto mee these small
matters of vnkindnesse, as that the man is ingratefull, that hee hath
no good remembraunce of courtesies, that there is in him not so much
as an acknowledgement, which is a thing farre from requitall, these
I must confesse are iniuries to some, but vnto mee they are trifles,
matters of no moment, things not to bee reckoned of: what say you to
him that betrayeth his friend, seeketh his death that hath sought his
life, worketh by all possible meanes his ouerthrow, his destruction and
vndoing?| And in this exaggeration of |vices|, so also might there bee
the like of |Vertues|, as if one should exhort a man to |Pietie|, after
hee had set foorth all the commodities thereof, as |the tranquilitie
of minde, peace of conscience, libertie of spirit, the communion with
Saints, from a bonslaue of the diuell to become the childe of God, the
comfort of the holie Ghost which the Prophet denieth may be by man
conceyued:| he might lastlie adde, |what thinges then these in all the
worlde could be greater, what more singular, what more happie, and yet
if they be conferred vnto that blessed heritage of immortalitie, if
to the life and ioyes to come, if to that heauenlie Ierusalem, which
certainlie remaineth for all such as are endued with such a spirit:
they are toies and things of no excellencie or moment.|=

=_Metonoia_, when by a sudden restraint of spéech, wee giue grace or
mislike to a person, or thing, as to saie, |worthilie atchieued? nay
rather honourablie attained, a man notable|, we maie rather saie,
|singular: Ah cruell man|, and no man neither, but a |beast: Oh rare
clemencie|, or rather |most admirable patience. Hee is no thiefe, but a
rauener: no murtherer, but a tyrant.|=

=_Aphorismus_, a |Scheme|, like vnto the other, but differing by a
maner of reprehension, as to saie, |What lawes bee these, if at least
wise they may be termed lawes, which beare in them so vile customs,
and not rather firebrands of the citie, and the plague of the whole
common weale|. Or otherwise: |your counsellers, if such may be called
counsellers, as draw vnto mischiefe, are vtterlie vnmeete to such kinde
of assemblies.|=

=_Diminutio_, when we goe about to extenuate things difficult, to make
them lesse in seeming, as to one that would shun learning, for the
tediousnesse thereof in studie: We might shew, |that besides the great
necessitie thereof in the life of man, wee shall in attaining thereof,
take no other nor more laboursome course, then others before vs haue
done: that the way thereunto is verie plaine and easie, the labour
(if anie be) sweet and pleasant. And whereas in all our ordinarie
exercises of vanitie, there redoundeth for the most part in the ende
but meere trauaile, and vnprofitable charge: in this the commoditie
is as great as the delight, the gaine as ordinarie as the practise,
wherein the studie is but the least part of a mans life, but the
pleasure and commodity infinite|. And like as in this, so in all other
things, conducing to good and laudable exercises, the labour is still
diminished, by proposing the worthines, pleasure, honour, profit, and
so of euils commonlie, by mitigation of the fault.=

=_Climax_, or |Gradatio|, when each member in a sentence ariseth from
the other afore going, beginning with that which endeth the former,
as to say, |His industrie bred him vertue: his vertue, praise: his
praise, renowne: his renowne, glorie: and his glorie enuie|. Or thus:
|What hope haue we of good, if what men list, they may; and what they
may they do, and what they doe they dare, and what they dare they
prosecute, and what they prosecute, they are neuer ashamed of.|=

=_Antimetauole_ or _Commutatio_, when a sentence by charge is inuerted
to the contrarie, as thus, |We must eat to liue, and not liue to eat:
Not man for the Sabboth, but the Sabboth for man was ordained. They are
happy whose wisdome is answerable to their fortune, and whose fortune
answereth their wit.|=

=_Sinæciosis_, when one contrary is attributed to another, or when
two diuerse things are in one put together, as thus. |The prodigal
and couetous doe offende alike, for neither doe liue as they ought.
Pleasure it selfe is sometimes a labour, and labour also is often a
pleasure. To a couetous man is wanting as well that he hath, as that
hee hath not.|=

=_Etiologia_, a figure like vnto the other beforegoing, and much
resembling to _Orismus_, which defineth a matter by sorting the same
into a distinguishment: but this nowe telleth the cause or reason of
that which is before auerred, and is as a confirmation thereunto giuen
for the concluding of the same, you maie sée the examples as the figure
is quoted in my Epistles.=

=_Paralepsis_, or _Occupatio_, when in seeming to ouerpasse, omit, or
let slip a thing, we then chiefly speake thereof, as thus: |I will
not here rehearse vnto you how slippery and transitorie this life is,
howe much laden with cares, exposed to daungers, and attended with
miseries, for we knowe it and feele it: But I will come to speake of
the perdurable ioies of the other, &c.| Or thus, |for my part I haue no
pleasure to laie open other mens errors, it is inough vnto me, that by
themselues they are made apparant, and that the whole worlde may see
them. I omit to report vnto you these and such like ordinary matters,
which in comparison of that I will shew you are but trifles. I tell you
not, or I talke not now of times past. It is not the matter wherein I
am now occupied. His theft, his rapine, his spoile, and all his whole
disorderlie course of life in those daies perpetrated, I nowe omit, and
onely doe come to the times present. His counselling (I had almost said
concealing) of good when time was, if it bee well noted, was it that
procured our mischiefes, &c.|=

=_Procatalepsis_ or _Præoccupatio_, when we doe anticipate vnto our
selues that we know wil be obiected, as thus, |what do you obiect vnto
me the times passed, those seasons & ours are vtterly vnlike. But
peraduenture you will say that these things are for children fit to bee
considered, nay rather meetest of old men to be followed. You will
happely say vnto me herein, that I am too light of credit: but I can
tel you the proofe is extant, and fit to be beleeued.=

=_Metastasis_ or _Transitio_, when in briefe wordes we passe from one
thing to another, as thus, |You haue hearde by this what you ought to
consider, heare now I pray you what you are bounde to remember. These
things you will say are pleasant, but the rest yet vntold are far more
delightfull. This already shewed vnto you seemeth to be tolerable, that
which followes is no waies to be suffered. I haue now told you what was
done in priuate, I will next shewe you what was handled in publike:
these things he did at home, that which followeth was abroade in the
fielde: whilst hee was a young man, hee did this I told you, but the
vertues of his age were far more different. You haue vnderstood of
maners, I will now speake vnto you of learning: I will not trouble you
with many things further, only this one thing will I rehearse vnto you.
But of these enough, we will now go to the rest. I haue somthing beene
caried away with these motions, but we wil now go to the substance.
But why stay we so long in trifles? I wil go to the head of the
matter: what he promised I haue deliuered, what he performed you shall
vnderstande: I haue thus shewed you how much he was charged vnto me,
you shal now heare againe how gently he requited me.|=

=_Paramologia_, where we graunt one or moe thinges meete to be marked
or alleadged, and forthwith doe infer thereupon sufficient whereby to
ouerthrow it, as thus: |I deny not but I haue heretofore vsed you in
causes secret, in matters weighty and of counsell, that I haue found
you friendly, faithfull and ready: but what is all that to the purpose,
when in a thing so important, and matter neerly concerning me, as
whereon dependeth the safegard of my whole house and familie, I haue
founde you in both negligent and vntrustie|. Or otherwise thus: |Be it,
or suppose you haue omitted nothing in your owne person, of a friende
to be performed, that you were no partaker with him of those euill
counsels: that you abstained to accompany him in the execution of his
mischiefes, yet are you not therfore cleared. For it is not sufficient
for a man not to doe euill of himselfe, but that by to too much lenity
he become not occasion of an others mischiefe.|=

=_Dichologia_, when by a colour of mitigation wee defende our cause,
as to saie: |I fell, I confesse, but as a young man, I went astray,
but as one willing to be reclaimed: I forsooke my friend indeede, but
constrained by the lawes, I was a companion in their badnesse, but
forced by threatning.|=

=_Orismus_, _definitio_, or _finitio_, wherein we brieflie laie forth
the true properties of euerie thing, by impugning the contrarie, as
thus: |Men cannot be said in vertue to exceed, for in vertue there
is euer an excellency, but neuer an excesse, sith the excesse is
onely appropriate vnto vices. This cannot be said to be care but
couetousnesse, for care hath onely respect to necessary vses, but in
couetousnes, there is neuer any reasonable suffizance.=

=_Hypotyposis_, when any thing is described in particular, or made
knowne to the viewe, as thus: |Shall I tell you what maner a one you
haue preferred vnto mee, for his stature, a Dwarfe: for his person,
a trunke: for his qualities a dog: for his countenance, a foxe: in
behauiour a swine: in condition, an Ape: in sense, an Asse, and in
vsage, a beast.|=

=_Merismus_ or _Distributio_, when that as maie bee generallie spoken
we distribute for amplification into parts: as if in generalitie we
said: |He hath consumed all his substance in riot:| By distribution wee
might amplifie thus: |Whatsoeuer patrimony hee had from his father,
what priuate inrichment by his deceased mother, what large assistance
by friends, whereat the worlde neuer barked, what dowry soeuer by
his wife, which no doubt was very great, all this hath he consumed
by a most dissolute and wanton liuing: mony, plate, lands, wealth,
possessions and all, are gone to the deuil, his cattel consumed, his
houshold stuffe solde, his apparell spent, and the poore miser at this
instant hath not left him a farthing.|=

=_Dialisis_, a separation of one thing from another, both being
absolued by a seuerall reason, in the nature of a |Dilemma|, as thus:
|When I haue preached vnto you all I may, if you bee well giuen it
auaileth, if graceles, forth you wil not be moued|. Or thus. |What
should I further set forth vnto you my good will, if you remember it, I
haue said inough, if not, my words wil not prouoke you.|=

=_Dialogismus_ or _Sermocinatio_, an imaginatiue speach, agréeing
to the quality of the person it is framed of. Whether he be valiant
cruell, young, old, or of what other condition, as if we shoulde saie
of the times present. |Were the ancient Apostles and olde Fathers of
religion nowe liuing, which with great innocencie of life, and true
pietie, shined in their seasons, and should but beholde the most
corrupt and abhominable estate of our times, subiect as they bee to all
kinde of euils, would they not thinke, you straight proclaime against
vs the vniust name of Christians, and challenge vs for the great want
we haue of the true profession thereof? Would they not rather cry out
of vs that deluding ourselues onely with a vaine title or name of
Christians, we do not so much as seeke in the meane time to followe any
part thereof?|=

=_Epiphonema_, or conclusion to a matter before shewed, as thus: |Of so
woonderfull force was his wisdome, which was able to compasse that in
short time, which a number haue diuerslie sought for, and could neuer
hetherto obtaine|. Or thus: |Such is the force of Nature which seldome
wee doe see is euer chaunged by anie colours. Much haue they forsaken
that haue cast all from themselues|. It is commonlie the conclusion or
making vp of a discourse or sentence by some pithie manner of speaking.
As if a man shoulde inueigh against drunkennesse, hee might thus
conclude, |Hee nowe that thinketh it parcell of humanity, by thrusting
on of many cuppes to driue his friend into drunkennesse, let him also
thinke it kindnes, by a venemous confection giuen, to driue him into
madnesse.|=

=_Expeditio_, or _enumeratio_, when many reasons of auerment being
numbred togethers, we make a confutation of them, each one in
particular, as thus: |The goods in question beeing alleadged to bee
mine, it is requisite you prooue, either that you had them by chance,
that you haue long held or enioied them, that you bought them with your
money, or otherwise that by some gift you came to them, or lastly, in
succession that you haue obtained them. That you had them by chance it
cannot be, for they were not lost from my keeping. Long haue you not
held them, for they were alwaies till this in mine owne possession. It
is plaine you neuer bought them, for you paide mee no mony for them.
By gift you could not haue them, for the right was in me to giue them.
The succession must be void, for my selfe am yet liuing. It remaineth
then if you keep them, that liuing you doe cast me out of mine own
possession|. This chiefly appertaineth to the Iudiciall Epistles in the
state |Coniecturall|.=

=_Cōmoratio_, when matters diuerslie enlarged, are yet staid vpon, and
lastlie brought into one short conclusion, wherby the reasons are
made more weightie, and of the greater efficacie, as thus. |What will
you make of this man, whom ye seeke in this maner to set free, you see
he is a man prodigall of his owne fame, & a lier in waite for others
credits, one full of guile, intemperate, railing, proude and ambitious,
to his parents most wicked, ingratefull to his friends, hated of his
owne kinsemen, stubborne to his superiours, insolent with his equals,
to his inferiours cruell, and finallie to all persons whatsoeuer a
creature most intolerable.|=

=_Sententia_, A recitall of some graue matter by waie of a notable
saying or sentence, either by common custome admitted, or by some
authour deliuered, examples whereof are plentifullie to bee seene in my
Epistles.=

=_Exuscitatio_, A prouocation or stirring vp of others to the praise
or mislike of a thing, as thus: |What one is hee of so slender or
contemptible a spirit amongst vs, or who of all our Nation woulde bee
counted so enuious, as vpon so great and large a desert had by a man
so woorthie, woulde not willinglie render vnto him all honour and
due commendation?| Likewise of the contrarie for dispraise. |Doth it
not abhorre you to heare and vnderstand of a rabble of so great and
vnaccustomed lewdnesse, a man euerie way so vile, to goe thus freelie
vnpunished? Surelie I doe thinke no honest minde but would be of this
opinion, that of all creatures liuing hee were most worthie to be
extirped.|=

=_Omiosis_, The figure of resemblance or similitude, whereby wee
resemble one thing to another, as thus: |Like as they greatlie do
offend, who going to a publike well, whence all a whole citie hath
their water, do infect the same with a most deadly poison: Euen so do
they most wickedly merit of the common weale, who deprauing the mind
of a Prince, doe lade and frequent the same with most mischieuous
counsels|. Or thus: |Is it seene that men at the blast or byting of a
Viper, do shrinke, and forthwith do run for a medicine? How much more
ought they thē, for the auoiding of a most horrible shame, yᵉ infamous
sting wherof is far worse then all other poisons, to run to a remedie?|=

=_Icon_, An image or artificiall description of that we meane to
deliuer, as if in setting forth our most gratious Soueraigne, we
shoulde saie, |That Goddesse like adorned with high aspectes, or
statelie grace and maiestie diuine. In Chariot deckt with Princelie
ornaments shee issued foorth, &c.| Or thus, laying out the dreadfulnes
of warre, |Fierce and vntamed warre with eyes sparkling as the flaming
fire, whose face caried in it selfe a terrour to the lookers on, and
his coūtenance was as it were a present death. His gesture was as
the furious assault of a Lion, and his mouth as a deuouring pitte to
swallow the bloud of multitudes. Armed hee was with fire, with famine,
and with sword, crying reuengement on the world, and persecuting all
nations with a ceaslesse dread.|=

=_Paradigma_, a maner of exhorting or withdrawing by example, as to
saie, |the Elephants engender not, but in places most remote, and any
that by chance do see them in that time they kill. How much more then
behooueth that betweene those of reason, a shamefastnes be included
in executing that action|. Or thus. |The nature of the Dolphin is not
to suffer the yong ones of her kinde to straggle vndefenced, such
care haue they of their frie: How much more beseeming is it, that our
procreation which are men, should not be suffred to runne at random
without either guide or controlment.|=

=_Pareonasis_, or _Digressio_, a spéech beside the matter in present
spoken on, as to saie, |But heere let mee remember vnto you something
of the deserts and eternized memorie of your worthie and most vertuous
Parents|. Or thus: |giue me leaue a little to digresse from this
purpose, to the ende that by laying out of something yet vnspoken of, I
may the better wade into the rest.|=

                                FINIS.




                    Of the partes, place and Office
                          _of a Secretorie_.


=Considering howe many woorthie and excellent men, not onely in our
present age, but in manie yeares before vs haue liued, none of all
which (though questionlesse furnished with verie great abilitie) haue
to my certaine knowledge, euer written ought in our English tongue,
touching this title: It maie seeme questionable, how I the most
disfurnished of manie others, and subiect thereby to the insight and
correction of all others, durst take vppon mee to discourse thereupon,
weighing with my selfe the subiect I take in hand, to be of speciall
qualitie, and to none so much fitting as to those that bee greatest
learned, best aduised, discreetest gouerned, and worthiest ruled,
to treate vpon. Nor doe my selfe by such presumption of mine, déem
the same to be of lesse moment then it is. Howbeit, as one tied by a
former promise, in that my first edition of this present Methode of
|Epistles|, haue nowe taken vpon me (as you see) to write thereupon.=

=Truth is, that as I am none of those that maie vaunt my selfe of any
furniture sufficient to so speciall an end & purpose, yet haue I not
bin in some time of the yeares I haue spent, altogither excluded from
any fauour or tast therof at all. Neither haue I whollie spent the
seasons I haue caried, so vainely, but that at one time or other I haue
(not without some considerate aduerting) eyed the demeanours, issues,
and dispositions of sundrie humors, by insight whereinto, and some
proofe made of that which my selfe haue practised in place of seruice,
I am bold in this onelie discourse, to aduenture the performance of
that I haue promised.=

=In the discouerie whereof, my minde is not, nor shall be to prescribe
vnto any one, but to deliuer what in mine owne opinion, I haue
coniectured to be meetest in such a person. Wel regarding the number
of those who enabled by farre better skill, or guided by experience,
and their owne proper vertue, can both search and wade further therein,
then my poore abilitie may anie waies looke into. For which my purpose
is, and shall be in this present discourse, onlie to set forth vnto
such, whose vnripened yeers, or want of decernment, haue not yet made
them apt vnto so speciall a beeing, and qualitie: what in my plaine
conceit, vnto the place and office of such a one, meete and fit to be
a |Secretorie|, maie be thought most consonant and worthie.=

=To the accomplishment whereof, as the best and méetest induction to
such a matter, it shall not bee to slender purpose, to speake first
of the name thereof, and to sift out by what meane the partie seruing
in such a place, had the originall title to be called a |Secretorie|.
You shall then vnderstande, that as me séemeth, by speciall reason and
iudgement, this name |Secretorie|, importing therein as it doth action
of great consequence, doth beare in it matter of more circumstance,
then by euerie one is considered, and by howe much the more honourable
the place of attendance is, where such a one doth serue, by so much the
more beseemeth the partie called vnto such seruice, be a man choice
and of worthie estimate, habilitie and iudgement. So then am I not
of opinion of the multitude, who holde that the praiseable endeuour
or abilitie of well writing or ordering the pen, is the matter that
maketh the |Secretorie|, (albeit the vse heereof is not the least part
of manie other things incident to the same |office=) but that carying
with it selfe a purpose of much weightier effect, the person therunto
named was as a deriuatiue from that which containeth the chiefest title
of credite, and place of greatest assurance that may be reposed, in
respect of the affinitie they both haue of trust and |fidelitie|, each
with the other, by great conceyte and discretion, tearmed to bee a=
Secretorie.

=And albeit there happily maie be opinions some waies contrarying vnto
this my present deliuerie, touching the |originall| of this title: yet
standing directly assured that they all being laid togithers, must
of necessitie conclude on the verie |Secrecie, trust| and |regarde|,
speciallie imposed on him who beareth the same title: I will boldlie
for this cause define, that in respect of such |Secrecie, trust| and
|assuraunce| required at the handes of him who serueth in such place,
the name was first giuen to be called a |Secretorie|, and that by the
|etymologie| of the verie word it selfe, sounding in true coniecture,
_quasicustos_, or _conseruator secreti sibi commissi_, a keeper or
conseruer of the secret vnto him committed.=

=By this reason, we do call the most secrete place in the house,
appropriate vnto our owne priuate studies, and wherein wee repose and
deliberate by deepe consideration of all our waightiest affaires, a
|Closet|, in true intendment and meaning, a place where our dealings
of importance are shut vp, a roome proper and peculiar to our selues.
And whereas into each other place of the house, it is ordinarie for
euery néere attendant about vs to haue accesse: in this place we doe
solitarie and alone shut vp our selues, of this we keepe the key our
selues, and the vse thereof alone doe onelie appropriate vnto our
selues.=

=And if we should run but into the nature of things secret, and
consider by the name, what to such a matter is required, we shall find
that of it owne selfe it chalengeth so much, wherby with three things
most speciallie it is saide to be fortified, |viz.| with |couertnes|,
that it be closelie kept from the eyes, eares or vnderstanding of
others: |Safetie|, that securelie it be retained, and laid vp, both
with choice respect and tendering: |Assurance|, that by no mistake,
negligence, or defect of the partie hauing charge of such a secrete, it
may turne to a preiudice.=

=Thus then by the concurrence of these, it appeareth that vnto euerie
|secrete| there is required a |Closet|, and the proper vse of that
|Closet|, is onelie for the |couertnesse, saftie| and |assurance| of
the |secrete|: all which considered, let vs nowe see, if you will, what
|analogie| or proportion they haue with our |Secretorie|.=

=It hath beene alreadie before alledged, that by the verie |etimologie|
of the worde it selfe, both |Name| and |Office| in one, doe conclude
vppon |secrecie|: If so, then in respect of the |couertnes, safetie|
and |assurance| in him reposed, and not otherwise, the partie seruing
in such place may be called a |Secretorie|. The |Closet| in euerie
house, as it is a reposement of |secrets|, so is it onelie (as I saide
before) at the owners, and no others commaundement: The |Secretorie|,
as hee is a |keeper and conseruer of secrets|, so is hee by his
Lorde or Maister, and by none other to bee directed. To a |Closet|,
there belongeth properlie, a |doore|, a |locke|, and a |key|: to a
|Secretorie|, there appertaineth incidentlie, |Honestie, Care|, and
|Fidelitie|.=

=And forasmuch as by the concurrence of these twaine, both |Name| and
|Office| doe seeme in vsage and account to be of so great waightinesse,
and that our |Secretorie|, as wel in title, as place standeth by such
declaration, ioyntlie tied vnto so district an obseruance: let vs now
a little further enter into the function and place he beareth in such
kinde of seruice, and consider that being in one condition a |seruant|,
he is at the pleasure and appointment of another to be commanded:
and being in a second respect as a |Friend|, he is charilie to haue
in estimate, the state, honor, reputation and being of him whom he
serueth.=

=Touching the first of these, in that he is (I meane) a |Seruant|, it
is to be intended, that thereunto belongeth a |Superiour|, by whose
absolute direction, his actions of seruice, are to bee ordered and
commaunded. And notwithstanding the reputation, credite, and estate of
beeing, to him giuen and allowed by his |Lorde| or |Maister|, hee is
yet to consider, that the weight and summe thereof acrueth from his
onelie fauor, countenance, and good opinion, and that by howe much the
more, hee liberallie and of an honourable minde affoordeth vnto him
the respectes thereof: by so much the more seriouslie ought hee by all
possible endeuours of seruice and industrie, as farre forth as in him
is, to studie to conserue and vpholde the same.=

=And herein seemeth it not fruitlesse to oppose vnto such a ones
remembrance, some part of the considerations pertinent and annexed
to the state of a seruant, and what dependancie in common reckoning
resteth betwéene him, who beareth in his sway the authoritie and rule
of a Maister, and the other, who in account that he is to be commanded,
carieth a maner of subiection to that partie, who for the time of such
seruice, is at his hands to bee reuerenced and obeyed.=

=In regard of which, wee are to see, that by the title and prerogatiue
which euerie |maister| hath generallie ouer his |seruant|, there is a
certaine linke of dutie, wherewith each one that serueth is strained
to his obeysance. There is also by that very name of |seruant| a kind
of fidelitie and trust required, more speciall then that betwéene the
|sonne| and the |father|, and that of so great efficacy, as whereon
(peraduenture) may rest not alonely this disposition of the goods,
estate, & principall affairs, but also oftentimes yᵉ life, hazard or
vndoing of the person of his said |maister|.=

=A |Son| cannot be saide to owe fidelitie to his |parents|, for which
cause there is also no breach of trust on him to be imposed. If he
deale contrarie to the condition of a |son|, the bond by which he is
strained proceedeth of nature, and so are his actions accordinglie held
for vnkind, or vnnaturall. But the |seruant| not linked by nature, is
tied in trust, and by contrarying of such trust, or not performing
thereof, is held treacherous or vnfaithfull. Besides, so great a
|predomination| hath this name of |fidelitie| in the harts of a number,
that many haue refused to commit themselues in times of hazard to
their |Children|, but rather haue relied themselues wholie on the
assurance of their seruants.=

=And howbeit, most certaine it is, that |Nature| woonderfullie swaieth
manie times in her proper features, yet in this case hath she commonly
lesse efficacie then in any others. For as a currant of water loseth
his power in being turned backwarde, from his straightened course, but
hath forcible passage in the waie that it holdeth: so is |Nature| in
this action of |parentes| and |children|, which running forwards from
issue to issue, hath mighty operation, but when it should be returned
backwarde, hath seldome anie power at all.=

=Contrariwise, whether it be the |honestie| of the name that leadeth
it, or the |common reputation| that each faithfull vsage carieth in
the eares of good men, or a |feruencie of affection|, linked properlie
to the place where anie trust is reposed, I will not now dispute vpon,
but questionlesse, of so charie regarde hath |fidelitie| alwaies beene
accounted, as immediatlie vpon the name of a |seruant| taken, it
seemeth not alone to be vnto the selfe title appropriate, but it is in
a manner by the proper allowance thereunto giuen, seuerelie exacted.=

=Now, albeit this kind of exaction and charge, seemeth in the deliuerie
thereof to bee indéed verie great, yet when hee that serueth hath
performed all that in such case is to be required: he cannot for this
or that alledge, that hee hath effected anie more then whereunto by
the verie loyalty of a |seruant| he was enioyned, nor can hee rightlie
or properlie affirme, that by an extraordinarie respect more then he
ought, he hath accomplished the same. For that in things whereunto a
man is bounde, there can be no gratuitie opposed: but where a man
aboue that hee is charged hath further endeuoured, or more worthilie
attained, therein of troth, and not otherwise, shineth the greatest
praise and glorie vnto him that maie be.=

=For this cause then doe I saie of our |Secretorie|, that as hee is
in one degree in place of a |seruant|, so is he in another degrée in
place of a |friend|. A |seruant| meanlie trained in some |Mechanicall|
Science, sheweth fidelitie to his Maister, in an vpright dealing and
disposition of his wares or goodes. Another in like sort hauing the
receyte of his Maisters reuenewes, becommeth a faithfull dispenser in
his accountes and reckonings. Some on the other side haue asmuch or
the like |fidelitie| in keeping of counsels. Others againe by a termed
zeale vnto their masters, haue in recognizing their |fidelitie| died
willinglie for their fauours.=

=Of all these sortes of |Fidelitie|, the last as I am sure it hath
lesse seeming of credence or supposition of troth in common beléeuing
then anie of the others, so is it (you will grant mee,) the most
assured and most moouing pittie, prayse and commendation, in all
reckoning aboue anie of the others. And that such are and haue beene, I
could recite vnto you sundrie remembrances, and one but of late yeares,
that in verie sufficient knowledge fell out to be effected, and thus
was the circumstance, as my vnderstanding could beare it.=

=When sir |Iohn| of Desmond in Ireland, some number of years
passed, of a rebellious and cruell minde to the state there being,
and principallie to her Maiesty, had solemnly conspired, and most
tyrannously sworne the death and destruction of all English men in
his Countrey, there happened one |Henrie Dauill| an English Gentleman
to lie, at that verie bloudie pretended season, in the house of the
saide Knight, and for two causes of him was thought entirelie to bee
fauoured, the one in respect that hee was his Christian Gossip, as they
there terme it (a linke strong inough to haue purchased fauour in that
Countrey, had it not beene with a most bloudie tyrant) the other, in
that hee was a Gentleman both courteous, bountifull and valiant.=

=This Maister |Dauill| had at that time onelie an Irish boy attendant
vpon him, the time conspired for this murder was at midnight, when
all men careleslie were sleeping. About the watch whereof, sir |Iohn|
and his companie entring the Chamber of maister |Dauill|, wakened him
from sléepe, opened the conspiracie, and willed him to prepare him
to his lot, assuring him that were it not he had without exception
vowed in his heart, and sworn the death of all English men, he could
desirouslie, aswell for that he was his Christian Gossip, as for other
loue he ought him, haue suffered his life, but all being appointed to
die, he must go with the rest.=

=The boy hauing receiued into his eares the sound of his masters death,
and therewith sundrie menacing strokes seeing readie to bee proffered,
stirred (no question) by a most zealous |Fidelitie|, clasped on his
masters breast, and with such slender resistance as hee coulde, did
beare off the blowes, receyued vppon his owne bodie diuers and sundrie
wounds, and doe what they could, no one could pull or remooue him from
thence, till fretting rage kindeled in these mercilesse creatures, made
them kill the Boy vppon his maister, and his Maister vnder the Boy,
both at one instant togithers.=

=The memorie of this acte, as it is most pitifull in rehearsall, so
will it of a number bee thought verie strange. If anie |Fidelitie|,
haue by feruencie beene accounted off, this you will iudge of anie
others ought chieflie to be embraced. But yet not this, nor anie of
the residue of those partes of |Fidelitie| by mee alreadie deliuered
are such, as in this place I hold meete to be pursued. For howbeit
the seruice of our |Secretorie| is properlie by it selfe with all
|assurance| to be caried, yet doe wee not place him in so meane a degree
as that by corruption of coine, he might be held for distrusted nor on
the other side would we haue him of iudgement so disfurnished, but that
touching the difference of counsels, or tender of his life, he should
make a decernment.=

=In this Boy voluntarilie as hee did, in the verie weakenesse of his
yeares, to seeke by death his Maisters safegarde, was no doubt, a
thing woorthie to bee admired. But in manifestation of so great loue,
and testimonie of so loyall affection, had hee beene by yeares more
enabled, it would haue beene thought verie fondlie of to haue done it,
without thereby his Masters death might haue beene reuenged, or his
life preserued: Els to what end is |Fidelitie| applied, or what vse at
all in reckoning, remaineth there of it?=

=By |discretion| to discerne, by |vertue| to iudge, and by |wisdome|
to resolue, how and which way the efficacie and assurance of all
|trust| and |fidelitie| ought to be caried, is a thing meetest in
all reputation principallie to be obserued. How can there otherwise
appeare anie worthinesse, if affections sort to bee equall, or what
distinguishment may there be of spirits when mens iudgementes are
common.=

=|George Castrioth|, surnamed |Scanderbeg|, the terrour while hee
liued, and onlie man able to confound the |Turkish| forces, during his
infancie, hauing bin trained vp with |Amurath| father to |Mahomet| the
second Emperour of the |Turkes| (for that in the conquest of |Epirus|
by the same |Amurath|, the father of |Scanderbeg| being slaine, and his
|Signory| subdued vnto the |Turke|, hee was then with others led awaie
into |Turky| a captiue.) When hee arriued to manlie yeares, and serued
with great fortune and valour the saide |Amurath| in his warres: it
happened that being in one great battell as generall of the |Turkish|
Armie against the |Christians|, and fighting against |Hungarie|, a
remorse of conscience tooke him, in that hee being the sonne of a
|Christian| Prince, professed in Christianitie, and vowed to God,
should so wickedlie become the confusion of his brethren, and warre
against |Christ| and his kingdome.=

=And albeit he was neuer vnfortunate in anie fight, and at that time
likeliest of al other to attaine the victory, yet regarding the state
and maner of the conquest, he faintinglie withdrew, & with great
discouragement vnto his people, gaue power vnto the enemy to be at
that time a conquerour. Which done, himselfe with a few chiefe and
principall persons his associates, tooke themselues together in flight.=

=In this company, was a noble Gentleman, wise in behauiour, faithfull
in counsell, and secret in trust, at that time |Secretorie| and of
counsell to the great |Turke|. The place of their residence seruing
well to the purpose, him |Scanderbeg| (being of the others assured)
tooke onlie in hand to acquaint with his enterprize. And forasmuch as
his credence with the saide |Amurath| was such, as in the repose of
his troth, rested both Signet, and warrant sufficient, to put forwarde
whatsoeuer direction or commaund in anie the |Turkish signories|, vpon
paine of death to be obeyed, |Scanderbeg| declaring his wearisomnesse
of captiuitie and seruage, desire to visite his kingdome, and liking
after that to liue at liberty a |christian|, and therewithall howe
often the |Turke| had promised to restore him, and yet still brake with
him, enioyned the |Secretorie| to write letters of command in the
|Turkes| name, to the Deputie or rulers of his fathers kingdome, that as
their lawfull Prince and gouernour they shoulde then at that instant
without more delaie receiue him, and thenceforth renounce and put from
them their wonted charge and authoritie.=

=And albeit the power of |Scanderbeg| was in that place great, and the
|Secretorie| nothing misdoubted at all his resolution, and therefore
feared too much to contradict him in the same, knowing also that if
he assented to that demaund, hauing yet libertie to depart, he might
timely inough aduertize the |Turk| to the preuention: yet vsed he
neuerthelesse so manie effectuall speeches as for the present he could,
to disswade him: which not preuailing, hee assented at last for feare,
and wrote as he required him.=

=The Letters orderlie signed and sealed, as to the importance belonged,
|Scanderbeg| knowing the great wisedome, fidelitie and counsell of the
|Secretorie|, thought it nowe a matter of no small worth, if by any
facility he could win him also vnto his companie, to passe in the same
iourny, or otherwise if he refused, then déemed he fit that he should
not returne aliue, to carrie newes to the |Turk| of his determined
iourney. And therefore first with as manie kinde entreaties and offers
of all honour, fauour, estimate, and aduauncement that could be, he
assailed him, he proposed also the expectation of his own fortune,
valour, power and strength of the euerliuing God whom he serued, that
was able to defende them, and all possible meanes that otherwise could
bee deuised to mooue him. But none of these in fine preuailing, he
lastlie set before his eies, that vpon such refusall, hee for his owne
best assurance must be enforced to kill him.=

=Which maner of spéech, albeit mooued in the |Secretorie| diuers
alterations, yet chose he as the most honestest part, no wayes to
defraude the trust in him reposed, especiallie by assistance in
his owne person thereunto giuen. And seeing he could by no meanes
escape with life, aduised suddenlie rather to die in the handes of
|Scanderbeg| for that he had alreadie done, then in so manifest an
action of disloyaltie, to be found a principall actor of treason
against his Lord and maister.=

=Great is the linke of |Vertue| whereby the mindes of men singular are
manie wayes bound, neither falleth it out in those of weake spirite
and capacitie to become partakers of the praise due vnto so high and
honored excellencie. To men baselie conceyted, there is neither respect
of troth, loue, honor, duty, or other matter whatsoeuer, whereby
to drawe them from a sensuall appetite or carnall desire of their
owne liuing, safetie and commoditie: But to those who are the sworne
schollers of |vertue|, to whom true glory is of price, who solie haue
in estimate to make choyce of things worthie: In these it sorteth to be
a shame, what others reckon for laud: to them a preiudice, what many
hold for gaine, they contemning by a sole |vertue| and discréete choice
of the minde, what is besides or lesse then that which accordeth to the
true honor and reputation of well deseruing, cannot content themselues
to liue where their credite dieth, despise wealth, where honour is to
be pursued, neglect reputation, where loyaltie is not entertained, and
expect no fidelitie, where consequently the effects of an honest and
woorthie mind, are not principallie to be caried.=

=As then, by what vse soeuer applied, I do in al things commend
|Fidelitie| and |Trust| to be performed where by districtnesse it is
chalenged: so nowe doe I in the carriage of this our |Secretorie|,
sort him forth properlie from the residue by a difference, for
where in persons of lesse conceite, and lower respect, some vsages
are commendable, in him they are to bee presumed, as no wayes to bee
doubted of: neither is it to be expected, that the mould of such a one
should be so subiect to imperfections, as that in common & mean actions
he should thinke to be praised: séeing that where any breach of those
parts in men lower conceyted might be found, it woulde in them be helde
as in comparison a thing no more then might be doubted, but in him
would it turne to a most vituperable basenes with such intendments to
be spotted.=

=And as I thus sequester him from the ordinarie vsage of what held to
be liked, so doe I againe drawe in him a speciall choice, of things
high, and worthie beseeming, aboue others (lesse considerate) in all
things to bee carried, and wherein the summe of his fidelitie shall
onelie be required. For seeing that by reason of the place wherein hee
standeth of imployment, by reason of his supposed education, birth,
qualitie, or other decernment, by reason of the waight, more then of
common trust, in him diuersly imposed, he séemeth to be a man euerie
way proportionate to a farre other end & purpose, then of euerie
ordinarie attendant is commonlie required, it must néeds thē be of such
a one coniectured, that by far greater skill & measure he be in euery
of his actions demeaned, yᵉ with much greater modestie, care, respect,
consideration and integritie he doe by such meanes temper all his
outward and inward behauiours, and iudgements, as beeing himselfe in
reputation a Gentleman, and conuersing among such as haue discretion to
deeme of a Gentleman, hee may least of all be touched with anie thing,
that lesseneth or il beséemeth anie part of that, which principallie
may appertaine to a Gentleman.=

=And whereas in any other attendant it is a matter praise worthie, to
be beautified or aduanced by some one or other speciall |vertue| or
qualitie, in him it is of necessitie, who by how much the more néerer
he is in frequentation of any honorable place or calling, by so much
the more néedefull is it, that he be accordinglie furnished wherewith
in séemelie and laudable sort, to enter and approch the same. And as
in the seruice of euery one whatsoeuer, it is specially required, to
be endued with all parts of dutifull attendance & loyaltie: so is it
for him to excell, and bee different, because in his imployment, trust
and otherwise, there is exacted at his hands a far greater scope and
efficacie, then wherewith anie other seemeth to be charged by anie
proportion or qualitie.=

=By this measure nowe of |Fidelitie, trust| or |loyall credit| of a
seruant, in which place our |Secretorie|, as you see standeth bounden
by the first degrée of his seruice, it maie secondlie be coniectured,
in what respectiue estate, he ought for the residue of that which to
his attendance appertaineth, bee accounted a |Friend|. The limits of
|Friendship| (as it might bee obiected) are streight, and there can bee
no Friend where an inequalitie remaineth. Twixt the partie commaunded
and him that commaundeth, there is no societie, and therefore no
|Friendship| where resteth a |Superioritie|. But I say and affirme,
that if it bee true, that the summe of all |Friendship| taketh his
originall of loue, and that the true demonstration of loue groweth by
a |simpathie| of affections, of which affections |Vertue| is said to be
the whole & simple ground, then may this |simpathie| of affectiōs so
groūded on |vertue| as aforesaid, be turned into loue, notwithstanding
yᵉ inequality of estate or condition whereby a man vertuouslie
disposed, being seruant to such a one who is honourablie inclined, may
in that place of seruice in which he continueth, be reputed in processe
of time to become as a friend.=

=But if we shall goe to the true definition of friendship, you will
then saie, that this friendshippe so called and reputed among men, as
it is a |simpathie| of affections firmlie vnited togithers, so is it
such a vniting, as wherein what the one coueteth, the other desireth,
in respect whereof worlds and life, and all are not desirable, but
despised, I would not here be taken, that of any sorts of people that
run into all or a number of these like effects, without exception of
qualitie, I intend, that they therfore were also to beare the name of
|friends|, for so men vtterly vicious and lewdly giuen, consorting in
wickednes, and other base exercises, in which each spendeth his life,
or desperatlie dieth one for another, might be reputed as |friends|, I
haue no such meaning, nor is my intent herein to so generall a purpose.
But speaking of |friendship|, I only deale with such, whose actions and
sincere desires haue in |vertue| highest preheminence, for these, not
by aduenture, but by a deliberate counsell and choise regard speciallie
had, of things valuable and worthy, do accomplish their effects by a
most honourable purpose.=

=To this then I answer, that if the weight of |friendship|, so
consisteth in a |simpathie| of affection, vniting of hearts, coueting
anothers good, and despising all that maie be gained, in respect of
the partie befriended: whie yet maie not our |Secretorie| as well as
any other, merit neuerthelesse in this place of seruice at the handes
of his L. or master, the name of a |Friend?| Why should he not therein
aswell as anie other haue that power in him planted, whereby to become
a |Friend?| Touching the equalitie of affections, though it is still
laid down that therein ought to be no difference, & the |commander|
and the |commanded|, do yet alwaies make a discordance: I maie
neuerthelesse thus much deliuer thereof, that by all common likelihood
it is assuredlie to be coniectured, that no one personage of estate,
laieth choice vpon such a one to serue so néer about him, and to be in
place of so great trust as appertaineth to a man of that reckoning,
but ere he long haue vsed him, he bindeth vnto him at least some good
part of his affection. For how can it otherwise be thought, but that
our |Secretorie| being one euerie waie so waightilie to be imployed
as he is, partaking as he doeth with so manie causes of importance,
and vndiscouered secrets and counsels, standing as he must vpon so
neere attendance, as hee that is almost (as occasion serueth) euerie
minute of an houre to be vsed, but that to his L. or Master, he must of
necessitie bee verie charie, and at the leastwise more particularlie
then manie others, by a great deale to be beloued.=

=He then thus finding in so noble a place, so honourable an account,
our |Secretorie| being as he ought to be, a man of |vertue|, and
|worth|, cannot chose on yᵉ other side, but frame his vtmost
thoughts correspondent in all things to those particular fauours,
his conuersing, his neerenesse and attendance, turneth then to an
affection, and this, heated by the dailie encrease of his Lord or
maisters liking towardes him, groweth thence to a feruencie, and
so each |vertue| kindled by the others |Grace|, maketh at last a
coniunction, which by the multitude of fauors rising from the one,
and a thankfull compensation alwayes procured in the other, groweth
in the end to a |simpathie| vnseparable, and therby by all intendment
concludeth a most perfect vniting.=

Panutius|, the faithfull |Secretorie| and counsellour to the great
Emperour and Philosopher surnamed |Aurelius|, for the high |wisdome,
fidelitie|, and counsell by him in all his seruices continued towards
the Prince during his life time, and euen to the verie entrance of
his graue, deserued before manie others, (secrete also in aduice to
the said Emperour) to be termed and called by the name of a |friend|.
Insomuch as he onelie daring to speake plainlie, what in others
iudgements might séeme to be offensiue, & to perswade faithfullie,
what he saw most agreeing to the present extremitie, made the Emperour
pronounce himselfe fortunate, to haue nourished one so discreet in his
Pallace, and most blessed of all, in that when each failed him in his
dying, he onely was found assured vnto him, among all that were liuing.=

=In this friendlie knot of loue, and that of seruile commaund,
remaineth a most notable difference, especiallie for this matter of
|trust| and |fidelitie|, required in seruice, for, _quem metuunt
odiunt_, whom men feare they hate:| well may they for fashions sake
please, but this sound kinde of affection is often far from their
thought. And yet that there may bee an awed reuerence, aswel in |loue|
as in |feare|, who doubteth it, yea and that rather far more assured
and effectuall then the other. For where this grounded |Loue| by
|vertue| once staieth confirmed, the humilitie and gentlenesse of the
mind is it immediatlie that afterwards directeth the thoughtes, we then
doe gladlie honour the more, by how much the willinger we desire to
serue, and more firmlie obeie, by how much the more entirelie we stand
to be fauored. This friendlie |Fidelitie|, not vrged or constrained by
soueraign command, but of a zeale to weldoing voluntarily embraced;
leadeth the reputation and estimate of our |Secretory| to be receiued
as a friend.=

=As of |Fidelity|, besides |Credit| of |counsell| and |riches|, there
are sundrie other branches, and diuers deserued partes that seriouslie
may bee commended, so are there of |Friendship|. The association of
both twaine, combineth and knitteth together all other perfections.
Which granted, vndoubtedlie must the partie frequenting so great
a place of seruice, proue then to be a person of right speciall
commendation, of answerable |vertue|, and of noted discretion. For that
in doing seruice to his Lorde or maister, it séemeth a matter incident
to his accompt, and to the better effecting the name of a friend,
that in causes vrgent and néedfull, he be not vnpurueyed in his owne
person, wherewith discreetlie, as occasion serueth, both to aduise &
counsell (the very efficient matter wherin his enabled discretion may
with greatest singularitie be performed) the assurance whereof, by
credit of most memorable antiquities, hath not onlie framed that of
loyall seruantes, such haue bin entertained as faithfull friendes, but
also hath not beene slender occasion manie times, to the preuention of
sundrie vehement and dangerous mischiefes.=

=To accompanie the troubles, miseries, calamities and infortunities
of him to whom we are this waies, or that waies in our seruice linked
or beholding, or to beare willinglie, and with a sufferable mind
for his sake, whatsoeuer in declaration of our vertue seemeth to an
honest disposition, to be either incident or appertaining, no man
verely denieth, but that they are assured & notable demonstrations of
a verie exquisite performance. But what of that? the propertie and
excellencie of this vertue is not therefore alwaies in that one only
sort to bee caried, neither with the greatest estimate and commendation
that thereunto is appropriate, is the worthinesse hereof whollie to be
commended.=

=To preuent mischiefs sometimes, and by a warie foresight and care had
of the honor and reputation of our commander, to fence (if need be)
the same by a politicke deuise, without preiudice, from any touch of
disgrace or dishonour, to disswade or dehort faithfully, from things
impeaching or offensiue to their estates or nobility to reueale the
hurt they know not, or causes important wherunto they are nothing
priuy, to counsaile deuoid of flatterie, and to oppose the good that
least harmeth, and the euill that hath neerest remedy: these things
as in their seueral considerations, they can as sufficientlie as anie
others declare a man to be endued, both with rare knowledge, and right
excellent vertue, so who doubteth, but that the most slender of them
all, weigheth as déeply as any other in cause of |Fidelity|. And yet if
anie more speciall liking in one thing then other be to be attributed,
where comonly men do seem to haue generallie well deserued, then
of necessitie must the same greatlie rather insue where euils most
preiudicing are foreseene and auoided by politick wisdome, then where
vnskilfullie they are entred into, carying in their bosomes, either
extreame hazard or ineuitable vndoing.=

=Much is the felicitie that the maister or Lord receiueth euermore
of such a seruant, in the chary affection and regard of whom affying
himselfe assuredlie, he findeth he is not alone a commander of his
outward actions, but the disposer of his verie thoughts, yea he is the
Soueraigne of all his desires, in whose bosome hee holdeth the repose
of his safety to be far more precious, then either estate, liuing, or
aduancement, whereof men earthly minded are for the most part desirous.=

=Of all the abuses that haue beene or at this daie remaineth in the
attendance of honorable personages, there is no euil so secret or
pernitious, as is the venome of flatterie, the couert seating whereof,
in men of all ages, humors, qualities and complexions, hath for the
most part taken so vehement and deep impression, as it seemeth almost
irrecuperable in the greatest sortes and numbers of persons to be
auoided. The daliance of this daintie clawback is smooth, the entrance
pleasing, the progression subtill, the continuance forcible, but the
ende falleth out euermore to bee deceitfull.=

=Men infected with this kinde of scurrilitie, and basenesse of
condition, being in proper designments |Curri-fauels| of the world,
it is no maruell if hauing in common request, all shewes possible of
graffed and sound demeanours, they slide manie times into the opinions
of the most notable and worthiest, for they haue learned by art to
acquaint themselues at the first with all sorts of humors and fashions,
and being of their owne dispositions so placable as they be in all
things, it is with them a maner of sacriledge, to bee found slacke or
contrarious in anie thing, _Dicunt?_ saie they, _Dico, aiunt? aio._
Finallie, resoluing trustilie to deale no waie, they deuise how it may
be possible to frame themselues euery way.=

=These and such as these impugning the plaine and simple drifts of
honest meaning, haue alwayes a face of brasse, wherwith to shooue
forward, and to forestall what by the shamefast entendment of anie
other, seemeth bashfully to bee pursued, they are still pressing on,
and euermore sliding, but if they once get handfast, or happilie be
after strained from the hope of that they would, their loue then and
attendance immediatlie thereuppon die at one instant togithers.=

=Iniurious me séemeth, and too perillous is the approaching of these
priuate whisperers, whose inward conuersation, as in the verie first
conceit and discouerie thereof, it appeareth vnto a man vertuously
giuen, to be altogither odious, so vnto him that intendeth purely of
himselfe, they are in the seruices of Noblemen euermore most thwarting
and malicious, insomuch as if such a one staied with honestie, woulde
neuer so faithfullie, simplie and trulie endeuour himselfe by all
parts of dutifull care and loialtie, hee shall yet neuer want of those
peruerse créepers, that by one cautelous suppose or other, will still
be before hand, wherwith if it be possible to disgrace him vtterlie.=

=That these and such other actions of vilitie, commonlie handled, as
they are in honorable places, do become oftentimes barres to good
meaning, and stumbling blockes to plaine dealing, there needeth (as I
thinke) at this present verie small question. Neither would I be so
misled, as to déeme that there wanteth either insight or iudgment
in many noble personages to discerne them, for they are discerned &,
oftentimes spurned at, I know it right well, but what of that? This
beeing also a common practise and occupation of the worlde, smoothlie
to slide through all thinges, and to meane trulie in nothing, it is no
maruell if by the too double diligence of such men, some one or other
happen now and then to be deceiued.=

=But forsomuch as it is of necessitie; that euerie honorable estate
must and ought to bee serued, and that where a multitude good are in
attendance, there ensueth cōmonly to be among them some few that are
euill, either of an annexed propinquitie or opposition of good and
bad, vertue and vice, emulating or rather enuieng as we see the daily
progression each of the other, or else for that the world something
addicted to peruerse manners, sendeth forth often times such imps
of her substance, as become monstrous disturbers of euery honest
endeuor. It shall notwithstanding behooue him whatsoeuer, whose end
& expectation stretcheth to yᵉ sole desert, that of euerie laudable
purpose is rightly to be attained, either in abstaining from anie
occasion of blemish to his vertue that may happen, to resolue with
himselfe neuer to serue at all, or seruing, at the least wise so to
arme his conceiptes for all maner of such like disgraces as that he
maie content himselfe in that being but trulie censured as he ought,
the ende of his determinations are certainlie to be adiudged honest,
albeit his ill hap perchance such, as therby he attain neither liking
nor preferment or if either he stand in present, or be in possibilitie
to attain fauor, then not to be discouraged in the honest prosequution
thereof, by anie practis or enuie whatsoeuer, resting in himselfe
firmly assured, that time or the true discernment of him whome hee
serueth, shall at length yéeld scope to that, whereunto by true degrees
of |vertue| he sought to haue aspired.=

=And séeing that in all causes of zeale and loue, where the mind is
tied by an entire desire and care of weldoing, to him whom once in
conceipt it seemeth to growe chary ouer, the force thereof seldom or
neuer passeth lightlie at the first, without some blocke or other laid
before it, whereby to hinder or discourage the proceedings alreadie
determined, and that so farre forth as one while a man supposing
the fidelitie of his seruice might at a time be fully effected
and discharged in the requisite deliuerie of some present aduise &
counsell, yet terrified perchance, or otherwise disswaded with the
resolution, mightinesse, or nobility of his L. or Maister, or fearing
to be argued of presumption, or else in setting downe the desire he
hath of safegard vnkindlie to be mistaken. It shall not therefore
be consonant to this our |Secretories| place of seruice thereupon
immediatly to become silent, or so to suffer the euill which himself
clearly séeth, to passe vnregarded, especiallie when the case is either
weightie, or neerelie otherwise concerneth his nobilitie whom he
serueth, for so should he by a kind of |Pusillanimitie|, become guiltie
of the verie occasion, how great soeuer the same should happen, which
somtimes lying in his credit or counsell, to haue impugned, he of a
weak disposition abstained neuerthelesse to see preuented. And yet is
it not (néeds must I saie and confesse) a matter altogether vntried,
that men vaingloriouslie minded, or arrogantlie otherwise intending of
their owne proper seruices, notoriouslie oftentimes do fal into this
vain of presumption, who pricked on with the credit and fauour to them
giuen by their L. or Maister, and foolishly conceiuing thereof to lead
their thoughts in a string, do ignorantly or péeuishlie thereupon,
take in hande manie times to direct them in their serious affaires
or counsels, and controlling in their inward thoughts whatsoeuer is
besides or contrarying to their own opinions, do of seruants become
|sawcie:| of men modest, |malapert:| of aduisers, |arrogant:| and
consequentlie, running into euerie misprision of others, and what else
appertaining to a regarde of other mens actions, appeare at length so
imperious, as by the sole default of their owne misdemeanours, they are
turned at the last quite forth by the elbowes.=

=The defect hereof, so far discrepant as it is, from the steadie kind
of gouernment hereby throughout concluded vpon, needeth not I thinke in
the framing of this our |Secretory|, to be anie further forewarned, who
by shaking from his own person anie part of the vilities that in others
may seeme chieflie to be discommended, is herein to be ascertained,
that in nothing so greatly can the excellent vertue or condition of
any man shine, then in not first committing anie action that may
appeare vile, or hardlie to bee borne withall, and next in suppressing
so much as in him is, whatsoeuer commendation or liking dulie to
bee annexed to his owne proper deseruing, wherein |humility| fréede
from all maner of base and seruile purposes, shall then sufficientlie
instruct him, that |curtesie| is a vertue, |lowlinesse| a thing annexed
vnto |gentility|, to bee |proud| is a vice, to be |contemptuous| a
filthines, |simplicity| is found, |deceipt| to be abhorred, |Loyalty|
a matter in estimation, |Flattery| to be held abhominable. I will
not here dispute how much excellent and néedfull it were vnto their
estates, that the neerest attendance of honourable personages, were
with men of such vertue and knowledge in this sort frequented, neither
carping at sundry enormities, would I therby deuise, to draw forth
vnto you a man vnmatchable in qualitie, and whereof the worlde or
anie heauen besides, scarce yéeldeth either shadow or propertie, but
proposing the worthiest partes which of euerie one absolutelie are
fittest to be acquired, I do only endeuour to laie down no other matter
or ground, then wherewith men that be speciall are at this date helde
to be endued, and such as in all ages heretofore haue been thought
meetest to be followed.=

=What should I lade this discourse with numbred examples vnto you
of the great estimate and regard of those, who to kéep their faiths
inuiolable to their Lordes, haue some of them beene so iealous of
their honours, as for the safegard thereof, haue by great aduisement
made a voluntarie aduenture of their dearest liues: some againe with
great loue and fauour, entertained and reputed of by their Lordes, and
not able in their seruices as they thought, during their life times
sufficiently to compense the loue and especiall zeale they beare vnto
their Honours, haue afterwards vnto their children beeing in great
disgrace with the state present, so fully effected the fruits of their
welwishing, as that by the tender accompt, reuerance and loialty to
them proposed, they haue right well declared that not vnto times alone
of estate & fortune, when little regard of such things might be at
their hands expected, their vertues haue been limitted, but chieflie in
extremity and times of want, wherin their sundry fruitions, haue bin in
most aboundant maner supplied. Others likewise charged on the death bed
with the secret affaires of their L. to be kept in speciall care and
reckoning from the knowledge of other men, could not by multitudes of
fauors, by threatnings, or other large offers whatsoeuer, bee so far
seduced, (as when the dead was quite passed and gone out of the world,
whereby they néeded not at all to haue doubted) they would yet be led
in the least iote of al, to defraud the trust in them reposed, but haue
kept the same inuiolable to their vndoubted commendation, and further
increase afterward of good liking to a far greater credit.=

=Infinite are the remembrances that of these, and suchlike occasions
are and haue béen dailie recorded, the multitude whereof for breuity
I do omit. Contenting my selfe that of these two chief and principall
matters of seruice, I haue thus far forth alreadie in generalitie
debated, leauing therefore what els to bee considered therein to the
known ability of others, I procéed vnto the next part that in the
continuance of this discourse was at the first intended. And forsomuch
as the exercise of these and such like peculiar vertues and qualities,
appertaineth not, as I haue partly before deliuered, vnto men that
are of meane spirit, to such as bee naturallie touched with anie bad
or vile coercement, capacities that be insensible or ignorant, such
as haue want of education, or whose demeanors are to vertue wholie
insufficient. Let vs then more particularlie if ye will see what maner
a one he ought to be touching his person, habilitie, and condition,
that to the worthines and reputation hereof séemeth a man méetest and
most allowable to be chosen a |Secretory|.=

=For the deliuerie whereof, and the better to finde our |Secretory|,
as neere as either may bee gessed, or framed, such and none other
indeed as in true and perfect meaning hee ought to be reputed, we will
distinguish the seuerall considerations and respectes of such a one, in
three special points sorting to his office, solie and fullie in this
place to be considered.=

=The first shalbe of the person, touching his education or being: the
second of his conuersation and order of liuing: the thirde of his
sufficiencie, by skill, knowledge, and abilitie wherewith to discharge
the place of his calling. Formerlie then touching the regard of his
person, it is requisite, that hee be descended of honest familie or
parents, the efficacie whereof conduceth not a little to the coniecture
of a sound and honest condition: that he haue also had good education,
whereby the minde well disposed is often times framed to verie good
purpose. That he be of shape & countenance proportianable to those
required vertues, forsomuch as commonly ensueth, that |Nature| in
producing of all her creatures maketh in them effects answerable
to their seuerall constitutions, as to flowers of most exquisit
proportion, she giueth the most excellent fauour; the dog is not shaped
like the lion, nor the curre as the Spaniell: the Rennet tree is not
as the Crabbe stocke, the one bearing an Apple, wholsome, delicate and
pleasing, when it commeth to be tasted: the other putting forth of the
knures, no other then the sappe of Vertuyes, when the best of it is
inioyed.=

=By the countenance we doe further also iudge of the qualities and
disposition of men, insomuch as the verie markes of fauour haue not
too many iudgements proued weak discouerers of some peoples good or
vntoward conditions, wee haue likewise in euident testimonie, that
ill disposed nature confirmed by custom, seldome degenerates from the
kind either whence it is sprung, or wherein it hath long time beene
nourished.=

=To mankinde there happeneth in the bodie manie deformities, which
arising not by the defect of |Nature|, so much as by ill vsage
of those, who haue had charge ouer them, cannot be amended, but
being produced by |Nature|, doe portend some one or other notable
inconuenience: To beautifie such a shape with vertuous and honoured
actions, is vndoubtedlie praise worthie, but to accord vnto faire
lineaments, portraied with requisite and daintie fauour, a mind
corrupt, base, wretched and vile, that of all others is the most
greatest and noted deformitie.=

=|Diogenes| being of one passing by, rebuked of his preposterous shape,
and hard kinde of fauour, aunswered, |I with my vertues doe ornifie my
shape, but thou with thy lewdnesse disgracest thy fauour.|=

=Touching the iudgement of nature by the outward face, many things
might be alledged that diuerslie haue beene decerned, the matter wherof
néeding small proofe, more then our owne common experience, I surcease
to debate vpon, seeing my meaning is, but out of sundrie apparances
to drawe forth the greatest likelihoode, and thence to repose a
foundation consonant to yᵉ module or compasse of this my present
intendment. Onely let this be laid down for a certaine, that the finest
ware receiueth the fairest figure, and purest mettall the brightest
colour, the damaske Rose carieth the swéetest fauour, and the most
pliable part of |vertue|, is by greatest obseruance planted in the most
proportionate feature.=

=This being then sufficiently spoken of the person, let vs now go
to the |Conuersation|. This |Conuersation| séemeth vnto me in three
points, or speciall notes to be considered: that is, in the |Qualitie,
Disposition| and |order of companie|. Touching his |Qualitie|, it is
requisite, that first and aboue all other, he be a man sequestred
from all kind of pride, arrogancie or vaine conceiuing of himselfe,
for that the infection of these, are steppes vnto all maner of
disorder, contempt, malice, and presumption whatsoeuer: that he be not
litigious in argument, as one vainlie giuen to contend: that hee bee
no ordinarie scoffer, or friuolous deluder of other mens speeches,
gestures, reasons, or conditions: that he be no quareler, lewd speaker,
priuy carper, slanderer, or sinister backbiter of other mens actions,
or laudable indeuours: but contrarie hereunto, that he be in spéech
gentle, in gesture friendlie, in lookes familiar, in talke courteous,
in argument not obstinate, but giuing place to better opinions, that
gladlie of euerie one he do suppose the best, be readie to excuse
infirmities, and to salue imperfections, that in ieasting hee become
not another |Democritus|, or in carping a |Zoilus|, that his tongue,
eie, and thoughts, be indifferentlie framed to iudge trulie and
impartiallie of euerie one: that of all thinges hee abhorre priuate
quarels, and open contentions, and as the rocks of |Scylla|, doe eschue
of anie one absente sinisterlie to speake, or otherwise to enforme
against them, for that in these qualities and conditions properlie,
each one carieth a decernment of that which néerest appertaineth to a
Gentleman.=

=Now touching his |disposition|, it is exacted at his hands, that hee
bee not a man gluttonous, or that he bee not ouer much subiect to
drinking, for drunkennes ouercommeth the mind, dulleth the memorie,
enfeebleth the wits, maketh a man forgetfull of himself, the reputation
he beareth, and the company wherein he sitteth. |Wine| saith _Ouid_,
is the discouerer of secrets, & maketh a man often commit, yᵉ which
afterwardes turneth to his great preiudice: in wine the regard of a
mans selfe, and likewise all others vanisheth, the respect of his
credite also and place wherein he serueth: a man giuen much to wine,
hath no maisterie ouer himselfe, and is not to be trusted with matters
that be important: a man talkatiue and one giuen to wine are both
likened togither in disposition, for in the one the strength of the
liquor inforceth to speake what he ought not, and in the other the
volubility of the tongue, giueth vtterance many times to what it should
not: |Speech|, saith the wise man, is a thing naturally giuen to euery
man, but he that ordreth his words by discretion, seeth the way to
wisdome.=

=This vertue of ordring and kéeping the tongue, is vnto our
|Secretorie| not the least of manie other points wherewith he ought
especiallie to be charged, in him that is disposed to speake much,
it cannot but ensue that his often babbling must néedes at one time
or other, giue proofe that hee hath in himselfe as little |secrecie|
as |silence|. To preuent this inconuenience, wise men haue obserued
in nature a most notable and singular prouidence, who to the intent
that men by her verie instigation, might be commended to |silence|,
hath giuen vs two eares to heare, and an attentiue conceyte, whereby
generallie to debate and consider of all things, and but one mouth to
speake, giuing vs in testimonie thereby, that we ought to heare much,
to know much, to vnderstand much, and to speake but a little. Besides,
that the tongue whereby deliuerance is made, she hath first closed in
with our téeth, and them couered againe with our lippes, forewarning
still thereby, that nothing ought thence to be discouered in hast, not
without especiall regard and district obseruance. For in this case
also discréete |Nature|, after we haue once receyued into our eares
the sound of anie thing, she thence preferreth it immediatelie vnto
the minde, and thence to the heart to be censured or considered vpon:
and last of all vnto the tongue, to whose lot, as last of these it
befalleth to bee partaker of it, so ought it from thence carefullie,
and not without especiall cause to be deliuered.=

=The |diuine Philosopher| foreséeing in man, the manifolde
discommodities oftentimes ensuing by loosenes of the tongue, where all
others were teachers to speake wel, he only taught his scholers to
vse silence, iudging therby, that the vertue of the toung consisted
not soly in speking, but how or by what occasion to vse yᵉ same, and
vnderstanding first how to restraine the thing, that of it selfe
was plyable ynough to bee vsed without measure, they might easilier
find mean afterward to speake oftentimes to good purpose, and not to
accustome themselues as they did before, to prattle without order or
anie good or reasonable parte belonging to discretion.=

=For this cause |Silence|, as the first gard of all affaires, beeing
either secrete or important, is (vnto men seriouslie occupied or
imployed in the same) directly to be commended. Which maner of
|Silence|, as it fullie instructeth in causes serious and of waight,
to speake nothing more than néedeth, so conueieth it also into the
residue of our behauiours, a modest and choice kind of gouernment, in
all actions whatsoeuer, either of question or argument, to bee with
discretion pursued.=

=How much it importeth vnto our |Secretorie|, to haue notice of the
true and perfect vse hereof, who aboue al others ought rightlie to
know and discerne, how, where, when, what, and to whom hee ought to
speak, and when, and wherein, to be likewise silent: it may by the
reasons aforesaid be sufficientlie collected. For ought his speech in
troth to be so ordinarie as other mens, who for the moste part limit
themselues neither to time, place, occasion, or company, the which in
our |Secretorie| is, and ought to be farre otherwise. And as touching
the affaires, secrets or counsels committed to his charge: It is in him
principallie to aduert and consider that he is but the closet, wherof
another hath both the key, vse and commandement, that he ought therein
to be as a thicke plated doore, where through, without extraordinarie
violence no man may enter, but by the locke which is the tongue, and
that to be of such efficacie, as whereof no counterfeit key shoulde bee
able to make a breach, without the selfe same instrument that by the
director thereof is alwayes to be caried. By reason whereof, he is of
méere trust and fidelitie in him reposed, to become warie of his wayes,
and to take the course néedfull, whereby the least occasion of breach
thereof may preciselie be auoided.=

=Ouer and besides all this, it shall further appertaine to the
disposition of this our |Secretorie|, that in shewing himselfe affable
to all, he doe not either by reason of his birth, qualitie or estimate
that he hath of his L. or maister, goe about to abuse or wrest the
simplicitie of any one to a bad end or purpose, but rather enforce
himselfe gladlie to vnderstande the sutes of the meanest, and to giue
them aide and furtherance to his vttermost: herein shall hee not a
little aduance the honor of his L. or maister in preferring the iust
and lawfull petitions or complaints of the poore, & in helping them to
yᵉ spéedie dispatch of that, wherwith by reason of their simplicitie,
they oftentimes are greatlie incumbred. It behooueth also so much as in
him is, that he auoid all kind of intemperancie, eyther of choler or
too much furie, that hee dispose not himselfe to vile or vnbeseeming
tearmes of basenes or surquedrie, that hee with the two extreames
of couetousnes or prodigality be not touched, that naturallie he do
incline to good, and hate the badnes of any, that he abhorre flatterie
as a Toad, and giue himselfe of anie particular action, either to be
vtterlie silent, or els to speake trulie.=

=Lastlie now, touching the third point of these thrée, consisting in
order, |appertaining to companie:| Néedfull it is that our |Secretorie|
haue in speciall remembrance the auncient saying, that common
experience giueth to all men for approoued, which is, that |Such as a
man of himselfe is, such alwayes are they with whome he conuerseth.=

=If therefore of his owne mind and disposition a man endeuoureth to
bee good, and so to liue and be accounted of, him then beseemeth
chieflie to haue respect to the companie hee holdeth. For which
occasion, the Philosopher aduiseth, that men being good, doe choose to
haue familiaritie with men that are best, to the intent that by the
societie of them, their |Vertue| may haue encrease, and themselues
learne to become better. The corruption of young men, by nothing so
much accrueth, as by the slender respect they haue of those with whome
they do accompanie, for that it resteth assuredlie out of doubt, that
the euill example and encouragement of one vile and ill disposed
person, hurteth more a great deale oftentymes in one dayes companie
kéeping, then seuen yeares endeuour afterwards, maie release by anie
good instruction. Herein also the rather resteth vnto our |Secretorie|,
a most principall regard thereof to be had, forsomuch as not the
conuersation alone, wherein he is choiselie to be affected, dependeth
therupon, but the matter also of his ouerthrow and discredit, for
who séeth not in often apparance, that men simply conceited, and of
their owne proper instinct verie well giuen, are more discredited and
condemned many times, by occasion of the company wherinto they haue
aduentured, then of anie apparant euill that in their owne persons
rested publiquelie to be decerned.=

=Hereunto accordeth the proofe of all common societie, wherein men
onely of those that know them are iudged as they be, but in generall
reckoning, are euer censured according to the goodnesse or badnesse of
those, with whom they liue familiarlie. It followeth therefore, that
|Who so will no euill doe, must doe nought that longs thereto|, for in
good men it is not alwayes inough of themselues wittinglie not to haue
committed anie euill, but hee that desireth to be good indeed, ought
not so much as to become an occasion or slander of euill. If men would
but throughlie enter into the weight of their estates, and trulie
consider with themselues what of dutie appertaineth to verie reputation
indéede, they would not then think it ynough to be in this credite,
or that place, or thus countenanced, or that waie enriched, arming
themselues onelie thereby with vainglorious titles, but therewith
would also deepelie imprint, that them likewise behooued by certaine
especiall insight had into their owne wayes, so to order and direct
themselues, as therby deseruedlie they might beare the selfe same
account whole and vnblemished, which in opinion they haue caried, the
which cannot anie wayes bee, without in all their outward and inward
actions, they doe beare an especialleie to the matter of their owne
credite. And what one thing is there in the world (to him that by true
degrées of |vertue| endeuoureth to be aduaunced) more charie then the
account and estimate had of his name and fame? What one good more
excéeding, nay what life can be more precious? Much therefore ought the
regarde hereof be in choice vnto our |Secretorie|, as that which as an
action most singular I haue iudged fit to be exposed in this place vnto
him.=

=Hitherto haue we endeuoured in person and behauiour to find a man méet
and conuenient to the purpose hereof, wherein my intent hath béene not
to omit anie thing which to that place and calling might anie wayes be
adiudged necessarie. Now the circumstance of these procéedings leadeth
vs next to consider of our |Secretories| abilitie.=

=In this consideration, it falleth out, that for asmuch as his
|Office| and |place|, calleth him altogither, or for the most part
to the handling of deepe and weightie affaires, wherin his capacitie
shall sundrie wayes be exercised, and his wits throughlie tryed,
it behooueth he therefore be furnished with |Skill| and |knowledge
=accordinglie, whereby the better to be adapted, vnto the ordinarie
vsage and employment thereof. To this end it befitteth that he bee well
studied, especiallie in the |Latine| tongue. It is likewise conuenient
that herewithall he haue a ripe and quicke conceit, aptlie to receiue,
what on a sudden shall be to him deliuered, and that he retaine with
himselfe a sound and good memorie, for the conseruation of those things
that vnto his charge shall daylie bee committed. He ought for his owne
furniture and instruction to bee a man not altogither vnexperienced,
to be well languaged, to bee sufficientlie read in |Histories| and
|antiquities| of times passed, to haue notice both by reading and
conference, of the situations, customs, maners & conditions of men,
cities, countries, & common weals, to haue familiaritie with strangers,
and men of diuers nations, whereby the better to bee ascertained of
their humours, behauiours, and dispositions: and wiselie to worke
vnto himselfe a peculiar insight into their estates, counsels and
iurisdictions, béeing there withall warie that this association with
such kind of people, worke not vnto himselfe, or the affaires wherewith
he shall bee credited anie matter of preiudice.=

=Now is it a matter often séene, and in common vse almost to be found,
that a great many of men otherwise discréete, learned, experienced,
and for their seueral callings questionlesse of very good deliuerie,
and euery way to be deemed sufficient, some also that in the |Greeke|
and |Latine| tongues are verie well studied, and are also with the vse
of forraine languages laudablie indued, that notwithstanding haue not
in themselues the facultie and vse of well writing, nor can orderly, &
vpon a sudden lay down without much adoe, and that many times also in
very preposterous maner when it is done, what to anie extraordinarie
purpose seemeth to bee thought meete and conuenient. Some againe in
whome there is lesse |Skill|, greater |Ignorance| of learned knowledge,
and farre meaner application euerie waie, wherewith to bee enabled
with sufficiency, haue neuerthelesse a |Conceipt| so rife, and are
in |wit| so prompt and capable of any thing laide before them, as by
and by there wanteth not (though in truth when they haue done, they
cannot learnedly answere for it) neither |inuention| nor |imitation|,
wherewith in very commendable sort to performe what them seemeth good,
on a sodaine to deliuer in writing.=

=What shoulde be the cause hereof, I cannot else déeme, but onlie
a méere instinct of Nature, who seuerallie poureth her giftes in
their creation vnto euerie one, whereunto others (exempted from that
proportion) doe seldome by anie |Art| or |Studie| reach vnto, yet is
|Exercise| no doubt in those that haue any fauour of learning, hereunto
a great furtherance: But he that in this place must bee applyed, how
learned so euer he bee, must a little giue place vnto his Schooles,
and frame his penne and order of practise to pursue that forme of
writing, which plainest meaning and aptest speech, hath in common
deliuerie, the indeuour whereof howe difficult the same will bee to one
beeing rife in discourse, my selfe haue had some priuate testimonie,
notwithstanding Vse and continuall Practise I knowe, is that which in
time ouermaistreth all things.=

=To the beautifying then of this part of our |Secretorie|, it is
néedfull that he be somewhat therein ayded and furthered by |Nature|,
to the intent his inuention to euery seueral occasion, may be
the more easie and proper, and that without any often blurring or
enterlining which commonlie happeneth to those, in whom long studie
seemeth so hardly to hew out their labours, as if by a manner or
kinde of inforcement, the same from a hard rock were violently to be
drawne forth and caried, which |Bluntnesse|, as I maie tearme it, of
|Conceite|, is not in this part of seruice in anie wise to be admitted.
Neither am I for all this ignorant, how manifoldlie it often befalleth
vnto diuerse the readiest wittes, that at some one time more then at
another, they haue lesse abilitie, and much harder is their deliuerie
a great deale, in matters exquisite to be performed, then vsuallie
otherwise is by ordinarie triall vnto them accustomed: the occasions
whereof may be diuers, whereby the sences are manie wayes dulled, as
by too much replexion of meates and drinkes excessiuelie taken, by
too great studie and often musing, driuing therby into a melancholie
passion, by motions too intemperat, happening vnto the mind: and
finally, vpon sundrie other instincts and occasions, which I cease to
remember, all which being offensiue as they are, vnto the necessarie
regarde of this our |Secretories| attendance, it standeth him greatly
vpon by all possible meanes to represse them, to the end that his
wittes being as néere as by endeuour can be compassed, alwaies in one
self state and readinesse, he maie not in times suddenlie requiring
effectual and present dispatch, appeare any waies disfurnished, of
that which at his handes, is and must of necessitie in this place bee
required.=

=It is not then learning alone (as you see) that is able to make a man
meet to this kind of practice and study, but naturallie to be besides
indued both with |wit, vnderstanding|, and |memory| whereby to lead and
conueie those necessarie euents, that in this place are dailie to be
frequented, and therewith to haue likewise care and regard, with modest
and discreet maners and behauiours to preserue and keepe the same
forces, whereby he may be the more readilie prouided (as I said before)
for all times and purposes. Neuerthelesse, how much needful it is to
that place more then ordinarilie to bee learned, yea with the greatest
abilitie and perfection (if it were possible) to bee also euerie waie
adorned, I haue alreadie sufficientlie laid downe before hande, and
still do propose the waight thereof, as a respect amongst others to be
most especiallie imbraced.=

=In this maner haue we by sundrie degrees endeuoured to lead along our
|Secretory| vnto his appointed |Place| and |Office|, wherein we haue
first discoursed largelie of the function hee beareth, respectiuelie
touching his seruice: next to frame him both in |Person, Birth,
Education, Qualitie, Disposition, Conuersation|, and |Abilitie|,
a man meete for that purpose. It now resteth, that as the finall
determination of this labour we deliuer vnto him his office. Of this
then the parte especiall and intendment most principall, consisteth,
(as by experience is found) in the vse and exercise of the |Pen|, the
|Wit| and |Inuention| togethers. The abilitie so exactlie before
required, and discoursed vpon, is herein nowe to be put in practise.
To the execution of this office, it is requisite the |Secretory|, be
for the perfection of his hand, in the varietie and neat deliuerie
of his letters in writing, singularlie to be commended, that he haue
with himselfe also therein a verie readie vse, quicke, and speedie
conueyance for dispatch, that warilie he giue heede to obserue the
order, methode and forme to him from his Lord or master deliuered:
forasmuch as in discharge hereof he is vtterlie to relinquish anie
affectation to his own doings, or leaning herein to anie priuate
iudgement or fantasie. His pen in this action is not his owne, but
anothers, and for this cause the matter to him committed are to depend
vpon the humor of his commander, and not vpon his own or any others
directions.=

=Hereof is he excéedingly to becom studious, and a zealous imitator in
all thinges, to the intent that knowing the effects of his Lord, with
what ends and purposes they are caried, & vnto what forme and maner of
writing he is speciallie addicted, he may the more easilie and with
better contentment discharge that part of his seruice, wherein by
continuall occurrents he shall haue occasion daily to be imploied.=

=He is in performance of this charge, to bee a man watchfull, diligent,
carefull, industrious, not giuen to ease, to auoid all occasions of
slouth, to the end, (as I said before) by continuall exercise of his
wits, to retain his spirits apt, & his memory fresh. For |Idlenes| of
it selfe is the proper nourishment of manie other euils, the hinderer
of each good purpose, and the deformed monster of al humaine exercises.
Whilest |Idlenesse| attacheth the bodie, it giueth scope to ill
thoughts, occasioneth distemper, maketh vnweldie to labour, breedeth
wearisomnes of vertuous exercises, entiseth to vanities, corrupteth
with pleasures, and feedeth a man with trifles. If therefore there
shall bee anie time vacant of affaires vnto our |Secretory|, (as all
seasons are not alike wherein still to be occupied) the same shall he
deuise, either in pleasant recreation to bee spent or in some other
honest exercise or studie, wherein whatsoeuer is not improper vnto a
gentleman, shall be to him in speciall choise and as an action fittest
of all others to be receiued.=

=His office is likewise to entertaine all maner of suters vnto his
Lord, to conceiue and vnderstand of their seuerall occasions, and how
much or how little, they or anie of them do import, to answer the
dispatch of the greatest with as much facilitie as he may, and those of
lesse moment with discretion to remooue, and put backe, to the ende the
walkes and passages of his Lorde be not with the vaine and friuolous
demeanors of fond people too often encumbred.=

=He ought also to haue regard to times and places conuenient wherein to
mooue his Lord vpon anie speciall or vrgent occasion, or in which he is
to prefer vnto his presence or hearing, the person or cause of any one.
To see that the same returne not offensiue vnto his priuate liking,
that the furtherance thereof bee not in times when hee is soly disposed
to particular studies, or that he is otherwise busied in matters
of estate or counsell. To consider first of the qualitie of euerie
sute, and condition of the partie as neere as he maie be informed,
ere he take vpon him to acquaint his Lord with the parts thereof, and
accordinglie, if he see cause, in his owne person to answere the same:
for it is not seemelie he should trouble his Lord vpon euerie light or
ill beséeming suggestion. To be circumspect in the dispatch of euerie
thing to him deliuered, and in matters of weight and charge, to be
also prouident and wary, heedfully intending to the safe disposing
of whatsoeuer requisite, from the eyes or knowledge of anie other,
whereunto none so much as himselfe ought to become priuy.=

=He is likewise to auoid all maner of delaies, and not to accustome
himselfe in any wise vnto negligence, for that the vse hereof in
ouerslipping of small trifles, induceth manie times, to pretermit
things of larger circumstance, and of farre greater moment. It standeth
him vpon in the exercise of his office to bee alwaies as neere and as
readie as may bee, in his ordinarie attendance, for so much as being
vpon a sudden to bee vsed, it is needfull he be alwaies at hand,
and is intended that his absence cannot therefore anie long time be
spared. In conclusion, it is meetest in all things, that so far forth
he bee addicted vnto his present seruice, as that in respect thereof
hee become vtterlie sequestred from all priuate regarde or affection
of anie thing, sounding to his owne appetite. Finallie, being a
man fauored or entirelie reputed of in his office, hee may not for
anie friendship, corruption or gaine whatsoeuer, by anie sinister
practise, colour, or meanes, go about to abuse the countenance and
credite to him giuen, by his Lord or maister, nor couertlie thereby
suggest, or informe any thing, wherewith the good opinion of himselfe
may afterwards be hazarded, or by the graunt or assent of his Lorde
thereunto giuen, there maie iust cause acrue, whereby thereafter a
great deale lesse he may deserue to be trusted.=

=In these particularities haue I at last concluded, & brought to ende
the sum of all my former trauell. The |Secretory| is nowe accomplished
& by all respectes, circumstances, and inducements that maie bee,
confirmed both in person and office: much haue I to require of the
generall perusers hereof, that I bee not anie wayes therein mistaken,
for that passing immediatelie to the publique notice of all, there is
no doubt but the verie particularities there of, shall speedilie be
therewith censured of all. My request is, that the skilfull and best
experienced, will of their owne good conditions, not otherwise misdeeme
thereof then what in equall trueth maie bee vnto them tendered, nor
that the wise and discreetlie minded will haue other conceipt of me,
then as my weake abilitie sought herein at their hands to haue at the
first deserued.=

=Touching any others lesse able to speake or giue sentence in the
cause, as my will and desire is, fauourablie to be regarded of the
whole in generall, so if anie one more of selfe-liking then of
|Skill|, will either carpe at, or peremptorilie reiect the labour by
me vndertaken, let him first consider with himselfe, how much easier
it is to finde fault with a thing by another alreadie finished and
done, then for himselfe by priuate endeuour to accomplish the like: so
shall he find, that men at all times see not into all things at once:
and in proofe hereof become assured, that hee, as I shall sooner in
the performance of anie labor, make our selues obiects of euery common
opinion, then with such account to deliuer our trauels, as that we may
stand ascertained of their own deserts, that they may be pleasing to
all men.=

=And forasmuch as it resteth yet a thing doubtfull, how well or euill,
till the perusing this slender trifle of mine may of all sortes be
measured, I will in the meane time (as manie others before me haue
done) affie my selfe in the hope and expectation of the best Glad if
in the conueiance hereof, there may by my willing endeuour, arise anie
pleasure or profite to anie, which being the intention of me solie
desired, I passe foorth this (as the residue) of the best and aptest
fauourers thereof, to be entertained.=


                              FINIS. _A. D._

[Illustration]




                  A Table shewing the principal mat-
                 _ters contained in the first part of
                             this Booke_.


  Of Epistles, the commodities, and vse thereof                 _pag. 1_

  What is chiefly to be respected in framing of an Epistle.            2

  Of the habit and parts of an epistle.                                8

  Of certain contēts generally incident to al maner of Epistles.      11

  Diuers orders of Greetinges, farewels and subscriptions.            13

  Of Superscriptions and Directions.                                  17

  The Diuisions of Letters, and vnder what titles all sorts of
  epistles are contained.                                             20


  _Of epistles meerly Descriptory, & the parts thereof._              23

  An example of a Letter Descriptorie, wherein is particularly
  described an ancient Citie.                                         24

  An other example wherein the State of a countrey is solie
  described.                                                          26

  An example wherein the death of a noble man is only described       27


  _Of Epistles Laudatory and vituperatory._                           33

  An example of a Laudatory epistle solie touching the person.        35

  An example of an Epistle Vituperatorie concerning also the person.  42


  _Of epistles Deliberatiue._                                         46

  An example of an Epistle exhortatory to the attaining of vertue.    50


  _Of Epistles Responsory._                                           53

  An example Responsory to the last epistle before remēbred.          54

  An example of an Epistle Hortatorie to the studie of learning.      55

  An other example Hortatorie wherein an honourable Gentleman is
  egged forwardes to the profession of armes.                         58

  An example Swasory, wherein a Gentlewoman is counselled to mariage. 62

  Another example of an epistle Swasorie, perswading the carefull
  acceptance and regarde of one brother to another.                   65


  _Of Epistles Dehortatory, and disswasory._                          67

  An example of an Epistle Dehortatorie, wherein a Noble gentleman is
  dehorted from infidelitie or rebellion.                             71

  An example of a Disswasorie Epistle wherein one is disswaded from
  fruitlesse vanities, to more learned and profitable studies.        76

  An other example Disswasory wherin the party is by diuers reasons
  disswaded from entring into an action in apparance daungerous.      79


  _Of Epistles conciliatory._                                         83

  An Epistle conciliatory, written from one of good accompt to his
  inferiour.                                                          84

  An example Conciliatory frō one equall to another.              _ead._

  An Epistle Responsory, answering the first of these letters.        86

  A Letter Responsory answering the latter Epistle.               _ead._


  _Of epistles Reconciliatory._                                       87

  An example Reconciliatorie, from one friend to another.         _ead._

  An Epistle Reconciliatory frō an inferiour person to his better.    89


  _Of epistles Petitory._                                             90

  An example of an Epistle Petitory, in a cause indifferent.          93

  An example Petitory, in the nature of a reconciliatory from a son
  to his displeased father.                                           94

  An Epistle Petitorie, wherein is craued trauell and counsell to be
  assistant vpon vrgent occasion.                                     96

  Another of the same.                                                97

  A Letter Responsorie to the same.                               _ead._

  An example Petitorie, concluding a briefe request, and curteous
  remembrance of a thing before promised.                             99

  An other example of the like effect.                            _ead._


  _Of Epistles Commendatory._                                        100

  An example Commendatorie, wherein is recommended to a noble man
  from his inferiour, the conditions and behauiours of a person.     102

  A Letter Responsorie to the same.                               _ead._

  Another epistle Commendatorie of the sort before deliuered.        103

  An example Commendatory from a noble man to his inferior, wherein
  one is recommended to an office.                                   104

  An Epistle Commendatorie, from a noble man in referment of his
  seruant.                                                           105

  Another example wherein is recommended the cause & speedie
  furtherance of iustice.                                            106

  An example Responsory, wherin is denied, what in the formost
  directions was recōmended.                                         107

  Another Letter Responsorie, wherin consent and allowance is giuē to
  the matter required.                                               108

  The third Epistle Responsorie, wherein is doubfullie allowed, what
  to the same was recommended.                                       109

  A letter Commendatorie pleasantly conceited in preferring an
  vnprofitable seruant.                                              110


  _Of Epistles Consolatorie._                                        112

  An example Consolatorie of the first sort, wherein a Gentlewoman is
  comforted of the death of her sonne.                               114

  An Epistle Consolatorie of the same, wherein one is comforted in
  case of hard extremitie.                                           117

  A Consolatorie epistle of the third sort, wherein a Gentlewoman is
  comforted of the death of her husbād slain in the wars.            119

  An example consolatory pleasauntly written to one who had buried
  his old wife.                                                      125

  A Letter responsorie to be conferred to an Epistle consolatorie.   127


  _Of Epistles Monitorie and Reprehensorie._

  An example Monitorie concerning a staied and well gouerned life.   131

  An other Epistle Monitorie, touching the reformation of a couetous
  life.                                                              134

  An Epistle Reprehensorie to a father, touching the lewde and ill
  demeanour of his sonne.                                            136

  An example Reprehensorie, wherein a man of wealth sufficient is
  reprehended, for marriage of his daughter to the riches of an old
  wealthie miser.                                                    138

  An epistle Reprehensorie, to a young Gentleman.                    141


  _Of Epistles Amatorie,_                                            143

  An example of an Epistle for the entreatie of the first good wil.  145

  An other example to that purpose.                                  146

  An answere to the first of these Epistles.                     _eadem_

  A replie to the same answere.                                      147

  An answere vnto the second letter.                                 148




             _The Table of the second part of this Booke._


  _Of Epistles Iudiciall._                                        pag. 1

  An example of an epistle Accusatorie in the state coniecturall.      4

  An example Excusatorie returned to the effects of this Coniecturall
  Epistle.                                                             6

  An example Purgatorie, from the partie chalenged, in answere of the
  Epistle accusatorie before remembred.                                7

  An example of an Epistle accusatorie in the state Iuridiciall and
  Coniecturall.                                                        9

  A Letter Defensorie, aunswering by confutation al the obiections in
  this former Epistle surmised.                                       14


  _Of Epistles expostulatorie._                                       19

  An example of an Epistle Expostulatorie, touching certain iniuries
  betweene two friends.                                               19

  An answere Defensorie, vnto the effects of the same epistle.        20

  A replie to the saide answere Defensorie, wherein the matter of the
  Epistle is more firmelie maintained.                                22

  A seconde answere to the like reasons of the Replie in further
  defence of the partie.                                              24

  An example of an epistle Expostulatorie touching vnkindnes
  receiued.                                                           25

  An example of an epistle Expostulatory for breach of promise.       26

  An example of an Epistle expostulatorie from an inferiour
  Gentleman, to his farre better in degree, authoritie and calling.   27

  An example of an epistle exprobratorie touching ingratitude
  receiued.                                                           30

  An epistle exprobatorie more largelie exampled.                     31


  _Of letters inuectiue._                                             34

  An example of an Epistle inuectiue from a father to his sonne. _eadem_

  An answere purgatorie of the sonne touching the matters Inuectiue
  of the former epistle.                                              37

  A reply of the father confuting the allegations of the sonne, and
  maintayning the causes of the former Inuectiue alledged.            42

  An example of another epistle Inuectiue pleasantlie written against
  the humors and conditions of a vainglorious person.                 45

  An example of another epistle Inuectiue, written in cause of great
  desert agaynst two seuerall parties.                                48


  _Of epistles Comminatorie._                                         61

  An example of an epistle Cōminatorie.                               52

  Another example Comminatorie containing a greater vehemencie in the
  deliuerie.                                                      _ead._


  _Of epistles Deprecatorie._                                         54

  An example of an epistle Deprecatorie, where the partie is charged
  in good opinion.                                                    55

  An example of an epistle Deprecatorie, in cause of wrong supposed
  to be committed.                                                    57

  An example of an epistle Deprecatorie, pleasantlie written to
  answer a former letter.                                             58


  _Of Epistles familiar._                                             59

  A Letter Nunciatorie from a sonne to his father or friends,
  touching his being in seruice.                                  _ead._

  A Letter Nunciatorie in another sort of the same matter.        _ead._

  An Epistle Narratorie, contayning aduertisements from one friend to
  another.                                                            60

  A letter of aduertisements from a sonne to his father.              61

  A Letter from a seruant or factor to his master.                    62


  _Of epistles Remuneratorie._                                        63

  An example of an epistle Remuneratorie from an inferiour to one
  farre his better, in reputation and calling.                    _ead._

  A Letter Remuneratorie from a Gentlewoman of good sort, to a
  nobleman her kinsman.                                               64

  A Letter Remuneratorie from one friend to another.                  65

  A Letter Remuneratorie from a better to his inferiour.          _ead._


  _Of epistles Iocatorie._                                            66

  An epistle Gratulatorie, from one friend to another.            _ead._

  A Letter Gratulatorie from a wife to her husband.                   67

  A letter Gratulatorie from one to his Kinsman seruing in London.
                                                                  _ead._


  _Of epistles obiurgatorie._                                         68

  A Letter Obiurgatorie from a maister to his seruant.                69


  _Of epistles Mandatorie._                                       _ead._

  A Letter Mandatorie from a Maister to his seruant, or Factor being
  beyond the seas.                                                    70

  An other Letter Mandatorie from a maister to his seruant.           71

  A Letter Mandatorie from a man to his wife.                     _ead._

  A letter Mandatory from one friend to another.                      72

  Of Figures, Tropes and Schemes.                                     77

  Of the parts, place, and office of a Secretorie.                   101

                                FINIS.


                         Transcriber’s Notes:

  - Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).
  - Text enclosed by equals is in blackletter (=blackletter=).
  - Text enclosed by ‘|’ is emphasized normal font within an italicized
    or blackletter paragraph (|normal|).
  - Blank pages have been removed.
  - Decorative header formatting is maintained.
  - Decorative art dividers removed from text version.
  - Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected.
    Examples: upside down letters (n for u),
      missing letters (theunto -> therunto),
      reversed letters(hwoe -> howe)
      otherwise there were no spelling corrections.
  - Spacing was tight and inconsistent, many spaced or unspaced words
    were a judgement call (beholding/be holding).
  - There were many capital first letters that were italicized, I
    assumed these were only due to typesetter convenience as there was
    no contextual reason.
  - There is frequent use of vowels with macron, per Wikipedia: “In
    Old English texts a macron above a letter indicates the omission of
    an m or n that would normally follow that letter.”.
    Example: iudgmēt -> iudgment.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ENGLISH SECRETARY; OR, METHODE OF WRITING EPISTLES AND LETTERS (1599) ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


