The Project Gutenberg eBook of A brief history of the Tenth Michigan Cavalry
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A brief history of the Tenth Michigan Cavalry

Author: L. S. Trowbridge

Release date: July 3, 2025 [eBook #76434]

Language: English

Original publication: Detroit, MI: Friesema Brothers, 1906

Credits: Carol Brown, The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE TENTH MICHIGAN CAVALRY ***


[Illustration: COL. AND BVT. MAJ. GEN’L LUTHER S. TROWBRIDGE]




             Prepared at the request of the Adjutant-General
                               of Michigan


                             A Brief History
                                 of the
                         Tenth Michigan Cavalry


                       By General L. S. Trowbridge
                      Late Colonel of the Regiment

                        [Illustration: colophon]


             _Together with half-tones of the photographs of
             all its Officers, from its organization to its
                    muster out, and a map showing the
                   theater of its active operations._




                                  1908.
                       FRIESEMA BROS. PRINTING CO.
                             DETROIT, MICH.




To My Comrades of the Tenth Michigan Cavalry:


I think a word of explanation is due. In consenting to prepare this
history for the Adjutant General, I did not fully appreciate the
limitations that were imposed. The space to which I was limited
necessarily prevented giving to many matters the importance which
they really deserved, while much of the details and many of the minor
matters had to be omitted altogether.

I thought a map would be of interest, but I could find none published
that was available, and I was therefore put to the necessity of
having one made. Thanks to the generous offer of my friend, Mr. F. C.
Leeseman, late an officer of the German Army, now residing in this
city, who volunteered to do the work under my direction, I am able
to present a map which shows accurately the active operations of
the regiment, except in West Tennessee in the fall of 1865. To have
extended it so as to embrace that territory would have made it too
large, and as the service there was after the war was over, it was
thought to be unnecessary. In East Tennessee the country was marched
over and fought over so many times that it was impracticable to show
each expedition by itself. It is thought, however, that the names of
places and dates of engagements in connection with the history will
sufficiently indicate the different expeditions in which the regiment
took part.

The preparation of the history and the map has been a great pleasure
to me, and my chief regret is that more full and ample notice could
not have been given to all, and the many minor engagements in which
they took part. With this parting salutation, I bid you all hail and
farewell,

                                                  L. S. TROWBRIDGE.

Detroit, Mich., March 15, 1905.




                             History of the
                         Tenth Michigan Cavalry


The Tenth Michigan Cavalry was organized in the summer and fall of
1863, under authority given to the Hon. F. W. Kellogg, Representative
in Congress, who had shown great zeal and efficiency in raising troops.
It rendezvoused at Grand Rapids. All the field officers of the regiment
had seen service in other regiments--the Colonel and Junior Major
in the Sixth Michigan Cavalry; the Lieutenant-Colonel in the Fifth
Michigan Cavalry; the Senior Major in the Third Michigan Infantry,
where he had won merited distinction in the battles of Chancellorsville
and Gettysburg, in the latter of which he was seriously wounded while
serving on the staff of General De Trobriand; the Second Major in the
Third Michigan Cavalry, where he distinguished himself by the capture
of a large band of troublesome guerillas in Western Tennessee.

The full organization of the regiment was as follows:

Colonel Thaddeus Foote, Grand Rapids. Lieutenant Colonel Luther S.
Trowbridge, Detroit. Senior Major, Israel C. Smith, Grand Rapids.
Second Major, Cicero Newell, Ypsilanti. Junior Major, Wesley Armstrong,
Lapeer. Adjutant, Charles E. Soule, Muir. Quartermaster, Oliver N.
Taylor, Grand Rapids. Commissary, Don A. Dodge, Grand Rapids. Surgeon,
David C. Spalding, Muir. Assistant Surgeon, Charles W. Leonard,
Newaygo. Assistant Surgeon, William D. Scott, Greenville. Chaplain,
Henry Cherry, Owosso.

Co. A. Captain, John H. Standish, Brooks. First Lieutenant, Henry W.
Sears, Muskegon. Second Lieutenant, Wallace B. Dickinson, Newaygo.

Co. B. Captain, Rhoderick L. Bryan, Franklin. First Lieutenant, Adam R.
Insley, Muir. Second Lieutenant, Samuel T. Bryan, Franklin.

Co. C. Captain, Benjamin K. Weatherwax, Grand Rapids. First Lieutenant,
Stephen V. Thomas, Elba. Second Lieutenant, L. Wellington Hinman, Elba.

Co. D. Captain, Archibald Stevenson, Bay City. First Lieutenant,
Frederick N. Field, Grand Rapids. Second Lieutenant, William H. Dunn,
Ganges.

Co. E. Captain, Harvey E. Light, Eureka. First Lieutenant, Edwin J.
Brooks, Leelanaw. Second Lieutenant, Robert G. Barr, Grand Rapids.

Co. F. Captain, Chauncey F. Shepherd, Owosso. First Lieutenant, William
E. Cummin, Corunna. Second Lieutenant, Myron A. Converse, Corunna.

Co. G. Captain, James B. Roberts, Ionia. First Lieutenant, Ambrose L.
Soule, Lyons. Second Lieutenant, George W. French, Lyons.

Co. H. Captain, Peter N. Cook, Antrim. First Lieutenant, Edgar P.
Byerly, Owosso. Second Lieutenant, John Q. A. Cook, Antrim.

Co. I. Captain, Amos T. Ayers, Bingham. First Lieutenant, Enos B.
Bailey, Bingham. Second Lieutenant, George M. Farnham, St. Johns.

Co. K. Captain, Andrew J. Itsell, Marion. First Lieutenant, William T.
Merritt, Eaton Rapids. Second Lieutenant, William Yerrington, Muir.

Co. L. Captain, Elliott F. Covell, Grand Rapids. First Lieutenant,
James H. Cummins, Holly. Second Lieutenant, Edwin A. Botsford, Fenton.

Co. M. Captain, James L. Smith, Plainfield. First Lieutenant, B.
Franklin Sherman, Virginia. Second Lieutenant, Jeremiah W. Boynton,
Grand Rapids.

[Illustration: CAPT. AND BVT. MAJ. JAMES H. CUMMINS]

The organization having been completed, and the ranks filled, the
regiment was ordered to Lexington, Kentucky, where it arrived on the
5th of December, and there received its horses and camp and garrison
equipage. After remaining at Lexington one week, the regiment was
ordered to Camp Nelson, where it arrived on December 13th, and remained
there until January 25th. On December 30th, Co. H, under command of
Captain Cook, started for Knoxville in charge of a drove of cattle for
the army in East Tennessee, but a superior force of the enemy relieved
them of the further care of the cattle, and they were appropriated
by the enemy’s commissary. The stay at Camp Nelson was exceedingly
unpleasant, the weather intensely cold, and much sickness in camp.
There were other troops there and large depots of supplies for the
quartermaster and commissary departments, and some hospitals not well
constructed for cold weather, as many men were reported as having
frozen to death in them. The regiment suffered much from sickness
and disease, and it was a great relief when orders came to move to
Knoxville, via. Burnside Point. After a very leisurely march, mostly
in pleasant weather, the regiment reached Burnside Point February
1st. The question of supplies, especially of forage, was still a
serious one at Knoxville, and consequently the march to that point
was not hastened, and it remained at Burnside Point, protecting boats
while collecting forage on the Cumberland river, and discharging other
appropriate duties until February 29th, when it started for Knoxville.
To all who participated in it, that march across the mountains will
long be remembered as one of especial discomfort. Rain, snow, sleet
and ice made the marching very uncomfortable for both men and horses.
Heavy branches overloaded with snow were breaking on all sides. One
man of Co. E was seriously injured, and had to be left behind at the
first available stopping place, while the Colonel narrowly escaped
injury from a large branch, which struck his horse. All discomforts,
however, have an end some time, and as the regiment wound down the
side of the Cumberland Mountains above Jacksboro, it presented a sight
worthy the attention of the greatest artists. The view from the top of
the mountains was one of rare beauty. After a tedious delay in crossing
the Clinch River at Clinton by a small and inadequate ferry, Knoxville
was finally reached on the evening of March 6th. Remained at Knoxville
until the 9th, when ordered to report to the Major General Commanding
at Morristown, via Strawberry Plains. At Mossy Creek received orders
to make a reconnaissance to the mouth of Chucky River, thence to
Springvale, if possible, thence to Morristown. The reconnaissance
was made, and although no enemy was seen, it gave the men a taste of
real business. Upon reaching Morristown, ordered to report to Colonel
Gerrard, commanding Cavalry Division. The whole army fell back to
Mossy Creek. One incident of the service with Colonel Gerrard will
be recalled with interest by all who participated in it. The whole
division made a reconnaissance to Morristown and Russellville, when
the regiment, under the command of Lt.-Col. Trowbridge, was sent to
Hugh Kane’s to get forage. On March 22 a violent storm of wet snow
came on, and as the snow balled greatly under the horses’ feet the
march was very hard on the horses and very cold and chilly for the
men. When they reached Mr. Kane’s (he was a very thorough union man)
they were received by a most hearty welcome. Mr. Kane came out to
welcome them, and said, “Come in. I have been looking for you. The day
they were fighting at Bean’s Station I hid a lot of corn in the hay
mow, as I thought you would want it some day.” “But, Mr. Kane,” said
the commanding officer, “there is one thing that we want almost more
than corn. My men are almost frozen with this wet storm. We want some
fires.” “Oh, well,” said he, “don’t you see all those fence rails?
Help yourselves, only leave those around the house.” Then he took
all the officers in and gave them such a dinner as they had not had
before in Tennessee. Of such stuff were made the sturdy union men of
East Tennessee. The regiment returned to Mossy Creek, and the next
day received orders to report to General Thomas J. Wood, commanding
a division of the Fourth Corps at Rutledge. The service with General
Wood was made up of outpost duty--scouting and reconnaissance--with
nothing worthy of note except the lessons learned in practical
campaigning, of which the men were in need. It continued until the
6th of April, when the regiment was ordered to Strawberry Plains to
recruit the horses. During the month of March, two companies, under
Captain Light, were detached for service at Knoxville. The command
was afterwards increased to four companies under the same officer. The
service was pleasant and important, consisting of picket duty, courier
and escort duty, with some scouting when occasion required. They had
the disadvantage, however, of being away from the regiment and missing
many of its interesting and exciting experiences. Captain Light was
highly commended by Generals Tillson and Ammen for his fidelity and
zeal. East Tennessee had been so much of a thoroughfare for the two
armies that it was pretty well stripped of all supplies, and it was
difficult to obtain forage for the horses or provisions for the men
away from the railroad. April 20th the regiment was ordered to move
with all effective force to Bull’s Gap, to report to General Cox.
The Colonel being indisposed, the command fell on Lieutenant Colonel
Trowbridge. Upon reporting to General Cox he was informed that he was
to take six companies of the Third Indiana Cavalry, besides the Tenth,
with Manson’s Brigade of Infantry in support, and move to Carter’s
Station to destroy a large railroad bridge over the Wautauga River. The
movement was to be made with as much ostentation as practicable, so
as to lead the enemy to believe that it was the advance of an army in
the hope that at its approach the enemy might destroy the bridge, but
if he did not, then the force was to destroy the bridge, and falling
back, destroy the railroad as much as possible back to Bull’s Gap. Upon
reaching Jonesboro, it was learned that the bridge was defended by
General A. E. Jackson with a strong force on the north side, occupying
a redoubt, and extensive and well constructed rifle pits on the south
side of the river. Colonel Trowbridge, thinking it possible to capture
the entire force, divided his command and directed Major Smith with one
portion to cross the river at a ford below the bridge and get in the
rear. Upon the approach of Smith’s command the detachment guarding the
ford precipitately fled, but the river was found to be not fordable,
and the attempt had to be abandoned, and Smith rejoined his command on
the south side of the river. The cavalry was dismounted and deployed
and advancing soon received the enemy’s fire. In addition to the force
in the redoubt and rifle pits, the force on the other side of the river
swept the open ground with a hot cross fire. The ground in front of
the redoubt and rifle pits was perfectly open for two or three hundred
yards, and it seemed a risky thing to attempt an assault with a thin
line of dismounted cavalry. It was apparent, however, that if the
bridge was to be destroyed, these men must be driven out. Moreover as
this was the first serious business in which the regiment had been
engaged, the effect upon it of a successful assault would be very
marked, while to retire without accomplishing anything would be very
dispiriting. So the assault was ordered, and as the long thin line
sprang forward with a cheer the enemy broke and fled. Major Smith was
the first man inside the works, and Captain Weatherwax the second. As
soon as they were joined by sufficient men, they dashed over the hill
on which the redoubt was built, expecting to further rout the enemy and
capture many prisoners before they could cross the river. They were
met, however, by a destructive volley from a mill in which the enemy
had taken refuge. That volley killed Captain Weatherwax and two men,
and wounded sixteen. The rest of the men fell back under cover of the
brow of the hill. Although a strong position had been gained, it was
found to be still impracticable to reach the bridge without exposure
to a destructive fire. Word was therefore sent to General Manson at
Jonesboro that the enemy was in too strong a force and held too good
a position to be dislodged by the cavalry, and suggesting that if he
thought the destruction of the bridge of sufficient importance he would
better come on with his brigade of infantry. He replied that he did
not consider the destruction of the bridge important enough for that,
and directed the cavalry to return, doing such damage to the railroad
as they could. This was done, and so ended the first serious business
in which the regiment had been engaged. Should it be thought that
too much space has been given to this unimportant affair, it may be
answered that the importance of a matter cannot always be determined
by immediate results. The effect on the regiment of a successful
assault on superior numbers in well constructed defenses had not been
miscalculated, and undoubtedly had much to do with making the regiment
the strong aggressive force which it afterwards became. Mention of
this incident should not be closed without a just tribute of praise
to Captain Weatherwax. He was a noble man, and a soldier of dauntless
courage. His loss was most deeply felt. The command of the company
naturally fell to Lieutenant S. V. Thomas, who was promoted to fill the
vacancy, and proved himself a worthy successor.

[Illustration: MAJ. HARVEY E. LIGHT]

On reaching Bull’s Gap it was learned that preparations were being
hurried for the infantry to join General Sherman’s army at Chattanooga.
The Tenth was directed to remain at Bull’s Gap until the last train had
left, and then to move out immediately. This being done, the regiment
returned to camp at Strawberry Plains.

All available troops, except necessary garrisons, had gone to join
Sherman’s army. The Tenth was the only cavalry left in East Tennessee.
Its outpost and picket duty, its constant scouting and responsibility
for the frontier in the direction of Virginia, gave it plenty of work
to do. It was important work, too, and work that must be done by
somebody, but there was no chance for glory in it, except such glory
as attaches to the faithful performance of duty. There was plenty of
scouting--plenty of hard work--plenty of fighting--severe and gallant
fighting, but on a small scale. When such great things were going on in
other parts of the great theater of war, as in Virginia and Georgia,
it could not be expected that the operations of a single regiment of
cavalry in East Tennessee would attract much attention. Headquarters
and a permanent camp were established at Strawberry Plains, and the
regiment assigned to the Second Brigade, Fourth Division, Twenty-third
Army Corps, commanded respectively by Generals Tillson, Ammen and
Schofield. After matters had settled down to working order, General
Tillson sent for Colonel Trowbridge and informed him that a small fort
had been laid out and partially constructed by an engineer officer for
the protection of the large railroad bridge at Strawberry Plains, and
he was directed to go on and finish it. Upon examining the work, it was
thought that a mistake had been made in laying it out unless it was
intended to put the guns in barbette. General Tillson was consulted
about it, and declared most emphatically that he would never put guns
in barbette, but always in embrasures, but he thought no mistake had
been made in laying out the work, as he had done it himself. Colonel
Trowbridge being still satisfied that a mistake had been made,
prepared a diagram of the work and a sketch of the surrounding country,
which showed plainly enough that if the guns were put in embrasures,
not one could be brought to bear on any one of the prominent points
where the enemy would be likely to plant his batteries. On being shown
this diagram and sketch, General Tillson burst out laughing and said,
“I wrote you that I laid out that work; I did not actually lay it out
myself, but I explained to the engineer what I wanted. It is plain to
see that he did not understand me, or he did not know how to do it.
You are clearly right, so go ahead and change the faces of the work
according to your ideas.”

It became necessary to change every one of the five faces of the work,
and when completed it was a strong fortification of its class. This
matter would not have been considered worthy of mention except for the
fact that on two occasions afterwards a small force was enabled by
it to repulse attacks from largely outnumbering forces of the enemy,
whereas if the fort had been finished as originally laid out, the
enemy could have maintained a constant fire from a dozen batteries,
indefinitely, without coming within the range of a single gun from the
fort. As it was, their guns were knocked out of commission very soon
after they showed themselves.

Startling reports came from headquarters in Knoxville of large bodies
of the enemy coming down from Rogersville. After several such alarms,
it was thought best to make a good preparation for any such attack, and
work at the fort was suspended, and all hands put to work constructing
some rifle pits of permanent value. It was astonishing how much could
be accomplished by concentrated effort, with a few picks and spades,
and in one afternoon some very respectable rifle pits were dug, which
gave the men a sense of security, and furnished a rallying place
easily found in the darkest night. These rifle pits were extended and
strengthened until in a short time the camp had become an entrenched
camp of no small strength and importance. With frequent reports of the
enemy, and necessary scouting in different directions, with work on the
fort between times, the time was well occupied.

On May 28th Colonel Foote, with 160 men, made a reconnaissance to
Greenville, where he encountered Major Arnold’s Battalion. A brisk
fight ensued, in which the enemy was completely routed, losing 24 men
killed, 14 wounded and 26 taken prisoners, besides 38 horses and mules
and 17 negroes. One man, Sergeant Clark, of Co. A, was wounded in the
knee. It was a very creditable affair, and served to increase the
reputation of the regiment as a fighting organization. On the return
march Colonel Foote was slightly wounded in the foot by the accidental
discharge of his own pistol.

June 14th General Tillson was informed that the enemy had a large
number of horses, estimated at 1,000, in pasture near Kingsport, and
Lieutenant Colonel Trowbridge, with such force as could be spared from
the camp, was directed to attempt their capture. He very unexpectedly
met a party of the enemy at Bean’s Station, which was promptly charged
by the advance guard and portions of Companies C and M, under Captain
Roberts. The charge was a spirited one, and the enemy was put to
flight. One of them was badly wounded and left at Colonel Garrett’s
house. After charging them for about two miles, Captain Roberts wisely
called a halt. Lieutenant Brooks of Company M, however, being in
advance, and smarting under some ill-treatment from a superior officer,
kept up the pursuit with a few men for about ten miles. The command
went into camp about eight miles from Rogersville. Taking an early
start the next morning, the enemy was again met before proceeding a
mile, and another brisk fight ensued. Co. D led in a charge in which
three of the enemy were killed and one mortally wounded. The only
loss sustained by the charging party was one man of Co. D--Corporal
Benton--wounded in the leg. The command moved on to Kingsport, but all
hope of capturing the horses had to be abandoned, as couriers had been
sent on to give warning, and the horses had been removed. The next
morning, while giving the horses a much needed feed in a meadow near
Blountsville, the enemy made a sudden dash on our pickets, but was
promptly driven back. One man of Co. M, coming in from picket when the
attack was made, was mistaken for one of the enemy and lost an arm by a
shot from one of our own men. For convenience in foraging, the command
was divided into three parts and sent by different routes for the camp
at Strawberry Plains, where it arrived on June 21st without further
incident worthy of note. In a brief history like this it is impossible
to make mention of every movement of every detachment of the regiment.
An affair occurred at Wilsonville, about twenty-five or thirty miles
north of east from Sevierville, which showed the steadiness of the
men in presence of sudden danger. Lieutenant Dunn was ordered with
twenty-five men to attempt the rescue of Colonel Fry of the East
Tennesseeans, a valuable scout and guide, who had been captured by a
roving band of guerrillas. Soon after leaving Sevierville, he struck
the track of a party of about the same size as his own, which had been
robbing the citizens right and left, and was making for the mountains.
He followed them all day, and part of the next, until they reached the
mountains without bringing them to action. As he could learn nothing of
Colonel Fry, and there were no prisoners with the band he was pursuing,
he deemed it proper to return. At Wilsonville, while unbridled and
unsaddled and feeding in a meadow, they were charged by the same party
they had been pursuing, reinforced by about sixty men, who killed one
of the pickets, Bert or David A. Crammer, of Ottawa County, but when
they reached the field where the horses were feeding, they were met by
a sharp fire from the Spencer carbines, which killed and wounded six
men and two horses. As soon as the men could be mounted, pursuit was
made, but the enemy seemed quite unwilling to come within range of the
Spencer carbines again, and kept at a respectful distance.

It must be sufficient for many such matters to say that there was
constant scouting in pretty much all directions toward the Virginia
line. Reports were made of the approach of the enemy in larger or
smaller bodies, and in order to keep well informed and ready for any
emergency, it was necessary to keep scouting parties out all the time.
On July 31st orders were received by Colonel Trowbridge to take 250 men
and go up the country to destroy bridges on the Wautauga and Holston
Rivers. Major Smith went up with three companies from Knoxville to
join the expedition. At Morristown they met Major Arnold’s battalion
of rebel cavalry. Major Smith, with one battalion, immediately charged
them and drove them through the town and up the road to Russellville,
where Major Smith was detached with one battalion to get in their rear
at Bull’s Gap, but they succeeded in getting away by taking the Snapp’s
Ferry road. The Tenth then moved on to Greenville, where it being
evident that the attempt to destroy the bridges would be fruitless, the
command returned to Strawberry Plains, where it arrived on the 5th of
August. On that day Colonel Foote went home on leave of absence, and
on the 10th word was received of the acceptance of his resignation.
Exciting rumors continued to come in of the proximity of large bodies
of confederate cavalry, and their threatening attitude, which caused
work on the defenses at Strawberry Plains to be pushed with the
greatest vigor, although it is doubtful if anyone really apprehended
a serious attack. It is easy to be deceived, and so in order to be
well prepared for such an event, work was rushed and scouting parties
sent out in every direction where a confederate force was reported. An
indented line of rifle pits had been run from the fort to the railroad,
and strengthened by piling up railroad ties. On the 17th of August
General Joe Wheeler, of Hood’s Army, and later of much repute in the
Spanish-American war, was reported to have cut the railroad at Athens,
and was approaching with his corps of cavalry, with several batteries
of artillery. It seems that, wishing to get into Middle Tennessee, to
cut up the communications of Sherman’s Army, he was obliged to go above
Knoxville, in order to cross the Holston River, there being no fords
below Knoxville, and the ferries all being in possession of the Union
troops. On the same day there arrived at Strawberry Plains from Middle
Tennessee a brigade of three regiments of cavalry, under command of
General A. C. Gillem. These regiments were well armed and splendidly
mounted, having had their pick of horses from the well stocked
farms of Middle Tennessee. General Gillem claimed to have a command
independent of the officers at Knoxville, and to have been sent to
East Tennessee at the urgent request of Andrew Johnson, then Military
Governor of Tennessee, to rid that section of the state of the presence
of confederate troops. Colonel Trowbridge was ordered to report to him
with every available man that could be mustered in his regiment. Such
a force judiciously handled in contesting the fords of the Holston,
hanging on the flanks of Wheeler’s command, and attacking whenever and
wherever opportunity offered, could have greatly impeded the march of
Wheeler, and doubtless could have picked up many prisoners. Instead of
that course, however, General Gillem decided to go towards Virginia,
and on the 19th moved to New Market, with the Tenth in advance. An
incident occurred on this march which tested the steadiness of the
regiment in a new and unexpected manner. The command stopped at a small
stream to water. Company A, under Lieutenant Converse, was in the
advance of the column, with two companies under the command of Captain
Sears a mile or so further in advance as an advance guard. The General,
with his staff and an escort of two full companies, had moved out after
watering. Co. A had finished watering, and the Colonel, after giving
directions how to hasten the watering, went to the head of the column,
when back from the front in a wild race came the General with his
staff, orderlies and escort, wildly shouting, “I’m ruined, I’m ruined,
I’m ruined--they are right on us, they are right on us,” and went
galloping back to the rear, apparently very much in a panic. It would
not have been remarkable if the panic had communicated to the rest of
the command, but the voice of the Colonel rang out clear and strong,
“Steady, Co. A, draw sabre, forward, trot, march.” If there had been
any fear of a panic it was over, and the regiment trotted on to the
advance guard, only to learn that the alarm was without any foundation
in fact. But the Tenth had a chance to show its nerve, and it showed
it. On the 23rd Giltner’s brigade was met at Blue Springs, and a sharp
fight ensued, in which six men in Co. A and one in Co. L were wounded,
three of whom died. The enemy was dislodged from a strong position,
pursued for several miles and driven in confusion through Greenville.
Instead of following the enemy up, the command was switched over to
Rogersville, and for several days nothing was done worthy of note
except to march down to Bean’s Station to keep away from Wheeler, when
it was learned that Wheeler had gone into Middle Tennessee. Colonel
Trowbridge was sent to camp by General Gillem on some duty, leaving
Major Newell in command.

While the Colonel was away occurred an affair reflecting great credit
on the regiment and all the officers concerned, and worthy of a more
extended notice than the writer can give it by reason of lack of
authentic information on the subject. He cannot recall that any written
report was made at the time, of the part taken by the regiment, and he
has endeavored by correspondence and otherwise to get at the facts.
While the different accounts agree as to the principal facts, they
differ widely in matters of detail.

Mrs. Joe Williams, a loyal woman of Greenville, rode one dark night
to General Gillem’s camp at Bull’s Gap and notified the General of
the presence at Greenville, eighteen miles away, of General John H.
Morgan and his command. It was a very dark and stormy night, the 4th
of September. Gillem moved out with his command, with the 10th Michigan
in the advance. They struck the pickets of Vaughn’s brigade at Copper
Ridge a few miles west of Greenville. They captured the first picket
post, and moved on the second, when Vaughn’s brigade opened fire on
them from behind Copper Ridge. Major Newell dismounted and deployed
the advance battalion under Captain Light, and followed the enemy
towards Greenville. There was more or less firing on the way, and it
seems strange that it did not arouse the force in Greenville. A story
was current at the time that General Morgan had given orders the night
before to have all the fire arms discharged at daylight, and when
the firing was heard it was supposed to be only the result of that
order. At all events, when the 9th Tennessee and the 10th Michigan
charged into town, the enemy was in no condition to resist,--some were
getting their breakfasts, others cleaning up their equipment, and all
unprepared for an attack. The 12th Tennessee under Colonel Miller had
gone around to the east of the town to come in on the flank and rear of
the enemy. General Morgan and staff were at the house of Mrs. Williams,
the mother-in-law of the woman who had carried the information to
General Gillem at Bull’s Gap. The men of the 9th Tennessee learning
that fact surrounded the house. Morgan ran out of the rear door,
seeking to escape by hiding in a grape arbor. He was seen by a
member of the 9th Tennessee, who ordered him to halt, and upon his
disregarding the order, he was shot and killed. His staff, among whom
was a grandson of Henry Clay, 100 prisoners and 6 pieces of artillery
were captured.

In this fight the 10th did its full share, and great credit is due to
Major Newell for the coolness and skill with which he handled his men,
as well as to the officers and men of his command for the promptness
and zeal with which they executed his orders.

When Colonel Trowbridge reported to General Gillem for duty, he took
with him every man from Strawberry Plains who was fit for duty, leaving
behind 125 men who were convalescent, blacksmiths, horse farriers, and
other special duty men. There was also in the fort which the regiment
had constructed a section of a field battery of light artillery,
Colvin’s Illinois Battery. While the regiment was away Wheeler came
up with his cavalry corps of six thousand men and nine pieces of
artillery. Standish played a splendid game of bluff, blazing away
with his two field pieces as if he had a great sufficiency of men
stowed away somewhere. General Williams, commanding one of Wheeler’s
divisions, and known in the old army as Cerro Gordo Williams, was told
by some of the rebel citizens that there were no troops there, that
they had all gone up the country. He replied, “Oh, you can’t fool
me. Those Yankees are full of tricks. Those men wouldn’t be walking
about there so unconcerned if they hadn’t plenty of men to back them.”
Standish had sent a sergeant, Edward Drew, and seven men to guard
McMillan’s ford. One of the men, formerly a corporal, was disgruntled
at having been reduced to the ranks, and went off on his own hook, so
that only seven were left. One of them was a horse farrier of Co. B,
by the name of Alexander H. Griggs, of Wayne County. These seven men
actually kept back a rebel brigade from crossing at that ford for three
hours, and a half by desperate fighting--disabling more than fifty.
The rebels finally, by swimming the river above and below this little
party, and out of their sight, succeeded in surrounding and capturing
them all. During the fight Griggs was badly wounded. General Wheeler,
who crossed over with the brigade, was much impressed by the valor of
these men, and at once paroled a man to stay and take care of Griggs,
particularly cautioning him to take good care of him, as he was too
brave a man to be allowed to die. Approaching the wounded farrier, the
following dialogue is said to have taken place.

General Wheeler--Well, my man, how many men had you at this ford?

Griggs--Seven, sir.

Wheeler--My poor fellow, don’t you know that you are badly wounded. You
might as well tell me the truth; you may not live long.

Griggs (indignantly)--I am telling you the truth, sir. We only had
seven men.

Wheeler (laughing)--Well, what did you expect to do?

Griggs--To keep you from crossing, sir.

Wheeler (greatly amused and laughing)--Well, why didn’t you do it?

Griggs--Why you see we did until you hit me, and that weakened our
forces so much that you were too much for us.

Wheeler was greatly amused, and turning to another prisoner (who
happened also to be a horse farrier--John Dunn, of Co. I), inquired
to what regiment they belonged. On being informed he said, “Are all
the Tenth Michigan Cavalry like you?” “Oh, no,” said Dunn, “we are the
poorest of the lot. We are mostly horse farriers and blacksmiths and
special duty men, and not much accustomed to fighting.” “Well,” said
Wheeler, “if I had 300 such men as you, I could march straight through
h--l.”

On the same day Major Smith, of the Tenth, was sent out from Knoxville
with seventy-two men, all the mounted force that could be mustered,
to scout in the direction of Strawberry Plains, and ascertain the
strength and position of the enemy. The authorities at Knoxville had
become a little anxious over the near approach of so large a body
of the enemy’s troops, for while the fortifications were extensive
and very strong, the garrison was sufficient to man them only very
inadequately. General Tillson therefore desired Major Smith to get
as much accurate information as possible. Accordingly the Major gave
orders to his advance guard, Sergeant Rounsville and ten men, to charge
the first body of the enemy that they should meet, regardless of its
strength. Two and a half miles from Flat Creek bridge the enemy was
discovered and charged by the advance guard in gallant style, the Major
following up with his command. The enemy proved to be the Eighth Texas
Cavalry, 400 strong. Major Smith routed them completely, capturing
their commanding officer, a Lieutenant Colonel, and thirty or forty
prisoners. Thinking that he could capture the whole party before they
could recross the Holston River, he pursued them at full gallop until
he came to Flat Creek bridge. Over this he dashed, to find himself
confronted by Hume’s entire division of cavalry drawn up in line of
battle, scarcely 300 yards from the bridge. Of course he was obliged
to retire, and the pursuit was the other way. All his prisoners were
recaptured, and about one-half of his men, but he obtained a good deal
of information. The officers, among whom were Lieutenants Barr and
Weatherwax, and men were paroled after having been stripped of their
boots and shoes and much of their clothing, and being obliged to walk
barefoot over the rough and stony roads for more than twenty-five
miles. They were so used up by their ill-treatment as to be unfit for
duty for a considerable time.

September 4th Lieutenant Colonel Trowbridge received his commission as
Colonel.

On the 5th General Gillem was ordered to send the Tenth back to
Strawberry Plains, but refused to do so. On that day Colonel
Trowbridge, Major Smith and Captain Thomas, of General Carter’s staff,
were appointed commissioners to negotiate for the exchange of citizen
prisoners, and went up to Greenville to meet the rebel commissioners.
After several days’ delay waiting for them a meeting was held on the
11th and 12th, but could accomplish nothing, as they had no lists, and
adjourned to meet at Danbridge October 1st.

The regiment returned to Strawberry Plains, but nothing worthy of note
occurred until the 15th, when the regiment was ordered out with General
Tillson and about 850 infantry to intercept a large force on the other
side of Clinch River, said to be four brigades of Wheeler’s cavalry
going to Virginia from Middle Tennessee. The movement to intercept them
was too late, however, as they had all passed Walker’s Ford before the
Tenth reached there. On the 21st Colonel Trowbridge was ordered to move
to Bull’s Gap, which he reached on the 23rd, and reported to General
Ammen. The joint command of Generals Gillem and Ammen marched toward
Carter’s Station. At Jonesboro, on the 29th, the rebel commissioners
were met on their way to Danbridge, under flag of truce. Colonel
Trowbridge was directed to return with them, and turned the command
of the regiment over to Major Newell, who gained for the regiment
fresh laurels and the hearty commendation of General Ammen for their
steadiness and gallant conduct in a stubborn fight at Carter’s Station
the next day, when the enemy was driven from his position.

October 9th a party of 75 men, under Lieutenant Sherman, a loyal and
gallant officer from Virginia, of Co. M, was sent out by General Ammen
to find a band of guerillas under Hipshir. Sherman’s party was led
into an ambush at Thorn Hill, and lost 1 man killed, 4 wounded and 15
captured.

On the 13th Colonel Trowbridge was ordered to Michigan to hurry forward
a large number of men who were said to have been enlisted for the
regiment, and were awaiting transportation. The command devolved upon
Major Newell. Nothing of unusual interest occurred beyond the usual
scouting until the 12th of November, when occurred a series of actions
worthy of careful notice. General Gillem had remained at Bull’s Gap
with his brigade without any good reason apparent. There was nothing in
particular to be defended there, and the position was easily turned.
General Breckenridge was coming down from Virginia with quite a little
army, larger than the one with which General Taylor fought the battle
of Buena Vista. He had several thousand infantry, under the command of
General John B. Palmer, formerly of Detroit, about 1,500 cavalry, under
Basil Duke, an experienced officer from Kentucky, and a full complement
of artillery. Undoubtedly his object was to capture Knoxville, and in
that way relieve the pressure at other points. The movement excited
much interest, and aroused much apprehension in the minds of those
charged with responsibility for affairs in that region, as was shown
by dispatches between the Secretary of War and Generals Thomas and
Ammen. General Gillem remained at Bull’s Gap until nearly surrounded
by General Duke’s cavalry, and then attempted to withdraw. In doing so
he seemed to have lost his head, and much confusion followed. In answer
to appeals for reinforcement, Major Smith of the Tenth was sent up by
train from Knoxville with one hundred men of the Tenth dismounted, and
one hundred men of Kirk’s North Carolina regiment to Morristown. There
they disembarked and formed, Major Smith on the right of the railroad
and Kirk on the left. When Smith arrived panic and confusion reigned
supreme in Gillem’s command. That officer, for reasons best known to
himself, had gathered together a few officers and twenty or thirty
men, abandoned his command, and taken the shortest route through the
woods for Knoxville, where he safely arrived the next day. The officers
and men of his command, being deserted by their commanding officer,
naturally thought that everything was lost, and the only safety was
in flight. There was one notable exception, brave and gallant Colonel
Miller, with his sturdy regiment, the Thirteenth Tennessee, seeing
no hope of any successful resistance to Duke’s victorious legions,
wisely withdrew to the north side of the river and escaped the rout.
The other regiments were streaming past Smith in wildest confusion,
hotly pursued by the enemy. The captain of the battery of six Parrott
guns, a brave and gallant officer, whose name is not recalled, seeing
Smith in position, thought he would be supported in making a fight,
and took position some little distance in the rear. Smith sent him
word by two or three mounted men not to stop, but to keep on down the
road. He did not get the order. Smith, having cautioned his men not to
fire until the order was given, waited until he thought the last of
Gillem’s men had passed, and the enemy was within a few rods when his
challenge rang out clear and strong, “Halt! Who comes there?” “Johnny
rebs” was the quick response. Then, “Ready, aim, fire,” and the Spencer
carbines belched forth their fiery blast. It was reported that those
volleys killed seven officers and thirty men, and doubtless wounded
many more. The effect of the sudden and unexpected shock was tremendous
and most stunning. The enemy broke and fled in the greatest alarm. A
Colonel commanding one of Duke’s brigades told the writer afterwards
that he was in the rear that night, and that if those volleys had been
followed up by a charge of a single squadron of cavalry, the whole of
Duke’s command would have been thrown into a panic. As it was, they
came pouring back upon him in the greatest confusion. But there was
no squadron to make the charge. Smith, seeing that with the confusion
of Gillem’s command, it would be hopeless for him to contend against
such overwhelming odds, and doubtless supposing, too, that the check
which the enemy had received would enable the balance of Gillem’s men
to make their escape, wisely drew off into some timber and quietly
withdrew, and after an all-night’s march brought his men safely into
camp the next day at Strawberry Plains. After recovery from the shock
of their bloody repulse, the enemy advanced again and captured the
battery and wagon train. The most of Gillem’s remaining force, however,
made good their escape, with the loss of about 300 prisoners. There
is no doubt that except for the timely arrival of Smith and his men
of the Tenth, and the bloody check which they administered with their
Spencer carbines, the bulk of Gillem’s force, or of two regiments
of it, would have been captured, for up to that time the enemy had
had things all their own way. This fight occurred on Sunday night.
On the following Tuesday morning Colonel Trowbridge returned and
found Major Newell calmly awaiting Breckenridge’s approach, keeping
well informed of his movements by frequent scouting parties. Colonel
Trowbridge kept Generals Tillson and Ammen at Knoxville well informed,
and suggested that, if it was considered important to hold the post,
it would be well to send up some reinforcements. General Gillem heard
of the suggestion and stoutly protested against it, as the post was
certain to be captured, and sending any reinforcements would be just
throwing the men away. General Tillson, however, sent up two companies
of Ohio Heavy Artillery, acting as infantry, which brought the force
at Strawberry Plains, including hundred days’ men, scouts and a small
battalion of Kentucky cavalry that had happened to stop there, up to
about 700 men--besides a section of an Illinois field battery, under
Captain Wood, which was in the fort of which mention has been made. Two
hundred of the Tenth had been sent to Kentucky for horses and had not
returned. Scouting parties were kept out on both sides of the river
Tuesday and Wednesday, and Wednesday night it was thought that an
attack would be made in the morning, and the men were ordered to sleep
on their arms in the trenches. The next morning the enemy opened with
three guns from College Hill, and drew a prompt response from Wood, who
had the hill covered with his guns. At the same time a strong skirmish
line was thrown out to the rear, which developed the enemy about a mile
from the camp. A brisk fight was kept up with that portion of the enemy
all the forenoon, while an equally sharp fight was maintained with the
enemy across the river, both artillery and infantry. About half past
three the force in the rear was seen to be moving away up the river.
Undoubtedly the hot reception which they had met at Morristown had made
them cautious about coming near the Spencer carbines. Breckenridge
remained in the vicinity for several days, when he withdrew, and the
fear of the capture of Knoxville was relieved. Should inquiry be made
why the conduct of General Gillem was not officially investigated,
it might be answered that he had in Governor Johnson a very warm
and powerful friend, and the influence of personal and political
considerations was so great as to make the institution and prosecution
of charges a matter of extreme difficulty. No one familiar with the
facts seemed to be willing to take the responsibility of pressing an
investigation.

On December 6th, the regiment broke camp permanently and moved to
Knoxville to refit. On December 10th Captain Roberts, with 50 men,
was sent as an escort to General Stoneman, in command of Gillem’s and
Burbridge’s Cavalry, on an expedition to the Salt Works in Southwestern
Virginia. The regiment remained at Knoxville engaged in the affairs
of the camp, until March 20th, 1865. During this time some changes
had occurred. Lieutenant Colonel Trowbridge had been promoted to be
Colonel; Major Smith to be Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain Standish to
be Major. But these officers could not muster in their new grades by
reason of the paucity in numbers. An order was received from Washington
to send an officer and six men to Michigan on recruiting service.
Captain Light was selected for that service, which he discharged with
his accustomed energy and zeal, and the ranks were filled.

On the 20th of January Lieutenant Colonel Trowbridge was appointed
Provost Marshal General of East Tennessee, to relieve General S. P.
Carter. Major Newell, having mustered out, the command of the regiment
devolved on Major Standish. Colonel Trowbridge remained in the position
of Provost Marshal General until March 20th, when he was relieved
at his own request to take command of the regiment on an important
expedition organized by General Stoneman, who had come to Knoxville
to take command of the cavalry in Kentucky and East Tennessee, and to
organize an expedition into Virginia. General Grant, with his great
foresight, anticipating, as a possibility, that General Lee, when
driven out of Richmond, might attempt to retire into the mountainous
and easily defensible regions of South Western Virginia and East
Tennessee, determined to send an expedition to destroy as much as
possible of the railroad running to the southwest by way of Lynchburg.
That was the Stoneman expedition of which the Tenth Michigan was a
part. It consisted of three brigades and one field battery. It left
Knoxville on March 20th and moved to Jonesboro. On the 26th there was
an issue of rations for eight days, the last regular issue for nearly
two months. The destination was kept very secret. In order to deceive
the enemy, one brigade was sent to Bristol, to draw the attention of
the enemy in that direction, afterwards rejoining the column as it
crossed the mountains, while the other two brigades struck directly
across the mountains to Wilkesboro, North Carolina. The appearance of
a large body of cavalry in Western North Carolina, threatening both
Salisbury and Greensboro, must have been somewhat disturbing to the
confederate authorities. It was reported that troops were hurried to
both of those places in anticipation of an attack. After waiting a
few days for the subsidence of a freshet in the Yadkin River, and
incidentally for its presence to be fully felt, the command turned
square off to the north to strike the railroad. Five hundred picked
men of the Tennessee brigade, under Colonel Miller, were sent to
Wytheville. A battalion of the Fifteenth Pennsylvania, under Major
Wagner, was sent to the immediate vicinity of Lynchburg, while the
main body, by a rapid march, moved to Christiansburg, arriving there
April 4th about midnight. The Tenth was immediately sent about 20
miles east to destroy six railroad bridges over the Roanoke River,
which was thoroughly accomplished. While engaged in the work at Big
Spring, Colonel Trowbridge found a Lynchburg paper of the day before
containing an account of the fall of Richmond. He immediately sent
it to General Stoneman at Christiansburg, and thus was the first to
convey intelligence of that important event. After resting at Salem
the 5th and 6th, he received orders at 1 a. m. of the 7th to move by
the shortest and best route to Rocky Mount, thence to Martinsville,
or Henry Court House, to be there by 9 o’clock on the morning of the
8th, and there await the balance of the brigade, which was to move by a
different route. The distance was 75 miles. The regiment moved at 4 a.
m., and by a forced night march reached Henry Court House about 7 a. m.
of the 8th, to find it occupied by about 500 of Wheeler’s cavalry, said
to be a regiment commanded by Colonel Wheeler, a brother of General
Joe Wheeler. The regiment was encamped about a mile from the town, in
a piece of woods, leaving a picket post in the town. Captain James H.
Cummins, commanding the leading battalion, immediately charged and
routed the party in the town, and drove them back on the main body.
The noise of the firing aroused the main body, which quickly saddled
and formed, and when Cummins reached them they were in line of battle.
Nothing could restrain the Tenth, however, and they attacked with
vigor, and the enemy was driven out of the woods. They mainly took
refuge in a deep depression so common at the South, and there, huddled
together, they formed an excellent target for the Spencer carbines of
Captain Dunn and his plucky boys. The casualties of the enemy were
reported as 27 killed. How many were wounded was not learned. The fight
was not without loss to the Tenth. Lieutenant Kenyon, a gallant young
officer, who had been promoted but not mustered, and four men were
killed, and Lieutenant Field, a brave and gallant officer, and three
men were wounded. As the regiment was ordered to remain there until
the balance of the brigade came up, the men were drawn in and placed
in the most available positions for defense in case they should be
attacked, and then waited the balance of the brigade until 3 o’clock
in the afternoon. The next day the command started for Germantown
and Salem. General Stoneman, with two brigades, crossed the Yadkin
at Shallow Ford and moved on Salisbury. The Tenth was sent to burn
bridges on the railroad between Greensboro and Salisbury. One battalion
under command of Captain J. H. Cummins was sent to High Point to
attract the attention of the enemy, if any there should be, in that
direction, while the other two battalions, under Colonel Trowbridge,
proceeded towards Lexington to burn some bridges over Abbott’s Creek.
Captain Cummins at High Point captured and destroyed a large amount
of Confederate Government property, four warehouses filled with
quartermaster and commissary stores, one woolen factory, one engine, 20
box cars, one baggage car, about $75,000 of medical stores and 7,000
bales of cotton.

Colonel Trowbridge wishing to get the bridges destroyed before
daylight, sent on Captain Roberts with two companies to go ahead at
a trot, while he followed more leisurely. It was an all-night march.
About half-past six, to his great surprise, he came on a party of the
enemy. All his information up to that time was to the effect that
there were no confederate troops in that section. They had all gone
to Greensboro to join General Beauregard. Such was the information,
but before him quietly in camp was Ferguson’s brigade of confederate
cavalry from Wheeler’s corps. His orders were, after destroying the
bridges, to proceed on the direct road to Salisbury to co-operate with
General Stoneman, who had gone to attack on the other side. But what
had become of the two companies which had passed over the same road
only a few hours before? And the bridges, what of them? Had Roberts
been able to destroy them, or had he been gathered in and left no sign?
It was a perplexing situation. Apparently the Confederates were quite
unaware of the approach of an enemy, and, with horses and men fresh, it
might be possible to stampede them by a sudden dash, but after a nearly
continuous march of more than twenty-four hours, neither horses nor men
were in good condition to make an aggressive fight against such large
odds, six companies against a brigade. Moreover, if it were possible
by any good fortune to drive the enemy, which was very doubtful, he
would simply go towards Salisbury, and make General Stoneman’s task
the harder. On the other hand if by falling back the enemy could be
drawn after and still kept at arm’s length, it was thought to be a
good move in this game of military chess, like capturing a bishop or
a knight at the expense of a pawn. These considerations quickly passed
through the mind of the commanding officer, and he decided to retire by
alternate squadrons. But he did not wish to begin the movement without
hearing from Captain Roberts, and so he placed his men in the best
positions available, threw a barricade across the road, behind which
he placed Captain Dunn with his reliable and plucky company. He had
scarcely completed his arrangements when Captain Roberts came in with
his two companies in good order, and reported that he had destroyed
two bridges. “But,” said he, “there is a large force about a mile
down the road.” Upon being asked how he knew, he said he had slipped
passed them on their flank, and could see the whole camp. He was quite
sure that besides the cavalry there was a good force of infantry.
The object of the expedition, the destruction of the bridges, having
been accomplished, the movement to retire by alternate squadrons was
explained, and without longer delay commenced. It was not long before
it was discovered, and the enemy attacked with great vigor. Then for
two hours ensued a remarkable fight, in which the officers and men of
the Tenth acquitted themselves with great credit. The enemy repeatedly
charged with great gallantry, and as he attempted to pass a column
around each flank, it became necessary to retire rapidly, but never
at any time was there the slightest evidence of uneasiness or panic.
The men wheeled out of line into column and into line again, when new
positions were reached with the same coolness and precision as if on
the parade ground and no enemy near. Their conduct was worthy of the
highest praise. Strange as it may seem, the only losses in the Tenth
were two men captured during the night while trying to get some horses
out of a barn. From rebel newspapers, deserters and men who came in to
be paroled, it was learned that the losses of the enemy in killed and
wounded were between 75 and 100. Where all did so well, it may seem
invidious to mention any specially, and in the lapse of years some
names may have been lost sight of, but the following named officers
are distinctly remembered as worthy of special mention for their
coolness and courage: Major Standish, Captains Roberts, Dunn, Minihan,
Lieutenants Beech, Wild and Sergeant Dumont, commanding Co. D.

Upon rejoining the brigade at Salem the command moved to Shallow Ford
to join General Stoneman in his attack on Salisbury. On reaching the
South Fork of the Yadkin, about three miles from Salisbury, General
Stoneman was unable to cross. The stream, though narrow, was deep,
with high precipitous banks. It was spanned by a bridge, the planks of
which had been removed, and it was covered by artillery well supported.
General Stoneman, with his battery, tried to drive them away, but
could not succeed. After some delay he said to Major Smith, of the
Tenth, who was serving on his staff, “I want you to take 20 men of the
Tenth Michigan, with their Spencer carbines (he had an escort from the
Tenth), get across this stream in some way, and flank those fellows
out of there.” Smith got across on logs and fallen trees, and creeping
up on the flank of the rebels, delivered some rattling volleys from
his repeating carbines, when the whole force broke and fled. Stacey,
with his Tennesseeans, who had been waiting for the chance, quickly
relaid the planks on the bridge and charged across. The fight was over
in a very short time, and the city, with 900 prisoners, 19 pieces
of artillery and immense quantities of stores was captured. It was
estimated by General Gillem’s quartermaster that enough quartermaster
stores were destroyed to equip an army of 75,000 men. About midnight
of the 14th news was received at Statesville of the surrender of Lee’s
army. On the 17th the Tenth was sent to Newton to guard the fords of
the Catawba, and to gather in any stragglers from Lee’s army who were
seeking to get away without being paroled, being busy at that work
for several days. News of the assassination of President Lincoln was
received at Newton on the 23d. Then came the ill-judged armistice
between Generals Sherman and Johnson, and the division was ordered
to East Tennessee. When about fifteen miles from Ashville, an order
was received reciting that the armistice had been disapproved, and
directing General Palmer, commanding the division (Generals Stoneman
and Gillem having returned to East Tennessee) to return to the
Carolinas, and make sure by laying waste the country, if necessary,
that no supplies should reach General Johnson’s army from south or west
of the Catawba River. The Division returned, but before the work of
laying waste the country had begun, Johnson had surrendered, and that
painful necessity was avoided.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus ended what has been called the Stoneman Raid of 1865. It may
be safely said that no similar enterprise in the history of the war
accomplished so much of importance with so little public attention.
General Thomas, in his official report, said that no railroad was more
effectively dismantled than the road running to the southwest from
Lynchburg. For 125 miles substantially every bridge and trestle of any
importance had been destroyed, while several bridges on the Danville
road had met a similar fate. Large quantities of military supplies and
property of the Confederate Government had been captured and destroyed
at High Point and Salisbury. That it attracted no more attention ought
not to be wondered at under the circumstances. With Farragut and Canby
knocking at the gates of Mobile, with Wilson and his splendid army of
cavalry sweeping over the states of Mississippi, Alabama and Georgia,
with Sherman striding like a giant through the Carolinas, and Grant
tightening his relentless grip on the army of Northern Virginia, it
was not strange that a small division of cavalry in Virginia and North
Carolina, away from the scenes of great achievements, should attract
but a small degree of public attention. In all the operations of the
division, the Tenth Michigan Cavalry bore a conspicuous part.

On the 29th an order was received from the Secretary of War reciting
that Jefferson Davis and his Cabinet, with a large amount of treasure
(estimated at $6,000,000.00 in coin), with a large escort of cavalry,
was making his way to the southwest, and directing the commanding
officer to spare neither men nor horses, but to pursue him to the ends
of the earth if necessary, and to obey no orders except such as should
come directly from the Secretary of War. Mr. Davis and his party,
with an escort of 6,000 cavalry, had been reported two days before at
Yorkville, two days’ march in advance. By making a wide detour and a
rapid march, the Division was thrown across his front on his line of
march. All the commands of the escort had been embraced in the terms
of surrender of Lee’s and Johnson’s armies, and consequently were
not in condition to do any more fighting. When they found further
progress disputed by an armed force, they broke up into small parties
and scattered in different directions for their homes. Many of these
small parties reported having Mr. Davis with them, so that according
to apparently very reliable authorities Mr. Davis was reported in
many different places in many different directions at the same time.
The plan of the pursuers was to occupy all the roads running to the
west, and all the fords and ferries on the rivers, and this was done
for a distance of probably one hundred and fifty miles from north to
south. It was while trying to avoid these forces as well as General
Wilson’s cavalry at Macon by a wide detour to the south of Macon,
that he was captured by the Fourth Michigan Cavalry near Irwinsville.
While the Tenth had no part in the capture itself, there is no doubt
that the close watch they kept by scouting parties on the roads,
bridges, fords and ferries, contributed very largely to the result. The
capture, however, was not known for several days at General Palmer’s
headquarters, and the Tenth was ordered to move to McDonough and guard
the road from there to Sandtown. At McDonough orders were received to
move to the west side of the Coosa River in Alabama, and there take up
a line as had been done in Georgia. At Newnan, May 13th, it was learned
that the railroad and telegraph lines were opened to Atlanta, and a
halt was made to get rations and forage, the first regular rations that
the men had received since the issue of March 26th in East Tennessee.
While waiting for them information was received by telegraph from
Atlanta that Mr. Davis had been captured, and passed through Atlanta
for Savannah under good escort. This information was at once sent to
General Palmer, in the hope that it would soon be followed by an order
to return to East Tennessee, but Division Headquarters were about 100
miles away toward the north, and it necessarily took some time to
reach there, and a long and tiresome march through a sparsely settled
country, affording scant provender for men and horses, was unavoidable.
But there is an end to all disagreeable experiences, and there was
an end to this pursuit of President Davis, whom we knew to have been
captured, and the Tenth returned to East Tennessee on the 31st day of
May, having marched not less than 1,800 miles in the enemy’s country,
without any base of supplies, living on the country, except for the
few days’ rations received from Atlanta, for 58 days, counting from
the end of the eight days for which rations were issued on the 26th of
March. Much to the disappointment of the men, the regiment was not to
be mustered out at once. There was a reorganization of the Division at
Linoir Station. Colonel Trowbridge was assigned to the command of the
First Brigade, and Major Standish to the regiment, Lieutenant Colonel
Smith being still on staff duty at Headquarters in Knoxville. This
assignment continued at Linoir Station and Sweetwater until the latter
part of August, when the Tenth was ordered to Jackson, West Tennessee.
Colonel Trowbridge’s term of enlistment would expire on the 1st of
September, and he thought as the war was over it would be but fair for
him to muster out, and thus make possible a promotion in each grade. By
permission he remained at Knoxville until he mustered out on September
1st. On August 24th the regiment, under command of Lieutenant Colonel
Smith, left for Jackson, West Tennessee. Captain Light had returned,
having had great success in recruiting, and the ranks were full enough
to permit promotion and muster in all the grades. The regiment remained
in West Tennessee until the latter part of October, when it was ordered
to Jackson, Mich., where on November--it was finally mustered out and
paid off.

In the short space allowed for this general history, it has not
been practicable to mention in detail all the engagements in which
detachments of the regiment participated, and only the more important
ones are selected for special mention. The monthly returns of the
regiment show that some portions of it came in contact with the enemy
on the following occasions:

At House Mountain, Tenn., Jan., 1864; Bean’s Station, March 27 and
June 14, 1864; Powder Spring Gap, Tenn., March 28, 1864; Rheatown,
Tenn., April 24, 1864; Jonesboro, Tenn., April 25 and Sept. 30, 1864;
Johnsonville, Tenn., April 25, 1864; Wautauga, Tenn., April 25, 26 and
Oct. 1 and 2, 1864; Dandridge, Tenn., May 19, 1864; Greenville, Tenn.,
May 30, Aug. 3 and 23 and Sept. 4, 1864; White House, Tenn., May 31,
1864; Morristown, Tenn., June 2, Aug. 2, Nov. 13, 1864; Rogersville,
Tenn., June 15, 1864; Kingsport, Tenn., June 16, 1864; Blountsville,
June 16, 1864; Cany Branch, Tenn., June 18, 1864; New Market, June
19, 1864; Mooresburg, June 25, 1864; Williams’ Ford, June 25, 1864;
Dutch Bottom, June 28, 1864; Seviersville, July 5, 1864; Newport,
July 8, 1864; Mossy Creek, Aug. 18, 1864; Bull’s Gap, Aug. 21 and 29,
1864; Blue Spring, Aug. 23, 1864; Flat Creek Bridge, Aug. 24, 1864;
Rogersville, Aug. 27, 1864; Sweet Water, Sept. 10, 1864; Thorn Hill,
Sept. 10, 1864; Seviersville, Sept. 18, 1864; Johnson’s Station, Oct.
1, 1864; Thorn Hill, Oct. 10, 1864; Chucky Bend, Oct. 10, 1864;
Newport, Oct. 18, 1864; Irish Bottoms, Oct. 25, 1864; Madisonville,
Oct. 30, 1864; Morristown, Nov. 13, 1864; Strawberry Plains, Aug. 24,
Nov. 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21, 1864; Kingsport, Dec. 12, 1864; Bristol,
Dec. 14, 1864; Saltville, Dec. 20, 1864; Chucky Bend, Jan. 10, 1865;
Brabson’s Mills, March 25, 1865; Booneville, N. C., March 27, 1865;
Henry C. H., N. C., April 8, 1865; Abbott’s Creek, N. C., April 10,
1865; High Point, N. C., April 10, 1865; Statesville, N. C., April 14,
1865; Newton, N. C., April 17, 1865.

The writer of this short history himself a companion in nearly all
the hardships, dangers and successes of the Tenth Michigan Cavalry,
desires to put on record his high appreciation of the courage,
patient endurance and conspicuous gallantry by which it established
and maintained to the end a high reputation. Whether acting on the
defensive, as at Strawberry Plains, Morristown, McMillan’s Ford
and Abbott’s Creek, or on the offensive, as at Carter’s Station,
Morristown, Blue Springs, Greenville, Bean’s Station, Rogersville, Flat
Creek and Henry Court House, it was always the same cool, courageous
and reliable body of citizen soldiers, never seeking to provoke useless
or unnecessary fighting, and never declining or seeking to avoid in
any way a fight where fighting was the thing to be done. It is and
ever will be a source of profound satisfaction that he was permitted
to serve with such a manly, resolute, courageous and patriotic body
of men. He rejoices with them in their enviable record of hardships
patiently endured, dangers bravely met and victories nobly won.

                                      L. S. TROWBRIDGE,
                                        Colonel 10th Mich. Cavalry.

[Illustration: REUNION OF THE TENTH MICHIGAN CAVALRY AT THE HOME OF
GENERAL L. S. TROWBRIDGE, AT DETROIT, AT THE TIME OF THE NATIONAL
ENCAMPMENT OF THE G. A. R., AUGUST 5TH, 1891.]




    Total enrollment                             1,886
    Killed in action                                13
    Died of wounds                                  12
    Died in confederate prisons                     11
    Died of disease                                121
    Discharged for disability (wounds or disease)   80




[Illustration: OFFICERS OF THE TENTH MICHIGAN CAVALRY

Col. Thaddeus Foote

Col. and Bvt. Maj. Gen. Luther S. Trowbridge

Col. and Bvt. Brig. Gen. Israel C. Smith

Major Cicero Newell

Lt. Col. and Bvt. Col. John H. Standish

Major Wesley Armstrong

Major Peter N. Cook

Major Harvey E. Light

1st Lieut. and Adjt. Charles E. Soule

Major Henry W. Sears

1st Lieut. and Brevet Capt. Adjt. Charles W. Watkins

1st Lt. and Adjt. William T. Merritt

1st Lt. and R. Q. M. Oliver N. Taylor

1st Lt. and R. Q. M. Alphonso A. Maxim, Jr.

1st Lt. and R. C. S. Don A. Dodge

1st Lt. and R. C. S. Wallace W. Dickinson

Surg. David C. Spaulding

1st Asst. Surg. Charles W. Leonard

1st Asst. Surg. William D. Scott

2nd Asst. Surg. Thomas Shaw

Chaplain Henry Cherry

Capt. and Bvt. Lt. Col. Edwin J. Brooks

Capt. and Bvt. Maj. James H. Cummins

Capt. and Bvt. Maj. William H. Dunn

Capt. Ben. K. Weatherwax

Capt. Stephen V. Thomas

Capt. George M. Farnham

Capt. James B. Roberts

Capt. Ambrose L. Soule

Capt. William E. Cummin

Capt. Rhoderick L. Bryan

Capt. Sam T. Bryan, Jr.

Capt. James Minihan

Capt. Myron A. Converse

Capt. B. Frank Sherman

Capt. Amos T. Ayers

Capt. Enos B. Bailey

Capt. Edgar P. Byerley

Capt. Elliot F. Covall

Capt. Andrew J. Itsell

Capt. Chauncey F. Shepard

Capt. James L. Smith

Capt. Archibald Stevenson

1st Lt. Adam R. Insley

1st Lt. Fred. N. Field

1st Lt. Edmund G. Fechet

1st Lt. Rodney W. Beach

1st Lt. John L. Wild

1st Lt. Alfred A. Garlock

1st Lt. Robert G. Barr

1st Lt. Lord W. Hinman

1st Lt. John R. Bennett

1st Lt. Jesup Morehouse

1st Lt. George W. French

1st Lt. Sam W. Harback

1st Lt. Nelson Robinson, Jr.

2nd Lt. Sidney Walters

2nd Lt. Thomas Kenyon

2nd Lt. John H. Starkweather

2nd Lt. Persons H. Brace

2nd Lt. Jacob Weatherwax

2nd Lt. Henry Stone

2nd Lt. Lucian A. Chase

2nd Lt. Sam White, Jr.

2nd Lt. Walter A. Palmer

2nd Lt. Edwin A. Botsford

2nd Lt. Emory J. Blanding

2nd Lt. William E. Smith

2nd Lt. Henry L. Covell

2nd Lt. Charles H. Dumont

2nd Lt. Charles Watson

2nd Lt. John Spears

2nd Lt. Samuel N. Eddie

2nd Lt. John Q. H. Cook

2nd Lt. Adoniram J. Cole

2nd Lt. Jeremiah W. Boynton

2nd Lt. William Yerrington

Sergt. Maj. Loren S. Rounseville

Hospital Steward James Cilley

Hospital Steward Hiram C. Luce

Chief Musician Christopher Rawling

Veterinary Surg. Chas. E. Robinson

Saddler Sergt. Isaac W. Kendrick

R. Q. M. Sergt. Henry M. Cronkite

R. C. S. Sergt. Ezra Dowd]




[Illustration:

                                   MAP

                    Showing Theatre of Operations of
                        THE 10ᵀᴴ MICHIGAN CAVALRY
                               IN 1864-65.

                 _Drawn under the personal direction of
                        General L.S. Trowbridge,
                          by F. C. Leesemann._]




Transcriber’s Note:

Words and phrases in italics are surrounded by underscores, _like
this_. Final stops missing at the end of abbreviations were added. Five
misspelled words were corrected. The word “the” was changed to “be” in
the phrase “... to be pushed with ...” Illustrations of the Officers of
the Tenth Michigan Cavalry were consolidated under a single title and
moved to the end of the book, preceding the map.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE TENTH MICHIGAN CAVALRY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


