The Project Gutenberg eBook of An historical sketch of the First Hillsboro Baptist Church
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: An historical sketch of the First Hillsboro Baptist Church

Author: W. Camp

Release date: March 13, 2025 [eBook #75602]

Language: English

Original publication: St. John, N.B: s.n, 1893

Credits: George A. Rawlyk Library, Crandall University, produced from scans generously made available by the Internet Archive.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE FIRST HILLSBORO BAPTIST CHURCH ***

AN HISTORICAL SKETCH
OF THE
FIRST HILLSBORO BAPTIST CHURCH

Read before the N. B. Eastern Association, July, 1893, and published
by request of that body.

In May, 1763, a few years after the taking of Quebec by the English
and in the same year in which the “Treaty of Paris,” was signed at
Paris, which marked the close of “The Seven Years’ War,” six German
families left Pennsylvania to settle somewhere in a northern climate.
“They sailed in a sloop commanded by Capt. Hall. After a long and
wearisome passage, they arrived at a place now called Hillsboro, July
1, and landed at a small creek on the north side of Gray’s island.”

Among these adventurers was a family by the name of Steeves. Hendrick
Steeves and his wife, Rachel, had seven sons—Jacob, John, Christian,
Frederick, Lutrick, Henry and Matthias—names still cherished among
the Steeves and given to present generations.

Mr. and Mrs. Hendrick Steeves, with their seven sons, stopped at
Hillsboro, built a log house and made this their headquarters.

The sloop after landing the Steeves family, proceeded up the
Petitcodiac to a place afterwards called “The Bend,” and later
Moncton. Here the remainder of the party was landed. The names of
these families were Jones, Trites, Ricker, Lutz and Somers. After
this the sloop left on her homeward voyage promising to return the
next spring.

The Steeves family at Hillsboro began to clear land and make for
themselves a home. As the season was too late when they arrived to
sow grain they planted a few turnips, and contented themselves by
fishing and hunting and making preparations for the coming and
untried winter. When the winter came it was cold and stormy, and
seemed extremely severe to those accustomed to a warmer climate. They
looked forward to the coming of the spring with great hopefulness.
Soon the snow and ice began to melt, the forests were clothed in
green robes and June, with her warm and gentle breath stirred new
life in this lonely and discouraged family. Eagerly did they now look
for the returning sloop, but were doomed to disappointment. The
summer passed, the autumn with its beautifully tinted leaves came,
and the winter with its biting blasts returned, but no vessel arrived
to cheer these isolated settlers. After the first winter the most
trying times in their experience came. Their provisions were about
gone, and there was no place to procure more; the remainder of the
seed they brought with them they had just planted; and no vessel came
to supply their growing needs.

What they passed through the second summer and winter, hoping against
hope that the sloop would return; and then at last giving up all
hopes of her coming back. Manfully and heroically meeting the
difficulties which arose when they had only a few turnips and such
fish and game as they could procure—all this can be better imagined
than the stern facts can be recorded.

But meeting isolation, loneliness, cold winters and scarcity of food,
this noble family struggled on with a cheerfulness, a perseverance, a
hardihood and a heroism that characterize only the truly great. Such
manly conduct in the face of discouraging and trying surroundings
deserves a place in the history of the early settlers of this
province. And be it known that these pioneers building houses,
clearing lands and constructing dykes to keep out the Petitcodiac
from their marches did not toil without the inspiration of a preached
gospel. Henry Steeves, the sixth of the seven sons, began, about
1795, to preach the gospel to the people. Thus until the organization
of the church he kept alive in the hearts of those who came to hear
him the fires of faith and love towards Jesus, and made their lives
all the brighter and nobler by holding up to them the inspiring and
helpful life of Christ.

At the close of the Revolutionary War many of the troops came from
Fort Cumberland and settled along the Petitcodiac river. Among them
was a man by the name of Jacob Beck, known as the “king’s baker.”
Henry Steeves married Mr. Beck’s daughter and settled on his father’s
farm. He wrought with his hands six days of the week, tilling the
ground, and on the Sabbath read from his German Bible and expounded
the Word of God to his hearers. Thus until 1822 this man taught the
people the love of God in Christ. An old man now living informs the
writer that he, when a lad, heard Mr. Steeves speak to the people the
precious things of the gospel. There was a house of worship standing
on the same spot where now the village church stands. It was here
Henry Steeves preached or exhorted from Sabbath to Sabbath. Some time
after the First Hillsboro Baptist church was organized this building
was removed and came into the possession of the Methodists. Another
large building was put on the spot. This in time was removed and a
third still larger edifice built here. This is the present beautiful
structure which commands the old and memorable hill. Until the arrive
of Father Crandall, in 1822, Mr. Steeves was the only minister in
this neighborhood, save, perhaps, an occasional itinerant preacher.
Mr. Crandall, directed by God, visited what is now known as
Hillsboro. Shortly after his coming the Spirit of God began to move
upon the people.

Mr. Peter Janah, now an octogenarian, gives the writer a vivid
picture of a baptism which took place on the 6th of October, 1822. He
claims to have been present at the organization of the church. He was
then a boy of 18 years. On the banks of Weldon Creek, about three
miles from the village, there gathered, one Sabbath day, a few
settlers to witness the sacred ordinance of baptism administered to
several candidates. It was not the first baptism the people had seen.
There may have been one or two scenes like this before. What is now a
pleasant half hour’s drive amid beautiful trees and along beautifully
cultivated fields, and by neat and pretty houses, was then a tedious
journey over stumps and stones. And where now in Hillsboro and Salem
are large farms with delightful and pleasant homes then there were
isolated clearings with here and there a dwelling.

The octogenarian above referred to says that at this time,
seventy-one years ago, there were but five houses at the ‘Bend;’ and
from Edgett’s Landing to McLatchey’s in Weldon only fourteen houses.
But to return to the scene on the banks of the Weldon Creek. It was
the 6th of October, 1822. Rev. Joseph Crandall stood with several
happy converts who were about to follow their Saviour in His own
appointed ways. And there amid autumnal foliage, with God, and angels
and men as witnesses, this little band of believers put on Christ by
public obedience to His commands.

After this service was completed they went to a barn a short distance
from the spot and there organized the First Hillsboro Baptist church.
This barn was owned by Henry Steeves, grandson of the preacher and
one of the first deacons of the church. A man by the name of Robert
smith, a good singer, who was present from the Salisbury church and
whose home was in Pollet River, at Mr. Crandall’s request read the
articles of the Baptist faith: and those who were baptized that day,
together with others who had been baptized previously—perhaps ten or
twelve in all—formed themselves into a New Testament church. The name
of some of them were: Michael Steeves, Patrick Duffy, John Steeves,
Peggy Steeves, Jennie Gross, Vinnia Taylor, William Gross, Mrs. Peter
Hopper, and perhaps others.

Christ was born in a manger and cradled upon straw. If the barn was
not too low for the son of God it was not too mean and human a place
to witness the organization of a church His. What a quaint scene! On
the barn floor, surrounded by fragrant hay, solemn obligations were
assumed and sacred pledges given, which are now recorded in God’s
Books. One can imagine the love and affection which bound together
that little band of pioneer men and women, who could conquer the wild
forests and compel the earth to yield her increase, all the more
heroically and successfully by cherishing in their hearts the
religion of Christ and maintaining a visible church of our Redeemer
in their midst.

To the unconcerned this must have appeared as a delicate plant soon
to wither and die; but the sturdy nature of the pioneer was in the
organization, and it soon proved itself to be no “reed shaken in the
wind,” for toward Christmas this little band had grown to
seventy-seven—thirty-seven of these bearing the name of Steeves.

It is but fair to state that no church record has been preserved with
reference to the place of the organization of the Church, and that
some of the members hold that the tradition I have described and
verified from the memory of an old man is incorrect. Those who do not
think the church was organized at Salem believe the organized at
Salem believe the organization took place in the village in the first
building standing where now the village church stands.

The writer has presented what he believes to be the facts. It is
recorded that an association was held with this church the next
summer after its organization, i.e., in 1823. “In 1824 one of the
member, James Wallace, was licensed to preach. He had to improve his
talents without the aid of schools and colleges and with but a few
books. Towards the close of 1834 there seemed to be a subsiding of
the first enthusiasm. Doubtless the truth was penetrating beneath the
surface, effecting a work of which they were hardly conscious. Memory
says that the first deacons were Henry Steeves, David Steeves and
Elijah Milton. Joseph Steeves was clerk in 1824, and Isaac Gross was
appointed to that office in 1832.”

In 1834 Rev. Wm. Sears became pastor of the church, giving
three-fourths of his time. He had preached to the people before, but
now became their regular pastor. From 1834 to 1838 no remarkable
events occurred, but the work of God continued. Members were received
and baptized—not many at a time, but a few frequently. In 1840
Pastor Walker, from the Hopewell church, visited them. This sister
church was organized in 1818. After this visit the church seems to
have gained a new life. The country all about felt her influence. In
1841 a sister comes all the way from Middle Coverdale to confess her
Lord and to receive baptism. In 1848 Patrick Duffy was licensed to
preach. In 1844 James Wallace became pastor of this church. In 1845
William Gross was elected as a deacon of the church. For a few years
the church seems to have been in a depressed state. But in 1848
Alexander McDonald and John Francis arrived from Wales and for a time
preached and labored with good success. Many were converted, the work
extending to Baltimore. Among those converted at this time was James
Irving, who afterwards became a preacher of the gospel, and who for
some eighteen years held the pastorate of the Baltimore church,
leading many precious souls to Christ.

Little is known of the church’s prosperity from 1848 to 1860. These
are proofs, however, to show that this was not an uneventful period.
During these twelve years no less than three churches sprang from the
First Hillsboro. The Second Hillsboro was organized at Dawson
Settlement in 1852. The Third Hillsboro at Demoiselle Creek in 1855,
and the Fourth Hillsboro at Baltimore in 1857. Mr. James Newcomb, a
graduate of Acadia College, taught a high school and preached for the
churches of Hillsboro for some little times. Afterwards, in May,
1849, he and Patrick Duffy were ordained to the gospel ministry. Both
of these men did valiant work for God and died loved and honored by
all who came under their kind and Christian influence.

In 1852 Rev. John Hughes became pastor of this church. Before his
coming among the people the church was threatened with division.
Under his able and wise ministry the different opposing elements were
brought together and the work of the Lord carried forward with great
success. He remained until about 1861.

In 1860 steps were taken to provide for the first instrumental music.
Record is also made of a gracious revival during the winter of ’61,
when many souls were led to Christ as the result of special meetings.
No less than twelve ministers assisted in this work. The name Salem
was given to what was then called “The Back Settlement” in 1861.

In 1862 Rev. Levi Marshall had charge of the church for a short time.

In 1863 Rev. James Austen Smith accepted a call to this church, and
for four years continued his indefatigable labors with the people.
“During his ministry at Hillsboro, a revival of mighty power aroused
the church and called a large number to participate for the first
time in the blessings of redeeming love.” In the winter of 1863 this
revival took place, when there were added to the church 155 by
baptism and thirteen by letter, making in all 168—the largest
in-gathering at any one time during the history of this church. In
1865 the Salem house of worship was opened. About this time the
present edifice in the village was built—it being the third building
standing on this spot. In 1867 Rev. W. T. Corey was called as pastor
of the church. During his pastorate of some seven years, the village
church building was finished and dedicated. Mr. Corey’s pastorate was
a successful one. Many were added to the church and the Work of God
prospered.

It was during this pastorate that regular preaching services were
held in Weldon, where now there is an “upper room furnished” and set
apart for the worship of God, and where regular prayer and preaching
services are held.

In 1876 the Valley church, the fourth and last child, was organized.
A church building was already built in that part of Hillsboro, and
services had been held here. Now this became the home of one of the
most active churches in the county. And be it said with gratitude to
God, that these four daughters have, from the very first, maintained
a character worthy of a New Testament church. They have cherished the
pure gospel and built up a strong membership, and have done a work
for God that eternity alone will reveal. And so they have given their
mother church every reason to be grateful for their existence and
proud of their useful career. And now she looks upon them as loved
children who have grown up to womanhood and settled for themselves,
and rejoices that they have settled so well.

In 1878 Rev. C. B. Welton became the pastor of this church. During
his pastorate a large and burdensome debt was removed and many souls
added to the church.

In 1880 the convention of the Maritime Provinces was held in this
church. These meetings are still cherished in the memories of a large
part of the church members.

Rev. J. C. Bleakney was called to the pastorate in 1883. His stay,
though short, was one of great helpfulness to the cause. During the
summer of 1884 Evangelist Chubbuck visited Hillsboro and held special
services. Some eighty were converted and united with God’s people.

The present pastor, Rev. W. Camp, began his labors with the church
March, 1886. During these past seven years the church has greatly
prospered. About 153 have been baptized and 38 received by letter.
Large sums of money have been raised to purchase a parsonage, repair
and paint church buildings, and remove indebtedness. The benevolent
offerings of the church have more than doubled in these years. The
church is united and prosperous. The people have every reason to
thank “God and take courage.”

Last October, 1892, the church celebrated her seventieth anniversary.
For four days religious services were held. On the evening of October
sixth, after devotional exercises, a short historical record of the
church was read. Then followed addresses from former pastors. On the
evening of the seventh addresses were delivered by pastors of the
invited churches. October eighth there was held an old-fashioned
conference meeting. The ninth being Sunday, three services were held.
Preaching services morning and evening. In the afternoon was the
“roll call” and special “thank offering.” On this occasion 202
answered to their names, and $91 was taken as the thank offering.
These services were much enjoyed by the people and the life of the
church was quickened.

Beginning with ten or twelve members the church has grown until
twelve hundred and twenty-five have come into our fellowship. It has
become the mother of four living, active and flourishing churches.
Many of those who were baptized into the fellowship of this church
are now laboring for Jesus in different parts of the world. There are
at present 436 members, and hundreds have gone triumphantly to
heaven. Only the faintest outline of the history of this people has
been given in this summary. Facts interesting to the church members,
but not so interesting to this body, are withheld. Only the briefest
record has been kept from time to time, and unfortunately part of
that is gone. But form what facts are available and from what memory
can furnish we have many reasons for believing that the First
Hillsboro Baptist church has done a great and good work for God and
perishing souls. Only eternity can reveal all that has been
accomplished.

What inspiration is afforded by the study of the history of God’s
people! How we see His hand in all the years moving, guiding and
overruling all things to His glory and for the good His people. What
an inspiration to every church to make a good record—to live in
harmony, fellowship and love! And what an inspiration to every member
to live for the glory of Christ and the highest good of one another!

To the church and to the members of the church God is calling all
generations for earnest, God-fearing, consecrated and holy living.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN HISTORICAL SKETCH OF THE FIRST HILLSBORO BAPTIST CHURCH ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


