The Project Gutenberg eBook of Lost Mine Trail, Big Bend National Park, Texas
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Lost Mine Trail, Big Bend National Park, Texas

Author: Anonymous

Release date: June 12, 2019 [eBook #59740]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOST MINE TRAIL, BIG BEND NATIONAL PARK, TEXAS ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






    [Illustration: (_The cover photograph of this booklet is furnished
    through the courtesy of Peter Koch._)]




                            LOST MINE TRAIL


                         BIG BEND NATIONAL PARK
                                 TEXAS

              PRICE 10 CENTS IF YOU TAKE THIS BOOKLET HOME




                        LEGEND OF THE LOST MINE


_Of the many romantic legends which abound throughout the West, few
match the Lost Mine story from which the peak takes its name. Is it
true? Did the mine exist? Or was it a campfire fabrication handed down
from generation to generation?_


Early Spanish explorers of the Southwest, in their fervent search for
gold and other riches, discovered and developed many mines, some
yielding silver and gold. According to legend, a rich ore body was
discovered on the highest point of Lost Mine Peak. Life-term prisoners
were forced to work the mine. These men were blindfolded on several
occasions in their march from the Presidio in San Vicente, Mexico, to
prevent them from learning its location. The ruins of this presidio may
still be observed some 20 miles southwest of this peak across the Rio
Grande in Mexico.

A story relates how the fierce Comanche Indians, who resented the
Spaniards’ invasion of their homeland and hunting grounds, attacked and
killed them to the last man. The last act, so goes the story, was to
seal the mine entrance to prevent further exploitation.

Legend states that if a person stands in the chapel door of San
Vicente’s Mission on Easter morn, he can watch the sun’s first rays
strike Lost Mine Peak at the exact mine entrance.

    [Illustration: _Lost Mine Peak in the Chisos Mountains_
    (Photo by 111th Photo Sec., Texas Nat’l Guard)]




                            LOST MINE TRAIL


This is your guidebook for using the trail which starts at this
registration desk. For about one mile of this walk the interesting
plants, unusual geological features and other things of interest are
explained. _Each object of special interest is marked by a numbered
stake._ Refer to the corresponding number in this booklet, and you will
find the name of the plant or feature and a description. The information
recorded here is necessarily brief, but the rangers will be glad to
answer your questions and give additional information.


1. Evergreen Sumac (_Rhus virens_). This sumac is commonly found in
Green Gulch and through the Chisos Mountains. It bears attractive
clusters of small white flowers followed by red berries which are seen
in the late autumn and winter.

2. Alligator Juniper (_Juniperus deppeana_). Observe alligator skin-like
bark of the tree which easily identifies this evergreen and gives it its
name. Under favorable conditions the species attains an age in excess of
500 years.

3. Mexican Pinyon (_Pinus cembroides_), is the only species of pine
found along this trail. Pinyon is the name given by the early Spanish
explorers and was described by Cabeza de Vaca in 1536. The seeds are
used by Indians for food and in recent years the nuts of a close
relative, _Pinus edulis_, have become an article of commerce.

4. Gray Oak (_Quercus grisea_). There are several species of oak on this
trail, but this particular one is easily recognized by the blue-gray
color of its leaves.

5. Emory Oak (_Quercus emoryi_). Of the several oaks in the park, this
represents one of the larger evergreen groups. The acorns are edible,
sweet, and are important as food for birds and small mammals. Notice the
glossy hollylike leaves.

6. Graves Oak (_Quercus gravesi_). Here is another of the oaks with
typical notched or toothed leaf margins. The lovely fall colors of the
Chisos Mountains (pronounced CHEE-sose) are principally due to the
abundance of these trees whose leaves takes on the rusts and reds of
autumn.

7. Picture! From this point on the trail there is an excellent view of
Green Gulch. The high point on the left (north) of the gulch is Pulliam
Peak, 6,921 feet high. The faraway hills are the Rosillos Mountains, so
named because of their roan coloring.

    [Illustration: _Agave_]

8. Agave (_Agave scabra_). There are many different species of agaves
(often called century plants) in the Southwest, several occurring in Big
Bend. Plants of this group furnish many important products in Mexico,
and were utilized by Indians in various ways. Among the products are
fiber, food, drink (mescal), soap and medicine. Agaves are grown
commercially in more than 40 countries. These plants store up food in
the root and leaf systems for many years, finally send up one
fast-growing flower stalk, mature their seeds, and then die. The bloom
stalk grows almost 10 inches a day and represents the largest bloom of
any North American plant.

9. Texas Madrone (_Arbutus texana_). This beautiful tree has thin,
peeling bark. Its red berries, which mature in November, are highly
favored by deer which often rise up on their hind legs to reach them.
The name “Naked Indian” is sometimes applied because the twigs and
branches are the copper color of the Indian torso. A close relative of
this madrone is found along the west coast. Most of the madrones along
this trail were killed by drouth. This one is sprouting from the old
base. There are a number of fine living madrones along the road in upper
Green Gulch.

A fine angle view of Casa Grande is obtainable here. This large single
mass of volcanic rock (rhyolite) is 7,300 feet high.

10. Skunkbush Sumac, or Squawbush (_Rhus trilobata_). Although this
sumac belongs to the same family as the obnoxious poison ivy, it has
none of the latter’s irritating qualities. Leaves turn brilliant shades
of red and orange in the autumn.

11. Basketgrass (_Nolina erumpens_). Although referred to as a grass,
this plant belong to the lily family. The narrow, fibrous grasslike
leaves often attain a length of 5 feet, making them excellent material
for native basketry. The compact clusters of small pinkish-white flowers
rarely rise above the rank mass of foliage.

12. Geological Explanation. This rock is called conglomerate, because it
is formed from many kinds of rocks from many places. Note the rounded
shapes of the individual stones, caused by wearing away of the sharp
corners and edges when they were being transported by streams millions
of years ago. Later these materials were deposited in beds and under the
terrific pressure of overlying masses of sediments were compacted with
mineral cementing materials to form the solid mass which you see here.

13. Drooping Juniper (_Juniperus flaccida_). Appearing to be slightly
wilted, the drooping aspects of this graceful evergreen suggests grief.
Botanists claim that Big Bend National Park is the only area in the
United States in which it is found.

    [Illustration: _Drooping Juniper_]




                             CACTUS GARDEN


14. Lechuguilla (_Agave lechuguilla_) (pronounced lay-choo-GHEE-yuh) is
a small species of agave whose leaf crown somewhat resembles a bunch of
green bananas, and does not belong to the cactus family. The plant is so
well protected by its spine-tipped leaves that even hungry goats refrain
from eating it. The fibers within the fleshy leaves are used extensively
in northern Mexico for making brushes, matting, coarse twine and rope.
The short stem is used as a substitute for soap.

15. Claretcup Echinocereus (_Echinocereus triglochidiatus_). This is one
of the commonest and most spectacular of our hedgehog cactuses.
Occasionally, plants will have as many as 50 salmon-colored blossoms
open at the same time.

    [Illustration: _Desert vegetation and Chisos Mountains as seen from
    the east._]

16. Engelmann Pricklypear (_Opuntia engelmanni_) is one of the desert’s
most useful plants. Its fruits may be eaten raw and delicious jams and
jellies may be made from them. When young and tender, the young joints
are called “nopalitas” (no-pahl-EE-tahs), and are cooked and eaten.
Ranchmen burn off the spines to supply hungry cattle with food when the
range is poor. In the lower elevations of the park a lovely
purple-colored species is found, known as purple-tinge cactus.

17. Strawberry Cactus (_Echinocereus stramineus_) has one of the
desert’s tastiest fruits. When ripe, the fruit resembles a strawberry in
texture and is delicious served with cream. The blossom is a deep red
and is one of the park’s gems of floral beauty. Large numbers of these
dome-shaped plant mounds may be observed along the highways throughout
the park.

18. Brownpitaya (_Echinocereus chloranthus_) is one of the so-called
rainbow cactus group. Notice the banded color separation of the short
needles. The small brown flowers grow around the plant in large numbers
during the bloom period. Another variety, which grows at low elevations
in the park, has yellow-orange blossoms reaching a diameter of 4 inches.

19. Mountain-Mahogany (_Cercocarpus eximius_). The wood is extremely
hard, so brittle that it may be broken very easily. Deer browse on the
leaves, and, outside the park, cattle and sheep feed upon it.

20. Lichen. Raise your eyes to the exposed barren escarpments of Casa
Grande and other rock outcroppings. Here you observe greens, blacks, and
other colors. Much of this color may be attributed to the lichens
(LYK-ehnz) encrusting the bare rock surfaces.

The small colorful organisms are the first visible signs of life to gain
a foothold on rocks. Without true roots, this little “mutual” obtains
moisture from the atmosphere. A lichen is actually a fungus and an alga
living together in mutual dependence (one provides board and the other
room for both). As a product of their life processes, carbonic acid is
formed. This slowly disintegrates the rock, helping to form soil, thus
aiding in the production of suitable living conditions for higher types
of plants.

21. Ash (_Fraxinus_ sp.). Ash has long been identified as a very useful
wood; even the early Indians utilized it for paddles, bows, arrows, etc.
The winged seed resembles a small canoe paddle.

22. One-Seed Juniper (_Juniperus monosperma_). There are four junipers
found in the park. (You have already seen two of the others along this
trail.) This one is so named because it has but one seed in each berry.
Junipers (often miscalled cedars) are distinguished from other
cone-bearers by the seeds being enclosed in a berry instead of a cone.
The wood is resistant to decay and used much for posts. Of course, in a
National Park, trees are preserved for their scenic and watershed
protection value and are not harvested for commercial purposes.

23. Another picture just ahead—Striking view of Juniper Canyon.


                    _Help Protect the Park from FIRE
                 Please Smoke Only in Designated Areas_




                           ORIENTATION POINT


As an inducement for hikers desiring to continue farther along this
trail, an orientation table has been constructed about 1½ miles beyond
this point. The table points out the major landscape features together
with their elevations. From the same general area, a spectacular view of
the rugged Big Bend country may be enjoyed.




                        GEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE


Millions of years ago, the ocean which extended from the Gulf of Mexico
to the Arctic Circle covered this part of west Texas. Muds, sands, and
gravels were deposited in the bottom of that ocean. In these sands and
gravels were preserved the remains of fish, shellfish, and various other
forms of sea life.

Tremendous pressures within the globe’s interior caused the earth’s
surface to rise in this region and the waters to recede. Much of the
area became swampy, forming suitable habitat for the giant dinosaurs.
Peat beds were compressed to form coal deposits. The remains of these
coal beds as well as of petrified trees and dinosaur bones may be seen
in the rock exposed in various parts of the park. At a still later date
there were more extensive earth movements which caused great breaks to
occur in the earth’s surface.

    [Illustration: _Sierra del Carmen in Mexico_]

Generally speaking, the geologic structure in the Big Bend area is a
“sunken block” that might be compared to cutting through the elevated
landscape twice. One cut is along the Sierra del Carmen mountains on the
east, and the other at Santa Elena Canyon on the west. The area between
the two cuts has sunk an average of several thousand feet. The central
part of this block has been arched upward forming the Mariscal, Chisos,
and Christmas Mountains.

Part of this uplift was caused by volcanic activity. Large masses of
molten rock pushed toward the earth’s surface and arched and deformed
the overlying sedimentary layers that had long before been deposited on
the floor of the ocean. The Chisos Mountains were formed by this
volcanic pressure.

As you look south or north, you see an extensive plain that is underlain
very largely by sedimentary rock layers. The isolated peaks for the most
part were caused by hot lava that pushed up from below, then cooled to
make the present highlands. This is also true of the Chisos Mountains
which are a much larger mass. Cooling of these melted rocks caused
fracture joints, or shrinkage cracks, and weathering along these breaks
caused the columns, spires, buttresses, and pinnacles that you see in
all directions near you. Forces of erosion have done most of the
carving, forming the various rugged features near at hand.

The geological history is very complex and cannot be even summarized in
a few paragraphs. Park Rangers can give you additional information
regarding the geological history, or explain the origin of features you
may wish to know more about.




                  WHAT TO DO IN BIG BEND NATIONAL PARK


                                                            Approximate
                                                             Round Trip
                                                                   Time

 1. HIKING TRIPS
    A. Lost Mine Trail                                          3 hours
    B. Juniper Flats                                            2 hours
    C. Window Trail                                            3½ hours
    D. South Rim Loop Trail                                    10 hours
 2. HORSEBACK TRAIL TRIPS
    A. Juniper Flats                                            2 hours
    B. Window Trail                                            3½ hours
    C. South Rim Loop Trail                                     9 hours
    D. Pack Trips by special arrangement.
 3. AUTO TRIPS
    A. Santa Elena Canyon                                     4-6 hours
       1. Visit Mouth of Canyon.
       2. Castolon trading post.
       3. Terlingua and Study Butte ghost mining towns (outside park)
    B. Boquillas Canyon                                       4-6 hours
       1. Excellent View of Del Carmen Mountains and Mexican Village
          of Boquillas.
 4. SUNSETS
    A. From the Basin through the “Window.”
    B. Del Carmen from Vicinity of Lower Tornillo and Boquillas.
    C. Chisos Mountains from vicinity of Lower Tornillo and Boquillas.
    D. Chisos Mountains from vicinity of Santa Elena Canyon and Study
       Butte Area.
 5. SUNRISE
    A. Over Casa Grande from the Basin.
    B. Over the Del Carmen from vicinity of Hot Springs and Boquillas.
    C. Over the Chisos Mountains from Santa Elena area.
 6. WILDLIFE
    A. Over 55 mammals have been identified to date.
    B. Approximately 200 birds have been identified to date, including
       the rare Colima warbler and Aplomado falcon.
       Fifty-four reptiles, which include 4 species of turtles, 22
       species of lizards, and 28 species of snakes.
 7. WILDFLOWERS, TREES, AND SHRUBS (1,100 plants identified to date)
    A. Cactuses and other desert flowers are usually at their height
       of bloom from the latter part of March to the middle of April.
    B. Semi-desert shrubs—mostly July, August, and early September,
       depending upon rain.
    C. Autumn foliage coloring—late November and first half of
       December.
 8. GEOLOGY
    A. The oldest rocks (Persimmon Gap) are comparable in age and
       structure to those found in the Appalachian Mountains.
    B. The Lowland area is underlain by rock with fossil content,
       comparable to the Gulf Coast and Great Plains areas.
    C. Chisos Mountain volcanic area is comparable in age and
       structure to the great volcanic activity period of the
       Northwest.

    [Illustration: _Santa Elena Canyon_]

    [Illustration: _Mariscal Canyon_
    (Photo by 111th Photo Sec., Texas Nat’l Guard)]

Big Bend is one of the newest of the great, scenic National Parks,
having been established June 12, 1944. A unit of the National Park
System, it is administered by the National Park Service, U. S.
Department of the Interior.




                               MISSION 66


MISSION 66 is a 10 year development program, now in progress, to enable
the National Park Service to help you enjoy and understand the Parks and
Monuments, and at the same time, preserve their scenic and scientific
values for your children and for future generations.




                       CONSERVATION—YOU CAN HELP


If you are interested in the work of the National Park Service and in
the cause of conservation in general, you can give active expression of
this interest, and lend support by alining yourself with one of the
numerous conservation organizations which act as spokesmen for those who
wish our scenic heritage to be kept unimpaired for the enjoyment of
future generations.


           This booklet is published in cooperation with the
                      National Park Service by the

                   SOUTHWESTERN MONUMENTS ASSOCIATION
                Box 1562-P, Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona

   _which is a non-profit distributing organization pledged to aid in
    the preservation and interpretation of southwestern features of
                    outstanding national interest._

The Association lists for sale many interesting and authentic
publications for adults and children, and color slides on Southwestern
subjects. These make fine gifts for birthdays, parties, and special
occasions, and many prove to be of value to children in their school
work and hobbies.

For the complete sales list of more than 100 publications and 1700 color
slides on Southwestern Indians, geology, ruins, plants, animals,
history, etc., you can obtain one by mail by writing to the above
address.

                            * * * * * * * *

                             ALSO AVAILABLE
  are the following booklets of information on Big Bend National Park:

  “A GUIDE FOR THE BIG BEND,” by Maxwell and Koch may be purchased from
          National Park Concessions or Big Bend Natural History
          Association
                                                                   $1.00
  “BIG BEND NATIONAL PARK,” by Ray Scott, may be purchased from National
          Park Concessions, Inc., Big Bend National Park, Texas
                                                                   $ .50
  “PLANTS OF BIG BEND NATIONAL PARK,” by McDougall and Sperry may be
          purchased from Big Bend Natural History Association or
          National Park Concessions, Big Bend National Park
                                                                   $1.00

            The following may also be purchased in the park:

  “ANIMALS OF THE SOUTHWEST DESERTS,” Olin and Cannon. Handsome
          illustrations, full description and life habits of the 42 most
          interesting and common mammals, members of the strange animal
          population of the lower desert country of the Southwest below
          the 4,500 foot elevation. 112 pp., 60 illus., color cover,
          paper
                                                                   $1.00
  “FLOWERS OF THE SOUTHWEST DESERTS,” by Natt N. Dodge and Jeanne R.
          Janish. In 100 beautifully drawn plates are illustrations of
          145 of the most interesting and spectacular plants of the
          deserts of the Southwest, with descriptive text. 112 pp.,
          color paper cover. May be purchased from Southwestern
          Monuments Association, Box 1562, Globe, Arizona
                                                                   $1.00
  “FLOWERS OF THE SOUTHWEST MESAS,” by Pauline M. Patraw and Jeanne R.
          Janish. A companion volume to the Deserts flower book, but
          depicting and describing more than 150 common and interesting
          plants of the higher plateau country of the Southwest. 112
          pp., color paper cover. May be purchased from the Southwestern
          Monuments Association, Box 1562, Globe, Arizona
                                                                   $1.00
  “FLOWERS OF THE SOUTHWEST MOUNTAINS,” Arnberger and Janish.
          Descriptions and illustrations of plants and trees of the
          southern Rocky Mountains and other Southwestern ranges above
          7,000 feet elevation. 112 pp., color cover, paper. May be
          purchased from the Southwestern Monuments Association, Box
          1562, Globe, Arizona
                                                                   $1.00

    [Illustration: SOUTHWESTERN MONUMENTS ASSOCIATION]

                   SOUTHWESTERN MONUMENTS ASSOCIATION
                 Box 1562-P—Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.









*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LOST MINE TRAIL, BIG BEND NATIONAL PARK, TEXAS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


