The Project Gutenberg eBook of An account of the giants lately discovered
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: An account of the giants lately discovered
        In a letter to a friend in the country

Author: Horace Walpole

Release date: February 21, 2025 [eBook #75432]

Language: English

Original publication: London: F. Noble, 1766

Credits: Robert Tonsing and The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ACCOUNT OF THE GIANTS LATELY DISCOVERED ***





                                   AN
                                 ACCOUNT
                                 OF THE
                                 GIANTS
                          +Lately Discovered+.

                          (Price One Shilling.)




  This Work is entered in the Hall-Book of the +Company+ of
    +Stationers+, according to Act of Parliament; whoever Prints it,
    or any Part thereof, will be prosecuted as the Law directs.




                                   AN
                                 ACCOUNT
                                 OF THE
                                 GIANTS
                           LATELY DISCOVERED;
                 In a Letter to a Friend in the Country.

                                 LONDON:
              Printed for +F. Noble+, opposite _Gray’s-Inn,
                                Holborn_.

                                MDCCLXVI.




                           An +Account+ of the
                                 GIANTS
                           LATELY DISCOVERED.


_Dear Will_,

Though People in the Country are enough disposed to believe Wonders,
yet are they prudently apt to suspend giving Credit to all that are
sent from _London_, except of a political Cast. You good Folks still
believe in an uninterrupted Generation of Patriots; and though they so
seldom come to Years of Maturity, you trust in them as fast as they
are produced in St. _Stephen_’s Chapel. For other monstrous Births,
you are fonder of them, the farther they come. Ghosts and Witches are
entirely of your own Growth. Excepting the famous Ghost of a Sound in
_Cock-Lane_, from which the Methodists expected such a rich Harvest,
(for what might not a rising Church promise itself from such well
imagined Nonsense as the Apparition of a Noise?) I think many, many
Years have elapsed, since the Capital could boast of having regenerated
a Spirit. Your Sagacity will therefore incline you to doubt the
marvellous Account I am going to give you of a new discovered Race of
Giants.

Perhaps you will take the Relation for some political Allegory, or
think it a new vamped Edition of _Swift_’s Brobdignags. My good
Friend, it is neither the one nor the other; though I must own, a
political Mystery, and a wonderful one too, for it is really kept a
Secret.—The very Crew of the Ship who saw Five Hundred of these lofty
Personages, did not utter a word of the Matter for a whole Year; and
even now, that a general Idea has taken wind, can scarce be brought to
give any Particulars to their most intimate Friends.

All that the Public can yet learn, is, that Captain _Byron_ and his Men
have seen on the Coast of _Patagonia_ Five Hundred Giants on Horseback.
Giants? you will cry, what do you call Giants? why, my Friend, not Men
of Fifty or an Hundred Feet high, yet still very personable Giants, and
much taller than any Individual ever exhibited at _Charing Cross_.
Come, what do you think of Nine or Ten Feet high? and what do you think
of Five Hundred such? will Mrs. —— cry, “pish, That is no Giant, it is
only a well made Man?”

I am told, for I am no reader of Travels, that this Gigantic Nation
was known to exist as early as the discovery of that Continent: That
Sir _John Narborough_ mentions them; and of late Years, _Maupertuis_.
The _Spaniards_ assert that they have long been acquainted with their
existence——So they you see can keep a Secret too. But the Reasons
given why we know so little of the Matter, are, that few Ships ever
touch on that Coast, standing more out to Sea, in order to double the
_Cape_, and that these Giants are a roving Nation, and seldom come
down to the Coast; and then I suppose, only _to bob for Whales_.

You will be eager to know a great deal more than I can tell you; but
thus much I think is allowed. That Captain _Byron_ being on that
Coast, saw a Body of Men at a distance on very small Horses; as they
approached, he perceived that the Horses were common-sized Horses, but
that the Riders were enormously tall, though I do not hear that their
Legs trailed much on the Ground. This was fine Game for a Man sent
on Discoveries. The Captain and part of his Crew immediately landed,
on which Messieurs the Giants as quickly retreated. Whether this
Timidity was owing to the Terror which the _English_ Arms have struck
into all Parts of the known, and I conclude, unknown World; whether
they took Captain _Byron_ for Mr. _Pitt_; whether they took our Men
for _Spaniards_, whose name must be in Horror to all _Americans_; or
whether they had any apprehensions of Fire-Arms, I cannot tell. Be
that as it may, the more the Captain and his Men advanced, the faster
the Giants kept trotting off. Seeing this, the Captain took a bold
and sensible Resolution: he ordered his Men to lay down their Arms
and remain Stock still, himself alone advancing. I doubt much whether
_Homer_ would have cared to venture his _Jupiter_ alone against Five
Hundred _Titans_.

Captain _Byron_’s _Titans_ had more of the _Scavoir vivre_, and seeing
him advance alone, stopped. He came up with them, and addressed them
in all the Languages he knew, and that they did not. They replied in
the Giant-Tongue, which I am told a very reverend Critic, upon the
Strength of one Syllable which the Captain remembered, affirms is
plainly _Phœnician_. The Captain not being Master of that exceedingly
useful and obsolete Language, had the Misfortune of not comprehending a
Word they said. Had he been a deep Scholar, he would undoubtedly have
had recourse to Hieroglyphics, which the Learned tell us was the first
Way of conveying Instruction: But I must beg leave to observe that it
was very lucky the Captain had not so much Erudition. I do not know
whether he can draw or not, but most probably if he can, he had not his
Implements with him. At most perhaps a Black-Lead Pencil, or a Pen and
Ink, and the Cover of a Letter. He could not with such Tools have asked
many Questions; and as the Giants are probably not better Painters
than the _Egyptians_, he would have understood their Answers as little
as the Learned do the Figures on Obelisks. Thus he would have lost
his Time, and got no Information; or what is worse to every Man but a
Critic, have made a thousand absurd Guesses. The Captain having a great
Deal more Sense, and the Savages some, they naturally fell into that
_Succedaneum_ to Language, Signs. Yet I do not hear that either Side
gained much Information.

The first Thing, or rather first Sign, he said to them in this Dilemma,
was, _sit down_, which he explained by sitting down on the Ground
himself. The poor good Giants understood him, dismounted, and sat down
too. It is said, but far be it from me to affirm it, that when the
Captain (who I am told is upwards of Six Feet) rose again, the nearest
Giant to him, tho’ sitting, was taller than he.

An Hour or two was spent in fruitlesly endeavouring to understand one
another: All I hear the Captain comprehended, was, that the Giants
invited him very civily to go with them into the Woods, where, I
suppose, _Gigantopolis_ stands, and their King resides, who, no doubt,
is at least two Feet taller than the tallest of his Grenadiers. The
Captain declined the Offer, at which these polite Savages expressed
much Concern, but never once, as any still more polite People would
have done, attempted to force him.

When he took his leave they remained motionless, and continued so, as
he observed by his Glasses, till the Ship was out of their Sight.

Very few other Particulars are come to my Knowledge, except that
they were clothed in Skins of Beasts, and had their Eyes painted of
different Colours; that they had no Weapons, but Spears pointed with
Fish-Bones, that they devour Fish raw, and that they showed great
Repugnance to taste any Liquids offered to them by the Captain; and
that though they were too polite absolutely to refuse his Toast, they
spit the Liquor out of their Mouths again; whether from Apprehension
of Intoxication or Poison, is not certain: However it looks as if they
had some Notion of such _European_ Arts. What is more remarkable; the
Weather being very severe at that Season, the whole Colossal Troop
seemed as sensible of the Cold, and shivered like us little delicate
Mortals of Six Feet high. They had a few Giantesses with them, but as
the Captain did not survey them with the small End of his Spying-Glass,
I do not hear that he was much struck with their Charms.

This, my dear Friend, is all the Satisfaction I can give you. However I
am proud to be the first who has communicated this important Discovery
to _Europe_.

The Speculations it has already occasioned, and will occasion, are
infinite. The Wolf of the _Gevaudan_, that Terror of the _French_
Monarchy, is already forgotten. Naturalists, Politicians, Divines,
and Writers of Romance, have a new Field opened to them. The Scale of
Being ascends; we mount from the Pigmies of _Lapland_ to the Giants of
_Patagonia_.

You will ask, but I cannot answer you, Whether the Scale of the Country
is in proportion to such Inhabitants? Whether their Oaks are half as
lofty again as the _British_; and such is your Zeal for _England_,
you will already figure a Fleet built of their Timber. How large is
the Grain of their Corn? of what Size their Sheep, Cows, and Poultry?
Do not go and compute by _Gulliver_’s Measures, and tell me that a
populous Nation of such Dimensions would devour the Products of such a
Country as Great _Tartary_ in half a Year. Giants there are; but what
proportionable Food they have, except Elephants and Leviathans, is more
than I can tell. They probably do not live upon Bantam-Chickens.

As you are still more of a Politician than a Naturalist, you will be
impatient to know if Captain _Byron_ took Possession of the Country for
the Crown of _England_, and to have his Majesty’s Stile run, +George+
the Third, by the Grace of +God+, King of _Great-Britain, France,
Ireland, and the Giants_! You will ask why some of their Women were not
brought away to mend our Breed, which all good Patriots assert has been
dwindling for some Hundreds of Years; and whether there is any Gold or
Diamonds in the Country? Mr. _Whitfield_ wants to know the same Thing,
and it is said intends a Visit for the Conversion of these poor blinded
Savages.

As soon as they are properly civilized, that is, enslaved, due care
will undoubtedly be taken to specify in their Charter that these Giants
shall be subject to the Parliament of _Great-Britain_, and shall not
wear a Sheep’s Skin that is not legally Stamped. A Riot of Giants would
be very unpleasant to an Infant Colony. But Experience, I hope, will
teach us, that the invaluable Liberties of _Englishmen_ are not to be
wantonly scattered all over the Globe. Let us enjoy them ourselves, but
they are too sacred to be communicated. If Giants once get an Idea of
Freedom, they will soon be our Masters instead of our Slaves. But what
Pretensions can they have to Freedom? They are as distinct from the
common Species as Blacks, and by being larger, may be more useful, I
would advise our prudent Merchants to employ them in the Sugar Trade;
they are capable of more Labour; but even then they must be worse
treated, if possible, than our Black Slaves are; they must be lamed
and maimed, and have their Spirits well broken, or they may become
dangerous. This too will give a little respite to _Africa_, where we
have half exhausted the Human, I mean, the Black Breed, by that wise
maxim of our Planters, that if a Slave lives Four Years, he has earned
his Purchase-Money, consequently you may afford to work him to Death in
that time.

The Mother Country is not only the First, but ought to be the sole
Object of our political Considerations. If we once begin to extend the
Idea of the Love of our Country, it will embrace the Universe, and
consequently annihilate all Notion of our Country. The Romans, so
much the Object of modern Admiration, were with difficulty persuaded
to admit even the rest of _Italy_ to be their Countrymen. The true
Patriots never regarded any thing without the Walls of _Rome_, except
their own _Villas_, as their Country. Every thing was done for immortal
_Rome_, and it was immortal _Rome_ that did every thing. Conquered
Nations, which to them answered to discovered Nations with us, for they
conquered as fast as they discovered, were always treated accordingly;
and it is remarkable that two Men equally famous for their Eloquence
have been the only Two that ever had the weakness to think that
conquered Countries were intituled to all the Blessings of the Mother
Country. _Cicero_ treated _Sicily_ and _Cilicia_ as tenderly as the
District of _Arpinum_, and I doubt it was the folly of that Example
that misled his too exact Imitator on a late occasion. However, the
Giants must be impressed with other Ideas: Bless us, if like that Pigmy
old _Oliver_, they should come to think the Speaker’s Mace a Bawble!

What have we to do with _America_, but to conquer, enslave, and make
it tend to the Advantage of our Commerce? shall the noblest Rivers in
the World roll for Savages? shall Mines teem with Gold for the Natives
of the Soil? and shall the World produce any Thing but for _England_,
_France_, and _Spain_? It is enough that the Overflowings of Riches in
those three Countries are every Ten Years wasted in _Germany_.

Still, my political Friend, I am not for occupying _Patagonia_, as we
did _Virginia_, _Carolina_, &c. such might be the Politics of Queen
_Elizabeth_’s Days. But modern Improvements are wiser. If the Giants
in question are Masters of a rich and flourishing Empire, I think they
ought to be put under their Majesties, a _West-Indian_ Company; the
Directors of which may retail out a small Portion of their Imperial
Revenues to the Proprietors, under the Name of a Dividend. This is an
excellent Scheme of Government totally unknown to the Ancients. I can
but think how poor _Livy_ or _Tacitus_ would have been hampered in
giving an Account of such an _imperium in imperio_. _Cassimirus Alius
Caunus_, (for they latinized every proper Name, instead of delivering
it, as uncouthly pronounced by their Soldiers and Sailors) would
have sounded well enough: But Dividends, Discounts, _India_ Bonds,
_&c._ were not made for the Majesty of History. But I am wandering
from my Subject; though, while I am talking of the Stocks and Funds, I
could chalk out a very pretty New South-Sea Scheme, _à propos_ to the
_Patagonians_. It would not ruin above Half the Nation, and would make
the Fortunes of such industrious Gentlemen, as during the Want of a War
in _Germany_ cannot turn Commissaries.

Command is the Object of every Man’s Ambition; but by the impolitic
Assent of Ages and Nations to Hereditary Monarchy, you must be begotten
on a Queen, or are for ever excluded from wearing a Diadem; except in
a very few Instances; as in _Poland_, where the Throne is elective;
in _Corsica_, where they will not acknowledge Hereditary Right in the
Republic of _Genoa_; in _Russia_, where a Soldier’s Trull succeeded
her Husband the _Czar_, and where there are other Ways of succeeding a
Husband; in _Peru_ where they are tired of exchanging their Gold for
Tyrants; and in _Paraguay_, where the Outcasts of the Earth, and the
Inventors of the Oath of Obedience, have thrown off all Submission to
their Prince, and having mounted the Throne, will probably renounce the
Oath of Chastity too. But it is to _England_ that Persons of the lowest
Birth are indebted for the Invention and Facility of weilding at least
Part of a Scepter. Buy but an _India_ Bond and you have a Property in
the Kingdom of _Bengal_. Rise to be a Director, and the _Mogul_ has not
more Power appointing and displacing Nabobs. _Indian_ Sovereigns may
now be born in _Threadneedle-Street_.

What the Government means by pocketing a whole Nation of Giants, is
not to be conceived. It ought again to draw down the Vengeance of
their Antagonists on the present Ministers. I am sure they have done
nothing worse. Who knows but at this Instant they may be preparing to
pour in Forty or Fifty thousand Giants upon us? Their Love of Liberty,
their Tenderness of the Constitution, their Lenity, Mildness and
Disinterestedness, their Attention to the Merchants, in short, all
their Virtues may be affected, and only calculated to lull us asleep,
until the fatal Blow is struck. I own my Apprehensions are gloomy; yet,
thank +God+, we have a pretty tall Opposition, who will not suffer us
to be enslaved by any Thing higher than themselves.

In the mean Time, till we know something of the Matter, it is to be
hoped, that all speculative Authors, who are so kind as to govern and
reform the World through the Channel of the News Papers, will turn
their Thoughts to Plans for settling this new acquired Country. I call
it new acquired, because whoever finds a Country, though Nobody has
lost it, is from that Instant intitled to take a Possession of it for
himself, or his Sovereign. _Europe_ has no other Title to _America_,
except Force and Murder, which are rather the executive Parts of
Government than a Right. Though _Spain_ pretends a Knowledge of our
Giants, she has forfeited all Pretensions to their Allegiance, by
concealing the Discovery; as is plain from the Decision of the _Canon_
Law, _Tit. de novis regionibus non abscondendis_.

The first Thought that will occur to every good Christian, is, that
this Race of Giants ought to be exterminated, and their Country
colonized; but I have already mentioned the great Utility that may
be drawn from them in the Light of Slaves. I have also said, that
a moderate Importation might be tolerated for the Sake of mending
our Breed; but I would by no Means come into a Project I have heard
dropped, and in which Propagation would not be concerned, I mean the
Scheme of bringing over a Number of Giants for second Husbands to
Dowagers. _Ireland_ is already kept in a State of Humiliation. We
check their Trade, and do not allow them to avail themselves of the
best situated Harbours in the World. Matrimony is their only Branch of
Commerce unrestricted, and it would be a most crying Injustice to clog
that too.

In truth, we are not sufficiently acquainted with these Goliaths to
decide peremptorily on their Properties. No Account of them has been
yet transmitted to the Royal Society: But it would be exceedingly
adviseable, that a Jury of Matrons should be sent in the next
embarkation to make a report; and old Women for old Women, I would
trust to the Analysis of the Matrons in preference to that of the
Philosophers.

I will now, my Friend, drop the political Part of this Discussion, and
inform you what effect this Phænomenon has had on another Set of Men.
It has started an obvious and very perplexing Question, _viz._ whether
these Giants are _Aborigines_; if they are not, from which of the Sons
of _Noah_ are they descended, and in that case how we shall account for
this extraordinary increase of Stature?

The modern Philosophers are peremptory that these Giants are
_Aborigines_, that is, that their Country has been inhabited by Giants
from the Creation of the World. The Scriptures, say those Gentlemen,
mention Giants, but never posterior to the Flood; whence we ought
to believe that they perished in the General Deluge. Neither, add
they, are we told that any Son of _Noah_ was of Stature supereminent
to his Brethren. Yet we will suppose, say they, that some of their
Defendants might have Shot up to an Extraordinary height, without
Notice being taken of it in Sacred Writ. Nay, they allow that this
increase of Stature might not have appeared till after the Date of
Holy Writ. Yet is it credible, say they, that a race of Giants should
have been formed, and remain unknown to all Ages, all Nations, all
History? Did these Monsters pass unobserved from the most Eastern Part
of the Continent (the supposed Communication by which _America_ was
peopled) to the Northern Parts of the other World, and migrate down
that whole Continent to the most Southern Point of it, without leaving
any Trace, even by Tradition, in the memory of Mankind? Or are we to
believe, that Tribes of Giants sailed from _Africa_ to _America_?
What Vessels wafted them? Was Navigation so perfected in the infant
Ages of the World, that Fleets enormously larger than any now existing
were constructed for the transportation of a Race of _Polyphemes_? Or
to come to the Third Point, is it the Climate that has ripened them,
as _Jamaica_ swells Oranges to Shadocks, to this stupendous Volume?
But North and South of them are Men of the ordinary size, nor has the
same Latitudes produced any thing similar. Natural Philosophers cannot
account for it, therefore Divines certainly can; and when this People
shall be better known, I do not doubt but the Mystery will be cleared
up; for as these Giants have indubitably remained unmixed longer than
any other People, we shall probably discover stronger Traces of
their _Jewish_ Origin. Their Cult is in all likelihood less corrupted
from that of the Sons of _Noah_, than is to be found elsewhere: their
Language possibly the Genuine _Hebrew_, not _Phœnician_; and if I might
hazard a Conjecture, these Giants are probably the Descendants of the
Ten Tribes so long lost, and so Fruitlessly sought by the Learned; and
having deviated less from the true Religion of their Forefathers, may
have been restored so, or preserved in their primitive Stature and
Vigour. I offer this Opinion with much Modesty, though I think it more
reasonable than any _Hypothesis_ I have yet heard on the Subject.

Whatever their Religion shall appear to be, it will be matter of great
Curiosity. We scarce know of any People, except the _Hottentots_, or
the _Heroes_, who lived in the Days of _Fingal_, among whom no Traces
of any Religious Notions or Worship have been discovered.

If they are not _Jews_, but Idolaters, the Statues of their Divinities,
their sacrificing Instruments, or whatever are the Trinkets of their
Devotion, will be great Rarities, and worthy of a place in any Museum.

Their Poetry will be another Object of Inquiry, and if their Minds are
at all in proportion to their Bodies, must abound in the most lofty
Images, in the true Sublime. Oh! If we could come at an Heroic Poem
penned by a Giant! We should see other Images than our puny Writers of
Romance have conceived; and a little different from the Cold Tale of a
late notable Author, who did not know better what to do with his Giant
than to make him grow till he shook his own Castle about his own Ears.

In short, my good Friend, here is ample Room for Speculation: but I
hope we shall go calmly and systematically to Work: that we shall not
exterminate these poor Monsters till we are fully acquainted with their
History, Laws, Opinions, Police, _&c._ that we shall not convert them
to Christianity, only to cut their Throats afterwards; that Nobody will
beg a Million of Acres of Giant-Land, till we have determined what
to do with the present Occupiers: and that we shall not throw away
Fifteen or Twenty Thousand Men in conquering their Country, as we did
at the _Havannah_, only to restore it to the _Spaniards_:


  _July 1, 1766._

                                 Your’s,

                                                               _S. T._


                          Transcriber’s Notes:

  • Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).
  • Text enclosed by pluses is in small caps (+small caps+).
  • Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected.
  • Antiquated spelling is unchanged.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ACCOUNT OF THE GIANTS LATELY DISCOVERED ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


